@@@@@


doc= 52612


Sir John Nicholson Barran, second baronet (1872-1952), the eldest son of John Barran's first son, John, and Eliza Henrietta, daughter of Edward Nicholson of Wokingham, Berkshire, was the first of the third generation to enter the family firm. He was born on 16 August 1872 and educated at Winchester College and Trinity College, Cambridge. In 1902 he married Alice Margarita (died 1939), daughter of the Revd Leighton Parks of New York city. They had a daughter and three sons, the youngest of whom, Sir David Haven Barran (1912-2002), became the chairman of the Shell Oil Company. His second marriage was in 1946 to Esther, eldest daughter of the Hon. F. M. B. Fisher. He served as the Liberal MP for Hawick burghs from 1909 to 1918. Between 1909 and 1916 he was a parliamentary secretary to a number of government ministers including the postmaster-general, the president of the Local Government Board, the home secretary, and the foreign secretary. From 1916 to 1918 he was parliamentary secretary to H. H. Asquith. He was a director of the Barran business from 1903 to 1921. He was nominated one of the three sheriffs of Yorkshire in 1920. He died on 8 July 1952. The title passed to John Leighton Barran, third baronet (1904-1974), but the firm ceased to trade. 


@@@@@


doc= 52651


Joseph MacDonald (1739-1763), born on 26 February 1739, both played the violin; Patrick was regarded as an excellent amateur; Joseph also sang, and played the flute, oboe, and bagpipes. They and their sister Florence (Flora) all probably composed melodies for some of Rob Donn MacKay's verses. 


@@@@@


doc= 52753


Edward Fisher (fl. 1626-1648), religious controversialist, author of 'The Marrow of Modern Divinity' (1645). In the 1640s the book's concessions to Arminianism won the approval of many who were challenging orthodox Calvinism from the Independent and sectarian left. Its republication by James Hog of Carnock led to bitter controversy within the Church of Scotland, in the course of which James Hadow suggested that its author had been a barber by trade, and therefore unqualified to pronounce on such matters. Hogg quoted Anthony Wood's 'Athenae Oxoniensis' to 'prove' that Fisher was actually the man from Mickleton, but there is good reason not only to doubt this identification, but to believe that Hadow's claim, which may be traceable to the London-Scottish presbyterian circles of the 1640s, was well founded. 


@@@@@


doc= 52771


George Campbell De Morgan (1841-1867) was born on 16 August 1841 at Gower Street. He was educated at University College School, 1856-7, then under his father at University College, 1857-60, graduating MA in 1863 with the award of a gold medal. He was appointed mathematics master at the school in 1866; at the time of his death he was vice-principal of University Hall. As well as producing some promising mathematical work, he was one of the founders in 1865 of the London Mathematical Society (and his father was the first president). He died on 14 October 1867 at Ventnor, Isle of Wight. 


@@@@@


doc= 52809


William de Sens (fl. 1175-1179) -- a native, perhaps not coincidentally, of a city with strong associations with the recently martyred Thomas Becket. Gervase describes William as 'a man active and ready, and as a workman skilful both in wood and stone' and states that he was retained 'on account of his lively genius and good reputation' ('Works of Gervase of Canterbury', 1.6). In the autumn of 1178, however, William de Sens was seriously injured in a fall from the scaffolding. At first he directed the work from his bed giving charge 'to a certain ingenious and industrious monk, who was the overseer of the masons' -- 'much envy and malice' was caused by this appointment, according to Gervase ('Works of Gervase of Canterbury', 1.20). 


@@@@@


doc= 52810


AElfric Cild (fl. 975-985), magnate, was the brother-in-law (not son, as the twelfth-century chronicler at Abingdon calls him) of AElfhere. His wife may have been AEthelflaed, Ealhhelm's daughter, recorded 'c'.950 ('AS chart.', S 1539); his son AElfwine, killed at Maldon in 991, was remembered in the will of his uncle, AElfheah, who died in 971, and also, as Ealhhelm's grandson, in the Old English poem, 'The Battle of Maldon'. AElfric Cild (literally 'child', but probably meaning 'nobleman' in this context), came from the east midlands; he had lands in Huntingdonshire and is associated with Bishop AEthelwold in the foundation both of Peterborough and of Thorney. After the death of Edgar in 975 he is found visiting Ely in company with Queen AElfthryth and her son, the future AEthelred II. He succeeded as ealdorman of Mercia in 983 and held his position until early in 985, when he was banished by a council held at Cirencester; the charge was treason. No details are given, though he is accused of seizing land in Gloucestershire belonging to Eadflaed, possibly AElfhere's widow ('AS chart.', S 896, 937). The date of his death is not recorded. Henry of Huntingdon seems to regard his banishment as unjust; and the twelfth-century Abingdon chronicle says he fled to Denmark, later returning to England with a band of viking raiders. Both sources, however, conflate AElfric Cild with his namesake, AElfric of Hampshire, who died in 1016. 


@@@@@


doc= 53017


Mabel Henrietta Prichard (1875-1965), who was born in India on 17 February 1875, the daughter of Surgeon-Major Charles Grant Ross of the Bombay army. She was brought up in England and was educated at Liverpool high school and Royal Holloway College before going to Oxford as a member of the Society of Oxford Home Students, gaining a second in classical moderations followed in 1897 by a first in 'literae humaniores'. She spent a year as a lecturer in classics at Westfield College, London, before her marriage in 1899. As well as keeping house for her husband's undergraduate reading parties during vacations and entertaining his pupils, she undertook much unpaid work for women's education at Oxford as honorary treasurer of the Association for the High Education of Women, and, from 1911 to 1948, of the Society of Oxford Home Students (which became in 1942 St Anne's Society and in 1952 St Anne's College, of which she was elected an honorary fellow). 


@@@@@


doc= 53018


James Blount, sixth Baron Mountjoy (1532/3-1581), who was made a knight of the Bath in 1553 at the coronation of Queen Mary. On 26 May 1559 he became lord lieutenant of Dorset and he was a JP for Dorset and Wiltshire in 1562 and 1564. On 10 February 1564 he was admitted to Gray's Inn. In 1572 he took part in the treason trial of Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk. He married Catherine, daughter of Sir Thomas Leigh, and their sons William and Charles succeeded in turn to the title. In the dedicatory epistle to his 'Lyues of M. Luther, J. Ecolampadius & H. Zuinglius' (1561) Henry Bennet situated Mountjoy within the tradition of good letters followed by his father and grandfather. Bennet also claimed that James had a zeal towards good religion and in the same year Jean Veron dedicated his antipapal tract 'The Ouer Throw of the Iustification of Workes' to him. Apparently Mountjoy dabbled in alchemical studies and according to Sir Robert Naunton's 'Fragmenta regalia', written about 1630, he spent the family fortunes in pursuit of the philosopher's stone. He was also a shareholder in the Company of Mines Royal, and in his attempt to find a formula for the production of alum and copperas he fell badly into debt and was forced to mortgage several properties. He patronized a company of players from at least 1558 to 1578; they toured predominantly in the south-west. Mountjoy died on 20 October 1581 at Hooke, Dorset. He had two younger brothers, Francis and William, the former of whom later became a friend of John Dee. 


@@@@@


doc= 53020


Owain (d. 1212), from whom the manor of Hales came to be called Halesowen. He appears to have been a competent ruler and a good soldier, but the circumstances of his accession to power probably meant that his position could never be unchallenged and he was eventually overthrown by one of the greatest of all Welsh rulers, Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. 


@@@@@


doc= 53021


Sir Nathaniel Herne (c.1629-1679), the eldest son of Nicholas Herne and his second wife, Susan, was apprenticed to Sir John Frederick and took his freedom in the Barber-Surgeons' Company in 1655. On 1 September 1656 he married Frederick's daughter Judith and entered into partnership with his father-in-law. The firm was principally engaged in the Spanish trade and suffered under Cromwell's policy; Herne was probably the 'stout and active young citizen' concerned in cavalier plots in the City in 1657. 


@@@@@


doc= 53045


Clarissa Sandford Trant (1800-1844), diarist, was born in Lisbon on 30 November 1800. Owing to her father's long periods in Portugal in her early years her education was unconventional, frequently by tutors or a governess, though she also attended two schools in London: one at Gough House and the other in Sloane Street. Her mind was nimble and her pen well practised, as demonstrated by her diary. She was a serious-minded young woman who did not read fiction. She travelled extensively while young, and, though not associated with the highest society, she had contact with some of the great names of the period such as Lord John Russell, the prince of Orange, Talleyrand, Sir Charles Stuart, George Canning, the duke of Wellington, and Daniel O'Connell. She had a very close relationship with her brother Thomas and with her father during her early years. Though not wanting to be an 'old maid' she rejected at least twelve suitors before marrying in 1832, at the age of thirty-one, a spiritually compatible clergyman: the Revd John Bramston, pupil of Keble, friend of Newman, and vicar at Great Baddow, Essex. They had three children: Clara ('b'. 1833), Mary ('b'. 1841), and John ('b'. 1843). Her health was fragile in her later years, and she died of pleurisy on 10 April 1844 at the age of forty-three. Her husband remarried a year later. 'The Journal of Clarissa Trant', edited from the twenty-eight volumes of her diary, by a descendant, Miss C. G. Luard, was published in 1925. 


@@@@@


doc= 53118


Philip Lucas (1797-1865), cotton merchant, was born in 1797 in Kingston, Jamaica, the son of Sampson Lucas, a cotton trader who made his fortune in the West Indies before settling in London where he died in 1820. Philip was connected to wealthy Jewish merchant circles in London, through his elder brother Louis, and in Manchester, through his sister Anne, who was the wife of S. L. Behrens, one of the earliest and most successful Jewish immigrants in Manchester. Philip was the senior partner in Lucas and Micholls: Henry Micholls was Lucas's nephew and married Frederica, Behrens's daughter, strengthening family and business ties. In 1834 the firm set up in Brown Street, Manchester, as merchants and cotton spinners at a time when many merchants from London and continental Europe were establishing agencies in the town to gain a stake in the lucrative cotton trade. Lucas and Micholls was one of several Jewish firms to join this trend, but was unusual in setting out to control all stages in the cotton business, from the manufacturing and finishing of cottons and calicoes to their distribution in the overseas market. In Manchester, Lucas rapidly assumed a high place in middle-class Jewish and gentile circles. He supported Jewish institutions, such as the Jewish school in the foundation of which he was instrumental, and followed Moses Montefiore in standing against antisemitism. None the less, he sent his own son to a non-Jewish school and hoped for a national secular school system into which Jewish children could be integrated. He was a moderating influence and mediator between the groups into which Manchester Jews were split. He was an active anti-cornlaw campaigner, was elected a city councillor in 1851 (to the approval of Jew and gentile), and in 1858 was elected to the board of the very influential Manchester chamber of commerce. He maintained a fine residence at Temple House, Cheetham Hill Road, where he lived with his wife, Juliana (1825/6-1873), daughter of the mathematician Benjamin Gompertz, his one surviving son, Louis, and seven domestic servants. His wife undertook philanthropic work among Jews. Lucas died at 1 Ebenezer Terrace, Kennington Park, Surrey, on 30 July 1865. After his death he lapsed into an obscurity from which he has only recently been rescued, while his son, an unremarkable explorer, able to travel because of his father's wealth, had his exploits and death widely noticed. 


@@@@@


doc= 53236


Humphrey (II) de Bohun (d. 1164/5), who with his mother, Maud, founded the Cluniac priory at Monkton Farleigh, Wiltshire, evidently in fulfilment of his father's wishes. In 1130 Humphrey (II) de Bohun still owed relief for his father's land, plus 400 marks for the purchase of a royal stewardship. As steward he witnessed charters of Henry I towards the end of his reign, and also King Stephen's Oxford charter of liberties in 1136. However, he deserted to the Empress Matilda on her arrival in England in 1139 and successfully defended his castle at Trowbridge against the king. In 1144 he received from the empress confirmation of his lands and of his 'stewardship in England and Normandy', with a grant of other estates. He was loyal to the Angevins in the civil war, witnessing as steward both for the empress in the 1140s and for Henry II, before and after his accession as king, between 1153 and 1157. However, during the year 1158 he was deprived of former royal demesne which he was holding in Wiltshire. None of the royal charters he attested can with certainty be dated to 1158 or later, and it may be that he fell out of the king's favour. On the other hand he was present at the promulgation of the constitutions of Clarendon in January 1164. He was dead by Michaelmas 1165, when his son Humphrey (III) de Bohun owed 300 marks as relief. In the following year his widow, Margaret, who had become coheir to Miles of Gloucester following the deaths of her brothers, answered for the knights' fees which formed her share of the inheritance, and which passed to Humphrey (III) de Bohun along with the Bohun lands in Wiltshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 53262


Henry [iii] Hope (1735-1811). Buttressed by his father's wealth and commercial influence, John was destined to play a prominent role in Dutch society and politics and gradually withdrew from the firm's day-to-day management. His marriage in 1763 to Philippina Barbara van der Hoeven ('c'.1738-1789), daughter of Rotterdam's burgomaster, was his first step to membership of the Netherlands' political elite. They had at least three sons: Thomas Hope (1769-1831), Adrian [ii] (1772-1834), who became insane, and Henry Philip Hope (1774-1839) ['see under 'Hope, Thomas (1769-1831)], a partner of Hopes. 
William V arranged for John's membership of Amsterdam's Vroedschap (council) as an alderman from 1768 to 1784, and from the late 1760s through to his death in 1784 he acquired estates and great houses, not least Nederhorst den Berg Castle, near Hilversum. In 1770 he succeeded his father as a director of the Oost Indische Compagnie. 
John's American cousin Henry was the son of Henry [ii] Hope, elder brother of Thomas [ii] and Adrian [i] Hope. His father had settled at Boston, Massachusetts, about 1730, and Henry was probably born there. He moved to England about 1748 in order to complete his education. In 1754 young Henry joined Gurnell, Hoare & Co., London merchants, and about 1760 entered the London house of Hope & Co. as a clerk. 
From 1762 until the early 1780s these four partners developed Hopes into Europe's leading merchant bank. Adrian and especially Thomas consistently provided over 80 per cent of the capital, largely through the plough-back of profits, and this rose from just over 4 million guilders in 1762 to 10.3 million in 1780. In the process, the Hope partners accumulated great wealth, distributing over 500,000 guilders annually in ten years and under 400,000 in only four. 
The Hopes' merchanting business was broadly based, embracing all types of goods traded in markets across Europe and North and Central America. Occasionally they entered into trading speculations of immense size, as in 1787 when they endeavoured, albeit with limited success, to control the international cochineal market. From 1768 the business of financing sovereign clients through the issue of their bearer bonds supplemented the traditional merchanting business and became a major source of prestige. The Hope family's early clients included the kingdom of Sweden, for which 14.5 million guilders was raised in twelve loans between 1768 and 1787; the elector of Bavaria, for whom 400,000 guilders was provided in 1771 on security of his crown jewels; and the republic of Poland, for which 2.6 million guilders was raised in 1772. These were huge sums and were often provided at crucial moments in the histories of these countries. Initially Hopes sought out its clients; by the 1780s, such was their power, the statesmen of Europe beat a path to Hopes. 
Henry, 'singularly even, mild, engaging and amiable' (Buist, 16), was the leader in developing this business, benefiting from a neutrality afforded by his American origins. Following Thomas's death in 1779 and Adrian's in 1781, his role became vital and more so when John died unexpectedly in 1784 aged forty-seven. The huge breach their deaths made in Hopes' leadership was never made good. John's sons were then minors but when of age they showed little inclination towards business. For his part, Henry remained a bachelor. 
In July 1782 Henry's part-solution was to admit 


@@@@@


doc= 53263


Archibald [ii] Hope (1698-1733), who laid the merchant bank's foundations. In 1720 he became apprenticed to his uncle, an Amsterdam stockjobber, and swiftly got involved in banking business. In 1726 he married a merchant's daughter, Geertruyd Reessen (1702-1726); they had no children. 
His brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 53264


John Hope (1737-1784), and an American nephew, 


@@@@@


doc= 53345


Maria Susanna Taylor (1837-1904), also appeared on the stage until her marriage, on 9 June 1863, to William Rowland Taylor, the son of a prosperous Oxford brewer. Shortly after her mother's death she left her husband, and at the age of forty enrolled at the Slade School of Fine Art to learn to paint. She made her home in Rome and travelled adventurously in north Africa; and she worked as an artist and journalist, writing for the London 'Standard' for more than twelve years. She returned to England in 1898 and died in Southsea on 12 March 1904. 


@@@@@


doc= 53346


Frances Eleanor Trollope (1835-1913), was born in August 1835 on a paddle-steamer in Delaware Bay during her parents' tour of America. After a successful career on the stage she went to Florence to study opera singing, and became governess to Bice (Beatrice), the daughter of the widowed Thomas Adolphus Trollope (1810-1892). On 29 October 1866 she married her employer. They lived in Italy for many years. She wrote a number of novels, several of which, including 'Aunt Margaret's Trouble' (1866) and 'Mabel's Progress' (1867), were serialized anonymously by Dickens in 'All the Year Round'. After her husband's death in 1892 she wrote the life of her mother-in-law, Frances (Fanny) Trollope (1779-1863). During her last years her sister Nelly lived with her in Southsea, and she died there on 14 August 1913. 


@@@@@


doc= 53402


Beverley, Robert (1667/8-1722), historian, was born in Middlesex county, Virginia, the son of Major Robert Beverley (1635-1687), planter, and his second wife, Mary, 'nee' Keeble (1637-1678). He was educated in England, probably at Beverley grammar school, Yorkshire. In 1696 he married Ursula Byrd (1680?-1698), the sister of the landowner and diarist, William Byrd. The couple had one son, William (1695/6-1760), before Ursula's early death. Both his father and his older half-brother, Peter Beverley (1687-1729), had served as clerk of the Virginia house of burgesses, a position Robert achieved in 1696. When, two years later, the statehouse was consumed by fire, Beverley saved many of its records, which he transcribed and arranged. He sailed to England in 1703 to appeal to the privy council against a legal decision. He lost the appeal, but spent his time writing 'The History and Present State of Virginia' which was published anonymously 'by an Indian' in London in 1705. Though he claimed in the preface to the second edition that he was inspired to write the 'History' to correct the numerous errors in the account of Virginia in John Oldmixon's 'British Colonies in America', Beverley may have planned to write a history and probably brought materials with him, perhaps spending some time writing on the voyage to England. In the same preface he also identified the ignorance of and prejudice against America that he encountered in England as a motive behind the 'History'. In truth, his father probably prejudiced him against the English authorities after the privy council barred him from office in 1678; the elder Robert Beverley had none the less fulfilled various government roles until 1 August 1686, when James II commanded that he be barred from all civil offices. 
Beverley's 'History... of Virginia', one of the most outspoken books of Americanism before the War of Independence, satirized the 'Rapacious and Arbitrary' English governors and objected to the 'heavy Impositions' put upon the American colonies by the English. Throughout his study Beverley celebrated Virginia's history and laws, featuring stories of early Virginia -- among them the Lost Colony, Pocahontas saving Captain John Smith, Virginia's settlement by cavaliers, and the laziness of the ordinary southerner -- which became standard features of American history. In his personal life, he eschewed English material culture. Visiting Beverley's plantation on 14 July 1715, the Revd John Fontaine marvelled that he had 'no curtains' on the windows and that 'instead of cane chairs he hath stools made of wood, and lives upon the product of his land', which included his own vineyards and wine. 
In addition to criticizing English culture, Beverley also celebrated American nature. Virginian planters continuously have 'their Eyes... ravished with the Beauties of naked Nature. Their Ears are Serenaded with the perpetual murmur of Brooks, and the thorow-base which the Wind plays, when it wantons through the Trees; the merry Birds too, join their pleasing Notes to this rural Consort, especially the Mock-birds. (Beverley, 298)' Despite the originality and sincerity of its sentiments, large parts of the 'History' derived from existing sources. Much of Beverley's supposedly first-hand information concerning Native Americans actually comes from Captain John Smith, most of his technical detail on Virginia's natural history was taken from John Banister, while a good deal of material on the government and present state of the colony comes from a manuscript by three Virginians, published later also as 'The History and Present State of Virginia' (1727); and some information probably came from a manuscript history of Virginia by his brother-in-law, William Byrd of Westover. Nevertheless, Beverley's prose made his 'History' enjoyable and he often gave even the borrowed material his own interpretation. Thus, in a series of chapters devoted to the Virginia Indians, he obliquely advanced the merits of deism. Moreover, the 'History' proved popular, with four French printings between 1707 and 1718 and a second English edition in 1722. 
In 1716 Beverley accompanied the Virginian lieutenant-governor, Alexander Spotswood, on the fabled 63-man exploration over the Blue Ridge Mountains to the Shenandoah. He also served in the Virginia house of burgesses. In 1722 Beverley brought out 'An Abridgement of the Public Laws of Virginia' (2nd edn, 1728), which celebrated Spotswood in the dedication. He died on 21 April 1722, aged fifty-four, at his plantation, Beverley Park, King and Queen county, Virginia, and was survived by his son, William. 


@@@@@


doc= 53403


Taylor, Edward (c.1642-1729), minister in America and poet, was born in Sketchley, Leicestershire, the son of William Taylor, a yeoman farmer, and his wife, Margaret. Taylor's extant correspondence shows that he had at least two siblings: a brother, Richard, and another brother, Joseph, whose wife was named Alice. While his infancy was punctuated by the vicissitudes of the civil war, after 1650 Taylor's childhood and teenage years passed in relatively undisturbed comfort on his parents' productive farm. According to his obituary, printed in the 'Boston Weekly News-Letter' in August 1729, the young Taylor attended the local grammar school, where he was so proficient a scholar that he became himself 'qualified to keep a School' and did so for a portion of a year at Bagworth, Leicestershire. 
Ezra Stiles, a grandson of Taylor and one of Yale University's early presidents, wrote that his grandfather 'was a vigorous Advocate of Oliver Cromwell' (Stanford, 'Edward Taylor', 320). Upon the Restoration, however, Taylor's good fortunes began to shift. When in 1662 Charles II issued the 'Act of Uniformity', compelling schoolmasters, like the clergy, to accept the 'Book of Common Prayer' in its entirety and abjure the solemn league and covenant, Taylor became restive, but it was the 'Conventicle Act' of 1664, which made it illegal for Taylor and other nonconformists to practise their faith in 'conventicles', or groups of more than five, that forced him to consider another venue where he might worship in peace. By the middle to late 1660s Taylor had set his eyes on emigration to the Massachusetts Bay colony. 
Taylor set sail for Boston on 26 April 1668. In his diary, begun on the voyage, Taylor was scrupulous to record his unpleasant bouts of seasickness and was careful to note that sabbath exercises for the duration of the journey fell to him, predicting his later vocation. In a particularly diverting passage the young man remarks that, just before going to sleep one evening, he read 'the fourth chapter of 'John' in Greek' ('Diary', 12), indicating that his knowledge far exceeded that taught at New England's Latin grammar schools of this period. Despite his sessions of seasickness Taylor devoted a great portion of the diary to close observations of birds, fish, and debris encountered by the vessel, suggesting the keen interest in nature he would later display in his poetry. 
Upon arrival in Boston, Taylor declared his intentions to become 'settled in the college' of Harvard ('Diary', 15), and he recorded his admission to the college on 23 July 1668. He graduated BA in 1671, and proceeded MA in 1674. After receiving his first degree Taylor at first hoped to continue at the college as one of its tutors, but he soon took the opportunity to serve as minister to Westfield, Massachusetts, where he delivered his first sermon on 3 December 1671. 
By 1673 Taylor had been given a parsonage and a meeting-house, which doubled as a fort for protection against native Americans. He then turned his attention towards the prospect of marriage. His desires were realized soon after he met Elizabeth Fitch (died 1689) from Norwich, Massachusetts, whom he married in 1674. Taylor's sincere and moving courtship of Elizabeth is recorded in a letter and an elaborate acrostic poem dated 8 July 1674 and in another poem of 27 August 1674; the acrostic poem is particularly noteworthy as it is as ingenious in its complex architecture (a heart surrounded by a 'ring of love', encased in a triangle celebrating the Trinity, with the words of the poem entwined about these figures) as it is touching in its sentiment. 
Taylor was not ordained until 27 August 1679 because of the distractions provoked by the conflict known as King Philip's War. Not long after his ordination he composed one of his major poems, 'Gods Determinations Touching his Elect'. Taylor apparently wrote this long, often dramatic, tract as an aide to his parishioners wishing instruction in the church's catechism; while he may have had plans to publish 'Gods Determinations', he almost certainly allowed it to be circulated in manuscript among his parishioners. 
Many of his occasional poems, such as the well-known 'Upon the sweeping flood Aug: 13.14, 1683', 'Upon a wasp child with cold', 'Huswifery', and 'Upon a spider catching a fly', were composed during this same period, and Taylor allowed Cotton Mather to publish two stanzas from 'Upon wedlock, and death of children' in his 'Right Thoughts in Sad Hours' (1689). Having written thousands of lines of poetry, from his adolescence until his last years, Taylor permitted only these two stanzas to appear during his lifetime. The wonder is that Taylor, whose busy schedule demanded he serve his parish as physician as well as pastor and spiritual adviser, could have found the time to construct such a large poetic opus. 
Taylor's reputation as a poet rests primarily on his 'Preparatory Meditations, First and Second Series', a collection of poems numbering nearly 220, many of which were composed in preparation for the administration of the eucharist. Like the sermons Taylor's poems, with the exception of the two stanzas which appeared in 1689, only began appearing in print in the 1930s. 
Taylor's poetry is marked by his positive application of classical knowledge, in contrast to the hostility towards the ancient world and mythology conventionally expected from puritan writers. While Taylor's homilies include negative anecdotes and examples from the ancient classical world, his 'Preparatory Meditations', which should be understood as his private colloquies with his idea of God, contain many classical references employed in the positive contexts one might expect from a recipient of the typical Renaissance college education that Taylor obtained at Harvard. In the 'Preparatory Meditations' he faithfully practised the 'meditatio', deriving from the classical rhetorical exercise of memory (imagination and the senses), understanding (reason), and will (resolve to act upon instruction from the understanding), a rhetorical praxis early adapted to Christian rhetoric by such church fathers as Augustine. 
The classicism which characterizes his best poetry yields to Taylor's orthodox theology expressed in the plain, unadorned style of his sermons. This same orthodoxy characterized his public service to his community. In 1688, for example, Solomon Stoddard, who had been librarian at Harvard during Taylor's college days, established in his own parish the controversial half-way covenant, by which unregenerate sinners were allowed to participate in the performance of the eucharist. This practice so offended the orthodox Taylor that he denounced both Stoddard and the half-way covenant from his pulpit on many occasions. During this same period, moreover, tragedy struck the Taylor family with stubborn persistence. Elizabeth Taylor dutifully bore eight children: Samuel, Elizabeth, James, Abigail, Bathsheba, Elizabeth (the first Elizabeth had died), Mary, and Hezekiah. She died on 7 July 1689 soon after the birth of Hezekiah. Taylor memorialized his intense grief for Elizabeth in one of the most moving of his many elegies wherein he declares his 'Onely Dove' ('Poems', 473) has now his 'harp... turned to mourning' (ibid., 472); 'Not Proud... [but] Grave, Courteous, ever good', Elizabeth Taylor was one who 'I'th' golden mean did goe' (ibid., 474) -- that is, her life displayed the principal classical virtue, moderation. 
Three years passed before Taylor married again. His second wife was Ruth Wyllys (died 1729/1730), from Hartford, Connecticut, whom he married at Westfield on 2 June 1692, and who survived her husband by about six months. With her Taylor had six more children: Ruth, Naomi, Anna, Mekitabel, Keziah, and Eldad. During Taylor's second marriage he renewed his friendship with the colonial merchant and diarist Samuel Sewall, with whom he had shared a room at Harvard. In 1705 Taylor wrote a poem of 190 verses about the discovery of huge bones (probably those of a mastodon) that had been unearthed at Claverack not far from Albany, New York. It is a testament to Taylor's reputation for learning that at least two teeth from this 'monster' were brought to him at Westfield for his investigation. Towards the end of his life, Taylor embarked upon the construction of a long poem of over 20,000 lines. He left this substantial tract untitled, although his twentieth-century editor, Donald E. Stanford, gave it the title 'A Metrical History of Christianity'; again, Taylor probably shared this work with his parishioners for purposes of instruction. 
Taylor died on 24 June 1729 at Westfield, Massachusetts, where he was buried. He left his parish the solid legacy of his orthodox, puritan theology, a tradition of thorough medical care (Taylor's personal library included many books on surgery and pharmacology), and a sizeable body of sensitive and intellectually challenging poetry. While most of his poetic 'oeuvre' remained unknown to Westfield's denizens, this extensive and learned collection constitutes some of the best poetry written in America before 1800. Of this collection, it is the 'Preparatory Meditations', the elegies, and the several occasional pieces which establish Edward Taylor's place among the best of British American colonial poets. Thomas H. Johnson initiated the recovery of Taylor's poems and prose works when in 1937 he published selections from the 400-page manuscript of the poems left by Taylor and housed in the Yale University Library since 1883. A more complete edition of the poems appeared in 1960 as 'The Poems of Edward Taylor', edited by D. E. Stanford. 


@@@@@


doc= 53405


Wheatley, Phillis (c.1753-1784), poet, was born along the banks of the Gambia River, probably of aristocratic African parentage. The slender facial features, small nose, thin lips, and narrow brow rendered in the woodcut portrait used as the frontispiece to her only printed volume most closely resemble those of Africa's Fulani who inhabited the Gambia region by the mid-eighteenth century. She was seven or eight years old (as suggested by the presence of her adult front teeth), when she was sold on the block 'for a trifle' to John and Susanna Wheatley, who insensitively named her after the slave schooner the 'Phillis', which had brought her from Africa to Boston. At this age she had doubtless already been influenced by a syncretistic amalgam of animism, hierophantic solar worship, and Islam practised in that region of the Gambia at the time of her birth. Despite the efforts of her Christian owners to convert her, elements of these beliefs persist throughout her poetry, and solar imagery constitutes the dominant image pattern of her verse. 
Wheatley first came to the attention of the British audience with the London publication of her much celebrated elegy on the death of George Whitefield, friend of the Methodist John Wesley and of his Anglican brother Charles, and privy chaplain to the philanthropic Selina Hastings, countess of Huntingdon. Whitefield had died on 30 September 1770 in Newburyport, Massachusetts, just a week after having preached in Boston where he had probably lodged with the Wheatleys, as Susanna was a correspondent with the countess. Almost certainly crossing the Atlantic with news of this famous evangel's passing, variant forms of this elegy were widely circulated in broadside. Briefer and more accessible to the public than Charles Wesley's 536-line elegy on his friend or Thomas Gibbons's Latin epitaph, it soon came to the admiring eyes of the countess, later to be a pivotal player in the evolution of Wheatley's career. 
As a slave and a woman, Wheatley would have acquired only with difficulty the learning necessary to compose the sophisticated poetry of her 'Poems on Various Subjects' (1773). John Wheatley, nevertheless, claimed that she could read all parts of the King James 'Bible' within sixteen months of her arrival in Boston and that, since that time, she had acquired expertise in Latin. Her brilliant version of the Niobe episode from book VI of Ovid's 'Metamorphoses' ably attests her ability; almost doubling Ovid's Latin Wheatley renders 'Niobe in distress...' as a 212-line epyllion or short epic. The biblical tale of David and Goliath she also transforms into an epyllion of 222 lines, and she demonstrates even more extensive knowledge of Greek and Roman classical forms in her composition of several epic hymns, most of which are, significantly, written in celebration of women. 
Little is known about how Phillis Wheatley acquired her great learning, although it is possible that Mary Wheatley, John and Susanna's daughter, who was six years older than Phillis, taught her to read the 'Bible' in English. As none of the Wheatley family appears to have known Latin, she must have gone outside the family for this education. It has been suggested, based on the evidence of pervasive verbal parallels between her verse and the poetry of Mather Byles, that he may have acted as her tutor and poetic adviser. Byles, who lived across the street from the Wheatleys and was Harvard-educated, was a once popular poet who had become the Congregational minister of Boston's Old South Church. 
When in early 1772 Wheatley tried to assemble a volume of her poetry in Boston, she met an unreceptive audience. Learning of her difficulty, the countess encouraged her to seek a London publisher. Hence began the series of events which brought her in the summer of 1773 to London where she prepared her book for publication by the London printer and acquaintance of the countess, Archibald Bell. This volume, probably subsidized by the countess, was quite different from that she had proposed to the Boston audience. The earlier volume (which never appeared) was to have contained enough poems favourable to the fomenting colonial rebellion that it could have been called a clarion for the revolution. By contrast, the 1773 volume was more muted, including pieces on such aesthetic topics of the time as memory, imagination, and the religious sublime. 
While Wheatley herself claimed that her London trip was undertaken on medical advice, her activities there were hardly those of one affected by ill health. In London for only six weeks from 17 June to 26 July, she used this time most efficiently, almost certainly writing 'To Maecenas', one of her most difficult pieces, as an introduction to the volume, preparing the revised edition of 'Poems' for a British audience, and touring Westminster Abbey, the British Museum, and the Royal Observatory, among other sights. Although she was not able to meet the countess, who appears to have been ill at the time, she did meet many notable people, such as the earl of Dartmouth, Thomas Gibbons, and Granville Sharp. By Wheatley's own testimony Sharp befriended her, escorting her on tours of London, and there can be no doubt that he informed her that, although still a slave in Boston, she was technically free because of the famous Somerset decision of 1772 which held that 'as soon as any slave sets foot upon the soil of England he becomes free'. Having returned to the colonies in August, Wheatley announced in a letter of 18 October 1773 her Boston manumission; her legal freedom in Boston was, however, not won generously but only 'at the desire of my friends in England'. 
As it was Wheatley's success as a writer which brought her to the notice of her British friends, her pen literally freed her. Following the death of Susanna on 3 March 1774, Phillis Wheatley continued to live in the Wheatley mansion until her marriage on 1 April 1778 to John Peters, a free African American who was a grocer and advocate for black rights before the Massachusetts courts. The years after her own manumission find her struggle for freedom now embracing her black brothers and sisters. For example, in a letter dated 11 February 1774, Wheatley eloquently defines liberty for all human beings: '... in every human Breast, God has implanted a Principle, which we call Love of Freedom; it is impatient of Oppression, and pants for Deliverance.' During the American War of Independence, in a poem calling for an American victory, she also dares to demand that freedom from the British crown will also result in freedom for 'Afric's blameless race'. Phillis Wheatley died in poverty on 5 December 1784 in Boston from complications of childbirth; all three of her children had died in infancy. 
In her own time, Wheatley received many accolades. Her 'Poems' was reviewed favourably in London at least nine times before the end of 1773. Voltaire read her work while he was in residence in England, and commented in a 1774 letter that she was the author of 'tres-bon vers anglais'. Such renowned personages as Johann F. Blumenbach, John Stedman, Gilbert Imlay, and Thomas Clarkson, praised and quoted her. During the nineteenth century, Wheatley was celebrated by such abolitionists as Henri Gregoire and Frederick Douglass, the latter of whom twice printed the entirety of the 'Poems' in his 'North Star'. The 1773 volume of 'Poems' was reprinted many times in England and America during the later eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, although it appeared less frequently in America in the years following the civil war. 
In the past, when considered at all, Wheatley's work was almost universally applied to some sort of socio-anthropological argument against slavery and/or racism. In the last quarter of the twentieth century, however, a revival of interest in her poetry has resulted in more serious critical comment than in all of the two hundred years since her death. Her poetry has been anthologized in surveys of American and world literature, such as the fourth edition of the 'Norton Anthology of Poetry'. Once marginalized as a woman and as a black person, Wheatley now occupies a secure place as one of early America's best poets. 


@@@@@


doc= 53407


Occom, Samson (1723-1792), leader of the Mohegan Indians and Presbyterian clergyman, was born in a Mohegan village near New London, Connecticut, in 1723, the son of Joshua Ockham and Sarah Samson, both Mohegans. At seventeen he was converted to Christianity by James Davenport, an apostle of the early American religious great awakening. The Pious Mohegan, as Occom came to be known, embraced Christianity as a strategy for American Indian survival. He was appointed to the Mohegan council by the sachem Ben Uncas II on 1 July 1742. On 6 December 1743 Occom enrolled in Eleazar Wheelock's Preparatory School in Lebanon, Connecticut, aided by a stipend from the Church of England's Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts (SPG). In the course of five years he obtained a rudimentary education in English and theology. Poor health prevented Occom from transferring to Yale College, but his remarkable progress as a scholar motivated Wheelock to establish Moor's Indian Charity School in 1754, a special institution to train Indian missionaries. 
Late in 1749 Occom was employed as schoolmaster by the Montauk of Long Island, also serving as their minister, scribe, and legal adviser until 1761. In 1751 he married Mary Fowler, a Montauk ('b'. 1730), who outlived him and with whom he had eleven children. Occom was ordained by the Long Island presbytery at Easthampton on 30 August 1759. Between 1761 and 1763 Occom journeyed three times to the Oneida in New York, but his missionary endeavours there were upset by the pan-American rising against the British, the Pontiac War, which erupted in 1763. At the close of 1764 the SPG hired him as a minister to the Mohegan and other Christian Indian communities in Connecticut. He was also taken into service by the newly established Connecticut Board of Correspondents of the Scotch Society. 
Following his return to Mohegan in 1764, Occom became embroiled in a long-standing land dispute between a Mohegan faction and the Connecticut assembly, known as the Mason controversy. In sympathizing with the Mohegan faction demanding restitution, Occom incurred the disapproval of his superiors, who threatened to revoke his licence. On 12 March 1765 he wrote a letter of apology to the commissioners for his 'imprudent, rash, and offensive Conduct', but his relation with the SPG was strained thereafter (Blodgett, 79-80; Love, 127; Richardson, 28-9). 
Late in 1765 Occom accompanied the Revd Nathaniel Whitaker on a fund-raising tour to Great Britain. They set sail from Boston on 23 December 1765 and landed at Brixham in Tor Bay on 3 February 1766. From there they proceeded to the Revd George Whitefield's residence in London. Occom delivered over 300 sermons throughout England, Scotland, and Ireland, before departing again in the spring of 1768. He was patronized by numerous British dignitaries, developing a lifelong friendship with Selina Hastings, countess of Huntingdon, and John Thornton. The erudite Mohegan preacher collected nearly $12,000 for Wheelock's school. Most of the donations, however, were used to establish Dartmouth College, which was granted a royal charter in 1769. 
Occom's occupational prospects dimmed after his return to New England. The SPG refused to re-employ him, and his relationship with Wheelock also deteriorated when he accused the cleric of misappropriating the moneys he had generated for the express purpose of educating Indians. This charge proved well grounded as Dartmouth soon evolved into an elitist institution for white students. Although Occom received some financial support from the Society in Scotland for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge, his subsequent activities were beset with privation. 
Some time in 1773 Occom developed the plan to found Brothertown, an independent community of Christian Indians in Oneida territory in New York. With the assistance of two relatives, Joseph Johnson (1752-1776), a Mohegan, and David Fowler (1735-1807), a Montauk, Occom enlisted participants from among the Mohegan, Mashantucket, Stonington, Farmington, Charleston, Niantic, and Montauk. The project was postponed temporarily because of the outbreak of the American War of Independence. Occom and his family finally emigrated to Brothertown in the spring of 1789. He taught and ministered at Brothertown and the neighbouring Christian Indian community of New Stockbridge until his death, in New Stockbridge, on 14 July 1792. He was probably buried near Utica. 
Occom's major work is 'A Sermon Preached at the Execution of Moses Paul' (1772), which went through at least nineteen editions by the turn of the century. Several hymns contained in his 'Choice Collection of Hymns and Spiritual Songs' (1774) are believed to be original. Occom also produced a brief ethnography entitled 'An account of the Montauk Indians, on Long Island' (1809). 
The descendants of the New England Christian Indians still honour Occom as an elder who helped them survive through difficult times. On the recommendation of the Montauk Historical Society, Samson Occom day was celebrated in June 1970. The Brothertown Indian Nation, which at the start of the twenty-first century was seeking federal recognition in Wisconsin, regards him as its founding father. 


@@@@@


doc= 53410


Barrow, Henry (c.1790-1870), maker of mathematical instruments, may have been born in Suffolk. Nothing is known of his education or apprenticeship, beyond his attendance at the London Mechanics' Institute. He married Elizabeth Mary Collins (1790-1834) in 1816 at Christ Church Greyfriars, London, producing six children by 1830, three of whom outlived him. The circumstances of Barrow's second marriage, between 1839 and 1868, remain obscure. 
Barrow was an outworker for the mathematical instrument trade in London during the 1820s. He was well known to staff of the Royal Observatory at Greenwich, who in 1829 introduced him to Sir George Everest (1790-1863), surveyor-general of India, who was anxious to appoint a mathematical instrument maker to set up and run a new workshop for the survey based in Calcutta. Barrow was Everest's second choice for the post. He was taken on despite his age (about forty in 1830) -- which might affect his ability to cope with the Indian climate -- because of his good reputation, his steadiness, and his desire to make something of himself. Barrow accepted a five-year contract, uprooting his wife and family of six children, because it offered a chance to acquire the capital he needed to set up on his own account in London. Despite the deaths in Calcutta of his wife and six-year-old second son, William, he extended his contract for another four years in order to achieve this. 
Barrow had to appoint and train a group of about nine people with few existing skills and no experience. Part of the work was to maintain and repair equipment for the revenue survey, which used simple surveying apparatus such as small theodolites and perambulators (measuring wheels), the latter lasting only about two years under normal field conditions. A more important task, in Everest's eyes, at least, was to repair the magnificent 3 foot theodolite and the zenith sector that were required for the measurement of a meridional arc extending from the tip of India to the foothills of the Himalayas. Everest had also purchased new equipment for the latter purpose while in England, and Barrow was needed to help set up the instruments for use. 
Of the problems faced by Barrow, including professional isolation, inability to speak the languages, and living above the shop, by far the worst was his rapidly deteriorating relationship with Everest. Both men were strong-willed and independent. Everest, who could speak the native languages, was in the habit of dropping into the workshop several times a day when he was in Calcutta, and commenting on the work in hand. Some eighteen months after the start of his contract, Barrow lost his temper with Everest so severely that it triggered disciplinary procedures. (One consequence of this was that much information was disclosed about the instrument-making trade in London that would not otherwise have come to light.) 
In 1837 Barrow was ordered up country to Kaliana to undertake the conversion of two field astronomy instruments to fixed-base observatory use. This involved recasting the metal supports for the telescopes and other complicated procedures that would not have been easy in a settled permanent workshop, let alone in the middle of the countryside with no facilities at all. Everest became ever more autocratic, Barrow's mood swings became more pronounced, and at the end of the job in 1839 Barrow was sacked and dispatched home to England. 
Barrow's next appearance in the historical record shows him taking over the business of T. C. Robinson, a manufacturer of high-precision weighing balances and other special instruments. Barrow was well qualified to carry out such work and the business flourished quietly. Further orders arrived from the survey of India -- Barrow's professional skills were well appreciated and no slur had been placed on his workmanship -- and instruments under his signature went to Nepal with Joseph Dalton Hooker, to Spitsbergen with the Swedish ship 'Eugenie', and to the observatory at the Cape of Good Hope. Work on magnetic dip circles for expeditions formed a solid grounding for the future work on compasses that was to be the mainstay of the business after his retirement. 
Barrow became a fellow of both the Royal Meteorological Society and the Royal Astronomical Society on his return to England, but does not appear to have played an active part in either. By the mid-1860s he was living at Belmont House, Westfield, near Hastings in Sussex, where he died on 2 April 1870 in his eightieth year. Examples of his work can be found in museum collections in England, India, and elsewhere. His son Henry, born in 1822, also became an instrument maker and took over his father's firm after his death. Another son, Francis, trained as a solicitor and became an appeal agent for the India privy council. A daughter Henrietta also survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 53414


Wanamaker, Samuel (1919-1993), actor and director, was born Samuel Watenmaker on 14 June 1919 in Chicago, USA, the second son of Morris Watenmaker, later Wanamaker, and his wife, Molly, 'nee' Bobele. His parents were first generation Russian-Jewish immigrants. It is quite possible that his stage debut as a teenager in a plywood and paper replica of the Globe at the Chicago World Fair in 1934 was the cathartic experience which inspired his lifelong devotion to the Bard and brought into being the Shakespeare Globe Theatre on London's South Bank. 
Like many young actors in the 1930s, Wanamaker honed his talents in summer stock (1936-9) and was fortunate to be accepted into the celebrated Goodman Theatre School in Chicago. There he was first introduced to the tenets of Stanislavsky, acquiring the realistic acting skills which stood him in good stead throughout his career. He also studied at Drake University, Iowa. In 1940 he married Charlotte Holland. They had three daughters, one of whom, Zoe, inherited the unmistakable Wanamaker 'chutzpah' and became a leading actress in England. 
Wanamaker's Broadway debut was as Lester Freed in the play 'Cafe Crown' (1941), which was also Elia Kazan's first Broadway production. That was followed in 1942 with an appearance in 'Counter-Attack'. In 1943 he joined the war effort, serving in the Pacific with the US marine battalions which captured Iwo Jima in the spring of 1945. After demobilization, his career sprang immediately back into gear. In rapid succession he appeared in 'This, Too, Shall Pass' at the Belasco (1946), 'Joan of Lorraine' opposite Ingrid Bergman at the Alvin (1946), and 'Goodbye My Fancy' at the Morosco (1948), which he also directed. He also appeared in 'Give Us This Day' (1949), an independent film (shot in England) which, at the time, was considered to be remorselessly left-wing, if not explicitly communist. 
By this time the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) was in full swing and the McCarthy era was about to trample upon many of the socially conscious, left-wing zealots in the entertainment industry. Although Wanamaker never made an appearance before the HUAC, he was radical by temperament and always politically outspoken, and was scheduled to be subpoenaed shortly before flying to England to appear in Clifford Odets's 'The Country Girl' (which in its London incarnation was entitled 'Winter Journey') in 1952. Michael Redgrave and Googie Withers were also in the cast and despite the fact that both Wanamaker and Redgrave espoused the Stanislavsky system there were sizzling tensions between them which soon became hot gossip in the West End. Fully aware of the ravages the blacklist was wreaking in the United States, Wanamaker opted to remain in England and within five years had established himself both as a formidable American actor and a gifted stage director, mounting plays such as 'The Shrike' (1953), 'The Big Knife' (1954), 'The Rainmaker' (1956), and 'A Hatful of Rain' (1957), all highly charged American dramas which exemplified the 'method' style of acting which had recently gained prominence in both America and the UK. Wanamaker's presence in England provided a dynamic model of the gritty, hard-hitting acting style which was proving triumphant in both New York and Hollywood with method-trained actors such as Marlon Brando, James Dean, Rod Steiger, Julie Harris, and Kim Stanley. 
Nevertheless, Wanamaker's stage productions tended to be tame revivals of American commercial successes. When he took over the New Shakespeare Theatre in Liverpool, and presumably could dictate his own repertory, his seasons included predictable items such as 'Tea and Sympathy' (1957), 'Cat on a Hot Tin Roof' (1957), 'The Rose Tattoo' (1958), 'Finian's Rainbow' (1958), and 'Bus Stop' (1958). But in 1956 he staged a rollicking production of Bertolt Brecht's 'The Threepenny Opera' at the Royal Court Theatre. It was as if, having been chastened by the personal calamities perpetrated by McCarthyism in his own country, Wanamaker was determined to demonstrate a guarded catholicism in his adopted country. 
Wanamaker's film career, 'Give Us This Day' apart, bore virtually no relation to either his personal tastes or his political convictions. It included such uncharacteristic items as 'Those Magnificent Men in their Flying Machines' (1964), 'Private Benjamin' (1980), 'The Competition' (1980), 'Irreconcilable Differences' (1983), 'Raw Deal' (1985), and 'Superman IV' (1986). His stage work, on the other hand, was truly illustrious, even when the play itself lacked substance. His most notable stage performance may well have been in 1959 when he played Iago to Paul Robeson's Othello at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre in Stratford. Although his strident, dentalized diction was considered very un-Shakespearian by the critics, the performance had a savage, Chicago-gangsterish quality which was startlingly unorthodox for the period. A brief ten years later it might well have been lauded for being very 'mod' and innovative. 
Once the more immediate dangers of the blacklist had subsided, Wanamaker was back in the United States involving himself both in perishable films and serial television (including 'Hawaii 5-0' and 'Columbo') and appeared to be little more than a jobbing actor. But, paradoxically, during this period he gained new distinction as an opera director, mounting Michael Tippett's 'King Priam' at the Coventry Theatre and the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden (1962, 1967, and 1972), followed by a spectacular 'La forza del destino' (1962) at Covent Garden, and Prokofiev's 'War and Peace', which in 1973 opened in the new Sydney Opera House to great acclaim. 
Whatever his qualities as an actor and a director (and they were considerable), Wanamaker's most durable and outstanding achievement was the creation of the Globe Playhouse Trust (later the Shakespeare Globe Trust) in 1971, which, after some twenty-five years, succeeded in replicating the Globe Theatre in Southwark. Actively opposed by the local council, who wished to develop the land for low-income housing, and disparaged by members of his own profession who viewed the American bardolator as 'an upstart crow' (very much as Robert Greene had Shakespeare himself), Wanamaker, despite two decades of crippling setbacks and petty antagonisms, persevered with architects, scholars, artists, and backers who shared his vision. These eventually included the duke of Edinburgh and a bevy of distinguished supporters such as Sir John Gielgud, Dame Judi Dench, and Sir Anthony Hopkins. Opened for 'Workshop' and 'Prologue' seasons in 1995 and 1996, and finally formally opened in 1997 by the queen, 'Wanamaker's Folly' quickly established itself as one of London's most irresistible attractions. It is an irony worthy of Shakespeare's own tragedies that Wanamaker died on 18 December 1993, at his home, 7 Bentinck Close, Prince Albert Road, Westminster, of prostate cancer, shortly before he could see his dream fulfilled. He was survived by his wife and three daughters. A memorial service was held at Southwark Cathedral on 2 March 1994. 
In 1952, when he first arrived in London as a jobbing actor, Wanamaker sought out the site of Shakespeare's Globe, expecting to see it grandiloquently memorialized. Instead, he found only a dirty plaque rammed into the wall of a Courage brewery bottling plant on a back street in Southwark. It will remain one of history's abiding ironies that the most visible tribute to England's greatest poet and playwright was created, not by a magnanimous British philanthropist, but by a Jewish player from a lowly ghetto in Chicago. He was appointed honorary CBE in 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 53418


John [i] Nesbitt (1745/6-1817), whom he had taken as a partner after the death of his brother Albert in 1776. A younger son of Arnold's eldest brother Cosby Nesbitt and Cosby's wife, Anne Enery, John Nesbitt was presumably born in Ireland and was apprenticed to his uncle as a youth. When in the city he lived in the Aldermanbury counting house and, possibly from 1776, outside London in the villa at Keston either inherited or bought from the younger Albert Nesbitt. 
John Nesbitt's cousin and apprentice, the younger Arnold Nesbitt, also lived in the counting house. In 1784 they were joined by Edward Stewart and until 1802 the firm was usually called Nesbitt and Stewart. The younger Arnold later left, and was replaced by John Nesbitt's nephew, John [ii] Nesbitt (died 1853). The type of business remained similar, although in 1797 the firm ceased to act for Thomas Conolly after his repeated failure to take up bills presented to him. 
The elder John Nesbitt moved to a house in Grafton Street about 1787. He, too, was a member of parliament and sat for Winchelsea (1780-90), Gatton (1790-96), and Bodmin (1796-1802). He was a friend and political ally of Charles James Fox who proposed him for Brooks's in 1783. A connoisseur of wines and paintings, he was from 1796 to 1802 the owner of the version of Gainsborough's 'Blue Boy' later in the Huntington Library. His career was overshadowed by his uncle's insolvency, and, because of it, he was forced into bankruptcy in 1802 and his connection with the firm ended. The Keston house was sold and the lease of that in Grafton Street given up. 
At the request of the prince regent, with whom he had enjoyed a friendship, John [i] Nesbitt was appointed a commissioner of hackney carriages in 1814. In 1815 he secured the discharge by statute of Arnold Nesbitt's estate from his debt to the Treasury and afterwards reduced the remaining debt to $26,114 by negotiation. He died in Bolton Street, where he had lived from about 1807, on 15 March 1817 and was buried in the parish of St George, Hanover Square, on 22 March. From 1803 his nephew John [ii] Nesbitt was based at 16 Tokenhouse Yard and the firm, staffed by younger members of the Nesbitt family, continued as general provision merchants in the city and Southwark until the early twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 53419


Albert Nesbitt (d. 1753), a son of Andrew Nesbitt (died 1692) and his wife, Anne Lindsay. Presumably born in Ireland, he was introduced about 1717, most likely by a kinsman, to the firm of Gould, Baltic merchants in London. In 1729 he married Elizabeth (died 1781), sister of his business partners, Nathaniel Gould (died 1738) and his brother John (died 1740); they had a daughter, Rachel. 
Albert Nesbitt and the Gould brothers became the sole partners in the firm after the deaths of the latters' uncle, Sir Nathaniel Gould, in 1728 and their father, John Gould, in 1736. The firm was based in Coleman Street until about 1752 when it moved to 8 Bishopsgate Within. It was the chief house in the city dealing with Irish business: its partners acted principally as bill agents between London and Ireland, and had many distinguished Irish clients, including members of the Conolly family. Albert, a man of sound judgement, directed the firm's business away from the Baltic to include the import of wines from Bordeaux and elsewhere to London and Ireland. He took as apprentices three of his brother Thomas's younger sons, Arnold ['see below'], Albert (died 1776), and Alexander ('bap'. 1730, died 1772). 
Albert Nesbitt's commercial success enabled him to move from the city to a suburban villa at Putney about 1738 and to buy estates in Sussex, at Ringmer in 1741, at Whyly in East Hoathly in 1750, and at Winchelsea in 1751. The wealth engendered by the firm, and his family and business connections, through the Goulds, with the Pelhams allowed him to enter parliament, sitting on the Treasury interest for Huntingdon in 1741 and for Mitchell in Cornwall in 1747. He died on 12 January 1753 in his coach near London on the Bath Road and was buried on 19 January at Putney. 
The business was carried on by Albert's nephew 


@@@@@


doc= 53420


Arnold Nesbitt (bap. 1721, d. 1779), a younger son of his brother Thomas and Thomas's second wife, Jane Cosby (died 1771), an Irish heiress. Arnold was baptized in Kilmore Cathedral near Cavan in Ireland on 27 March 1721, was apprenticed to his uncle by 1744, and was his partner by 1753. The wealth of the firm and the continued patronage of the Pelhams allowed him, like his uncle, to represent the Treasury interest in parliament and to buy more properties in Sussex, Icklesham Manor in 1760 and at Winchelsea between 1753 and 1767. He briefly succeeded his uncle at Mitchell in 1753, and sat for Winchelsea from 1754 to 1761 when the duke of Newcastle requested that he stand down. An ambitious and enterprising man, he rejected Newcastle's control, successfully challenged the Treasury interest there in law suits called the Winchelsea causes, and after 1769 controlled one of the borough's two seats. He sat again in 1770 but, having established his influence there beyond doubt, chose instead to sit from 1774 for Cricklade in Wiltshire, the borough and hundred of which he had bought during his exclusion from Winchelsea. 
Arnold Nesbitt's domestic base in London was the counting house in Bishopsgate, the lease of which had been devised to him by his uncle, until about 1772 when he moved to a newly built house in Grafton Street. In the same year the firm moved to 18 Aldermanbury where it remained until 1802. In 1750 Arnold Nesbitt was prosperous enough to lease a suburban villa at Keston, Kent, where he lived until about 1760, when he moved to another at West Wickham, also in Kent. He is known to have had liaisons with four women: Nancy Parsons; Martha Yeates, by whom he had two sons, Colebrooke Nesbitt and Arnold Nesbitt (1756-1813); Ann Dryland, later Stevenson (1735-1783), by whom he had a son John ('bap'. 1761); and another by whom he had a daughter, Elizabeth or Frances Moore. In 1758 Nesbitt married Susanna, daughter of Ralph Thrale and sister of his close friend Henry Thrale, the Southwark brewer. He consequently became part of the social circle formed around Samuel Johnson from 1765 at Thrale's houses in Streatham and Southwark which included Sir Joshua Reynolds, David Garrick, and Oliver Goldsmith. 
Under Arnold Nesbitt's leadership, banking and remitting to Ireland, where clients included Thomas Conolly (1738-1803), remained the chief business of the firm. To it he added the import of sugar and rum from estates in Grenada and the West Indies, and, from 1756, the supply under government contract of provisions and money for troops in the American colonies. Sir George Colebrooke, bt (1729-1809), was his chief associate in those enterprises, and in the founding of a cambric manufactory in Winchelsea in 1761 and of a bank in Dublin in 1764. 
Both Colebrooke and Nesbitt suffered a severe reverse in the financial crisis of June 1772. Heavy borrowing after 1772 and the burden of his government contracts may have hastened Nesbitt's death. He was unwell in March 1779 and, according to Samuel Johnson, did not fight his illness ('Letters of Samuel Johnson', ed. B. Redford, 1992-1994 3.371). He died in Grafton Street on 7 or 12 April 1779 and was buried in Icklesham church on 18 April. Examination of his affairs showed that he was insolvent. 
Unresolved chancery proceedings and debts to the Treasury allowed the business to continue uninterrupted under the direction of Arnold Nesbitt's nephew 


@@@@@


doc= 53421


Nesbitt family (per. c.1717-c.1900), merchants and bankers, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 53422


Thomas Martin (bap. 1680, d. 1765), who was baptized at Evesham, Worcestershire, on 29 April 1680, the second and eldest surviving son of William Martin (1654-1693), coroner and mayor of the borough of Evesham, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1699), daughter of John Knight of Barrels in the parish of Wootten Wawen, Warwickshire. He had five brothers and four sisters. Together with two of his younger brothers, John [i] Martin ['see below'] and James [i] Martin ['see below'], he was to make a distinctive and important contribution to the development of the Grasshopper, one of the most famous names in English banking. 
The association of moneylending and the sign of the Grasshopper at 68 Lombard Street in the City of London are generally traced to Sir Thomas Gresham in the mid-sixteenth century. The contribution of the Martins in the eighteenth century was to build upon the continuous tradition of goldsmith activity at the Grasshopper, transforming it into one of the more prestigious and important of the London private banking houses. Thomas Martin left Evesham for London shortly before the end of the seventeenth century. By 1699 he was working as a clerk at the Grasshopper under Richard Smith, a distinguished goldsmith and partner in the firm, with which he was reputed to have a family connection. In this way he became the first of the Martin family to engage in the business of banking. Though he was made a partner in 1703, the entry of the Martins into banking was truly consolidated in 1711 when, on the death of the then senior partner Andrew Stone (d. 1711), Thomas Martin took up the offer to buy Stone's share of the business made in his will. On payment of $9000 he became senior partner, controlling the bank virtually single-handedly until 1714, when he brought James [i] Martin into the partnership. Always the dominant partner, Thomas Martin needed all his skill and ingenuity to steer the bank through the turbulent period of the South Sea Bubble and, though he formally retired in 1726, he remained a strong influence on the bank's affairs. Thomas Martin was a man of great integrity who made significant contributions in a variety of public roles. He married Elizabeth (1691-1744), daughter of Richard Lowe of Cheshunt, Hertfordshire; they had no children. Through his wife's connections he became impropriator of the great tithes of Cheshunt. He was also MP for Wilton, Wiltshire, between 1727 and 1737. He lived in Lombard Street until 1716, when he moved to Clapham, Surrey, residing there until his death on 21 April 1765. He was buried shortly after at St Mary's Church, Cheshunt, in the same ground as his wife and younger brother William Martin (1684-1757). He died a man of immense wealth, having established the name of Martin firmly within metropolitan banking circles. He left land and property in the counties of Hertfordshire, Middlesex, and Essex, in addition to his capital in the banking house. As he died without issue, his nephew Joseph Martin ['see below'], second son of his brother John [i] Martin, became the chief beneficiary of his vast legacy. 
From the mid-1720s the fortunes of the Grasshopper owed much to the skill and dedication of Thomas Martin's youngest brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 53423


James [i] Martin (bap. 1693, d. 1744), baptized at Evesham on 22 October 1693. Apprenticed to his brother until becoming his partner in 1714, he became the bank's senior partner on Thomas Martin's retirement in 1726, a position he held until 1743. The bank continued to expand, providing a wide variety of personal banking services to the aristocracy and gentry. Caution was the watchword, though, and with its emphasis on private deposit banking, the style and conduct of the Grasshopper was more akin to the aristocratic West End banks than the more aggressive commercial houses of the City. Until the early 1720s James [i] Martin lived at the Three Crossed Daggers in Lombard Street, which served as the partners' City residence. About 1725 he purchased the estate and manor of Quy, Cambridgeshire, and subsequently became involved with the political life of the county. A conservator of the River Cam and a JP, he represented Cambridge in parliament between 1741 and 1744. His influence and connections secured the accounts of a number of Cambridge colleges for the Grasshopper. James [i] Martin remained a bachelor throughout his life and had no children. He died on 15 December 1744. His significance to the continuity and direction of the Martin family's involvement in the banking business in Lombard Street was to continue after his death. Having purchased the freehold to the Grasshopper some time after 1740, detailed arrangements were laid down in his will to ensure that the premises of the bank, together with his share of the capital stock, could pass to his nephew Joseph Martin, second son of his brother John [i] Martin, the only one of the first generation of Martins in the bank to have children. 



@@@@@


doc= 53424


John [i] Martin (bap. 1692, d. 1767) was baptized at Evesham on 8 July 1692. He began work at the Grasshopper about 1717, though he left in the early 1720s before securing a partnership in the business. According to the family archives, in 1720 he married Katherine (1696-1762), daughter and heir of Joseph Jackson of Sneed Park, Gloucestershire. Together they had five sons and nine daughters. In 1723 John [i] Martin took on the lease of the estate at Overbury, Worcestershire, from the Parsons family, providing the first connection with what became the family seat. He rebuilt the main house following a severe fire in 1738. His eldest son, John [ii] Martin (1724-1794), though he did not work at the bank, received a share of the profits and spent a great deal of money improving the estate. In 1761 he married Judith (died 1809), daughter and heir of William Bromley of Ham Court, Worcestershire. John [i] Martin's two other surviving sons, Joseph Martin and James [ii] Martin ['see below'], were to play key roles in deepening the family connection with the Grasshopper. Throughout his absence from Lombard Street, John [i] Martin was kept informed about the progress of the firm by James [i] Martin. On his brother's death in 1744, he returned to the capital to oversee the running of the banking house, becoming senior partner between 1744 and 1759. Despite the pressures of maintaining the Grasshopper in the front rank of London private banking houses, he still found time to become MP for Tewkesbury, in 1741-7 and 1754-61. His first wife died in 1762 and he married Anna Kinlock (died 1765) in the following year. They had no children. He died on 7 March 1767 and was buried at Overbury, Worcestershire, on 25 March. With his death the extraordinary influence of the first generation of Martins in the Grasshopper came to an end. The family's position, controlling one of the City of London's important private banking houses, had been established. 



@@@@@


doc= 53425


Joseph Martin (bap. 1726, d. 1776) was baptized on 19 January 1726 at St Martin's Church, Outwich, City of London. He was apprenticed at the Grasshopper in the early 1740s, under the tutelage of his uncle James [i] Martin. In 1746 he was brought into partnership with his father, John [i] Martin, under the conditions of his uncle's will. On his father's retirement in 1759, he became the bank's senior partner, maintaining this role until 1775, a year before his death. One of the most important achievements of his tenure at the bank was ensuring the Grasshopper's full and active participation in the formation of the London clearing house in 1773, which helped to expedite the settling of balances between bankers without the need to transfer cash. The bank also participated in the financing of various turnpike promotions and added a variety of prestigious account holders, including Sir Francis Baring and the dean and chapter of Worcester. On 6 February 1749 Joseph Martin married Eleanor (1730-1812), daughter of Sir John Torriano, British envoy at Florence. Together they had seven sons and six daughters. None of his sons followed him into the bank, though his second daughter, Eleanor (1755-1831), married John Foote, a partner in the Grasshopper. Joseph Martin lived for many years in Downing Street, Westminster, also maintaining a house at Eastwick, Surrey. An MP for both Gatton, Surrey, between 1768 and 1774, and Tewkesbury between 1774 and 1776, he was also elected sheriff of London in 1771. He died in Downing Street in April 1776 and was buried probably at St Mary's Church, Cheshunt. He died a very wealthy man, leaving land and property in the counties of Hertfordshire, Essex, Middlesex, Surrey, Gloucestershire, Norfolk, and also the Isle of Wight. 
For many years Joseph Martin had worked closely in the management of the Grasshopper with his younger brother 


@@@@@


doc= 53426


James [ii] Martin (1738-1810) who was born on 24 May 1738 at Overbury Court, Worcestershire. Apprenticed in the mid-1750s and becoming a partner in 1760, James [ii] Martin became senior partner on Joseph's retirement in 1775, holding that position until 1807. His signal achievement was to manage the bank through the very difficult conditions associated with the early years of the Napoleonic wars. By eschewing the provision of agency links with country banks, limiting exposure to the risks of financing provincial industry and overseas trade, while concentrating on providing deposit banking for the financially secure, the Grasshopper weathered the storm better than most. He married, on 17 February 1774, Penelope (1740-1830), daughter of John Skipp of Upper Hall, Ledbury, Herefordshire, an estate she was to inherit, along with that of Whateley, in Warwickshire. Together they had three sons and four daughters. From an early age James [ii] Martin suffered from corpulence and laid out the walks in the Great Wood at Overbury in order to exercise, in the hope of relieving his condition. For much of his life in London he lived in Downing Street, next door to Pitt the younger, and the two were personal friends, though opposed in politics. Elected MP for Tewkesbury in 1776, he held the seat through successive parliaments until 1807. He died aged seventy-one on 26 January 1810 and was buried at Overbury, Worcestershire, on 3 February. 
James [ii] Martin's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 53427


John [iii] Martin (1774-1832), born on 27 November 1774 at Ledbury, was to become part of the third generation of Martins to serve the banking house in Lombard Street. The chief beneficiary of his father's considerable estate, which included the important title to the banking house in Lombard Street, John [iii] Martin joined his father in partnership in the 1790s after an apprenticeship at the Grasshopper. On his father's retirement in 1807 he became the bank's senior partner, a position he held until 1830. These were trying times for London bankers and John [iii] Martin had the difficult task of negotiating the difficult transition from war to peace after 1815 and the financial instability that ensued, culminating in the widespread financial crisis of 1825-6. By cautious application and avoiding undue speculation, the Grasshopper came through the period relatively unscathed. The traditions laid down from the first generation of Martins in the bank of prudence, discretion, and balanced judgement, proved again of the greatest significance. On 5 March 1803 John [iii] Martin married Frances (1770-1862), daughter of Richard Stone, a partner in the Grasshopper. They had five sons and two daughters. Three of his sons, John [iv] Martin (1805-1880), James [iii] Martin (1807-1878), and Robert Martin (1808-1897), all became partners in the Grasshopper, ensuring the close connection of the Martin family with its development into the later nineteenth century. John [iii] Martin lived in Lombard Street and Downing Street, before moving out to Camden Place, Chislehurst, in Kent. He maintained the family tradition of representing Tewkesbury in parliament, being elected MP in 1812 and holding the seat through consecutive parliaments until his death. He died on 4 January 1832 at Chislehurst, Kent, at the age of fifty-seven, and was buried at Ledbury on 13 January 1832. 
The Grasshopper remained a successful private bank until the Baring crisis of 1890 demonstrated the dangers of unlimited liability. In the following year, the partners decided to seek incorporation and the business became Martin's Bank Ltd in 1891. In 1918 it amalgamated with the Bank of Liverpool, becoming the Bank of Liverpool and Martins Ltd, the title reverting to Martins Bank Ltd in 1928. In 1969 the bank merged with Barclays Bank plc, after more than four hundred years of continuous banking activity on the same site in Lombard Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 53428


Martin family (per. c.1700-1832), bankers, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 53429


Mullock, Richard (1851-1920), sports administrator, was born on 31 May 1851 in Newport, Monmouthshire, the eldest of the four children of Henry Mullock (1826-1914), a local commercial printer, and his wife, Henrietta (1819-1896). The Mullock family played a prominent role in the municipal, commercial, philanthropic, and artistic life of nineteenth-century Newport. Richard Mullock, who entered into partnership with his father in 1877, invested his own energies outside the daily routine of the family printing business in the organization of local and national sport. 
Mullock helped bring the Newport athletic club into existence in 1874, when he handed over a $100 profit from an athletics meeting he had arranged to the secretary of the town cricket club, Edward Bellerby. The two men occupied the joint secretaryship until 1883. Mullock's administrative skills were also in evidence as secretary of the Newport Infirmary from 1877 to 1884, but it was as an energetic promoter of the emerging game of rugby football that he became most widely known. He arranged the first erratically flickering 'electric light' match seen in Wales, when Newport played against Cardiff at Rodney Parade on 16 October 1878, and then pulled off another coup by inviting the crack English side Blackheath to play their first ever fixture in Wales, against Newport on 20 November 1879. The subsequent drubbing by the 'heathens' of the leading Welsh side of the time convinced Mullock that rugby in Wales would improve only if it were taken out of the unambitious hands of its Neath-based organizing body, the South Wales Football Union. On his own initiative he met with other Welsh club representatives at Swansea in March 1880 and then proceeded to open independent negotiations with the Rugby Football Union in London, who on 30 November 1880 considered 'a letter from Mr. R. Mullock of Newport, Monmouthshire, proposing a match with Wales'. Drawing on a wide range of personal, club, and college contacts Mullock hurried to assemble a side that played the full English fifteen at Blackheath on 19 February 1881. 
Although Mullock's scratch team was heavily defeated, the momentum generated by his bold move proved unstoppable. With characteristic bravado, and to the chagrin of official Welsh rugby circles, he summoned representatives of eleven clubs to the Castle Hotel, Neath, on 12 March 1881, and the Welsh Rugby Union (WRU) came into existence. Mullock, who had precipitated its birth, was elected both secretary and treasurer, and the retrospective award of caps to the fifteen who had played at Blackheath gave official recognition to Wales's first international team. For the next decade the purposeful Mullock, portly in appearance and brusque in manner, ran the fledgeling union's affairs until his perceived high-handedness and casual approach to financial matters provoked his downfall. Having narrowly survived a bid to unseat him at the WRU's annual meeting in 1886, he obtained a stay of execution in 1887, when he was able to report the union's first credit balance, and for the next two years he was one of Wales's three nominees on the International Rugby Board (founded in 1886). But whereas in the WRU's early years Mullock had met some of its expenses from his own pocket, by 1890 he was rumoured to be guilty of financial impropriety, and the following year he was forced to relinquish the treasurership. He remained as honorary secretary, but only for one more year: at the WRU's annual general meeting on 10 September 1892 he was awarded a testimonial of 100 guineas and the decision was taken to appoint a paid secretary. 
Had Mullock enjoyed the annual stipend of $50 voted to his successor, W. H. Gwynn of Swansea, by the WRU he might have been saved from his subsequent financial difficulties. In April 1893 he was declared a bankrupt, although he continued in the family firm, which in 1897 bound the testimonial book for A. J. Gould, illuminated by Mullock himself. His considerable artistic talent won him high praise as curator of the fine art section of the Royal National Eisteddfod held in Newport in 1897, and he was renowned as a skilled copyist of engravings. When in 1902 he was sued in court for $3 of goods he pleaded that the $1 a month he earned from selling drawings was insufficient to support his wife, Emily ('nee' Phillips), whom he had married in March 1874, and their six children. He left the Newport area and disappeared from public view. The family's artistic streak was inherited by his daughter Dorothy Mullock, whose stylish illustrations for two plays by Clifford Bax, 'The Rose and the Cross' (1918) and 'Prelude and Fugue' (1923), indicate her currency in fashionable London circles of the time. 
Richard Mullock died in St Thomas's Hospital, London, on 8 July 1920, after an operation for throat cancer. By then he was living and working as a printer's clerk in Chiswick, in an elusive obscurity far removed from the publicity that had surrounded him as the founding father of the Welsh Rugby Union. 


@@@@@


doc= 53430


Robertson, James (1813/14-1888), engraver and photographer, son of Thomas James Robertson (occupation unknown) of Middlesex, was probably born in Middlesex. No record of his early years has come to light, but he spent most of his professional career in Constantinople, as chief engraver at the imperial mint. This appointment makes plausible the belief that he was the same Robertson who exhibited four medals at the Royal Academy in London, between 1833 and 1840. While still in England, he studied under William Wyon, chief engraver at the Royal Mint in London from 1828 onwards. When, about 1840, the new sultan decided to modernize the imperial mint in Constantinople, Robertson was one of several Europeans selected for the task, and his long career at the centre of the Ottoman empire began in 1841. In Constantinople, on 19 April 1855, he married Maria Matilda Beato, the sister of Felice Beato, the man about to become his partner in a photographic business. This family connection doubtless explains the intrepid plan Robertson made for the last years of his life. Less than a fortnight after the farewell dinner given to honour him in Constantinople on his retirement from the mint, on 29 October 1881, Robertson with his wife and three daughters embarked for Japan, to rejoin Beato, who had settled in Yokohama. 
Within Robertson's forty-year career as a medallist and engraver is a fifteen-year spell as an active photographer. He enjoyed making sketches and water-colours, and with such tastes, coupled with his professional training, it is not surprising that he took up photography. From the first he seems to have thought of it as a serious occupation, not merely a hobby, and to have sensed its potential for bringing both fame and fortune. The earliest record of his work can be found in the entry for 4 July 1853 in the diary of the earl of Carlisle who, on that day of his visit to Constantinople, had just acquired some Robertson views. The last record is of the photographic firm established by Robertson some time later in Pera, the European quarter of the city. The company was still in business during the spring of 1867, but was put up for sale in the autumn of that year. Robertson's reputation rests on his beautifully composed views of cities and landscapes throughout the Ottoman empire and the Mediterranean world. 
Settled in Constantinople, Robertson was well positioned to earn his place in history as one of the first war photographers. During the Crimean War (1854-6) he photographed British troops after their disembarkation at Scutari, but fame was established by his sobering documentary records of shattered fortifications and destroyed dockyards on the Crimean peninsula, made after the fall of Sevastopol in the autumn of 1855 and spring 1856. His images became known to contemporaries through exhibitions (such as that in London in 1856), published albums, and woodcuts based on the photographs which appeared in such journals as the 'Illustrated London News'. 
Robertson died in Japan, probably in Yokohama, on 18 April 1888, his wife surviving him. 


@@@@@


doc= 53433


Ben Holden Driver Warriss (1909-1993) had been born in the same bed as his cousin at 52 Andover Street, Sheffield, five months earlier than Jewel, on 29 May 1909, the son of Benjamin Holden Joseph Warriss, insurance company's inspector, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Driver, Jewel's mother's sister. 


@@@@@


doc= 53439


Haryett, Elizabeth Ann, countess of Beauregard in the French nobility (bap. 1823?, d. 1865), courtesan, was, like most of her kind, of obscure origins, but she has been tentatively identified with the Elizabeth Ann Haryett who was baptized at the church of St Nicholas, Brighton, on 13 August 1823, the daughter of Joseph Gawan Haryett and Elizabeth Alderton. After an early introduction to the life of a courtesan, she took the name Lizzie Howard and rapidly advanced in her profession; by 1840 she was among the most sought-after whores in London. She rapidly made a large fortune (one client was said to have paid $1000 for one night's entertainment). 
Haryett was introduced to Prince Louis Napoleon, later Napoleon III, by the Count D'Orsay at Gore House in 1839, and apparently fell in love. Whether she part-financed his Boulogne expedition of 1840 as was often claimed is not now known, but over the next eleven years she certainly advanced him large sums of money. The son she bore in 1842, Martin Constantin Haryett, was widely regarded as Louis Napoleon's, although it is equally likely that he was not. She rebuffed a potential client, the historian A. W. Kinglake, at about this time: he was unremittingly hostile to the French emperor. In 1846, when Louis Napoleon escaped from his captivity and returned to London, he set her up as his mistress in a house in Berkeley Street, where they remained until, following the revolution of 1848, he returned to France to contest the presidential elections. Miss Howard, who followed him across the channel, contributed largely to the presidential coffers (the sums have been estimated at anything between $13,000 and $320,000) and lived openly as his mistress. She evidently hoped to emulate the great mistresses of previous French kings, but in 1852, having declared himself emperor, Napoleon III decided to marry. Miss Howard was now surplus to requirements and, after some difficult scenes, was paid off. Accounts of the total amounts she received from the emperor vary as wildly as those of her gifts to him, but it is certain that she was created countess of Beauregard, and given the Chateau Beauregard and its 450 acre estate near Versailles, together with an annual pension estimated at $20,000. Her son was created count of Bechevet, which some have taken as an acknowledgement of his imperial parentage. 
On 16 May 1854 the countess married Clarence Trelawny ('b'. 1826), a scion of the Salusbury-Trelawny family, who was at that time an officer in the Austrian army. It was an unhappy marriage and ended in divorce in February 1865. (No mention of it is made in the genealogies of 'Burke's Peerage'.) Elizabeth long bore a grudge against the emperor, and especially against his wife, the Empress Eugenie, and when in Paris flaunted herself before them, taking boxes at the opera opposite theirs and driving her carriage behind the empress's. In the early 1860s Trelawny took a shooting lodge in Scotland for two years, but they did not visit the neighbours; great was the consternation when it was discovered that the religious and moral society of Ross-shire had been harbouring so notorious a woman. After the divorce the countess returned to her chateau outside Paris, and to her amusement of pestering the imperial couple. She died unexpectedly on 19 August 1865 at the Chateau Beauregard. Rumours of foul play were probably unsubstantiated. Her entry in the death registers of La Celle St Cloud described her as 'Elizabeth Ann Haryett, called Miss Howard, Countess de Beauregard, born in England in 1823'. 


@@@@@


doc= 53440


White, Sir Dick Goldsmith (1906-1993), intelligence officer, was born on 20 December 1906 at 119 High Street, Tonbridge, Kent, the youngest of three children of Percy Hall White, an ironmonger and agricultural engineer, and his wife, Gertrude ('nee' Farthing), of Edenbridge. White's early childhood was comfortable, but his father was over-ambitious in business and careless with money, and in 1913 the family endured a financial crash. White never forgot the shock of the sudden collapse into near penury. In 1917 he was sent to Bishop's Stortford College. Although he was initially seen as a rather quiet and self-contained schoolboy, his potential gradually became clear, and in his final year he was captain of cricket, rugby, and athletics, at the last of which he excelled. In 1925, having applied unsuccessfully to join the Royal Navy, he went to Christ Church, Oxford, to read history. There he came under the influence of the history don J. C. Masterman, who was to be a mentor, friend, and wartime colleague. White, tall, slim, fair-haired, and blue-eyed, made his mark on college and university life as a man at once unassuming and accomplished. A good though not outstanding student, congenial rather than gregarious, he won a blue as a middle-distance runner. Although he narrowly missed a first in his finals, he secured a two-year Commonwealth Fund fellowship to study American history in the United States. White enrolled at the University of Michigan, a useful choice outside the Ivy League which brought him into America's heartland. During his two years in America he travelled widely and for a time studied in California, although without completing any substantial piece of work. He returned home in 1930 uncertain what he should do with his life, although he hankered after the world of letters. He sought an opening in journalism, spent some weeks in Florence learning Italian, and briefly took up and then abandoned a postgraduate exhibition at Christ Church. After an inconsequential and unsettled year he drifted into teaching, initially by supervising a group of public schoolboys visiting Australia and New Zealand under a Dominions Office travel scheme. Early in 1932 he was appointed a schoolmaster at Whitgift School in Croydon. There, it appeared, White had finally found his niche. He quickly made his mark both in the classroom and on the playing field as a gifted and compassionate teacher and an inspiring coach, and he seemed set fair for a career in education; his lifelong friend Denis Greenhill believed that, had he remained in teaching, he would have become 'a great headmaster'. 
That White swapped Whitgift for Whitehall was completely a matter of chance. While taking part in a British public school tour of Australia and New Zealand White had met Lieutenant-Colonel Malcolm Cumming, who subsequently joined the security service in 1934. Cumming had been impressed by White, and duly recommended him to his MI5 superiors for appointment. A few months later White was approached by Guy Liddell of MI5 and was invited to join the service. The decision to accept cannot have been easy for White: he enjoyed teaching, and the job he was being offered in a small and shadowy Whitehall agency staffed mainly by superannuated army officers promised neither a decent salary nor eventual public rank and esteem. But he thought that a war was coming and he could see the value of the work to be done, so after consulting Masterman and deliberating for a time he took the plunge in January 1936. 
White was the first recruit to join the Security Service as a graduate, and almost its first without previous military or police experience. His first role was appropriate to someone of his academic background and experience: he was sent in the guise of an advanced student on a nine-month tour of Germany. His task was to observe and to learn rather than to recruit agents or to spy. He perfected his German, and he obtained a valuable insight into the nature of the Nazi regime, while also experiencing the vicissitudes of operating under cover. 
On his return to London, White was assigned to counter-espionage, concentrating on the activities of German diplomats in Britain. Modest, willing to learn from others, and incisive, he quickly won acceptance in a service which, despite its hidebound image -- particularly as afterwards portrayed by academic imports into wartime Whitehall -- had by 1937 succeeded in penetrating the German embassy as well as making contacts with other anti-Nazi Germans, and White dealt with some of these ideologically motivated sources. By the time war was declared, MI5 had enjoyed some success against individual German intelligence operations, although it did not then have a clear view of the overall threat. Officers were successfully running the important double agent Snow, and through him and other sources had obtained a good deal of information on German plans for espionage and sabotage in the United Kingdom and Ireland. Careful management of Snow and of other spies caught in 1939-40 saw the elaboration of the practice whereby captured agents were induced to feed back false and misleading information to Germany and to claim that they had built up networks of sub-agents and informers. In January 1941 an inter-services group, the Twenty (or double-cross) Committee, was established to identify genuine material which could safely be provided for these controlled agents to send back to Germany. This was the genesis of the double-cross system. It soon became clear that almost all enemy agents operating in the United Kingdom were already under British control, a conclusion supported by intercepted German intelligence radio traffic. Within MI5 White, along with other officers including the highly experienced T. A. (Tar) Robertson, played a crucial role in the subtle development of double-cross from a highly successful counter-intelligence operation into an instrument of strategic deception under the overall direction of the chiefs of staff. This work brought White into an interdepartmental milieu for which he was well suited: in partnership with Masterman, who was one of a number of academics and lawyers brought into MI5 during the war and who became secretary of the Twenty Committee, he was able to represent MI5's viewpoint firmly but without creating friction. 
White brought to the management of double agents an insight into character, a sureness of touch, and an ability to command the confidence of those with whom he dealt. These were attributes also to characterize his post-war career: even in the poisonous and sometimes paranoid world of secret intelligence, people who met him respected and trusted him. His ability to inspire confidence and to bring people along with him was reflected not only in his standing within the service. In 1943 White was drawn into the planning of counter-intelligence organization and operations in support of the invasion of France, and from then until 1945 he was largely occupied with European security affairs. He worked closely with Eisenhower's staff, including Walter Beddell Smith, a future head of the Central Intelligence Agency. At the very end of the war, by then holding the military rank of brigadier, he was involved in the inter-allied investigation which concluded that Hitler had indeed died in his Berlin bunker. In 1945 he was honoured with the award of the French Croix de Guerre and appointment to the American Legion of Merit. On 28 November that year he married Kathleen (Kate) Somers Tomkinson, 'nee' Bellamy (b. 1911/12), who already had a daughter by a previous marriage; they had two sons. White's family life was close-knit, and he was never happier than when at home. 
The evolution of double-cross saw a parallel -- though not commensurate -- rise in MI5's standing within Whitehall. By 1945 there were hopes that its success in developing and managing double-cross, in the face of difficulties which sometimes lay as much in Whitehall as in Berlin, would secure the service a central role in strategic deception in any future military conflict. In the event, the advent of the cold war brought such a weight of security problems, in addition to those arising from pressures for decolonization throughout the empire, that this planned dimension of MI5's post-war activities never took shape. 
In 1945-6 White toured the Commonwealth and colonies, both to review and advise on local intelligence and security arrangements and to trawl for talent for MI5. This experience gave him an insight into the range of overseas problems which Britain was to face over the next twenty years as decolonization gathered pace and as the pressures of the cold war grew in Asia and Africa. Within the service he was already seen as a future chief, though he wore the mantle of the coming man lightly and he avoided office intrigues. 
In 1945 the director-general of MI5, Sir David Petrie, retired, and Percy Sillitoe, a former chief constable, was appointed to succeed him. This was not a happy choice: Sillitoe brought to MI5 the outlook and management style of a tough provincial policeman, and he had no experience of intelligence affairs. Furthermore, he was unable to adapt to the ways of Whitehall, and this was to cost MI5 dearly when the first post-war security crises broke. White and other senior officers, while uneasy with Sillitoe, kept the show on the road, and the service prospered modestly as a result of its wartime successes. It recruited able and experienced officers from the armed services and from colonial administrations, and it maintained a network of former officers, friends, and contacts within Whitehall and the academic and legal worlds. Furthermore, the very close intelligence and security links with the United States built up during the war were assiduously developed. Here White's personal standing was crucial: his friend Denis Greenhill wrote that 'Dick was not one of those Englishmen who thought that the fact that our secret service could trace its ancestry back to Queen Elizabeth I assured its superiority for all time', and even in the darkest days of the interlinked crises of Guy Burgess and Donald Maclean, and of Kim Philby, the Americans never lost confidence in him personally. The security services of other friendly states inside and outside the Commonwealth held him in equally high regard: in 1981 an ailing former director of Irish military intelligence particularly asked a mutual acquaintance to tell White that 'he's a great man'. 
The decade after 1945 saw the revelation, through a series of spy scandals centred first on the Anglo-American atomic weapons programme and second on the Foreign Office and the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS), of considerable long-term Soviet penetration of the British establishment. Although the machinations of the Comintern and the activities of the Communist Party of Great Britain had been among MI5's principal inter-war concerns until the mid-1930s, in contrast to its first pre-war successes against German espionage, which had helped to lay the foundations for its spectacular wartime achievements, its surveillance of known communist groups and front organizations had left it completely unaware of the parallel but more sophisticated subversive activities of Soviet agents operating independently to recruit Englishmen as long-term agents. The result was that during the war a coterie of very able traitors had worked their way into key positions, including Donald Maclean in the Foreign Office, Anthony Blunt in MI5, and especially Kim Philby in SIS. Even when the reality of Soviet penetration of the atomic bomb project was brought to light with the detection of the scientist traitors Alan Nunn May and Klaus Fuchs, and despite warnings from Soviet defectors, Whitehall and in particular the Foreign Office failed to appreciate that the same techniques of ideological seduction could well have been used against other officials. 
In the public furore and the Whitehall storm that followed the disappearance of Burgess and Maclean, MI5 emerged in an unfavourable light. Sillitoe was out of his depth, and it fell to White and other senior officers to defend the service externally, to initiate a thorough trawl for other Soviet agents, and to begin to repair relations with the American intelligence agencies. This work was greatly complicated by the fact that within Whitehall opinion was bitterly divided about Philby, under suspicion as a result of the tip-off to Maclean. Investigation and interrogation of this most able of dissimulators proved inconclusive, although White and other MI5 officers concluded that he was a traitor. But many in SIS thought Philby innocent, and after his career officially ended in 1951 he was publicly exonerated by the foreign secretary in 1955. 
In 1953 Sillitoe retired from MI5, to the great relief of the service. White was selected to succeed him. This was widely welcomed within MI5 on account of his record, his personality, his high standing with the Americans, his good relations with Commonwealth intelligence services, and his understanding of Whitehall. He brought calm where there had been chaos, he secured the service's flank against attack from other departments, he was incisive and persuasive on paper and in person, and he commanded the confidence of ministers. He instituted a radical reorganization of MI5, including the creation of a separate personnel and recruitment division. He also secured Treasury approval for the long-overdue introduction of a proper career structure along civil-service lines. This enabled the service systematically to recruit and to retain good personnel. White's greatest difficulties during his years as director-general of MI5 arose not in managing internal change or in coping with external criticism of the service's failure to detect Soviet penetration, but in overseeing the necessary post mortems and in supervising the hunt for other Soviet agents within the establishment. In retrospect it is clear that more might have been done earlier to ascertain the extent and persistence of infection; at the time, however, MI5 had to strike a delicate balance between prudence and paranoia. 
After three years at the helm in MI5 White was abruptly transplanted to the very different world of SIS. This unexpected move was a consequence of the Commander Crabbe imbroglio, a freelance SIS operation against a Soviet cruiser visiting Portsmouth which went disastrously and publicly wrong. The head of SIS, Sir John Sinclair, was pushed out, and White was offered his post. He accepted out of duty, not ambition: he liked running MI5, and must have been apprehensive about the reaction he would encounter in the rather different world of 54 Broadway. In truth his appointment came more as a relief than a joy to SIS. While he was well known and generally liked, like his reviled predecessor Sinclair he came from outside the service. He had no personal experience of foreign intelligence gathering -- he once ruefully remarked to a subordinate that he wished that he had run agents in the field, as he felt that he would then have had a better grasp of the human pressures under which SIS officers worked -- but he had vast knowledge of counter-intelligence, he understood Whitehall, he had excellent international contacts, and he could manage. As head of SIS his approach, once he had imposed a necessary reorganization, was to concentrate on the service's external relations with Whitehall and the wider world and to let his directors get on with their jobs, a style which contributed to a perception among some field officers that he was aloof and out of touch. 
White's achievements as head of SIS are hard to estimate. He undoubtedly succeeded in restoring morale and in improving relations with the Foreign Office and the Cabinet Office. But secret intelligence operations of their nature are not intended to become public knowledge for a very long time, if ever, and it is uncertain what the organization did or failed to do under White's direction in cold war and other spheres of activity. The biggest known success was the recruitment of the Soviet agent Oleg Penkovsky, who provided an astonishing stream of technical intelligence on Soviet missile technology, crucial during the Cuban missile crisis, until his arrest and execution in 1963; the greatest public disaster was the treachery of the SIS officer George Blake. Philby's betrayal still cast a long shadow, but the Penkovsky success, together with White's presence as head of SIS, went far towards repairing Britain's standing with the American intelligence community. 
When the time came for White to retire in 1968, the selection of a successor proved difficult. In the event White was succeeded not by the outstanding internal candidate Maurice Oldfield but by Sir John Rennie, widely regarded as a Foreign Office cast-off beset by serious family problems. His performance was to vindicate his critics. Some felt that White should have tried to prevent that appointment, but the outgoing head of a department has no right of veto on his successor and to oppose the Foreign Office might have been to make enduring trouble for SIS. 
On his retirement from SIS, White was appointed to the newly created post of co-ordinator of intelligence in the Cabinet Office. This innovation was seen as the brainchild of the cabinet secretary, his one-time Whitgift pupil Sir Burke Trend, who took a keen interest in intelligence matters and who particularly valued White's unrivalled experience of the secret world and his advice on international and security affairs. The appointment of White to this novel position was not without its critics, and it is fair to say that only a man of his standing, tact, and judgement could have made a success of it without provoking monumental rows. White eschewed any temptation to turn the post into an overlordship of the various intelligence agencies or otherwise to throw his weight around, and instead concentrated on giving advice when asked. Some argue that this approach was tantamount to doing nothing at all, but there is no doubt that White's personal contribution was valued in the Cabinet Office. His influence was crucial in securing government approval for the preparation under F. H. Hinsley of the multi-volume official history, 'British Intelligence in the Second World War: its Influence on Strategy and Operations', an enterprise that demonstrated the extent of MI5's wartime successes both in counter-espionage and in strategic deception as well as the achievements of Britain's code-breakers. In 1972, feeling rather worn out, he retired from Whitehall for good. 
In retirement White spent most of his time gardening and reading -- his literary streak remained strong, and some of his poetry was circulated among former colleagues. In 1981 he was elected an honorary student of Christ Church, a distinction of which he was very proud. He became as accessible to researchers and journalists as a man could safely be who knew so many state and private secrets, and in 1981 he wrote to 'The Times' to deprecate the claim that Roger Hollis had been a traitor. Some in Whitehall faulted his judgement in retirement in making himself so accessible, arguing that he was ignoring rules and procedures which he had enjoined on others when in office. He was on particularly close terms with the journalist Andrew Boyle, whose book 'The Climate of Treason' (1979) led to the exposure of Anthony Blunt; he later granted interviews to the BBC producer Tom Bower, whose rather inappropriately titled 'The Perfect English Spy: Sir Dick White and the Secret War, 1935-90' appeared in 1995. Dick White was not a spy at all, but an able, patriotic, and humane leader of men who, exceptionally for one who headed successively the two most secret arms of government, commanded enduring trust across Whitehall and Westminster. White was appointed OBE in 1942, CBE in 1950, KBE in 1955, and KCMG in 1960. He died after a long illness at his home, The Leat, Burpham, near Arundel, Sussex, on 21 February 1993; his wife, Kate, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 53451


Winstanley, Michael Platt, Baron Winstanley (1918-1993), physician, politician, and broadcaster, was born on 27 August 1918 at Green Bank, Willaston, near Nantwich, in Cheshire, the first son and second child of Sydney Adams Winstanley (1878-1953), a doctor in general practice, and his wife, Isabella Beattie, 'nee' Platt (1883-1948). His father came from engineering stock, an ancestor having been inventor of the Winstanley mining lamp. His mother was Scottish, brought up on the royal estate at Ballater, and an accomplished opera singer. Winstanley was educated at Manchester grammar school and at Manchester University, where he took a medical degree. At university he was president of the union, editor of the university magazine, and captain of the cricket club. His sportsmanship extended well beyond cricket to encompass lacrosse, golf, athletics, rugby, table tennis, and snooker. He later contributed a regular sports column to the 'Manchester Evening News'. On 20 January 1945 he married Nancy Bennett Penney (1920-2001), a fellow physician. Having had one son their marriage was dissolved, in 1952. Winstanley served with the Royal Army Medical Corps from 1946 to 1948 before entering the family practice in Urmston, Lancashire. 
Winstanley combined his general practice with work as a medical officer of the Royal Ordnance factory in Patricroft, Lancashire, from 1950 and as a Treasury medical officer and Admiralty surgeon and agent from 1953. On 31 March 1955 he married Joyce Mary Woodhouse ('b'. 1928), an antiques dealer, with whom he had a son and a daughter. He became heavily involved in the British Medical Association and the Lancashire executive council of the National Health Service, and after 1957 often appeared as Granada television's 'screen doctor'. This role and his regular column in the 'TV Times' reflected his deeply held belief in the importance of health education. 
As a well-known active political campaigner not aligned with either of the major parties Winstanley was a prime target for recruitment by Jo Grimond's Liberal Party. He was equally impressed by Grimond's visionary approach and the potential that existed for an energetic expert to have a major impact on Liberal policy. He became a member of the Liberal Party council and was soon selected as prospective parliamentary candidate for Stretford. He took nearly one quarter of the vote in the general election of 1964 -- a creditable performance -- and quickly transferred, as prospective candidate, to the Cheadle division. Cheadle had been the scene of intense Liberal activity at local government level in the early 1960s, and in defeat Roger Cuss had polled the largest Liberal vote in the country -- 25,220 -- in 1964. Winstanley's decision to stand in the next general election marked a significant shift in his career away from general practice and towards a new role. Success in 1966 was far from being a foregone conclusion, but his broadcasting work undoubtedly contributed to his victory by 655 votes. 
In parliament Winstanley spoke on health, broadcasting, and Post Office questions, and as someone who could get by on little sleep was often called upon to keep the Liberal flag flying in late-night debates. From 1967 to 1970 he was a member of the General Advisory Council of the BBC, and he was also a member of the select committee on the parliamentary commissioner for administration. He contributed a chapter on the role of the committee to 'The Growth of Parliamentary Scrutiny by Committees', published in 1970, and after his defeat by 1754 votes in the general election of 1970 he continued to focus on citizens' rights. He presented Granada's teatime social action programme 'This is your right' from 1970 until stopped by the Independent Broadcasting Authority, before the first 1974 general election. The programme increased his regional profile and generated two books to add to the three earlier medical books that he had written. 
Winstanley's television work was a continuation of the work that he undertook on behalf of his constituents. Like all Liberals, by necessity he put much effort into constituency casework, and this helped him to victory in the new Hazel Grove constituency -- by 1998 votes -- in February 1974. Eight months later his marginal seat was lost again; in 1975 he was elevated to the peerage as Lord Winstanley of Urmston. 
Until his death Winstanley was an active member of the Lords, speaking mostly on broadcasting and health and other social issues. An amusing man with a lively speaking style, he could explain difficult or dry subjects using vivid everyday examples. As a peer he also became involved with a number of organizations that represented his wide range of interests, including the Post Office Board and the birth control campaign. He was a director of Piccadilly Radio in Manchester, a founder and chairman of the Groundwork Trust from 1980, president of the Fluoridation Society from 1984, and deputy pro-chancellor of Lancaster University from 1986. He chaired the Countryside Commission from 1978 to 1980, his early departure perhaps reflecting a lack of empathy with the Thatcher government. Winstanley died at his home -- 93 Bankhall Lane, Hale, Cheshire -- on 18 July 1993, after a short battle with prostate cancer, and was cremated eight days later at Altrincham. He was survived by his wife. 
Energetic, enthusiastic, imaginative, and down to earth, Winstanley was an enormous asset to the Liberal Party at a time when it could boast few. Had he joined one of the other parties he would have enjoyed a longer career in the House of Commons, although to the detriment of his broadcasting career and the House of Lords, of which he became a member at a relatively early age. On his death his Liberal colleague Richard Wainwright described him as 'a model democrat in an age which produced too few of his kind' ('The Guardian'). 


@@@@@


doc= 53454


Wisdom, (Arthur) John Terence Dibben (1904-1993), philosopher, was born on 12 September 1904 at 69A Davies Road, Leyton, Essex, the youngest of the six children of Henry John William Cridland Wisdom (1864-1937), a Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Edith Susan, 'nee' Dibben. In 1909, after four years in parishes in Devon and Cornwall, the family settled in the rectory of Hartest, Bury St Edmunds. John Wisdom, as he was known, was educated at Aldeburgh Lodge School and, briefly, at Monkton Combe School, Somerset. In 1921 he became a member of Fitzwilliam House, Cambridge. At Cambridge he read moral sciences and attended lectures by G. E. Moore, C. D. Broad, and J. M. E. McTaggart. After graduating BA in 1924 he was employed by the National Institute of Industrial Psychology. In 1929 he was appointed lecturer at the University of St Andrews, in the department of logic and metaphysics under G. F. Stout. 
Wisdom's early publications, from 1931 to 1934, established his reputation as an exponent of the theory of philosophical analysis associated with Russell, Moore, and Wittgenstein's 'Tractatus'. 'Problems of Mind and Matter' (1934) offers an introduction to the method of analysis, with critical discussions of Moore, Broad, and Stout. In 1934 Wisdom was appointed lecturer in moral sciences at Cambridge, leading to a fellowship at Trinity College. Wittgenstein had been at Trinity since 1929. Having rejected the logical atomism of 'Tractatus', he was developing the subtle critique of both traditional metaphysics and current analytic philosophy that occupied his later years. Wisdom was impressed, and soon papers appeared with acknowledgements to Wittgenstein. Yet even the earliest signalled a difference between them. Wittgenstein, Wisdom wrote, 'too much represents [metaphysical theories] as merely symptoms of linguistic confusion. I wish to represent them as also symptoms of linguistic penetration' ('Philosophical perplexity', 'Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society', 16, 1936; repr. in J. Wisdom, 'Philosophy and Psycho-Analysis', 1953). By 'linguistic penetration' Wisdom meant insight into the types of statement or question, into their roles and inter-relations. Previously he had seen the aim of philosophy as comprehensive 'perfect ostentation', complete analysis of all other statements or facts into the ultimate types of statement or fact. Now he saw reductive analyses as being, if interesting, false -- assimilating types of statement or question in ways that ignore irreducible differences but nevertheless embody insight, not otherwise easily conveyed, into logical and epistemological relations. Conversely, metaphysical realism, embracing 'the idiosyncrasy platitude' that 'everything is what it is, and not another thing', correctly distinguishes different kinds of question, but characteristically responds with unhelpful multiplication of 'ultimate' types of proposition or entity or knowledge. Scepticism figures in a three-way dialectic, typically springing from metaphysical realism, but thereby motivating reductive analyses. The model covers 'most or all metaphysical conflict' ('Metaphysics and verification', 'Mind', 47, 1938; repr. in J. Wisdom, 'Philosophy and Psycho-Analysis', 1953), and its application to the philosophy of mind is pursued at length in another series of articles in 'Mind', 'Other minds' (1940-43; repr. as 'Other Minds', 1952). 
On 8 January 1929 Wisdom married a South African singer, Molly Iverson ('b'. 1903/4), who gave up a promising career as a soprano at Sadler's Wells. A son, Thomas, was born in 1932. During the first years of the Second World War, while his wife and son moved to Canada, Wisdom lived largely in London. The marriage did not survive the separation. On 27 July 1950 Wisdom married Pamela Elspeth Strain (1914/15-1989), a painter. 
Wisdom's characterizations of philosophical truth and insight increasingly reflected his interest in literature, art, religious belief, and psychoanalysis (of which he had personal experience). In argument anticipating later ethical realism, he links the question of the nature of truth and insight in each of these areas with the question of the nature of value and of the distinction between reasonable and unreasonable attitudes or feelings towards things and people. Such truths, like those of philosophy, are elusive and hard-won. Whereas Wittgenstein offers a demystifying therapy aimed at dissolving philosophical problems, if not removing the desire to philosophize, Wisdom saw a similarity between metaphysics and psychoanalysis in the very need to ask questions and to take seriously even shocking or paradoxical answers, the reasons for them as well as the objections to them, as an essential route to understanding and insight. Debate can be cut too short, as well as go on too long. 
These analogies fall within a more general consideration of judgement and reasoning that is a priori in the sense that it may take place, as Wisdom puts it, after all the facts are in. Such reflective assessment involves neither strict deduction nor inductive inference to some further fact, but can issue in a revelatory characterization of what was already otherwise known. Examples range from sober argument between lawyers as to whether such and such behaviour constitutes negligence to the paradoxes by which poets can give a new view of the familiar. Fundamental in such argument is the appeal to analogies and disanalogies between unproblematic cases and the case in question. Indeed, an analogy can express or stimulate insight by itself, without a determinate judgement. (In one example a woman sees what is wrong with a hat when her friend murmurs, 'The Taj Mahal'.) Both traditional and analytic philosophy have tended to assume that appeal to examples and analogy ('the case-by-case procedure', or 'mother's method') is indirect appeal to an unstated principle or definition ('father's method'). Wisdom's radical claim is that the reverse is true. What Mill asserts of inductive reasoning, that it is always ultimately from particular to particular, Wisdom asserts of all reasoning. The peculiarity of a priori reasoning is that the relevant particulars are not necessarily actual. General principles simply order or 'cut a path through' the possible cases. Yet, so far from disparaging them, Wisdom allows that general principles may have force even in the face of counter-examples. Since assessing the force of an analogy or general consideration (or counter-example) always calls for judgement, there is room for rational disagreement, not only about borderline cases, when good reasons exist on both sides, but with respect to extravagant yet supportable and insightful assertions (see especially J. Wisdom, 'Proof and Explanation: the Virginia Lectures', ed. S. Barker, 1991). 
Wisdom followed Wittgenstein as professor of philosophy in 1952. His lively, socratic, humorously rhetorical lectures entertained many and, by their own account, deeply engaged some, including some who later achieved eminence outside academic life. His own style was hardly academic. His direct, sociable, and unconventional personality endeared him to students, to whom he showed great personal kindness. His wiry figure, his gait, and the cut of his clothes, as well, not infrequently, as his conversation and philosophical examples, reflected his lifelong passion for everything to do with horses. He rode to hounds, and would take students to race meetings, or invite them to help exercise his two hunters. In 1968 he resigned his Cambridge chair to become distinguished professor at the University of Oregon. On retirement in 1972 he moved with Pamela to 154 Stanley Road, Cambridge, an appropriately unpretentious house next to common land for his horse. In 1978 he was elected honorary fellow of Fitzwilliam College. He died in the Hope Residential and Nursing Care Home, Brooklands Avenue, Cambridge, on 9 December 1993, four years after Pamela. 
In 1967 Wisdom was accorded a significantly longer article in Macmillan's 'Encyclopedia of Philosophy' than A. J. Ayer, yet is nowhere mentioned in 'The Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy' of 1998, as if airbrushed out of the history of analytic philosophy. A decline in reputation probably began when Wittgenstein's writings were posthumously published and attention shifted from interpreter to oracle. At the same time 'Oxford philosophy' was getting into its stride, influenced by Wittgenstein but with ambitions to replace philosophical confusion with precision of one kind or another, and with little respect for Wisdom's unorthodox style and penchant for the provocative and paradoxical. When that movement lost steam, argument took other directions. Yet Wittgenstein's thoughts about meaning and metaphysics have remained important to many analytic philosophers. Wisdom's philosophy supplies arguably the most constructive development of some of those thoughts to date, avoiding their tendency towards a purely naturalistic vision of language in favour of a view of it, difficult to extract from Wittgenstein's own reflections, as even in its intrinsic unruliness (and in its metaphysical employment) essentially the tool of human rationality. One day semantic theory will have to come to terms with that view, whether or not John Wisdom is remembered for having expounded it. 


@@@@@


doc= 53456


Woddis, Roger (1917-1993), poet and satirist, was born on 18 May 1917 at 112 Addison Way, Golders Green, north London, the son of Moses Jacob Woddis, a Polish Jew and an English teacher, and his wife, Leah, 'nee' Marcus. 
Woddis was educated at Christ's College, Finchley, and intended to become a doctor; he changed his name during his schooldays, adopting Roger in place of his given forenames. His father introduced him to Ibsen, Tolstoy, and Strindberg, and took him for long walks in the countryside north of London, while they recited poetry to each other. 
In the 1930s Woddis joined the Unity Theatre, a left-wing company, and the Communist Party. In the former he acted and fancied himself as a playwright in rhyming couplets, a dramatic form for which there was little demand. He left the Communist Party after the Soviet Union invaded Czechoslovakia in 1968. 
During the Second World War, Woddis served in an army plastic surgery field ambulance in north Africa and Italy. After the war he took the civil service exam, and was set to take a job with HM customs (appropriately enough dealing with bonded warehouses). But he resolved to make his living as a writer. 
Woddis worked first for the 'Daily Herald', on its satirical back page entitled (characteristically) 'Tell me if it hurts'. The satire boom of the 1960s brought him to wider notice. He contributed to BBC television's 'That Was The Week That Was', and coined David Frost's catchphrase: 'But seriously, they're doing a grand job.' He married Joan Elizabeth Hobson ('b'. 1928), a teacher, on 21 November 1953. They had a son and a daughter. The marriage was dissolved in 1975, but the couple remained close. 
In 1970 Dick Crossman was appointed editor of the 'New Statesman', and determined to discover a successor to Sagittarius and Reginald Reynolds, each of whom had contributed weekly satiric verses to the magazine. Crossman had only to glance at the results of the literary competitions at the back of the 'New Statesman' to find his people's Juvenal. Woddis was a regular competitor, finalist, and winner. And so for the next quarter of a century almost without a break Woddis delivered his weekly witty satire. It usually made a barbed political point, sometimes a coarse one (Woddis delighted in sexual imagery). 
In his day he hit the bull's-eye of humbug and punctured the pretensions of cabinet ministers during the Thatcher years. He was equally savage about Americans. Woddis retained a fundamental anti-Americanism from his days in the Communist Party, and waffle from successive American presidents often gave him his target. He enjoyed the teamwork of creative collaboration. This suited his lifelong socialist principles, and he saw himself as one of a William Morris brotherhood of poets, parodists, and journalists. He considered himself a popular entertainer, because he did not write 'long, torpid tomes'. Kingsley Amis described him as a 'virtuoso parodist who is also a true and original poet'. 
At one stage Woddis was contributing his sharp rhyming commentaries on the week's news simultaneously to 'Punch' and the 'Radio Times' as well as the 'New Statesman'. And although he was a master of pastiche, he never plagiarized or repeated himself. His command of metre, rhythm, and style ensured that his verse seldom lapsed into doggerel. He said: 'People ask me how I find time to do all this stuff. But I think I'm lazy. If I weren't I would have written 'War and Peace' or 'The Cherry Orchard''. 
Lazy Woddis was not, but a professional journalist in an ancient genre of the inky trade. He needed the spur of a deadline. He habitually rose at 5.30 a.m. to start work. When he became a national institution for his verses, he branched out into television. He wrote for the cult series 'The Prisoner'. In 1971 he wrote a play, 'Sherlock Holmes Investigates', for the Victoria Theatre, Stoke-on-Trent. In his spare time he wrote and published serious poetry. His collected works were published in 1984-5. 
A sociable and charming man, Woddis lived in a small flat in Palmers Green, north London. It was filled with newspapers. He described his interests as 'music, cigarettes, women and whisky'. Roger Woddis was small (5 feet 6 inches tall), with a ginger, silvered beard, and dapper in an arty way. He was not flashy or smart like a City gent, but he took trouble with his appearance and dress. During his last illness from cancer he was nursed by his former wife. He told his family that he would like his epitaph to be: 'He always met his deadline.' He died on 16 July 1993 at Whittington Hospital, Islington, and was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 53466


Zuckerman, Solly, Baron Zuckerman (1904-1993), scientist and public servant, was born on 30 May 1904 in Cape Town, Cape Colony, the eldest son and second of the five children of Moses Zuckerman, furniture and hardware merchant, and his wife, Ruth, 'nee' Glaser, a prominent Zionist and social worker. His grandparents on both sides emigrated from eastern Europe in the latter part of the nineteenth century. Little is known of their origins: 'Wandering Jews were not in the habit of carrying their genealogical records with them', wrote Zuckerman in his autobiography (Zuckerman, 'Apes', 2). He was educated from 1915 to 1920 at the South African College School, which he loathed, and Cape Town University (to 1924), which he loved and where he won a scholarship to study abroad. His special field of study was the baboon, an interest which he widened to include the chimpanzee soon after he started work in London in 1925. Professor Grafton Elliot Smith encouraged him to join the University College Hospital medical school where he remained until, at the unusually early age of twenty-four, he was appointed anatomical research fellow, prosector, at the Zoological Society in Regent's Park. Thus began a lifelong association with that body. This period was crowned by the publication of what many people would consider his most important scientific work, 'The Social Life of Monkeys and Apes' (1932), a monograph whose appearance was followed by an invitation to work at a new ape research centre set up in Florida by Yale University. Eighteen months at Yale, interspersed with hectic and highly enjoyable interludes in the high bohemia of New York, were followed in 1934 by his appointment as demonstrator and lecturer in the anatomy department at Oxford. His particular interest was the study of hormones and reproductive rhythms; for this purpose he installed a team of apes in the grounds of the department. 
On 30 October 1939 Zuckerman married Lady Joan Rufus Isaacs ['see below'], daughter of the second marquess of Reading. Lord Reading was not best pleased at the prospect of acquiring an unknown South African scientist as a son-in-law, but Zuckerman had charm and determination as well as being obviously destined to succeed. Opposition did not last long, and though Zuckerman was sometimes inconsiderate as a husband and detached as a parent, the marriage endured successfully until his death. There were two children: Paul Sebastian ('b'. 1945) and Stella Maria ('b'. 1947). 
Towards the end of 1939 Zuckerman had been offered and had provisionally accepted the Sands Cox chair of anatomy at Birmingham University. In November of that year he revived the Tots and Quots, an influential scientific dining club which he had founded in 1931 and which ran until 1946. The war put a temporary stop to Zuckerman's move to Birmingham and instead he found himself researching the effects of blast on the human body. It was the start of an involvement with questions of defence and weaponry which was to occupy much of his next fifty years. So little was known about the subject that Zuckerman was soon the leading authority, and when the blitz began in the autumn of 1940 he and Professor (John) Desmond Bernal, a fellow member of the Tots and Quots, were perpetually on the move, assessing the effects of bombs on buildings and the human beings inside them. This experience inevitably led to Zuckerman being enmeshed in the controversy over the proper use of Bomber Command. On the one hand Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Harris, backed by Winston Churchill's scientific guru, Professor Frederick Alexander Lindemann, claimed that saturation bombing of Germany's urban centres would critically damage that country's industrial capacity and destroy civilian morale. On the other, Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Tedder, backed by Patrick Blackett, Henry Tizard, and most of the other scientists, maintained that this strategy was expensive and wasteful, and that the bombers would be far better employed attacking communications behind the enemy front line. Zuckerman was emphatically in the second camp; he was right, and his arguments were cogent and forcefully put, but his indifference to the sensibilities of others alienated some potential allies and increased the obstinacy of his opponents. 
Bernal had been recruited as scientific adviser to Lord Louis Mountbatten's fledgeling combined operations organization, and he introduced Zuckerman in his wake. It proved an instant success. Mountbatten found in Zuckerman an endless source of ideas and a dry realism which curbed his own more extravagant flights of impetuosity. One of Zuckerman's first tasks was to establish on how many nights a month tides, winds, and darkness would favour landings on the French coast. He devoted several weeks to this study and then reported proudly: 'Well, it turns out that there will never be a night suitable for a landing' (Ziegler, 188). In time this relationship with Mountbatten was to become highly important in Zuckerman's career. For the rest of the war, however, it was Tedder who made the greatest use of his skills. As commander-in-chief, Mediterranean air command, and deputy supreme commander under General Eisenhower, he relied on Zuckerman's advice on a multitude of issues, great and trivial. Perhaps the most significant related to the attack on Pantelleria. This rugged volcanic island between Tunisia and Sicily was heavily defended and was deemed impregnable by its Italian occupants. Zuckerman's task was to gauge the level of bombardment necessary to reduce the defences to impotence. His calculations were amply corroborated; the garrison surrendered just as the assault troops were about to land. The lessons learned in this operation were applied in the invasion of Sicily and, eventually, at D-day. 
When the war ended Zuckerman took up his long deferred appointment as professor of anatomy at Birmingham. Though the buildings were magnificent, equipment was woefully deficient and the department existed only in embryo. With characteristic ebullience, and sublime indifference to the demands of other sectors of the medical faculty, Zuckerman built up an elite and highly successful student body. Charles Oxnard, later professor of anatomy at the University of Western Australia, wrote that the department 'produced an exodus that has taken individuals to every continent, filled many Chairs in Britain and around the world and formed a Zuckerman mafia that has had an incredible influence in each of his areas of biological research' (private information). Zuckerman could sometimes be ungenerous in the credit he gave to his collaborators and he made ferocious demands on their time and energies, but nobody could deny that he was an inspiring teacher and endlessly stimulating to work with. 
For some years Zuckerman's energies were mainly concentrated on Birmingham, but he continued to cherish his contacts with Whitehall. At the end of 1945 he was invited to join Sir Alan Barlow's committee considering how best to develop the country's scientific resources over the next decade. One recommendation was that an advisory committee on scientific policy should be established. The recommendation was accepted. The new council was appointed in January 1947, and Zuckerman, according to his autobiography, was taken aback to be asked to join it. He would have been still more taken aback, outraged indeed, if he had not been. Over the next thirty years he was to serve, often as chairman, on every Whitehall committee in which issues of scientific importance were discussed: the agricultural resources council, the fuel and power scientific advisory committee, the natural resources (technical) committee, the committee on scientific manpower, the committee on control of research and development -- the list could be almost interminable. 
In 1960 Zuckerman's career took a decisive turn when he became chief scientific adviser to the Ministry of Defence. He retained his chair at Birmingham but on an absentee basis, drawing no salary. His first task in Whitehall was to help implement the Zuckerman procedures, the rules (for whose drafting he himself had been largely responsible) for the control of defence projects and the strengthening of the role of the defence research policy committee. During his four years at the Ministry of Defence his influence was at its greatest. He renewed his close relationship with Mountbatten, who was now chief of defence staff, and the 'Zuk-Batten Axis', as it was nicknamed, became one of the dominant forces in Whitehall. In 1964 the incoming prime minister, Harold Wilson, urged Zuckerman to become minister of state dealing with disarmament negotiations. Zuckerman had no wish to become a politician and refused. Whereupon Wilson replied that, in that case, he must serve as chief scientific adviser to the government as a whole, not just to the Ministry of Defence. Though clearly a promotion, this meant that his influence was spread more thinly and the power that he had exercised was substantially reduced. 
Zuckerman retired as chief scientific adviser in 1971, at which point he was created a life peer. He did not lose his interest in public life or defence issues, however. He was particularly active on nuclear matters. He believed that the so-called independent deterrent was neither independent nor likely to deter, and that the limited use of tactical nuclear weapons to combat Russian numerical superiority would inevitably lead to catastrophic escalation. What the West needed, he believed, was not ever larger nuclear stockpiles but more mobile, well-equipped, conventional forces capable of dealing with enemy incursions. As chief scientific adviser he had been closely involved in negotiations for a partial test ban, and he continued to urge a complete cessation of testing until his death. He was an active member of the Pugwash group. 
Zuckerman had renewed his connection with the London Zoo in 1955 when he became a member of the council of the Zoological Society of London, and two years later became secretary. He claimed to have supposed that this title was largely honorific, but passivity did not come easily to him and he became in effect chief executive officer. His most controversial reform was to open the zoo to the public on Sunday mornings -- thereby abolishing the privileged entry reserved for fellows. This greatly boosted the zoo's revenues but infuriated many of the fellows. It was the first of many campaigns to modernize the zoo and put it on a sound financial basis. In 1960 he installed Prince Philip as president, and in 1977 retired as secretary and took on the presidency himself. There he remained until 1984. His contribution was immense; it must also be admitted that his increasingly autocratic attitude and intolerance of those with slower minds or bureaucratic dispositions caused much discontent. 
From time to time it was rumoured that Zuckerman was to become head of some Oxbridge college. He would undoubtedly have been effective, both as administrator and fund-raiser, but he might well have caused considerable disruption in the senior common room. Instead he became a founding force in the new University of East Anglia -- a part of England dear to him since he had settled at the Shooting Box in Burnham Thorpe, Norfolk, in 1956. His particular responsibility was the school of biological sciences, the first at any British university, but he intervened vigorously in many other fields, invariably assertive, pugnacious, convinced that he was right, and usually justified in that conviction. He left his extensive archives to the university at his death. 
Zuckerman wrote three volumes of autobiography: 'From Apes to Warlords' (1978), 'Monkeys, Men and Missiles' (1988), and 'Six Men out of the Ordinary' (1992). He was prone to drop names and overstate his own achievements, but he had plenty of names to drop, his achievements were genuinely impressive, and his writing was always lively. The book to which he attached most importance was 'Nuclear Illusion and Reality' (1982), a passionate plea for reason and restraint in a world where a single mistake could spell the end of civilization. 
Zuckerman was short and stocky, with a prominent nose and rugged features; he was not conventionally good looking, but his energy, vivacity, and directness made him attractive to many women. He received numerous honorary degrees and other honours, was made a CB in 1946, was knighted in 1956, became a KCB in 1964, and was appointed to the Order of Merit in 1968. He died of a thrombosis at his home in Burnham Thorpe on 1 April 1993; his ashes were interred in his garden. He was survived by his wife and son, his daughter having predeceased him. 
Zuckerman's wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 53467


Wells, William Thomas (1887-1967), boxer, was born on 31 August 1887 at 250 Cable Street, Stepney, London, the eldest of five brothers, and one of nine children of the musician William Thomas Wells ('b'. 1862) and his wife, Emily Rhoda Farrier ('b'. 1867), a laundress. Both parents came from waterside families and the significance of music and sport in their lives was considerable. He attended Broad Street elementary school, Shadwell, until about 1901. 
Billy Wells was a reluctant boxer. East End board schools were keen on competitive football and swimming, and he shone at both. However, the local university settlement club in Broad Street, where his father taught fife and drums, encouraged boxing through the amateur London federation of working boys' clubs for 14- to 18- year-olds. A tall lad weighing 10 stones was uncommon and the gymnastics instructor pushed amiable Billy into the ring to represent the club. The annual federation championships were keenly contested and he never won a title. 
In 1906, at the age of eighteen, Wells relinquished the messenger-boy jobs which he held after leaving school to join the Royal Artillery as a gunner. He was posted to Rawalpindi, where he found that boxing was 'the' sport among the 80,000 strong British garrison of India, and he won his divisional heavyweight championship (Quetta, 1908), and the prestigious All India title at Poona and Lucknow in succeeding years. Wells, now promoted bombardier, was training full-time and prompted by his civilian coach, Jim Maloney, a former world title contender, bought himself out of the army in 1910 to return to Britain, already tipped as a boxing prospect. Maloney followed to manage Wells's professional boxing career, and between them they earned prolifically as boxing lifted off as a spectator sport in the USA, France, and Britain. Boxing's increased takings were led by heavyweights as 'white hopes' were sought to beat the first black world champion of that division, Jack Johnson, who reigned from 1908 to 1915. 
On 24 April 1911, in his eighth professional contest, Wells won the British title and the first heavyweight Lonsdale belt, defeating the title-holder, Iron Hague, at the National Sporting Club in Covent Garden. Thereafter he drew packed houses as hero on the music hall circuit. Matched with Johnson for the world title in London in October 1911, religious opponents of excessive prize money and inter-racial contests, led by the Baptist minister Frederick Brotherton Meyer, caused the fight to be blocked. Subsequently, Wells twice travelled to New York city (June 1912 and March 1913), where on both occasions he lost decisively. Between trips to the USA, Wells married sixteen-year-old Ellen Kilroy, daughter of Luke Kilroy, a publican, on 7 September 1912. They had five children before parting. 
Bombardier Wells held the British heavyweight boxing championship for eight years between 1911 and 1919 and he defended the title fourteen times. He was an exciting boxer; of his forty-eight professional contests only two went the distance, then set at twenty rounds. His straight left followed by a right cross was exquisite to watch, and his matches turned suddenly, often against the bookmakers' odds. 
Wells joined up for military service in May 1915, was promoted to sergeant, and in 1917 went to France, where he organized physical training. After demobilization he resumed his boxing career, but lost his British heavyweight title against Joe Beckett on 27 February 1919. He retired from the ring after defeat by Jack Bloomfield in October 1922 but made a brief comeback between November 1924 and April 1925, when he finally retired. Shortly after his title victory in 1911 he published 'Modern Boxing: a Practical Guide to Present-Day Methods', which went through eight editions. 
Wells's extraordinary popularity between 1910 and 1922 rested partly upon his own physical prowess and partly on three converging social trends. Sport, particularly football and boxing, had rapidly become the pastime of everyman; an extended range of personalities covered in the press allowed women a refracted interest in boxing; and in a decade of advancing democracy the Bombardier epitomized the common people. He died at his home, The Studio, 1b Florence Road, Ealing, London, on 11 June 1967 and was cremated at Ruislip. 


@@@@@


doc= 53468


Lady Jessie Wood (1882-1979)], to whom he gave an unusual number of concert engagements around 1900-02. (Born Jessie Amy Louise de Levante on 23 November 1882, she had adopted her mother's maiden name of Goldsack for professional purposes.) In 1902 she married, moved to Bowdon near Manchester, and almost completely withdrew from professional performance. After being widowed in 1933, she returned to London and, in the hope of resuming a career, recontacted Wood. 


@@@@@


doc= 53474


Ackland, Rodney (1908-1991), playwright, was born Norman Ackland Bernstein on 18 May 1908, at 5 Palmeira Gardens, Southend, Essex, the only son of Nathan Bernstein, a Jewish mantle manufacturer originally from Warsaw, and his wife, Emily Diana Lock ('c'.1874-1959), a former musical comedy artiste specializing in pantomime boys under the stage name Ada Rodney. Nathan Bernstein made a fortune out of jewellery in the East End of London, and lost it again when his business went bankrupt in 1914. Young Norman and his two sisters grew up under the spell of their mother, who sold stockings from door to door to support the household while attempting to revive her stage career, with enthusiastic support from her small son. 
Ackland was, by his own account, educated at the cinema, putting in time at Balham grammar school until he was old enough, at fourteen, to leave and set about becoming an actor himself. He took a day job as a shop boy at Swan and Edgar, and almost immediately embarked on a lifelong affair with the Russian theatre by landing the part of Medvediev in Maksim Gorky's 'The Lower Depths' at London's tiny, experimental Gate Theatre. In 1926 he saw the first English production of Anton Chekhov's 'Three Sisters' (with the young John Gielgud as Tusenbach) in Theodore Komisarjevsky's seminal season at Barnes. Ackland always said it turned him into a playwright. 
He was nineteen when he wrote his first play, 'Improper People', performed at the Arts Theatre in 1929. His acting career (which included stints with J. B. Fagan's Oxford Players and the Masque Theatre in Edinburgh) reached its peak the same year when he starred in a touring production of John van Druten's 'Young Woodley'. He had his first success as a playwright with 'Strange Orchestra', directed in 1931 by Gielgud in the West End. Mrs Patrick Campbell emerged from retirement only to retreat into it again when she realized that the star part was a cheerful, disorderly single mother (Laura Cowie took over the role, with Jean Forbes Robertson and Hugh Williams). 
Ackland's raffish early plays had a gaiety and exuberance that distracted attention from their subversive content. But, as his imagination deepened and his technical reach grew bolder, his work increasingly dismayed audiences accustomed to the artificially restricted emotional, social, and intellectual range of drawing-room comedy. Ackland produced his own characteristic variation on the form in 'Birthday' (1934), which dissects standard middle-class assumptions and behaviour with a sombre ferocity and wit that come closer to John Vanbrugh or William Wycherley than to Ackland's more popular contemporaries, such as Dodie Smith, Terence Rattigan, and Noel Coward. 

'After October' in 1936 was the nearest Ackland came to a West End hit ('Mr Ackland's theme is gloom,' wrote James Agate, 'but I came out dog tired from laughing' ('Sunday Times', 1936)). It was followed by 'The Dark River', a strange, musical, unsettling play, by turns painful and wildly funny, that remains one of the most powerful evocations in any medium of England on the brink of the Second World War. Peggy Ashcroft shone as the heroine but, by the time the play reached the West End in 1941 with air-raid sirens interrupting the first night, the last thing London audiences wanted was a serious attempt to come to grips on stage with a frightening present and a still more uncertain future. 
Ackland's professional career spanned the 1930s, 1940s, and early 1950s when, in Kenneth Tynan's memorable phrase, straight plays in the West End seldom strayed far outside 'a country house in what used to be called Loamshire but is now, as a heroic tribute to realism, sometimes called Berkshire' (K. Tynan, 'Curtains: a Critic's View of Plays, Players and Theatrical Events, 1950-1960', 1961, 86). Ackland's world is harsher, seedier, invincibly urban, sexually louche, emotionally unstable, and morally far from reassuring. He dealt with precisely the kind of realities the Loamshire play was designed to exclude. After the war, in an age of austerity when audiences craved glamour, frivolity, and escape, Ackland's unheroic view of the period in 'The Pink Room' (1952), set in a drinking club on the eve of the 1945 general election, was rejected as morally degenerate by reviewers. Their onslaught effectively put a stop to his career as a playwright. 
Ackland was the forerunner and should have been the natural ally of the theatrical generation that came to power with the upheavals sparked off by John Osborne's 'Look Back in Anger' in 1956. But, by a characteristically Acklandesque irony, the new wave of angry young iconoclasts made no distinction between Ackland's work and the stylized sentimentality of the well-made West End play which he had himself long and stubbornly resisted. For most of the second half of his life, his plays remained unperformed and out of print. 
Ackland found consolation, to the astonishment of friends who had always known him as frankly and flamboyantly homosexual, in a serenely happy marriage to Mab Lonsdale, herself an accomplished writer, wit, and daughter of the playwright Frederick (Freddy) Lonsdale. Married in 1952, the two were inseparable until her death in 1972. Ackland's life reflected to a startling degree the inconsistencies, reversals, and ambiguities of an imaginative world so powerful that people he met frequently started behaving as shambolically as characters in an Ackland play. 
Ackland was championed by independent directors such as Frith Banbury and Tyrone Guthrie. Actors -- from Edith Evans, Flora Robson, Peter Ustinov, and Paul Scofield to Judi Dench and Alex Jennings -- responded to his work with unfailing relish. His memoirs remained unfinished except for 'The Celluloid Mistress' (1954), devoted to his largely unrequited passion for the cinema. He left a string of brilliantly theatrical adaptations of other people's work, ranging from Hugh Walpole's 'The Old Ladies' (1935) to Bulgakov's 'The White Guard' (1934), Ostrovsky's 'Diary of a Scoundrel' (1942), and Dostoyevsky's 'Crime and Punishment' (1946). He came to see himself with a certain gloomy relish as the British theatre's invisible man. 'I can't keep from my mind the bitter reflection that, when I was 15, my career started in 'The Lower Depths',' he wrote in 1986, 'and now, when I'm 78, it's in the lower depths that I'm finishing.' He lived just long enough to see the start of a widespread revival of his reputation, helped in part by his award-winning adaptation of Ostrovsky's 'Diary of a Scoundrel' as 'Too Clever by Half' in 1988. 
Ackland died of leukaemia at home in Richmond on 6 December 1991, and was cremated at Mortlake later that month. 'The Pink Room', revised and retitled 'Absolute Hell', made a triumphant return to the National Theatre in 1995. Ackland was Chekhovian in his structural command of rhythm and pattern, in his ability to write orchestrally for a large cast, and in his effect on audiences who saw themselves and their world reflected too clearly for comfort in the mirror of his work. More than any other playwright of his generation, he operated alongside poets such as Auden and MacNeice, and novelists such as Powell, Greene, and Waugh, at the cutting edge of contemporary writing between and just after the two world wars. 


@@@@@


doc= 53476


Auden, John Bicknell (1903-1991), geologist, was born on 14 December 1903 at 54 Bootham, York, the second of three sons of George Augustus Auden (1872-1957), a medical doctor, and his wife, Constance Rosalie, formerly Bicknell (1869-1941). The poet Wystan Hugh Auden (1907-1973) was his younger brother. John Auden was devoted to his maternal Bicknell aunts, whom he felt gave him more love than did his parents; their favourite was apparently Wystan, 'the spoilt third son' (Davenport-Hines, 13). The family moved to Birmingham where his father became professor of public health and in September 1915 John was sent, together with Wystan, to preparatory school at St Edmund's, Hindhead, Surrey, where he gained prizes for French, English and classics and, already wearing spectacles, was nicknamed Dodo. He was at Marlborough College from 1917 to 1922 and read geology at his father's college, Christ's, Cambridge, from 1923, gaining firsts in parts one and two of the natural sciences tripos and graduating BA 1926, MA 1930, ScD 1948. 
As a young man John wrote poetry: his 'La Ciamarella' was published in 'Christ's College Magazine' (1926). Described by Cecil Day Lewis as 'an extreme neurotic' (Davenport-Hines, 12) in the early 1930s, he suffered from depression. From 1926 to 1935 he served in the Indian geological survey, working for ten years on the Vidhyan formations of the Himalayas, and he subsequently became head of the survey. He was a keen mountaineer and founder member of the Himalayan Club in 1927; in the 1930s he explored the higher ranges of the Karakoram and Anghil and the glaciers of K2, most notably on Eric Shipton's 1937 expedition. He visited Wystan in Berlin in 1929 and his talk of the then unconquered K2 gave Wystan the idea for the play he wrote with Isherwood, 'The Ascent of F6', which he dedicated to John. Wystan also turned to a geological theme in some of his poetry. 
In 1937 John learned to fly and he explored by air the unmapped areas of the Bijaigarh shales. In 1940 he was elected president of the Presidency College, Calcutta. Between 1945 and 1951 he investigated almost all the Indian major dam sites, hydroelectric projects, irrigation works, and water supply schemes. His groundwater studies of western Rajasthan, Cutch, and Quetta were considered a landmark in Indian engineering geology. He was awarded the gold medal of the Asiatic Society in 1953 and the Da Wadia medal of the Indian National Science Academy in 1980. 
Through Wystan, John met Margaret Marshall, who was about seven years older than Wystan and wife of her second husband, Douglas Marshall. She was interested in psychology and apparently a follower of Emil Coue. Wystan described her as 'one of those pleasant pornographic women' (Davenport-Hines, 70); according to Day Lewis 'she had no tabus' (ibid., 72). While on leave, John consulted her about his depression. She treated him and tried to persuade him not to return to India. Following her husband's early death, she and John married in 1930 and went to India. The marriage was disastrous. She was a domineering woman, her spending offended John, and she was unfaithful to him. Following 'bitterness and despair in Calcutta' (ibid., 72) they separated in January 1932 and were divorced in October 1933. 
In 1940 John married Sheila Bonnerjee, daughter of an English-educated barrister and granddaughter of Woomesh Chunder Bonnerjee (1844-1906), a founder and first president of the Indian National Congress. They had two daughters, Anita and Rita. Wystan visited John in Calcutta in 1951 and then and later discussed partition with him; presumably their discussions influenced his poem 'Partition' (1966). Wystan was very fond of John's daughters, generously assisted them when they were Oxford undergraduates, and made them his residuary legatees. 
John had been brought up as an Anglo-Catholic, and in 1951 he converted to Roman Catholicism. After his retirement from the Indian survey he joined the Sudan geological survey from 1953 to 1955, and worked from 1956 to 1960 as a research geologist for the Burmah Oil Company. He then moved to Rome, working until 1968 for the land and water sources division of the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO). He was a consultant for UNESCO from 1968 to 1969 and in 1975. In retirement he lived at 43 Thurloe Square, South Kensington, close to the Geological Museum, and he served as vice-president of the Geological Society of London, where he was sharply sceptical of the new geological orthodoxy of plate tectonics. He arranged for Wystan's ecumenical funeral at Kirchstetten and contributed 'A brother's viewpoint' to 'W. H. Auden: a Tribute' (1975), edited by Stephen Spender, defending Wystan's controversial decision to desert England for the United States in 1939 when war was imminent. John died at his home on 21 January 1991, survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 53478


Alanus Anglicus (fl. c.1190-c.1210), canonist, was an Englishman who studied and taught canon law at Bologna. Little is known of his life. There is no firm evidence to support the speculation that he was identical with the 'Alanus, clerk of the lord pope Innocent III' who held the prebend of Chiswick in St Paul's Cathedral some time about 1200. About 1192 he produced the first recension of his 'Apparatus', or commentary, on Gratian's 'Decretum'. He was again in Bologna in the years from 1202, and produced a second recension of his 'Apparatus' ('c'.1205). The apparatus to 'De consecratione' (in four manuscripts of the 'Apparatus') is not certainly by Alanus. Following the work of Gilbertus Anglicus (an English canonist studying and teaching at Bologna at the end of the twelfth and the beginning of the thirteenth century), Alanus assembled a decretal collection: of 484 decretals, 345 were by Innocent III, pope from 1198 to 1216. The first recension was rapidly succeeded by a second, which, with its glosses, was influential at Bologna. He also wrote an 'Apparatus' on the decretal collection 'compilatio prima'. Alanus's most famous students were Albertus and John Galensis. Alanus's academic activity ceases to be recorded before 1210. There is no firm evidence that he became a Dominican, or that a document, dated 1238, in the archive of the Dominican convent in Bologna refers to this Alanus. 
Alanus made substantial contributions to political and legal thought. He was an originator of the well-known formula, 'the king in his kingdom is the emperor of his kingdom', a way of expressing the territorial sovereignty of kings. As he said in his apparatus on the 'compilatio prima', 'What is said of the emperor is held to be said of any king or prince who is subject to no one. For each one has as much right in his kingdom as the emperor has in the empire' (Stickler, 364). Alanus's English origins may have led him in part to the development of this idea, which should be understood against the background of the Roman law model of the emperor as universal temporal sovereign. 
Alanus also developed the idea that spiritual power was superior to temporal. The trend among canonists commenting on Gratian's 'Decretum' may be termed dualist: they presented temporal and spiritual power as being derived from God but existing in parallel. In the first recension of his 'Apparatus' to the 'Decretum' Alanus followed such an interpretation. However in his second, and better known, recension he expounded what may be termed a hierocratic argument: that the emperor derived his power from the pope. Alanus used the established 'two swords' imagery: both swords, 'spiritual' and 'material', were possessed by the pope, from whom the emperor derived his 'material' one. The pope could judge and depose the emperor, who was his subject in both temporal and spiritual matters, though because Christ had divided the functions of clergy and laity, the pope could not directly exercise the material sword. During the thirteenth century, the hierocratic interpretation increasingly supplanted the dualist in canonist thought. 
Alanus did place some limit on papal monarchy. He said that a general council of the church was greater than the pope in matters of faith, and that a heretical pope could be judged against his will. It was, however, as an exponent of the idea of papal sovereignty that Alanus was remembered. 


@@@@@


doc= 53479


Bodi, John (fl. 1357), Benedictine monk and scholastic writer, graduated doctor of divinity at Oxford University. His institutional affiliation is not known, but he might have been attached to Gloucester College, which was established for monks of his order. His personal circumstances are known only from an incident in which a friar was ordered by the university to make a public apology for having made insulting references to him in a lecture of 20 December 1357. The following January Bodi witnessed a disclaimer made by the Augustinian friars of Oxford in St Mary's Church. However, he is known chiefly from a work in the best fourteenth-century Oxford tradition of applying logical techniques to the analysis of problems that were superficially physical. There were at Oxford at this time disputations based on sophisms, intended as an aid to learning logic. Those who took part were the more advanced students -- who thus became known as 'sophistae'. The disputations could be held outside the schools, but were supervised by masters, or possibly bachelors. Although the physics was not usually introduced for its own sake so much as for the sake of disputation, the activity was occasionally the source of useful new physical concepts, and the resulting Oxford literature brought the 'calculators' a certain European reputation for ingenuity. 
Bodi's only known work (beginning 'A est unum calidum') is a collection of twenty-two sophisms in this tradition. Of three known copies of the text, one is ascribed to John Bodi (that in Vatican City, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, MS Vat. lat. 4447). It is of some interest for its treatment of infinite series, which in the two previous decades had given rise to much activity centred on what were seen as paradoxical arguments. The series were handled intelligently, by the rearrangement and manipulation of terms. They were not regarded as a part of an abstract mathematics, however, but as part of a calculus of qualities -- in particular degrees of heat, which were typically reckoned to be only eight in number. Bodi's work, on the other hand, cannot be considered as a contribution to a physical theory of heat, for it dealt only with imaginary problems, without any empirical basis. It was probably without much influence, by comparison with the work of his mid-fourteenth-century contemporaries Richard Swineshead and William Heytesbury. Pierre Duhem was under the impression that 'A est unum calidum' was written under the influence of the ideas of Nicole Oresme (died 1382), but Anneliese Maier -- who first identified Bodi as the author of the collection -- showed that this was not the case. 
Nothing is known of Bodi's later career or death. A John Body who was fellow of Merton College in 1338, possibly already by 1334, and about whom it seems nothing else is known, was fairly certainly not the Benedictine of that name. 


@@@@@


doc= 53480


Brinkley, Richard (fl. 1355-1375), Franciscan friar, theologian, and philosopher, was for a long time mistakenly referred to as Walter Brinkley. Nothing is known of his early life, except that he joined his order in Oxford. Brinkley's philosophical and theological ideas circulated at the University of Paris and Prague University, and were discussed at Prague in connection with those of the mid-fourteenth-century Oxford philosopher Richard Billingham. But though mentioned by W. Senko in connection with an anonymous list of celebrated doctors of Prague University, he is not listed at all in Josef Triska's catalogue of pre-Hussite Prague University students and scholars. Brinkley's works have only recently been rediscovered, and are just beginning to be discussed by contemporary medievalists. In fact, to date only part 5, chapters 6-10, the tract 'De significato propositionis' of his 'Summa nova de logica' (so called by Thomas Rossy, a late fourteenth-century Franciscan) and 'De obligationes' from part 7 have been critically edited. 
Thus far what is known of Brinkley's philosophical views is that he defended a version of metaphysical 'realism', with respect to the ontological status of universals, against the prevailing nominalist views of the day. He defended a perspectivist theory of intellectual cognition, against direct intuitive cognition theories, such as those defended by Albert von Sachsen, William Ockham, or Duns Scotus. Brinkley likewise maintained a variety of reism with respect to the ontological status of the referent of an entire proposition, similar to that of Andre Neufchateau, sharply criticizing the propositional views of Richard Billingham, William Bermingham, and Richard Feribrigge. Brinkley also held the views that the referent of the phrase 'God's existence' ('Deum esse') is identical with the referent of the term 'God' ('Deum'), and that the ways God acts internally ('ad intra'), when understood adverbially, are the same as when he acts externally ('ad extra'). Brinkley's only complete surviving work, the 'Summa nova de logica' (composed between 1355 and 1365), exists in two manuscripts: Prague University Library, CR. III. A. 11 (olim 396), fols. 31-104; and Leipzig University Library, MS 1360, fols. 1-105. There also exists a portion of his 'Summa', namely the tract 'De insolubilibus', in BL, Harley MS 3243; and portions of his 'Lectura in libros sententiarum, inc: utrum per aliquam disciplinam vel scientiam', in Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, Lat. 16535, fols. 123'r'-129'r', and Lat. 16408, fols. 40'r'-42'r'. Brinkley's other two known works, his 'Determinationes, inc: sit aliqua conclusio theologiae' and his 'Distinctiones scholasticae, inc: ad sciendam primam originem et finalem', both seem to be lost. Brinkley exerted some influence on the theological writings of Heinrich Totting of Oyta, Dionysius the Carthusian, Johann Hiltalingen of Basel, Jean de Ripa, Pietro de Candia, Guglielmo Centueri da Cremona, and possibly the logical writings of John Wyclif. 


@@@@@


doc= 53481


Campsall, Richard (c.1280-c.1330), theologian, was born at Campsall, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, probably between 1280 and 1285. He first appears as a bachelor in arts at Balliol College, Oxford; by 1306 he was regent master in arts at Merton College; a papal letter of 1317 addresses him as bachelor in theology, and by 1322 he was a master in theology. Between 1306 and 1322 he is named repeatedly in Merton rolls. On 10 January 1326, as bursar and procurator, Campsall was locum tenens for the chancellor of the university in a dispute with the mayor of Oxford, who had moved the town pillory: Campsall negotiated a new location for it and absolved the mayor from the chancellor's excommunication. On his death 'c'.1330 five volumes owned by Campsall went to Merton: a glossed psalter, two works by Augustine, one by Hugh of St Victor, and 'some works' by Anselm, all of them missing when the catalogue of 1350-60 was drawn up. Campsall was buried in the college chapel at Merton; his tombstone has been securely identified, despite having been moved, and despite the disappearance of both a brass cross 'on steps' and of the inscription, still visible in the seventeenth century: 'Orate pro anima Magistri Ricardi de Camsale sacre pagine Professor... hic jacet tumulatum' (Wood, 1.23-4). Campsall should not be confused with a namesake who was rector of St Martin's, Canterbury. 
The catalogue of St Augustine's Abbey, Canterbury, ascribes two works to Campsall -- 'Questiones super tres libros phisicorum' and 'Notabilitates eiusdem super omnes libros phisicorum' -- but neither is known to be extant. Campsall's certain writings are a series of twenty disputed questions of c.1306 on the 'Prior Analytics'; a disputed question, 'Whether Matter Can Be Without Form'; aphorisms 'On Contingency and Foreknowledge', extant in one manuscript, but also in a Bologna printing of 1496 from a slightly variant manuscript base; and a short essay on the universal. All have been published by Synan. There survives also a brief treatment of 'Whether one can act against one's conscience' (Etzkorn, 322). But a truncated 'Logica Campsale Anglici, valde utilis et realis contra Ocham', long ascribed to Campsall, cannot be his. Modern scholars suggest that Campsall's works may be supplemented through citations by contemporaries of his opinions which probably stem from a lost writing on the 'Sentences'. He is credited with a solution of paralogisms on the Trinity ('The Father is God; the Son is God; therefore, the Father is the Son'), first by invoking the 'rule of Anselm', that in divinity all is one unless blocked by a relation, and second by pronouncing such syllogisms invalid owing to the 'fallacy of accident'. In the summary division of fourteenth-century thinkers into Scotists and Ockhamists, Campsall may count as mildly Ockhamist (Synan, 2.3, 4), or alternatively Ockham as Campsallist (Tachau, 'The influence of Richard Campsall', 123). 


@@@@@


doc= 53482


London, David of (d. 1189), ecclesiastic and canon lawyer, was one of the many Englishmen who studied law at Bologna in the twelfth century; what sets him apart is the survival of his letter collection, 'The register of Master David', so that some details of his life, interests, and personality are unusually well documented. He was born in London, was a student in Clermont, where he acquired the title 'magister'; he went on to Paris, and then to Bologna. He doubtless taught as well as studied at Bologna, and it is possible that he was 'D.', the glossator who appears in Bolognese glosses of the 1180s. While he was at Bologna, and at the latest by 1167, he was presented to the prebend of Brownswood in St Paul's, and he remained a canon of St Paul's until his death. In early days he enjoyed the patronage of Gilbert Foliot, bishop of London (died 1187); Gilbert put him in charge of two of his own nephews who were also studying in Bologna -- both dignitaries of St Paul's -- and in 1169-70 sent Master David to Rome to plead his cause with the pope. The bishop had been excommunicated by Thomas Becket for his opposition to Becket's cause, and David's defence both of the bishop and of the king against Becket's attack impressed the pope and curia: the pope himself said that it was David who persuaded him to grant Gilbert absolution, and that he was worthy of a bishopric, not just of a canonry. With this and other testimonials David set off from the curia, and attempted to improve his endowments at home, winning a royal pension of $20 per annum, and one of $10 per annum from the bishop, pending further preferment which never came. 
Late in 1170 Becket again excommunicated Gilbert Foliot, and David was once more at the curia. He gives a dramatic account of how he and his colleague Master Hugh were working hard in the cause when news came of Becket's murder on 29 December 1170. For a time the pope would not give audience to David and his colleagues; but he argued the case for king and bishop privately, and once again the pope bore witness to his fidelity and skill. Thus far he had worked wholly to Gilbert Foliot's satisfaction. 
David's later years, however, seem to have brought disappointment: he held his pensions until his death, but remained only a canon of St Paul's. In 1179-80, it seems, he unsuccessfully intrigued to become dean of St Paul's; by then he had quarrelled with Gilbert Foliot and was working for Roger, bishop of Worcester (died 1179). He continued to witness Gilbert's 'acta', especially those settling legal cases, throughout the 1170s, but not in the bishop's last years. Nevertheless David was resident at St Paul's for a part at least of his own later years. He probably died on 31 March 1189. 
David's register survives in the Vatican Library, MS Lat. 6024, amid a remarkable group of letter collections. But it was evidently originally a separate double quire, fols. 140-154, and there can be little doubt that these quires were put together by David himself or under his eye. The register was edited by F. Liverani in 1863, very inaccurately, and became more widely known from the fundamental article by Z. N. Brooke of 1927; some of its contents have been re-edited since. Most, though not all, of the contents relate to David's own affairs: the chief exception is the dossier concerning the canonization of Edward the Confessor. But taken as a whole it is a fascinating revelation of the interests of an active and intelligent canonist involved in Anglo-papal relations and lawsuits in the late 1160s and 1170s. 


@@@@@


doc= 53483


Etampes, Theobald d' (c.1060-c.1125), teacher and theologian, took his name from Etampes in the Ile-de-France, where he was born. He spent his youth at Caen, in the abbey of St Etienne, where he would have known Lanfranc (died 1089). His correspondence with Queen Margaret of Scotland (died 1093) shows that there was some exploration of the possibility that he might become one of her chaplains -- one which attests his ambition, and maybe also an early consciousness of exceptional ability which he wanted to have recognized. 
Perhaps before 1089 Theobald went to England, at a time when other scholars from the region were doing the same thing, but not, apparently, to join Lanfranc, as so many others did, but to settle in Oxford. Oxford had a nascent school of some importance from about the time Robert Bloet became bishop of Lincoln in 1094, which was fostered by Walter of Oxford, archdeacon of Oxford from 1111-12. Walter seems to have invited visiting lecturers to the school attached to his collegiate church of St George in the Castle, and Theobald was apparently one of the first and most notable of these. 
Theobald is the author of a number of surviving letters in which he describes himself variously as doctor of Caen, master of Caen, and master at Oxford. Several of these letters show him to be a highly competent theologian, and well versed in the topics of the day. Before he went to Oxford he had written to Philip, a friend, on the sins of the flesh, taking the view that lust was less serious than pride. To the bishop of Lincoln he wrote, now as an Oxford master, on penitence and confession in a context of scriptural interpretation; he wrote to Abbot Faricius (died 1117) of nearby Abingdon to insist that he had never taught that unbaptized infants would be saved. The most important of these theological letters is one to Roscelin de Compiegne, a grammarian who had attacked both Anselm of Canterbury and Peter Abelard; Theobald's letter discusses the current issue of the eligibility for holy orders of the sons of priests (in which there was recognized to be potential for nepotism). 
Theobald took part in a debate at the beginning of the twelfth century on the question whether a monk ought also to be a priest (taking the view that he should not). The 'Rescriptum cuiusdam pro monachis' ('c'.1132-3), written by an anonymous monk in response to Theobald, makes the point that there is no better life than the monastic, and condemns his teaching on the parochial rights of monks. Theobald is attacked as an insignificant little clerk, who is still merely a grammar master, although he had more than 100 pupils. This condemnation must be read as an attempt to diminish the reputation of a teacher of theology who was in fact of considerable standing, and evidently active in the controversies of a highly controversial period. 


@@@@@


doc= 53484


Fland, Robert (fl. 1335-1370), logician, may have been of Flemish origin. He has left three treatises ('Consequentiae', 'Insolubilia', and 'Obligationes'), preserved in codex 497 of the Stadsbibliothek at Bruges. This manuscript provides most of the very limited information there is concerning Fland. The explicits of each of these surviving treatises speak of them as works of Robert Fland, or simply Fland. Fland in each case is followed by an abbreviation sign, suggesting that Fland is an abbreviation -- perhaps for Flandriae, that is Robert of Flanders. Fland's 'Insolubilia' fixes the dates within which he wrote. This work quotes the opening chapter of William Heytesbury's 'Regulae solvendi sophismata', written in 1335, and seems itself to be quoted by Ralph Strode in his 'De insolubilibus', produced about 1370. It is most likely that all three treatises were written, then, between 1335 and 1370. The sources and uses of his work also suggest that he was associated with Oxford University. 
Fland's 'Consequentiae' shows a dependence on William Ockham for its theory of material consequences, where the consequence holds precisely because of the terms which make up a consequent, and not because of the logical structure of the discourse. This happens in the case, for instance, where there exists a necessary consequent. A necessary consequent is true because of the necessary truth its terms express, no matter what the antecedent might be: for instance, 'If a man is running, God exists'. Fland's 'Obligationes' presents a history of the competing theories concerning 'obligations'. The traditional theory or 'antiqua responsio', held by William Sherwood, Walter Burley, Ralph Strode, Albert von Sachsen, Pierre d'Ailly, and Paolo da Pergola, accentuated the importance of the order in which the opponent presented his statements, and this order set the stage for determining the correctness of the respondent's reply. The 'nova responsio', defended by Roger Swineshead and his close follower, Richard Lavenham, plays down the order in which the statements are presented, since the new response has developed rules that render the order of subsequent statements irrelevant. Although the old response remained dominant, Fland saw the new position of Swineshead as just as plausible as the old procedure. 
Fland also traces two traditions in his 'Insolubilia', and finds each of them equally acceptable. The first tradition (represented for example by Thomas Bradwardine) contends that an insoluble is a statement that declares in the first place and principally what in reality is the case (for instance, 'I am a liar'), and also signifies 'ex consequenti' or secondarily that the statement is a true statement. The second tradition (represented for example by Richard Swineshead) holds an insoluble statement to be one that likewise declares in the first place and principally what is in reality the case, and 'ex consequenti' or secondarily signifies something that is otherwise than what is in reality the case. From a study of his works it seems that Robert Fland fills in some gaps in our information concerning the topics discussed in these three treatises, as they were presented in the mid-fourteenth century. The positions he holds, although not original, are referred to by a few contemporary authors; yet the present state of knowledge indicates that he is not cited by name, and thus that the positions could be ones which he held in common with others. 


@@@@@


doc= 53485


Honorius Augustodunensis (d. c.1140), scholar and author, was long believed to have come from Autun in Burgundy, in consequence of the name by which he was generally known in Latin: Honorius Augustodunensis. However, it is now impossible to associate Honorius with Autun. The only direct and contemporary biographical information about Honorius appears in the final chapter of his own 'De luminaribus ecclesiae', published 'c'.1133. This describes Honorius as priest and 'scholasticus' of the church 'Augustodunensis', assigns his floruit to the reign of the Emperor Heinrich V of Germany ('r'. 1106-25), and lists twenty-two of his writings in this order: 'Elucidarius', 'Sigillum', 'Inevitabile', 'Speculum ecclesiae', 'Offendiculum', 'Summa totius', 'Gemma animae', 'Sacramentarium', 'Neocosmum', 'Eucharistion', 'Cognitio vitae', 'Imago mundi', 'Summa gloria', 'Scala coeli', 'De anima et de Deo', 'Expositio Psalterii', 'Cantica Canticorum', 'Evangelia', 'Clavis physicae', 'Refectio mentium', 'Pabulum vitae', 'De luminaribus ecclesiae'. All but the 'Evangelia', 'Refectio mentium', and 'Pabulum vitae' have survived. Another ten may, through manuscript attribution and inner associations, be added to the list, together with many, as yet unedited, fragments and 'quaestiones'. Over 260 manuscript copies of Honorius's works remain from the twelfth century alone, the majority from religious houses sympathetic to the reforming ideals of the monasteries of Gorze and Fruttuaria. 
Honorius was possibly of south German or Savoyard origin, and arguably a kinsman of Archbishop Anselm of Canterbury (died 1109). He spent his formative years ('c'.1096-1110) as a reforming canon in England, many of them in the archbishop's immediate circle. He was an ardent supporter of Anselm's battle for papal reform against the Anglo-Norman kings. At, or shortly after, the archbishop's death Honorius left England for Regensburg, in Bavaria. The puzzling name Augustodunensis may be a toponym, derived from his later career ('c'.1110-1133) as canon 'scholasticus', or teacher in the school, of the Alte Kapelle in Regensburg. He remained an advocate of the papal cause, and earned the favour of Bishop Cuno of Regensburg (1126-32). 
The immediate influence of Anselm's teaching is especially marked in the first three of the works listed in the 'De luminaribus', above all in the most popular of these, the catechetical 'Elucidarius'. Honorius's teaching career in Regensburg allowed him to continue to communicate Anselm's views, notably through the 'Offendiculum' and the 'Cognitio vitae'. Honorius was thus one of the main vehicles whereby Anselm's writings and reforming sentiments gained early currency, both in England and in Europe. In England, the dioceses of Canterbury, Rochester, Worcester, and Winchester showed an especially early interest in Honorius's writings. He may have spent time in each one, perhaps leaving Canterbury for the other southern dioceses during Anselm's exiles, between 1097 and 1100, and between 1103 and 1107. Honorius's abandonment of England for Regensburg, and his preferment there, is probably connected with the betrothal in 1110 of Matilda, daughter of Henry I of England, to the Emperor Heinrich V of Germany (died 1125). The betrothal is noted in an important early copy of Honorius's 'Imago mundi' (Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 66). The first recension of this work is dated 1110, and was dedicated to one Henricus. The earliest surviving copy of the 'Imago mundi' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. B. 484) comes from Winchester, home of Archdeacon Henry, Princess Matilda's chaplain. This connection would account, too, for Honorius's associating his own floruit with the reign of the emperor. 
Honorius's works may be divided by content into four main groups: polemical (primarily in support of the celibate priesthood), liturgical, cosmological, and exegetical. Many remain inadequately edited. A desire to extend the influence throughout the Christian church of reforming bishops, especially monastic bishops such as Anselm or Cuno of Regensburg, pervades his immense literary output and is perhaps the fundamental reason for it. 
The name Honorius is an unusual one for the period. This fact, together with the interest in the works of John Scottus (Eriugena) manifest in many of his writings, and the dedication of certain of these to Christian, Irish abbot ('c'.1133-1152) of the Schottenkloster of St Jakob of Regensburg, have been used to support the idea that Honorius was himself an Irishman. This idea has little substance. The name Honorius appears rather to have been adopted, perhaps in honour of Honorius, archbishop of Canterbury (627-52). Honorius's original name was probably He[i]nricus, a name that occurs not merely in early manuscripts of his works, but also in a twelfth-century gift of books containing, out of a collection of some forty-seven treatises, twenty-two known to be by him. This same donation, together with surviving Lambach codices of certain of the works on the list, connects He[i]nricus with the abbey of Lambach. In many other early manuscript copies of Honorius's writings their author is described as 'inclusus' or 'solitarius'. This combined evidence suggests that He[i]nricus, or Honorius, entered a Benedictine abbey late in life (possibly in 1133) -- perhaps Lambach or St Jakob of Regensburg, home of such other famous solitary monks, or monks 'inclusi', as Marianus of Regensburg. The precise date of his death is unknown, but is likely to have been about 1140. 


@@@@@


doc= 53486


Reading, John (d. 1346), theologian and Franciscan friar, is first recorded on 20 September 1292, when, already a friar, he was ordained subdeacon. He became a deacon two years later. He was trained at the Franciscan school at Oxford, becoming its forty-fifth lector about 1319, and holding that office for two years. By August 1321 he was DTh. At about this time he went to Avignon, where he revised his commentary on the first book of Peter Lombard's 'Sentences', and where he was one of the theologians whom John XXII consulted before he issued his decretal 'Antiquae concertationi' on 1 December 1323. He appears to have remained at Avignon, since he is reported to have died and been buried there in 1346. 
John Reading was one of Duns Scotus's most loyal and dedicated defenders, particularly against the criticisms of William Ockham. Surprisingly, however, in 'quaestio' 3 of the prologue to Ockham's 'Commentary on Book 1 of the 'Sentences'' Reading appears as one of the sources for Ockham, who quotes him verbatim, picking pieces here and there from 'quaestio' 2 of Reading's prologue to his 'Commentary on Lombard's 'Sentences''. In short, it seems necessary to postulate that John made two commentaries on Lombard's 'Sentences' -- an earlier one, which was a source for Ockham's 'Sentences', and another and later one, criticizing the same work of Ockham. Yet, despite such a postulate, both commentaries had large portions verbally in common, since the text that survives and serves as Ockham's source is the same as the later, and sole surviving, text that provides a Scotistic response to Ockham. 
The fact that he became lector at Oxford about 1319, rather than providing a probable date for a sole 'Commentary on the 'Sentences'' by Reading, indicates that he had already, as a bachelor of the 'Sentences', commented earlier on Lombard's work. Unlike earlier, more independent, associates of Duns Scotus -- Robert Cowton, William of Nottingham, and William of Alnwick -- Reading was, from the evidence of his writings, like Walter Chatton, among the more devoted followers of Scotus, for whom Ockham was in competition with Scotus for the leadership of the Franciscan school. 
A look at particular questions shows this fervent devotion to Scotus's positions. The postulate of an intelligible impressed species was attacked by many authors as putting an intermediary between the object known and the knower that interfered with the direct knowledge of things. Scotus defended its existence, particularly against Henri de Gand and Godefroi de Fontaines. His arguments were attacked by Ockham and by another Franciscan master, Richard Drayton. Reading defended Scotus against these Franciscan authors and the tradition which supported them. Yet it would be wrong to think that Reading follows Scotus after the manner of a one-book man. In his discussion of finality, he is influenced by Robert Cowton, and even by Pierre Aureole, with whom he finally disagrees. Nor should his frequent conflicts with Ockham be seen as judgements of absolute opposition. Ockham's 'Disputed Question 'De fine'' shows that he has accepted Reading's position with respect. 
Regrettably, the only surviving copy of Reading's 'Commentary on the 'Sentences'', found in Florence, Biblioteca Nazionale, cod. Conv. soppr. D. IV. 95, ends with distinction 6 of book 1. Nevertheless, the manuscript offers a wealth of information about various authors and opinions of his day, and also represents an important chapter in the development of the Scotistic school. As far as Reading himself is concerned, it is possible to say that on the scientific character of theology he disagreed with Thomas Aquinas, and did so on the basis of his agreement with Duns Scotus, that it is impossible to have faith and science concerning the same object. The theologian who receives his principles on faith from God, cannot then claim to have science or scientific knowledge concerning the conclusions he deduces from premises that have faith as their warrant. Likewise, in opposition to two of Scotus's main opponents, Gand and Conington, Reading attempted to establish that there were proper boundaries for certain sciences, and warned that the jurisdiction of theology should not overextend itself into the autonomous domains of those sciences. Finally, the surviving texts show that Reading's main concerns in regard to causality were to clarify the Scotistic notions involved in proving the existence and unicity of God, and to defend these positions against the attacks of William Alnwick, Pierre Aureole, and Ockham. 


@@@@@


doc= 53487


Lindores, Lawrence (d. 1437), natural philosopher and university principal, is first recorded as a Scottish student in Paris, taking his MA in 1393 under the nominalist Aegidius Jutfaes. Parisian records are wanting for the ten years before this, and nothing records his precise date or place of birth. As a master he presented pupils in arts up to 1401 at least; at the same time he was also studying in theology, in which he was a 'scholaris' by 13 October 1394, BTh by 8 August 1403, and LTh by 1406. Playing only a modest part in the wider life of the ('English') nation and university, he did successfully argue that members of his nation should not -- through the vagaries of end-of-schism politics -- lose their rights to supplicate for benefices under the aegis of the university. 
Lindores is last attested at Paris on 7 August 1403, though still technically 'present' in the university on 9 November 1403. He is next recorded -- for the first time in Scotland -- on 10 May 1408, when he is styled rector of Criech, near St Andrews. The appointment had been his from no later than 1407, by which year he was also an ordained priest, and Criech was to remain his only benefice until his death in 1437. He had earlier been styled 'dominus' (April 1393), 'cleric of St Andrews diocese' (October 1394), and by August 1403 had done everything needed to take up a benefice, with or without cure. He is not to be confounded with a namesake who became abbot of the Cistercian house of Culross, who outlived him by some years. 
Two strands stand out in Lindores's work in Scotland: his distinguished part in the foundation of St Andrews University, and his career as inquisitor-general. Named first among the university's first teachers -- he was the only theologian listed -- he lectured for a time on the four books of 'Sentences', but taught regularly in arts, as his status as examiner implied. He was rector twice: at the beginning, and in the crucial town-and-gown delegation which persuaded James I to confirm the university's privileges, and abandon the project of transferring it to Perth. He was more often dean of arts, consciously strengthening the relatively powerful faculty both in symbols of status, and in its possessions. Master for life of the college of St John from 1418, he became in addition principal of the faculty's pedagogy (regulated hall), which was founded on an adjacent site in 1430, and ran them increasingly as one institution, formally recognized as the faculty's possession on Lawrence's death. 
The 'Roman' inquisition operated for at least some sixty years in Scotland. Lindores was not the only inquisitor-general recorded, but he was the first, acting under Avignon and post-schismatic papal jurisdictions successively from 1408 until his death. Two trials ended in burning. At Perth in 1408 one James Resby, an English Wycliffite priest (and arguably not, 'pace' some, a Franciscan) was burnt. The inquisitor's arguments against two of the forty or more tenets found objectionable were recorded by the chronicler Walter Bower (died 1449). They are commonplace enough, but show that the inquisitor was taking Resby not as a simple enthusiast, but as someone who had been arguing a case (on papal authority) that would have to be met. The second burning, at St Andrews on 23 July 1433, was that of Pavel Kravar, who is now thought to have been a Bohemian (as Knox indeed said), rather than from Kravare in Silesia. An academic turned Hussite propagandist, Kravar had used a medical cover in Poland, and was apparently set to do the same in Scotland, to win support for the Hussite cause at the Council of Basel. Against a third accused, the Franciscan Robert Harding, Lindores showed himself reluctant to act. Harding, an English theologian, had been invited by the duke of Albany (died 1420), regent of Scotland during the captivity of James I, to put the case against the measures taken by the Council of Constance to end the papal schism. Arguing on broadly conciliarist lines, Harding was vigorously opposed by Scottish churchmen, who also pressed Lindores to act. Despite further pressure from Martin V ('r'. 1417-31) too, Lindores delayed still, and Harding died a natural death in 1419. The Avignon pope Benedict XIII ('r'. 1394-1417) under whose jurisdiction the inquisitor had earlier worked, was still alive, and Lindores (who had been significantly absent from crucial steps in transferring allegiance) is not recorded as acting again as inquisitor until after the deaths of both Benedict and Martin V. The two remaining cases known ended in recantations at an early stage. John Fogo, abbot of Melrose, one of those who had pressed Lindores to act against Harding, later exposed himself to the inquisition through loosely stated views on oath-bound obligations. Summoned to St Andrews, Fogo recanted. In 1435 one Robert Gardiner extolled canon law and disparaged arts in a lecture to St Andrews canonists. Before a significantly solemn assembly (27 October) Gardiner recanted the propositions that had been found objectionable. 
From Lindores's arts teaching at Paris come the surviving commentaries on Aristotle's 'Physics' and 'De anima' which migrated with 'Parisian' nominalism itself to Prague (by 1406), Cracow, Leipzig, Erfurt, Vienna, Freiburg, and elsewhere, and kept his name alive among philosophers for over a century. A commentary on the 'Perihermeneias' was last recorded in sixteenth-century Alcala, and a 'De caelo' commentary and a question 'De reflexionibus' have also been attributed to him. No theological works are known to survive, though he did lecture on Peter Lombard's 'Sentences' at St Andrews. Later attributions of works in canon law are more dubious. 
What of the thought in the surviving works? By the time of Lindores, nominalists were concerned to show in detail how the abstract terms needed in a scientific language could be grounded in a world of concrete particulars, and without appeal to the abstract entities of some earlier metaphysicians. Thus in Aristotelian psychology ('scientia de anima') Lindores set himself to explain how the term 'anima', taken as connoting a capacity for certain observable, vital operations, might be made sense of in relation to the operations: much as dispositional terms generally (for example 'soluble', 'fragile') have to be made sense of, he appears to have thought. This may not be particularly easy for a nominalist of Lawrence's stripe, and how far his programme succeeds either in this, or in his treatment of impetus in physics (which attracted some attention, but no known followers), or in his treatment of universals generally, cannot yet be safely assessed. 
Little is known of Lindores's family, and even his name need not tie him to Lindores, or to its abbey. The most intimate insight into the man comes from a charter of 1434, founding a chaplaincy in the parish church of St Andrews to celebrate mass 'for the salvation of the souls of... the present bishop of St Andrews, of my father and mother; also for the salvation of my own soul, and of the souls of my brothers and sisters and benefactors... living or dead... and of all the faithful' (Fleming, 578-87). No children are known, and no suggestion of interest in the romantic or the prurient was made in his lifetime. The chaplaincy was fulfilled into Reformation times, monitored by the provost and council. 
Poor enough in Paris, Lindores passed for a man of property in St Andrews: he put up the money, jointly with the earl of Douglas, for the faculty's mace, and owned houses in fashionable South Street. Named material beneficiaries of the chaplaincy were the bishop of St Andrews (10's'. annually), the abbot and convent of Balmerino (10's'.), the (Augustinian) 'monastery of St Andrews' (2's'.), and Agnes Fryslae and her heirs (6's'.). 
Lindores's inquisitorial work was followed by a couple of generations of (perhaps merely specious) calm. At St Andrews his institutions endured, and in the Scottish universities generally it became something of a custom for theologians to teach in arts, as John Mair (died 1550) was to note. But from the complexities made easier to appreciate by the publication of the arts faculty's 'acta', he should not -- in view of his opportunities -- be ascribed quite such a masterful personality, or quite the dominance in the university, that historians used sometimes to attribute to him. And his management of people left recurring conflicts, independently of the waning of nominalism at St Andrews, which in any case came neither from intellectual revolution nor active suppression (or release), but rather because academic contacts proved easier with realist-favouring Louvain and Cologne, than with the nominalist-favouring universities of central Europe. His natural philosophy, apparently unavailable at Paris when George Lokert (died 1547) and others were printing nominalist texts there in the early sixteenth century, fell into oblivion, until Michalski and other Polish scholars reported on it from the 1920s. Editions of the 'Physics' and 'De anima' commentaries are in progress, but a systematic and comprehensive exposition of his thought is not yet available. 
Neither the place of Lindores's death nor that of his burial is known, but the arts masters' haste to secure his muniments and assume his funeral costs -- before the theology faculty could be formally constituted (and hence succeed to the college of St John) -- makes the early hours of 16 September 1437, in or near St Andrews, the likeliest time and place of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 53489


Grubb, Sarah (1746-1832), miller and benefactor, was born on 11 December 1746 at Mountrath, Queen's county, the eldest of the fifteen children of John Pim (1718-1797), a rich Dublin wool merchant, and his wife, Sarah Clibborn (1724-1812) of Moate Castle, co. Westmeath; she was related through both parents to most of the prominent Quaker families in Ireland. Educated by her mother, she grew up in Dublin and Ballitore, co. Kildare, where she formed lasting friendships with the schoolmaster Richard Shackleton and his daughter Deborah. She moved to Middlesex with her family in 1771 and settled at a house called Tanner's End, Tottenham, where she mixed in fashionable Quaker society in and around London, describing her experiences to Deborah Shackleton with characteristic openness and liveliness. The English Quakers, she noted, loved finery whereas the Irish retained the 'plain' dress but entertained lavishly. Throughout her life she kept up a wide correspondence. 
On 8 April 1778 Sarah married John Grubb (1737-1784), a flour miller of Anner Mills, Clonmel, co. Tipperary, the second son of Joseph Grubb (1709-1782) and his wife, Sarah Greer (1717-1788), and thus she entered the circle of wealthy Quaker families who controlled Clonmel's milling industry in its golden age. Although some in this circle lived 'like princes of the earth' ('Journal of William Savery', 267), the Grubbs chose to live plainly and their comfortable home, Anner Mills, for years provided hospitality to numerous travelling Quaker ministers, ranging from Catherine Phillips and William Savery, to Thomas Shillitoe and Elizabeth Fry. This extremely happy marriage ended prematurely with John Grubb's death from overwork in 1784. 
Sarah chose to take her husband's place and run the mills herself, with the support of her brother Joshua, a prominent Dublin banker. She entrusted her five small daughters to Sarah Lynes (later Grubb), who came from London in 1787 and later became a leading Quaker travelling minister. Her sister Elizabeth Pim took over the Anner Mills household. Sarah Grubb found that business, and contact with the country people, raised her spirits. The mills had ten pairs of stones and three water wheels, and with David Malcomson as her first manager, followed by John Barclay Clibborn (a cousin who married her daughter Elizabeth) she was independently successful as 'Sarah Grubb, Miller and Corn Dealer' ('Directory of Clonmel', 1787). This success was largely due to her strict integrity, and a policy of always using cash when buying in, and selling at low rates rather than giving credit. 
Possessed of great clearness of mind and a powerful character, Sarah Grubb was also a person of warm human sympathy and benevolence. She did what she could to alleviate widespread local misery caused by poverty and drunkenness, and she was quick to send aid to those afflicted by the 1798 rising. She was a great encourager of the education of the young, and a supporter of Quaker building projects, helping to fund Newtown School, Waterford (established 1798), and Garryroan meeting-house, co. Tipperary (1789). Further afield she supported the fight against slavery and helped German refugees in London. The combination of success in business and social beneficence won her the nickname the Queen of the South. 
Her spiritual life was characterized by thanksgiving and a desire to come close to God, and 'her countenance often strikingly indicated the near access and sweet communion she was favoured to enjoy' ('Annual Monitor', 1834, 27). As an elder for over forty years, she strongly maintained the old Quaker testimonies, lovingly admonishing young and old alike, be it for playing music or straying into unorthodoxy. 
Sarah Grubb's business acumen and philanthropic instincts resurfaced in at least two of her grandchildren, John Grubb Richardson (1813-1890) who in 1845 used Anner Mills money to build the model industrial village of Bessbrook, co. Armagh, and Lydia Goodbody (1810-1886), active in the pioneering jute industry at Clara, King's county. 
Sarah Grubb considered herself 'over bulky' in appearance (Sarah Grubb to Eliza Greer, August 1785, MS, Dublin Friends' Historical Library), she enjoyed a green old age, and was described by Joseph John Gurney in 1827 as 'a veteran of the good cause, strong in her intellectual and lively in her spiritual faculties' ('Memoirs of... Gurney', 1.350). She was lampooned by Sarah D. Greer in 'Quakerism, or, The Story of my Life' (first published in London in 1851, and published in Dublin in 1852) as Sarah Mills, a clever, wilful and dominating woman; however, the attack was part of a general attempt to defame Quakerism, and is probably unrepresentative of her character. She died, leaving a fortune estimated at over $100,000, at her home, Anner Mills, on 31 October 1832, and her body was interred on 2 November in the Quaker burial-ground at Clonmel. 


@@@@@


doc= 53491


Countess Walpurga Ehrengarde Helena de Hohenthal (d. 1929), eldest daughter of Charles Frederick Anthony de Hohenthal, count of the Austrian empire. They had two sons and a daughter. Lady Paget was maid of honour to Queen Victoria's eldest daughter, Princess Victoria, crown princess of Prussia, who called her 'Wally', finding her, at least in 1869, 'prettier than ever... but I regret that she is a little affected and grand sometimes' ('Your dear letter', 248). The princess thought Lady Paget and her husband unsuited for Vienna, where 'she is not likely to be well or cordially received' and regretted the '36 naked little boys and girls' with which she decorated the embassy ('Beloved mama', 157). Lady Paget entertainingly recorded embassy life in 'Embassies of other Days' (2 vols., 1923) and other books. A woman of progressive views, she was a vegetarian and an anti-vivisectionist; she also wrote an introduction for 'Talks about Girls' (1905) in the 'Kirk Sex Series'. 


@@@@@


doc= 53492


Tappenden, James (bap. 1742, d. 1841), lawyer, banker, and ironmaster, was baptized on 13 October 1742 at St Mary's Church, Faversham, Kent, the only surviving child of James Tappenden (1707-1745), hoyman and mayor of Faversham (1743), and his wife, Mary Jones, daughter of Captain Isaac Jones, of the same town. Educated at King's School, Canterbury (1752-4), he was articled to Faversham attorney Thomas Buck in 1757, and took over his practice when Buck died in 1779. In 1765 he married Mary Frances Beckwith (1745-1771), with whom he had three children, one of whom died in infancy. In 1780 he married his cousin Margaret Tappenden, with whom he had four sons and four daughters, one of whom married George Giles Vincent, son of the dean of Westminster. Tappenden had four separate but overlapping careers, in local government, law, banking, and industry. He was an excellent example of a general type of eighteenth-century men of affairs. 
In local government Tappenden took all the important posts: he was appointed town clerk of Faversham and clerk to the wardmote (borough) court in 1779; he was clerk to the justices of the upper division of the lathe of Scray, giving him influence beyond the ancient borough. His regional influence was reinforced by his stewardship of the manor and hundred of Faversham and of the manors of Leysdown and Chilham and, by 1812, his chairmanship of the key audit committee of the Cinque Ports. He was, not surprisingly, also clerk to the vestry. 
Tappenden was Faversham's leading attorney. In 1814 a judge in Doctors' Commons thought Tappenden 'a considerable guarantee of the fairness of the transaction' ('The Times', 4 May 1814). The town's nineteenth-century historian E. Crow noted that 'few men stood higher in legal knowledge, or was consulted upon more various subjects' (Crow). He was also a scrivener -- a specialist in property conveyancing and mortgages -- a skill he put to his own advantage as he acquired considerable property in east Kent with his increasing wealth. 
In 1789 Tappenden brought together his close knowledge of other people's affairs, and built on the confidence people had in him, by establishing the Faversham Bank. His choice of partner, William Bennett, a well-known local merchant, was wise, as it brought a valuable London trade dimension to the town's first bank. It survived twenty-five turbulent years, supported by its London agent, Williams & Co., and was held in high esteem by individuals and institutions in the area. 
In 1801 Tappenden and his relatives invested $40,000 in a co-partnership in a new ironworks in Aber-nant, in Glamorgan, which was to lead to his financial collapse and disgrace. In 1807, when the investment had risen to $70,000 for no financial return, his Welsh partners (Jeremiah Homfray and James Birch) withdrew. Tappenden's ambitious attempt to build an integrated and competitive business included the construction of three furnaces, 8 miles of tramroad from Aber-nant to the head of the Neath Canal, and a 100-ton-per-week rolling mill at Pontypridd, the latter undoubtedly a stimulus to the development of that place. Tappenden's son called the Welsh enterprise a 'gigantic concern' (Centre for Kentish Studies, U1823/17 C1 T16-21). But just as the company's operating costs increased, aggravated by the loss of a protracted lawsuit against the Neath Canal Company, so the price of pig and bar iron weakened. This put intolerable strain on a business by then too reliant on credit. 
Williams & Co. petitioned for the bankruptcy of the Abernant Iron Company in December 1814, at the same time stopping the Faversham Bank. Creditors of the Welsh business claimed debts of $270,000. These claims were in addition to the claims on the Faversham Bank, and to the $130,000 invested by Tappenden, suggesting that total claims were upwards of $500,000. Thus Tappenden ranked among the largest business failures of the period; embarrassing questions as to where such large sums had gone went unanswered. 
The people of Faversham were shocked by the downfall of their leading citizen and, in an immediate gesture of support, elected his son Charles to all his public offices; here, too, their trust was misplaced, for Charles was imprisoned for felony in 1818. Tappenden died, insolvent, at Milbank Street, Westminster, on 5 April 1841. 


@@@@@


doc= 53494


Laking, Sir Guy Francis, second baronet (1875-1919), antiquary and museum curator, was born on 21 October 1875 at 5 Cleveland Road, Westminster, London, the only son of Sir Francis Henry Laking, baronet (1847-1914), physician-in-ordinary and surgeon apothecary to Queen Victoria and to her two successors on the throne, and physician to the royal household, and his first wife, Emma Ann Mansell (died 1905). 
Educated at Westminster School and Westminster School of Art, Laking very early developed an overwhelming interest in antiques and works of art, and, above all, in early arms and armour, and devoted most of his spare time to studying them. He often visited Christie's salerooms, only a short distance from his parents' home in Pall Mall, where he attracted the attention of one of the firm's partners, T. H. Woods, to whom he became a kind of unofficial apprentice. The association eventually led to his joining Christie's as art adviser, a position he continued to occupy for the rest of his life, despite being involved in many other activities. On 21 July 1898 he married Beatrice Ida, daughter of Charles Mylne Barker, a solicitor, with whom he had a son and a daughter. 
Laking's father's royal appointments, and the location of the family residence, meant that, in Francis Sheppard's phrase, he was 'brought up almost literally within the shadow of royalty' (Sheppard, 46). There can be little doubt that the post at Christie's, with its all-embracing title, was created for him with an eye to the business that the firm hoped his royal and aristocratic connections might produce as much as in recognition of his expert knowledge. That he possessed the latter is, however, demonstrated by the quality of his first catalogue for Christie's (of the Zschille collection), produced at the beginning of 1897 when he was only just twenty-one, and by the speed with which he established thereafter a reputation as a leading expert on the decorative arts in general, and especially on medieval and later arms and armour. 
In 1900 Laking was appointed honorary inspector of the armouries at the Wallace Collection -- recently bequeathed to the nation -- where he was already busy compiling a catalogue of the European pieces that went through four editions and two reprints between that year and 1910. Shortly afterwards he wrote a catalogue of the armoury of the knights of St John at Valletta (published in 1903), and in 1902 Edward VII created the post of keeper of the king's armoury at Windsor specially for him. This led to his producing a massive catalogue of its European pieces in 1904, followed in 1905 and 1907 respectively by catalogues of the furniture at Windsor Castle and of the Sevres porcelain both there and at Buckingham Palace. He had achieved all this by the time he was thirty-two, while also carrying on his work for Christie's together with related activities, leading an extremely active social life, and raising a family. 
In 1911 Laking was made the first keeper and secretary of the London Museum (now part of the Museum of London), which was then little more than an idea. He has been described as the greatest holder of this office, and so far as its collections were concerned he was certainly the museum's founder, since he was responsible for forming them from scratch and arranging them in Lancaster House, its first home. His long-standing connections with the royal family, some of whom took a personal interest in the museum, as also with the art and antiques trade, were specially advantageous, and the opening to the public on 23 March 1914, towards which he worked with tireless energy, was immensely successful. On the death of his father in that year he became the second baronet. 
While organizing the new museum, Laking was also involved in, among other things, gathering material for what was to be the other achievement for which he will be most remembered: his 'magnum opus', 'A Record of European Armour and Arms through Seven Centuries' (5 vols., 1920-22). It was unfinished at his death -- he lived only to see an advance copy of the first volume -- and was completed by his literary executor, F. H. Cripps-Day. It remains the largest and most fully illustrated survey of its subject ever published. 
Laking's capacity for hard concentrated work was to some extent masked by a playboy image. A man of extraordinary charm -- he seems to have been loved by everyone who knew him, not least by women -- he was also known for his great kindness, immense generosity, and wild extravagance. He had expensive tastes in all the good things of life, including the collection of works of art, above all of fine early arms and armour. His friend Oswald Barron wrote of him that he spent his money 'like one who has a store of gold angels and gold nobles in an iron chest rather than as one who draws cheques on a banking account' (Barron, 43), and many stories used to be told about his extravagances. The most celebrated is probably that of his entertaining the members of the Meyrick Society (of arms and armour collectors) to a medieval feast at his home, which included a roast peacock in its feathers and his children's governess in armour handing round a loving-cup. In order to maintain his lifestyle he appears to have supplemented his income by giving expert advice to both collectors and dealers about works of art. There is considerable evidence to suggest that his need for money was so great that he did not always behave ethically when doing so. 
Laking died on 22 November 1919 at his home, Meyrick Lodge, 16 Avenue Road, Regent's Park, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. He was survived by his wife. His son, Guy Francis William Laking (1904-1930), succeeded as third and last baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 53495


Wrinch, Dorothy Maud (1894-1976), mathematician and theoretical biologist, was born on 13 September 1894 in Rosario, Argentina, the elder daughter of Hugh Edward Hart Wrinch, mechanical engineer, and his wife, Ada Minnie Souter. Growing up in Surbiton, Surrey, she attended Surbiton high school and from there went to Girton College, Cambridge, on a scholarship in 1913. She studied mathematics and moral sciences (mathematical tripos, part one, second class, 1914; part two, first class, 1916). She also played on Girton tennis teams and was active in college debates and in the Mathematical Club (of which she was president in 1916). In her fourth year of studies she concentrated on symbolic logic and attended Bertrand Russell's lectures (moral sciences tripos, part two, second class, 1917); she remained at Girton as a research scholar in the year 1917/18. In 1921 she was awarded a London DSc. For a time she kept close working and social contacts with Russell, and while he was in prison for his anti-war activities she supplied him with books and news. 
Wrinch was appointed to a mathematics lectureship at University College, London, in 1918, but two years later returned to Girton as a Yarrow research fellow. In 1922 she married mathematical physicist John William Nicholson (1881-1955), then a fellow of Balliol College, Oxford, and with his help obtained a tutorship at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford. Over the next sixteen years she held various research fellowships and lectureships or tutorships at the Oxford women's colleges. Her marriage, badly strained by Nicholson's deteriorating mental state, was dissolved in 1938. One daughter, Pamela, was born in 1927. 
Dorothy Wrinch's early work was in mathematics, pure and applied, logic, and philosophy. Among her forty-two publications appearing between 1919 and 1929 were studies in classical analysis, classical mechanics, and mathematical physics (including work with her father and with her husband), papers in mathematical logic in the tradition of Whitehead and Russell, and joint studies with Harold Jeffreys on the theory of scientific method. In 1929 she received an Oxford DSc, the first awarded to a woman. She was an active member of the mathematics subsection of the British Association and for a number of years served on the International Commission on the Teaching of Mathematics. 
By the late 1920s Wrinch's academic interests were expanding. A brief excursion into sociology resulted in her short book 'Retreat from Parenthood' (1930, published under the pseudonym Jean Ayling). Reflecting her strong feminist outlook the work presented a broad plan of social reorganization to make child rearing more compatible with professional life. Her interests soon settled on biological questions, however, particularly the challenges in the new field of theoretical biology, where, she felt, the application of mathematical techniques would be critical for advances. 
In 1932, having already familiarized herself with the basic principles of biology and chemistry by attending courses in Vienna and Paris, Wrinch became a founding member of the Biotheoretical Gathering. Among the particular interests of this group of Cambridge biochemists and crystallographers was the structure of proteins and chromosomes; the possibility of linear sequences of amino acids or nucleic acids being involved in the genetic process was already being considered. In her first publications in the field (1934, 1936) she proposed possible models for chromosomes at the molecular level; although she was working from the incorrect picture of the overall structure then commonly held, she made the valuable suggestion that chromosome specificity was linked to the specific sequencing of constituent groups in the chain structure. With help from her friend, Oxford chemist and crystallographer Dorothy Crowfoot, she went on to consider the problem of the structure of globular proteins and here produced one of the most elegant hypotheses among the early attempts to find a basic plan in these giant molecules. Following an initial proposal that the chains of linked amino acids that constitute proteins could polymerize to form a mosaic sheet network to which she gave the name 'cyclol', she suggested (1937) that the sheets would fold into series of closed geometric figures, such as octahedra, built of definite, computable numbers of amino acid residues. The theory provided an attractive explanation for many recent observations on proteins, and when it was demonstrated (1937) that, by an extraordinary coincidence, the number of amino acid residues in egg albumen was consistent with her model, she considered her proposal strikingly verified. 
Dorothy Wrinch's work was of great interest to chemists and biologists at the 1938 Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on proteins; her tremendous enthusiasm contributed much to its favourable reception. Considerable controversy soon followed, however, with eminent scientists, including Nobel prizewinner Irwin Langmuir, taking sides. At times Dorothy Wrinch felt unfairly treated by some in the chemical community; her arguments with chemist Linus Pauling were particularly heated. However, in the years after the Second World War chemical and crystallographic evidence gradually proved that proteins do not have the cyclol structure. Nevertheless, Dorothy Wrinch's bold hypothesis, presented at a time when experimental evidence was sparse, was valuable in that it triggered widespread interest in proteins; further, her detailed and explicitly geometrical argument powerfully stressed the idea that complex protein structures had to be considered in terms of detailed molecular architecture. Her methodology was pioneering. 
With the coming of the Second World War, Wrinch had moved to the United States, partly for her daughter's safety. After a year as a visiting fellow in the chemistry department at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, she obtained in 1941 a visiting professorship at three small Massachusetts colleges, Amherst, Smith, and Mount Holyoke. Her appointment was arranged largely by Otto Charles Glaser (1880-1951), chairman of the biology department and vice-president of Amherst College, whom she married on 20 August 1941. From 1942, for almost three decades, she held research positions at Smith, where she supervised a few graduate students, conducted seminars, and continued her studies -- further work on protein structure and the development and application to proteins of techniques for interpreting X-ray patterns of complicated molecular structures. 
Despite the handicaps of losing her close contact with Dorothy Crowfoot, generally increasing intellectual isolation, and gradual reduction of research funding, Wrinch continued to publish at an impressive rate, often bringing out seven or eight papers a year. Her monograph 'Fourier Transforms and Structure Factors' (1946) remained in use for decades, and she made important contributions to extending methods of analysis of the sets of points which in X-ray diffraction patterns represent crystal structure. For a time she was a consultant to John von Neumann at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton in his pioneering work on the development of computers, the analysis of complex protein X-ray data being considered a major application. In the summers she lectured at the Marine Biological Laboratory, Wood's Hole, Massachusetts, an institution with which Otto Glaser was closely connected and where she had many friends. The main focus of her work, however, was the presentation and defence of her cyclol theory; she doggedly ignored the accumulating evidence against it. Her two books, 'Chemical Aspects of the Structure of Small Peptides' (1960) and 'Chemical Aspects of Polypeptide Chain Structure and the Cyclol Theory' (1965), presented the history of protein chemistry as she saw it. 
A controversial figure in early research in molecular biology, bright, ambitious, hardworking, and adventurous, Dorothy Wrinch was for much of her life a restless outsider, something of an exile in her American environment, who took up difficult problems in a field in which she, a mathematician by training, had insufficient background. Possessing a sharp wit and a dynamic, forceful personality, she was not always easy to get along with. Nevertheless, she was also an attractive woman and an inspired teacher who set high standards. After Otto Glaser's death she lived on the Smith College campus, moving to Wood's Hole, Massachusetts, on her retirement in 1971. She died in Falmouth Hospital, Falmouth, Massachusetts, of pneumonia, on 11 February 1976 and was cremated two days later at Forest Hills crematory, Boston. Her ashes were taken to Wood's Hole. 


@@@@@


doc= 53496


Paton, William Roger (1857-1921), epigraphist and classical scholar, was born on 9 February 1857 at 10 Chanonry, Old Aberdeen, the only son, and fourth of five children, of John Paton (1818-1879), a major, and later a colonel, in the Aberdeenshire militia and deputy lieutenant of Aberdeenshire, and his wife, Eliza Deborah (died 1860), daughter of Thomas Burnett of Kepplestone, Aberdeenshire. He was educated, like his father, at Eton College (1871-3), apparently boarding in Edward Peake Rouse's house before transferring to Oscar Browning's. Paton matriculated in 1876 and read classics at University College, Oxford, obtaining a first in classical moderations (1877). He then decided to pursue a legal career and was admitted to the Middle Temple in January 1878. Paton returned to Oxford and obtained a third in 'literae humaniores' (1880). This disappointing result may be explained in part by the death of his father in the summer before his final year in Oxford. 
Although Paton was not called to the bar, he kept terms at the Middle Temple until 1884. He also seems to have served as a review editor for 'The Academy' and he continued to maintain an interest in the classical world, joining in 1881 the newly formed Society for the Promotion of Hellenic Studies. His inheritance allowed him to travel to the islands of the Aegean to record previously unknown inscriptions. The search for new texts to supplement literary and historical works was characteristic of this period, exemplified by the travels through Anatolia of William Ramsay in 1881-2 and the American John R. Sitlington Sterrett in 1884, the work at Delphi through the 1880s of l'Ecole Francaise d'Athenes under the direction of Paul Foucart, and the appearance of volumes of 'Inscriptiones Graecae' under the auspices of the Berlin-based Akademie der Wissenschaften. During his epigraphic hunts, Paton fell in love with Irene (1869/70-1908), the daughter of Emanuel Olympitis, mayor of the island of Kalymnos, then part of the Ottoman empire. Irene's father did not approve of the match, and so Paton moved to the island of Kos where he made a study of the inscriptions of that island. 
In 1885, while Irene was still in her mid-teens, her father gave permission for her marriage to Paton, which took place in the same year. The pair made their base at the farm Paton had acquired through his wife's dowry at Gumishlu, the site of ancient Myndus, on the mainland of Turkey: in the following year, George, the first of their five children, was born at Gumishlu. The married couple then returned to the Paton family home at Grandhome near Aberdeen. Paton, like his father, served as a justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant of the county of Aberdeen. The Patons eventually settled in Pothia, the main town of Kalymnos, which gave Paton an opportunity to investigate the archaeology of the island. A study of pottery from graves on Kalymnos, and a report on an excavation at Assarlik on the Bodrum peninsula, appeared in the 'Journal of Hellenic Studies' (1887); the finds were presented to the British Museum. 
During the late 1880s Paton regularly sent details of new inscriptions to the epigraphist, later bishop of Lincoln, Edward Lee Hicks, then principal of Hulme Hall, Manchester. Drawing on Paton's knowledge of the island, and with the support of the German scholar Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Hicks and Paton collaborated on 'Inscriptions of Cos' (1891), described as 'a credit to British scholarship' (Tarbell, 278). Paton's knowledge of the islands led him to be invited, at the prompting of von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, to contribute a fascicule on the inscriptions of Lesbos, Nesos, and Tenedos to the major series 'Inscriptiones Graecae' (12/2, 1899). It is perhaps significant that the planned fourth fascicule of the same volume, which was to cover the islands of Kos and Kalymnos, was never published, possibly in the light of Paton's earlier work. Paton was made an associate of the German Imperial Archaeological Institute and in 1900 was awarded an honorary PhD from the University of Halle. 
In 1893 Paton asked Ernest Gardner, then director of the British School at Athens, to help find a suitable student to make a topographical study of the Bodrum (Halikarnassos) peninsula in Karia. Gardner suggested that he be joined by John L. Myres who had been pursuing research on 'Oriental influences on prehistoric Greece'. Myres travelled to Kalymnos in May 1893, finding the Patons living above a cafe on the waterfront with Irene's family. Myres and Paton made the Myndus farm the base for their exploration. Myres later recalled the cosmopolitan nature of the establishment: 'Paton spoke Greek and French to his wife, German to the children's governess, English to me, Turkish to the servants, Latin and Gaelic to his children' (Myres, 10). The permit for Paton and Myres had indicated that they wished to visit the ancient city of Alinda (Mugla), but they decided to study the coast of Karia instead. During the survey, which continued until July, Paton and Myres were arrested on suspicion of being pirates. The survey was published jointly in the 'Journal of Hellenic Studies' (1896) and the 'Journal of the Royal Geographic Society' (1897). 
Paton edited and translated several Greek texts alongside his epigraphic studies, including Plutarch's 'Pythici dialogi tres' (1893) and 'De cupiditate divitiarum' (1896), and a translation of Aeschylus's 'Agamemnon' (1907). His interest in the 'Greek Anthology' saw fruition in 'Anthologiae Graecae erotica: the Love Epigrams, or, Book V of the Palatine Anthology' (1898). Along with Eugenie Sellers and others, he helped to translate Max H. Ohnefalsch-Richter's 'Kypros, the Bible, and Homer: Oriental Civilization, Art and Religion in Ancient Times' (1893) into English. 
The Patons continued to live on Kalymnos, and in 1907 Paton reported a newly discovered inscription on his farm at Myndus on the mainland relating to a cult of Zeus Askraios in 'The Classical Review' (1907). Irene's death at Paris from typhoid in October 1908 seems to have precipitated a move to Ker-Anna, Perros Guirec, Cotes-du-Nord in France. It seems that at this time Paton was offered a chair at Oxford, presumably the newly created Wykeham chair of ancient history filled by Myres in 1910, but he declined. His daughter Sevasti Augusta, in her unpublished memoirs, linked her father's decision to Paton's feelings about how Oscar Wilde had been treated; she recalled Paton 'could never work with a People who were capable of confusing the great Artist with the man'. In 1911 Paton married a widow, Klio, daughter of Ioannes Nomikos of Smyrna, and they settled in Vathy, the main town of the island of Samos. The following year, during the First Balkan War, the island was acquired by Greece. 
During the First World War, in the aftermath of the Gallipoli campaign, there were increased attacks on the Turkish mainland by British naval units with the intention of tying down Turkish troops. During one of these raids Myres, serving as a naval officer, was forced to destroy the farm at Myndus: 'Mrs Paton's house on the beach... was occupied by a Turkish platoon and had to be destroyed, as were various other structures suspected of housing petrol dumps' (Myres, 14). In another major naval raid on the Turkish mainland at Asin (ancient Iassus) in late September 1916, Myres was forced to evacuate Mrs Paton's brother-in-law, Hadji Stephanos, to Samos. This led to the Patons making a complaint about Myres's activities which they claimed were damaging Greek interests in Anatolia; the raids were curtailed in early October. However, Compton Mackenzie, who served as an intelligence officer in the Aegean during the First World War, recalled in 1917 that 'the Greek wife of a distinguished English scholar in Samos used to scream at the top of her voice when from her balcony she perceived Myres walking along the street below, for she had an idea that Myres in the course of one foray had destroyed a family farm on the mainland opposite. (Mackenzie, 'First Athenian Memories', 253)' After moving to Samos Paton concentrated on his language interests. He prepared the five volumes of the 'Greek Anthology' for the 'Loeb Classical Library' (1916-19), and then started work on translating Polybius's 'Histories' for the six volumes of the Loeb edition (1922-7). During the First World War Paton was asked, again at von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff's suggestion, to serve as an editor for the Teubner edition of Plutarch's 'Moralia' (1925-9), published posthumously. Paton died suddenly, apparently from a heart attack while reading 'The Pickwick Papers', at Vathy, Samos, on 21 April 1921, and was buried on the island. 
A glimpse into Paton's character is provided by Oscar Wilde. Paton had written to his old friend Wilde on his release from Pentonville in 1897, and Wilde responded, 'I have often heard from others of your sympathy and unabated friendship... I hope you are happy, and finding Greek things every day' (Hart-Davis, 629-30). 


@@@@@


doc= 53497


Kingscote, Adeline Georgiana Isabella (1860-1908), novelist and travel writer, was born in Corfu on 16 November 1860, the daughter of Sir Henry Drummond Charles Wolff (1830-1908), diplomatist and MP, who at the time of her birth was serving on the Ionian Islands, and his wife, Adeline, 'nee' Douglas (1826/7-1916). Her paternal grandfather was the Revd Joseph Wolff, co-founder of the Irvingite Church. An accomplished linguist, Kingscote passed the senior local examination of the Oxford University Local Examinations Delegacy in 1877. On 25 June 1885 in St Paul's, Wilton Place, London, she married Howard Kingscote (1844-1917), a lieutenant-colonel in the Oxfordshire light infantry. Her husband was posted to India, where she gave birth to their three children (a daughter and two sons). She wrote 'Tales of the Sun, or, Folklore of Southern India' (1890) and 'The English Baby in India and How to Rear it' (1893), both published under the name Mrs H. Kingscote. The latter offers sensible advice but demonstrates contemporary prejudice in arguing against the use of Indian nurses. 
The Kingscotes had returned to England by 1891, and in 1895, when Howard Kingscote was appointed commander of Cowley barracks, they moved into Bury Knowle House in Headington, Oxfordshire. There Kingscote began her prolific career as a novelist. Under the pseudonym Lucas Cleeve she published more than sixty novels, including 'The Woman who Wouldn't' (1895), her response to Grant Allen's 'The Woman who Did' (1895). She wrote 'The Love Seeker' (1908) as Mary Walpole. Feminist concerns figure in the novels: in her posthumously published novel 'The Love Letters of a Faithless Wife' (1911), for example, the heroine, Hertha Atherton, feels so unfulfilled by her marriage to a cold and neglectful husband that she contemplates embarking upon a series of extramarital liaisons. Hertha argues that there are two kinds of husbands: 'The men who love again anywhere and everywhere, and who are unfaithful; and the men who, when they have married a wife, don't want to love or be loved any more'. Her husband falls into the latter camp; none the less Hertha remains faithful -- but the very fact of her temptation serves as a warning to unappreciative husbands. 
Though Kingscote continued to write until her death, at times producing as many as eight books a year, she is remembered more for her charm and financial irresponsibility than for her works of fiction. Her powers of persuasion enabled her to extract large sums of money from male admirers, while her 'consuming brown eyes' (Jenkins) captivated the future MP for Oxford, Frank Gray. Working as a solicitor's clerk in 1898, he met Kingscote when he went to Bury Knowle House to serve writs on her. She was described by Gray as 'the finest adventuress I ever met' (ibid.), but her extravagance caught up with her in 1899 when she was forced to declare bankruptcy for the astonishing sum of $100,000. The entire contents of Bury Knowle House, down to the bottles of Moet et Chandon in the cellar, were auctioned in June 1899. Two clergymen, the vicars of Cowley and Headington, who had stood surety for her, and the ninth Baron Byron, who had lent her $50,000, were also bankrupted as a result. Undaunted by financial disaster, she continued to write until her death at Chateau d'Oex in Switzerland on 13 September 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 53499


Gray, Andrew (1847-1925), physicist, was born in the parish of Auchterderran, Fife, on 2 July 1847, the eldest son of John Gray, labourer, then farmer, of Lochgelly, Fife, and his wife, Margaret Wilson. He was educated at the local village school and later studied with private teachers in Edinburgh. His talent for mathematics was recognized and he was encouraged to enter the University of Glasgow in 1872 at the comparatively advanced age of twenty-five. He graduated MA with honours in mathematics and physics in 1876, winning prizes in natural philosophy (1874-5) and mathematics (1875-6). He was appointed, in 1874, private assistant and secretary to Sir William Thomson (later Lord Kelvin), professor of natural philosophy at Glasgow, and in 1880 he was made official assistant. He was Eglinton fellow in mathematics, 1876. In 1870 he married Ann Gordon; they had four sons and four daughters. 
Gray became the foundation professor of physics in the University College of North Wales, Bangor, in 1884, and succeeded Kelvin as professor of natural philosophy at Glasgow in 1899, winning the chair against competition which included the young C. T. R. Wilson, and ushering in a period of undistinguished research in physics that lasted nearly fifty years. It would not be unfair to say that Gray dotted Kelvin's 'i's and crossed his 't's, and did little that was original. The splendid, but now lost, lecture theatre in Gray's 1907 Natural Philosophy Institute building (later the Kelvin building) was designed with Kelvin's expansive style in mind. Gray's major publications ('Absolute Measurements in Electricity and Magnetism', 1883; 'Theory and Practice of Absolute Measurements in Electricity and Magnetism', vol. 1, 1888, vol. 2, 1893, new edn, 1921; and 'Dynamics and Properties of Matter', 1901) reflect Kelvin's interests of a decade or so earlier. The story may not be untrue that just after the Second World War a drawer in the natural philosophy department was found to contain shards of glass along with a note saying 'Glass broken by Lord Kelvin'. He published 'The Scientific Work of Lord Kelvin' in 1908, the year following Kelvin's death, and organized the first of the historical collections of Kelvin apparatus and instruments to be preserved in the department. Yet his 'Absolute Measurements in Electricity and Magnetism', expanded in 1888, 'did much to make experimental electricity an exact science' ('Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh', 375), and was very helpful to physicists in national laboratories when determining electrical standards. Another of Gray's notable contributions to the physical literature was his massive 'Treatise on Gyrostatics and Rotational Motion' (1919). In this difficult subject he was reputed to have attained Dirac's ideal of understanding: he could say what would happen without actually solving the equations. 
Gray's principal achievements were as an indefatigable teacher, including extension teaching, and university administrator. Where Kelvin might easily have fallen foul of modern teaching quality assessments, Gray's attention to detail, his advice and guidance to students, kindness, and pastoral care would have seen him through with flying colours. As a result the number of students taking the various natural philosophy classes in the university increased enormously, though few of them were inspired to greatness as many were by Kelvin's exciting but, for the ordinary student, execrable lectures. Gray reorganized the obsolete department he inherited at Glasgow, and founded the Natural Philosophy Institute in 1906, the largest building devoted to physics in Britain; by 1923 more than 600 students a year took laboratory courses there. 
Gray was elected FRS (Edinburgh) in 1883 and served as a member of council (1903-6) and vice-president (1906-9); in 1896 he became FRS (London) and was awarded an honorary LLD by the University of Glasgow. He played a full part in the life of the university, serving as senate assessor on the university court (1904-12), and in the intellectual life of the city. He was president of the mathematical and physical section of the then extremely active Royal Philosophy Society of Glasgow in 1902-3 and was for some years a member of its council. 
His organizational exertions on numerous committees during the First World War, the death of a son in 1915, and the demands of vastly increased student numbers after the war undermined Gray's already uncertain health and he resigned his chair in 1923. He died on 10 October 1925 at 15 Victoria Circus, Glasgow. He was survived by his wife. It was a source of satisfaction to him that James Gordon Gray, his second son, had renounced the engineering profession for physics and been appointed professor of applied physics at Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 53500


Brickdale, Sir Charles Fortescue- (1857-1944), barrister and land registrar, was born on 1 March 1857 at 41 Victoria Street, Westminster, London, the oldest of the five children of Matthew Inglett Brickdale (1817-1894), barrister and sometime radical lawyer, and of Sarah Anna (1833/4-1909), daughter of Judge Edward Lloyd. At the time of Charles's birth the family name was Brickdale, and it was not until the Edwardian period that he and his siblings adopted the double-barrelled form. His sister, (Mary) Eleanor Fortescue-Brickdale (1872-1945), achieved fame as a painter and stained-glass artist, and his brother, J. M. Fortescue-Brickdale (1869-1921), was a physician of some note. 
Brickdale was educated at Westminster School and Christ Church, Oxford, where he also attended the Ruskin School of Drawing and learned proficiency in drawing and etching. Following in his father's footsteps, he was called to the bar in 1883 from Lincoln's Inn and specialized in land law. He acquired his credentials as a land reformer with a short book published in 1886, 'Registration of Title to Land and how to Establish it without Cost or Compulsion'. The Land Registry, set up under an act of 1862 to register and secure title to land and thus ease property transfers, the costs, complexities, and delays of which were a national scandal, had up to that time proved to be a failure. The system was a voluntary one; it was strongly opposed by conveyancing lawyers and a mere three thousand or so titles had been registered. Brickdale pointed to the success of the Australian and Prussian systems of land registration, and argued that the key was to accept that registered land would offer not 'indefeasible' but 'guaranteed' title. 
In 1888 Brickdale was appointed by the lord chancellor, Lord Halsbury, as assisting barrister at the Land Registry. From this time on, as a result of his energy and thoroughness, the thrust of its activities changed. Under Halsbury's protection, Brickdale took advantage of the strong agitation of the period for land reform, notably the controversies arising from the Irish land question and the campaigns of the American Henry George (1839-1897) and his English followers for the taxation of land values, to press consistently for the compulsory registration of land as the key to practical progress. After much lobbying and extensive study of the German and Austrian systems of registration and other foreign modes of tenure, Brickdale achieved this goal in the shape of the 'Land Transfer Act', 1897. 
The conversion of a voluntary system into a compulsory one in the teeth of continued opposition from lawyers proved a formidable task, and in the event was achieved only gradually, beginning from 1899; a critical date was the extension of registration to the City of London in 1902. Brickdale was rewarded for his persistence by being appointed chief registrar in 1900, a post he held until he retired in 1923. He was the butt of fierce criticism from the Law Society, and the costs and workings of the Land Registry were among the issues investigated by the royal commission on land reform conceded by the Liberal government in 1908-9. In the event Brickdale managed to turn the radicalism of the moment to advantage. In 1910 he secured Lloyd George's promise of a new ''Domesday' office' which would combine the Land Registry with the Ordnance Survey and the valuation department of the Inland Revenue. 
The Liberal land-reforming tide then receded, and R. B. Haldane as lord chancellor proved less amenable to Brickdale's ambitions than had been expected. What had in effect become a competition over conveyancing between the Land Registry and the solicitors came to an end through the compromise of the 'Law of Property Bill' (1922), enacted only in 1925 after Brickdale's retirement. However, during his period of office he had transformed a failure into a respected, revenue-earning department of government, housed in a handsome, purpose-built headquarters on the south side of Lincoln's Inn Fields. Brickdale himself in 1900 supplied the initial sketches for the Land Registry building, in a Jacobean style blending in with Lincoln's Inn. It was carried out by the office of works in 1903-5 and 1912-13, the latter phase housing also the Inland Revenue's land valuers. 
Brickdale was typical of the more highly educated reformers of his period, earnest, single-minded, cultivated, but stubborn. In 1888 he married Mabel Beatrice Gibbs (died 1944), daughter of George Louis Gibbs of the merchant banking firm Anthony Gibbs & Sons; they had two sons. Most of his many publications concerned land transfer and registration; he also edited the recollections of his brother-in-law, the soldier Sir Henry Hallam Parr, in 1917. He received a knighthood in 1911. He died at Gorse Corner, Townsend Drive, St Albans, on 20 September 1944 from heart disease and senile decay and was buried at East Sheen. 


@@@@@


doc= 53501


Margaret Mary Dilke (1857-1914), campaigner for women's rights, was born at Hampton, Middlesex, on 4 September 1857, the eldest daughter in the family of ten children of Thomas Eustace Smith (1831-1903), shipowner and Liberal MP for Tynemouth, and his wife, Martha Mary Dalrymple (1835-1919). She was brought up in the family home, Gosford House, Newcastle upon Tyne, and was educated at Orleans where she passed the public examination for French schoolmistresses. In 1886 she gave evidence in the divorce proceedings involving her sister Virginia Crawford. Her testimony, which was loyal to her sister, incriminated her brother-in-law and the guardian of her children, the politician Sir Charles Dilke, and was said to have strongly influenced the jury. 


@@@@@


doc= 53502


Beresford, George Charles (1864-1938), photographer and memoirist, was born at 15 Lypiatt Terrace, Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, on 10 July 1864, the third son of Major Henry Marcus Beresford (1835-1895) of the 9th foot and his wife, Julia Ellen (died 1923), daughter of the Revd Francis Richard Maunsell. Marcus Gervais Beresford, archbishop of Armagh, was his grandfather. He was educated at the recently founded United Services College at Westward Ho! in Devon. His study-mates and close friends were Rudyard Kipling and Lionel Charles Dunsterville: in Kipling's 'Stalky and Co.' (1899), based on their schooldays, Beresford features as M'Turk and Dunsterville as Stalky. Like Kipling, Beresford was destined for a career in India. He passed the annual examination of the Royal Indian Engineering College, Cooper's Hill, in July 1885. He was appointed assistant engineer, second grade, in the public works department on 23 September 1885, although he did not arrive in Bombay until over a year later, joining the architectural executive engineer's and surveyor's office. In November 1888 he went to England on a year's medical furlough (possibly the outcome of a particularly bad attack of malaria, or merely incapacity to endure the climate), but never returned to India to continue in this line of work. 
Instead Beresford turned in a wholly different direction, attending the Slade School of Art. He took up the still relatively new profession of portrait photography with great success, working from a studio in Knightsbridge between 1902 and 1932. His platinotype portraits of writers, artists, and politicians appeared regularly in the leading illustrated periodicals of the day. One hundred and eighty-one of his portrait studies are now held by the National Portrait Gallery. These studies of faces (nearly all are of head and shoulders only), while extremely visually pleasing -- his haunting studies of the young Virginia Stephen, later Woolf, are understandably much reproduced -- also show a considerable degree of insight into the individuals concerned, and many are acute character studies. His wide range of distinguished sitters included Sir Leslie Stephen and members of his family, Sir James Barrie, Keir Hardie, Herbert Asquith, Lloyd George, Yeats, Nancy Astor, and Jacob Epstein. He was also noted as a photographer of children. The aesthetic capabilities behind his success in this field also sustained his allied career as an antique dealer. He moved in the artistic circles of his contemporaries at the Slade and was an intimate of Sir William Orpen, who produced several portraits of him. 
However, in spite of his professional association with elevated social circles, Beresford had a questing and questioning spirit. Not entirely surprisingly, given the allegiance to Ruskin that Kipling reflected in the depiction of M'Turk, his artistic interests were wedded to an interest in social reform. He became a member of the Fabian Society and also dabbled in theosophy, although his membership of the Theosophical Society appears to have lapsed quite soon. He was also, it would appear, a supporter of the emancipation of women. He had close ties with the group of extremely radical feminist thinkers associated with 'The Freewoman' journal, producing a portrait of the founding editor, Dora Marsden, as a supplement for the June 1912 issue, lending his studio for the debates of the Freewoman discussion circles, and providing financial support when it fell into difficulties. During the First World War he donated the profits from his business to the work of the Red Cross. 
While maintaining this somewhat bohemian existence in London Beresford appears to have set up a menage in Brighton with Jessica Wilson. The reasons for their not marrying are obscure, but she is mentioned in the will he made in 1917 and he made careful provision for their two sons, Manfred and Vernon Wilson. According to a later codicil to the will Brighton had become his main residence by 1924, although he still maintained his photographic studio in Yeoman's Row off Brompton Road. He retired in 1932, passing on his studio contents to his assistant and retoucher, Miss Gertrude Topliss. 
Beresford was active in the establishment of the Kipling Society in 1927, and became no. 1 in the society's roll, serving as a member of council and regularly attending meetings. At the first meeting he gave an account of their schooldays together, advancing the argument that was expanded upon in his book, 'Schooldays with Kipling' (1936), that 'Stalky and Co.' was a work of fiction bearing relatively little resemblance to their actual lives at the United Services College, a view disputed by Dunsterville. Beresford died suddenly of coronary thrombosis and atheroma on 21 February 1938 at his home, 21 West Drive, Queen's Park, Brighton, Sussex. He was buried at Brighton. 
The impression that remains of Beresford's character is that he was a private person, somewhat aloof and detached, yet capable of considerable generosity to his associates. Kipling's first biographer, Birkenhead, strongly influenced by Dunsterville (a very different character and politically of opposing views), pronounced him embittered and envious of Kipling's success, but this may be an uncharitable reading of someone to whom irony and cynicism were natural modes of expression. His career can hardly be considered that of a failure. The obituary in the 'Kipling Journal' (45, 1938, 27-8) described him as having a 'nonchalant manner' and 'seeming appearance of indifference' concealing 'a brain with an edge like that of a good razor', a man of parts capable of generous praise and appraisal of others. 


@@@@@


doc= 53504


Lawson, Thomas George (1814-1891), colonial official and Baptist leader, was born in October 1814 in the town of New London, Anecho, in west Africa, the second son of George Acquatay Lawson ('c'.1778-1856), political leader and merchant, and his wife, Adolevi Ape, a sister of the king of Anloga (Awuna in British documents). George A. Lawson, born Akuete Zankli, was the son of Late Awoku ('c'.1739-1795) and the grandson of Late Bewu, who came from Accra to the kingdom of Glidji about 1730. A few years after his arrival Late Bewu married Adaku, a daughter of Assiongbon Dandje, king of Glidji. 
The coastal region near Glidji was one centre of European trade with which local African rulers were closely involved. In the 1750s, as a means of becoming better informed, Late Bewu entrusted Late Awoku to the British captain of a merchant ship for education in commerce and the English language. In family documents the captain's name is given as Law or Lawson, and a Captain William Lawson was active along the coast during this period. Late Awoku returned well versed in commerce and was granted land by the ruler of Anecho about 1767. In turn Late Awoku sent Akuete Zankli 'to Britain' to study, but it is likely that he settled for a time in the Sierra Leone colony and may have had a son there who remained in Freetown when Akuete Zankli returned to Anecho in 1812 or before. There he succeeded his father as an adviser to the king and built a town called Badji, later renamed New London. It was he, or possibly his father, who assumed the family name Lawson. 
By 1825 New London was closely allied with the United Kingdom, and following family tradition Thomas George Lawson was entrusted to Captain Isaac Spence from London for further education. Whether or not he was meant to study in London, Lawson disembarked at Freetown and was taken in by John McCormack, a wealthy timber merchant and a chief adviser to the colonial government. He lived in McCormack's large house on Rawdon Street and was educated in colonial schools. He often travelled with McCormack on business and fact-finding tours into the interior north and east of the colony. For several years he was employed by McCormack's timber company as a trading agent in the interior and as an interpreter. Through his extensive contacts he learned several African languages and gained substantial knowledge of Arabic. By about 1840 he was married to a woman from one of the royal houses of Koya kingdom, located about 30 miles east of Freetown. It appears that at least three children came from this liaison: William Thomas George Lawson, who was born about 1840; Thomas George Lawson, who died in 1897; and a daughter, who died in 1878. 
McCormack was so favourably impressed by Lawson's knowledge of African cultures and languages and by his skill as an intermediary that he recommended him for the position of the governor's personal messenger to African rulers in the interior. Between 1846 and 1851 Lawson ably fulfilled his mission, and Governor Norman William Macdonald recommended to the Colonial Office that he be appointed as the first official colony messenger and interpreter with an annual salary of $100. He became the principal colonial official responsible for representing British interests in the interior and for receiving African notables who travelled to Freetown. 
From Lawson's official appointment on 1 May 1852 until January 1889 he was the director of 'native affairs' for the British administration, and was deeply involved in the expansion of the coastal settlement into the colony and protectorate of Sierra Leone which occurred in 1896. Under government auspices he went on dozens of missions to various African kingdoms and towns, he arranged the housing and interpreted for African rulers or their representatives when they came to Freetown, and he presented thousands of pages of reports and memoranda to senior colonial officers. His writings and personal advice to several governors and administrators-in-chief provided the data and analytical basis for colonial policy. 
Lawson was a devoted Christian and an outspoken supporter of Queen Victoria and British administration in Africa. His religious proclivities are attested to by his active role in the West African Methodist church between 1840 and 1850. In 1850 he became a Baptist, and in 1853 he assisted John McCormack in founding the Church of God Chapel, an independent Baptist church for which he acted as manager. He married his second wife, Sarian (Sarah Anne in its Anglicized form), in St George's Cathedral in January 1863. They had at least two children. Moses Thomas George and Catherine Sarah Anne, like their older siblings, were educated in colonial schools and married into prominent Sierra Leone families. All Lawson's children and at least one grandson, James Glynn Lawson, became important members of Sierra Leone society. 
As a devout Christian and firm exponent of British colonial expansion Lawson took every opportunity to pursue his mission and to exhort African rulers to accept British values and administration. From his experiences with African notables he had developed a strong respect for Islam which he considered to be a 'civilizing' influence, and he had good relations with many important Muslim leaders whom he successfully brought into the British colonial administration. 
The Colonial Office in London recognized Lawson's essential role in representing British interests and in providing information and analysis that led to a network of treaties with African rulers by granting him British citizenship in 1860, by rewarding him with regular increases in his salary, and by authorizing a grand retirement ceremony for him in 1886. Governor Rowe wrote to the secretary of state in the Colonial Office on 18 May 1886: 'I do hope that Your Lordship may be pleased to show some special mark of appreciation of the services rendered by Mr. Lawson. They stand, I believe, alone and without equal in the history of Her Majesty's Settlements on this Coast' (TNA: PRO, CO 267/363, Dispatch 160). Hundreds of colonial officials and African notables from Freetown and the interior attended the ceremony in September 1886. He did not officially retire until January 1889, as his services were so essential for the smooth running of the administration. 
Lawson's salary at retirement was $350, with substantial additional income as a landlord in Freetown and owner of valuable farm lands in the interior. He continued to reside in his large house on Charlotte Street until his death, in Freetown, in June 1891. His funeral was held on 14 June 1891 in Freetown, and services were conducted by the Revd C. Marke at the Church of God Chapel on Regent Street. More than four thousand persons attended the funeral. Among them were all the chief colonial officials, political and professional leaders, merchants, and Muslim and Christian clerics. Lawson was the most significant African officer in the British colonial service during the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 53505


Gardner, Sir James Tynte Agg- (1846-1928), brewer and politician, was born on 25 November 1846, at Cheltenham, the elder son of James Agg-Gardner (1804-1858) and his wife, Eulalie Emily (1819-1901), the fifth daughter and coheir of William Richard Hopkins-Northey. He had one brother and a sister. His father took the additional surname after his patronymic of Agg as the nephew and heir of John Gardner (died 1836), a country banker and Cheltenham brewer. Agg-Gardner senior was an astute businessman who purchased the manor of Cheltenham in 1843 for $39,000 from Lord Sherborne; he unsuccessfully contested Cheltenham (then a pocket borough of the whig Berkeley family) as a Conservative in 1841 and 1848. James, his heir, was brought up in a Calvinist atmosphere; he became a ward in chancery on his father's death and was 'carefully reared, watched over by his widowed mother' ('Cheltenham Chronicle'). He went to Harrow School in 1861 and was coached privately at Hedsor in 1864 by the chaplain of his uncle, Lord Boston, before matriculating at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1865. At the age of nineteen he became a freemason. Owing to his first parliamentary candidature at Cheltenham in 1868 he took no degree, but became a student of the Inner Temple in that year and was called to the bar in 1873. He never practised. 
Agg-Gardner was lord of the manor of Cheltenham until 1862, when his interest was sold for $33,000, and again from 1872, when he bought back the manorial rights. His property in the town was developed after his coming of age. New malthouses were built in the 1870s, and $75,000 was spent on improving head premises and brewery houses. He bought a wine and spirit shop in Cheltenham High Street, and had a pecuniary interest in the Plough Hotel, where he lived before acquiring Evesham House at Pittville about 1888. Agg-Gardner's brewery enjoyed 'the highest possible character' for a radius of 50 miles, and was 'the largest brewery in England, and probably therefore in the world, which is the sole and entire property of one man' ('Licensed Victuallers Gazette'). It suffered by this, for Agg-Gardner was not a keen-minded entrepreneur and the business needed a committed managing director to impose policy. In 1888 it was turned into the Cheltenham Original Brewery Company Ltd (with Agg-Gardner as chairman until his death). The brewery was encumbered by heavy borrowings, and a collapse in profits about 1905 was reversed only by the appointment of a professional brewer to direct the business. 
The young lord of the manor was first elected Conservative MP for Cheltenham in 1874. Defeated in 1880, he was returned in 1885 and held the seat until the general election of 1895, when he did not stand 'for reasons unconnected with politics' (Agg-Gardner, 58). Agg-Gardner never married, and H. Montgomery Hyde, without giving evidence, stated he was homosexual (Hyde, 201). He had intimated in 1894 that he would not seek re-election, and conceivably his decision was influenced by the libel actions brought in 1893-4 by Charles Gatty who, as parliamentary candidate for West Dorset in 1892, had been sexually traduced by opponents. There may have been financial or other explanations for his temporary political retirement: he had lost about $15,000 invested in Horatio Bottomley's Anglo-Austrian Printing and Publishing Company. Agg-Gardner was returned unopposed in 1900, but was defeated in 1906. He did not contest the seat in 1910, but after Richard Mathias, the successful Liberal, was unseated on petition, Agg-Gardner was returned for the town in a by-election of April 1911, defeating Mathias's brother by four votes. He retained the seat until his death. 
Although regular in attendance, Agg-Gardner seldom intervened in the chamber. He introduced bills on fire escapes (1891) and hire purchase (1928). He voted for women's suffrage as early as the 1870s and always maintained his support, most notably on 28 March 1912, when he moved the second reading of the 'Parliamentary Franchise (Women) Bill'. After this was defeated, Robert Sanders, later Lord Bayford, noted: 'a very poor effort. He was frightened out of his life all through' (Ramsden, 45). Agg-Gardner's votes in support of bills to permit marriage with a deceased wife's sister strained his relations with high-church constituents. He resisted the 'Licensing Bill' in the 1870s, and opposed the reduction of liquor licences in 'The Times' (31 March 1883). He attended the inaugural meeting in Paris of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in 1887, and was later treasurer of the British group. He joined the kitchen committee of the House of Commons in 1886 and was chairman from 1917 until his death. In 'The Times' (5 May 1904) he complained that evening adjournments were too short for members who wished to dine in South Kensington. 
Agg-Gardner served in the Gloucestershire militia when young, and sat on the Gloucestershire bench of magistrates from 1875. He supported Cheltenham's incorporation as a borough, and sponsored the necessary parliamentary private bill. He was appointed its first freeman in 1896, and was generous to the town in both public and private charities. After selling Evesham House in 1907, he lived at the Queen's Hotel in Cheltenham. Twice he was mayor of Cheltenham (1908-9, 1912-13). He was chairman of the Cheltenham Newspaper Company (which owned the 'Cheltenham Chronicle and Gloucester Graphic') from its inception in 1912 until the sale of the business in 1928. He was knighted in 1916 and sworn of the privy council in 1924. 
Agg-Gardner was a short, bald man with a toothy smile, sagging moustaches, and ugly features, but gentle, unassuming manners. It was difficult to quarrel with him. In 1927 he published 'Some Parliamentary Recollections', 'a modest, kindly and discursive little book' ('TLS'). He died of heart failure on 9 August 1928 at the Carlton Club, Pall Mall, London, and was interred in the family vault at Prestbury cemetery, Cheltenham. 


@@@@@


doc= 53507


Sharp, Clifford Dyce (1883-1935), journalist and journal editor, was born on 21 October 1883 at White Post House, Redhill, Surrey, the son of William Sharp, a solicitor, and his wife, Harriot Luisa Dyce. He had a stern nonconformist upbringing, and after attending St Lawrence College at Ramsgate submitted to his parents' wishes that he study engineering at University College, London, and then join his father's practice after graduation. As an articled attorney he found the law as tedious as applied science, and looked to Fleet Street for his eventual career. Not only could he write quickly and to order, but his legal training and engineering background had left him uniquely skilled to embrace the technical side of editing. A. R. Orage of 'New Age' introduced the tiro editor to the finer points of newspaper composition and production. With his innovative ideas in layout and typography Sharp soon pioneered a fresh approach to weekly journalism. 
Sharp was employed by Sidney and Beatrice Webb to help run the National Committee for the Prevention of Destitution (NCPD), their singularly unsuccessful attempt to promote the minority report of the poor law commission. Between 1910 and 1913 he transformed the NCPD's 'Crusade' from a rather amateurish 12-page campaign newsletter into a polished if ponderous 35-page monthly magazine. The Fabian technician 'par excellence', the dour but ambitious Sharp had since joining the Society in 1900 assiduously cultivated the 'old gang' of Hubert Bland, George Bernard Shaw, and the Webbs. When in 1906 younger members established a 'Fabian nursery' he was duly elected treasurer; the secretary was Bland's (and his wife Edith Nesbit's) daughter, Rosamund Edith Nesbit Bland ('b'. 1886/7). Paternal intervention and the threat of a public scandal ended her romance with H. G. Wells, and on 16 October 1909 a heartbroken Rosamund reluctantly married Sharp. The couple had no children. 
Despite his debt to Orage, Sharp in April 1913 had the guild socialist 'New Age' firmly in his sights when launching the Webbs' last great propagandist initiative, the 'New Statesman', which embodied an unashamedly top-down Fabian collectivism. As its first editor, he swiftly established the 'New Statesman' as a weekly flagship of progressive opinion and an influential literary review, with a metropolitan influence which far exceeded its modest circulation. He relied heavily on the reputation of George Bernard Shaw, even though the relationship between the two men was stormy. The editor's increasing reluctance to tolerate his principal contributor's idiosyncrasies and eccentric opinions culminated in Shaw's resigning from the 'New Statesman' board in October 1916. Sharp tolerated Shaw, but genuinely loathed David Lloyd George. The prime minister reciprocated by orchestrating Sharp's conscription into the Royal Artillery early in 1917. 
Ironically, Sharp was infuriated when the Foreign Office soon secured the trainee subaltern's release. Posing as a freelance journalist, Sharp canvassed opinion among social democrats at the Stockholm conference. He became head of the British embassy's information service in Sweden, and late in 1918 commenced clandestine work for the Foreign Office's political information department as the author of fiercely anti-Bolshevik reports. Yet, when the articles finally appeared in the 'New Statesman', following Sharp's return to London in March 1919, they unequivocally condemned counter-revolutionary excesses in Finland and northern Russia. 
Sharp quickly discovered that the 'New Statesman' had moved decisively to the left during his absence. He endeavoured in vain to bring his creation within the orbit of Asquith's circle, with whom he desperately sought to ingratiate himself. Rejecting the opportunity to edit one of London's evening newspapers, the Liberal 'Westminster Gazette', Sharp battled with the bottle and with his board. His erstwhile colleagues were convinced that politically and commercially the 'New Statesman''s best course was to remain an independent and if necessary deeply critical supporter of a Labour Party which in the 1920s was making significant electoral gains at the expense of the Liberals. In 1924 Sharp survived dismissal and reinstatement, but his alcoholism became so chronic that five years later the directors funded a lengthy visit for him to New York in order to dry out. After his return in 1930 the unrepentant inebriate was duly dismissed. The 'New Statesman' had suffered deep wounds as a consequence of prolonged inertia and the absence of a clear editorial policy. Yet Sharp's creation was resilient enough in 1931 to absorb the moribund Liberal weekly 'Nation', and then embark upon a golden age of high sales and high politics under Kingsley Martin as editor. 
Sharp never wholly adjusted to his new circumstances, and his drinking prevented him from successfully completing any subsequent commissions. He was forced to live off his wife, despite their brief separation in the winter of 1932-3. In the final year of his life Sharp desperately tried to stop drinking, but on 11 February 1935 he died of a heart attack at Farnborough Hospital, Farnborough, Kent. Although Beatrice Webb was quick to acknowledge her protege's accomplishments as an editor, Clifford Sharp soon became the forgotten man of Fleet Street, his reputation as the chief architect of the 'New Statesman' eclipsed by the high profile of his successor. 


@@@@@


doc= 53508


Souvestre, Marie Claire (1835-1905), headmistress, was born in Brest on 28 April 1835, the second of three children (all daughters) of (Charles-) Emile Souvestre (1806-1854) and his second wife, Angelique-Anne (Nanine) Papot (1806-1886). The father was the prolific, Morlaix-born, republican-inclined author who, making his name with 'Les derniers bretons' (1836) and subsequently settling in Paris, achieved European fame through a plethora of writings of various genres, notably the best-selling 'Un philosophe sous les toits' (1850). Marie's vivacious mother edited a 'Journal des femmes' and wrote stories for children under the name Nanine Souvestre. 
The sole surviving glimpse of Marie Souvestre's childhood and early life is a visit paid by father and fourteen-year-old daughter to his friend the historian Jules Michelet early in February 1850. At some stage she learned German and English, translating into French 'Deux jeunes femmes' (1858) by Mme Carlen from the former and 'Paul Ferroll' (1859), Caroline Clive's best-seller, from the latter. 
In 1864, with Caroline Adelaide Dussaut (1832-1887), a qualified teacher, Souvestre opened a pioneering girls' boarding-school, Les Ruches, at Avon, Fontainebleau, at which forty or so girls from well-to-do non-French families received, in French, a liberal, secular, intellectual, and social education of high quality. The venture was supported by Victor Duruy, the education minister of the day, who foresaw its contribution to the global diffusion of French culture. Caroline Dussaut brought to the enterprise her professional expertise, Marie Souvestre her money, social flair, and acute intellect and the cultural contacts inherited from her father. The two women, who seem previously to have spent some time together in Germany, had been lovers at least since 1862, the fragile Caroline constantly cosseted by her more forceful younger partner. Of the two, Marie was also to reveal herself as by far the more demanding and charismatic teacher. 
To learn at Les Ruches came Anna (Bamie) Roosevelt, the favourite sister and later adviser of Theodore Roosevelt; Natalie Clifford Barney; Helen Vacaresco, the Romanian poet; Dorothy Strachey, future author of 'Olivia'; Beatrice Chamberlain, daughter of Joseph and half-sister of Neville; and the daughters of Stuart Rendel, Charles Kegan Paul, T. H. S. Escott, and Richard Potter -- though Beatrice Potter (later Webb), then antipathetic to the Frenchwoman's energetic atheism, declined to follow her sister Rosy. John Morley's sister briefly taught at the school. All fell under the intellectual spell of Marie Souvestre, an excitingly incisive and intuitive teacher of history, politics, and literature and a riveting reader of French poetry. 
The English intake to the school stemmed largely from the recruiting talents of, on the one hand, Lady Jane Strachey, and, on the other, Frederic Harrison. Jane Strachey, wintering in Florence in 1870-71, made the acquaintance there of Marie Souvestre, who had closed her school owing to the Prussian advance and, with Caroline, accompanied her friends, the elderly Michelet and his wife, into temporary Italian exile. Ardent friendship and the eventual attendance of Jane's daughters, Elinor and Dorothy, at Les Ruches, ensued. 'Olivia' (1949) by Dorothy Bussy ('nee' Strachey) is a scarcely fictionalized account of schoolgirl life in Fontainebleau and a posthumous homage from pupil to teacher. With Marie, Dorothy lost her heart and found her mind. 
The positivist Harrison had known Souvestre, perhaps through the Paris positivists or the Michelet connection, also since the early 1870s. They met at intervals -- she kept him abreast of French politics -- and corresponded. He rented holiday quarters at Les Ruches for the summer of 1877, when she introduced him to Fontainebleau society and took him to see the painter Millet at work in Barbizon. 
Professional and emotional jealousies between the two teacher-partners, exacerbated by Dussaut's increasing neurotic invalidism, eventually led Marie to abandon Les Ruches to her and, with the support of Lady Jane Strachey and her other English friends, to open, in 1884, Allenswood, a similarly 'French' international girls' boarding-school, in a grand house in Albert Road, Wimbledon Park, Surrey -- 'a very highly esteemed school for girls at high, breezy Wimbledon', Henry James wrote to his brother in 1900 (L. Edel, 'Henry James: the Master', 1972, 83-4). Finance (the fees by 1904 were $54 7's'. 0died a term) and administration were run by the devoted Paolina Samaia, who had followed Marie from Les Ruches -- and who perhaps supplanted Caroline. 
Isabel Fry, Helen Gifford, and Dorothy Bussy taught at Allenswood, as did Lloyd George's lover, later his secretary and eventual wife, Frances Stevenson. Among the pupils were Pernel and Marjorie Strachey, Marjorie North (Mack) (whose 'The Educated Pin' of 1944 contains a long account of Souvestre at Allenswood), Helen Gifford, Hester Ritchie, Olive Harrison, Megan Lloyd George, and Marie's most famous favourite, Eleanor Roosevelt. Roosevelt's autobiography 'This is my Story' lengthily describes her debt to and affection for the inspirational teacher, who took her travelling in Europe, and with whom she corresponded to the last -- and from whom, in addition, she may have indirectly learned her lesbian proclivities. She described Marie in her sixties: 'beautiful, with clear-cut, strong features, a very strong face and broad forehead... her eyes looked through you and she always knew more than she was told' (Roosevelt, 58). The young Lytton Strachey, too, who met her in the role of family friend, was in part her intellectual creature: a number of his views -- on religion, education, and French literature -- were coloured by her ideas. This is particularly true of his receptivity to the dramatic poetry of Racine -- Marie's readings were renowned -- of whom he was the first authentically insightful English critic in the modern sense. Marie thus stands at the source of modern English Racine criticism. 
In London, Souvestre became intimate, as well as with the Harrisons and Stracheys, with Leslie Stephen, the Morleys, the Chamberlains, Mrs J. R. Green, and a wider circle of radicals and freethinkers, including the young Beatrice Webb. A convinced humanist, candidly pro-Boer, anti-imperialist, and anti-clerical -- though she also frequented and liked the Mandell Creightons -- she impressed with her intellect and charmed with her personality. 
Souvestre died, unmarried, aged sixty-nine, of liver cancer, at Allenswood School on 30 March 1905, having named Paolina Samaia her executor, and was buried, alongside her parents, in the Pere Lachaise cemetery, Paris, on 5 April, beside Balzac and close, as she had been in life, to Michelet. Funeral orations were given by her friends Pastor Charles Wagner and Alexandre Ribot, a former 'president du conseil'. 'A brilliant woman', wrote Webb in her diary for 31 March, 'handsome, warm-hearted -- the very soul of veracity -- and keen-witted; she must have counted for much in the lives of many women coming from the best of the governing class in England, America, France and Germany' (Webb, 'Diary', 2.340-41). Allenswood School continued, under Mlle Samaia, then different proprietor-heads, at least until 1948. 


@@@@@


doc= 53509


Penty, Arthur Joseph (1875-1937), architect and social thinker, was born at 16 Elmwood Street, St Laurence, York, on 17 March 1875, the second son of Walter Green Penty (1852-1902), architect, and his wife, Emma Seller. After attending St Peter's School in York he was apprenticed in 1888 to his father. Working in the leading architectural firm in late Victorian York, he attracted national and even international attention, including favourable notice in Herman Muthesius's 'Das englische Haus' (1904). 
While still in Yorkshire Penty worked to compensate for his short school career through membership of the Plato group and the Theosophical Society. He became politically active in the late 1890s, joining the Independent Labour Party and the Fabian Society. Through these organizations he began his intellectual partnership with A. R. Orage, with whom he collaborated in setting up the Leeds Arts Club, an eclectic lecture and discussion group. His professional and intellectual interests coalesced in his support for the arts and crafts movement. 
Penty decided to leave his father's office in 1901, and moved to London in 1902 to pursue his interest in the arts and crafts movement. His younger brother Frederick T. Penty (1879-1943) took over the business after their father died. From 1902 to 1908 Penty struggled to make a living with intermittent work in architecture and furniture design, and, from 1906 to 1907, as a furniture restorer in New York. Throughout this time he read voraciously and wrote extensively, especially in the journal 'The New Age'. In 1908 he started to work for Raymond Unwin on the Hampstead Garden Suburb development, especially Temple Fortune, for which Edwin Lutyens was consultant architect; he remained with Unwin until 1914. On 15 January 1916 he married Violet Leonard Pike (1885-1978), a graduate of Vassar College he had first met at the Fabian summer school in 1908, and the daughter of Henry Harvey Pike, sugar importer. They had three children, Michael, Richard, and Mary. During the First World War Penty worked for London county council (in the housing department), the London Underground (in the advertising section), and the Coal Control. After the war he had a number of short-term architectural jobs, but concentrated increasingly on social and political thought, and his writing. 
Penty's social criticism developed through a total of thirteen books and a substantial corpus of articles and reviews in a wide variety of publications, including 'The Guildsman', the 'Guild Socialist', 'G. K.'s Weekly', 'The Criterion', the 'New Witness', 'The Crusader', and the 'American Review'. He elaborated a thoroughgoing critique of industrialism in its social, economic, and aesthetic aspects, and posited an alternative inspired by the agrarianism and craftsmanship of the middle ages. He acknowledged the influence of Ruskin, Carlyle, Matthew Arnold, and Edward Carpenter, and exchanged ideas with such like-minded associates as the Catholic intellectuals Hilaire Belloc and G. K. Chesterton, the Spanish conservative Ramiro de Maeztu, and the Ceylonese art historian Ananda K. Coomaraswamy. He was also impressed by the anti-industrialism of Gandhi and the Indian independence movement. His 'Old Worlds for New' (1917) was a reply to H. G. Wells's 'New Worlds for Old' (1907). In 'A Guildsman's Interpretation of History' (1920) he criticized the historical philosophy of linear progress and made the case for a reversion to simpler modes of social and economic organization. An Anglican, he set out the religious basis of his thought in 'Towards a Christian Sociology' (1923). 
For Penty a society's morality was expressed in its buildings. Consequently, his social theory was largely an extension of his architectural thinking. While earlier medievalists had supported the Victorian Gothic revival, Penty favoured the vernacular, or Queen Anne style, which he regarded as the legitimate successor to Gothic in the English architectural tradition. He published his ideas on the vernacular in 'The Elements of Domestic Design' (1930). 
This fusion of politics and aesthetics gradually separated Penty from his earlier political attachments. In 1902 he had an acrimonious exchange on architectural issues with the leading Fabian George Bernard Shaw. Later that year he clashed with Fabian Society secretary E. R. Pease over what he saw as the philistine architectural criteria for the design of the London School of Economics building. In 1907 Penty helped establish the Fabian Arts Group, but tensions between the group and the parent society led to its demise within four years. 
As a result of such experiences Penty rejected mainstream collectivist socialism and sought alternatives that he considered to be more respectful of individualism, spirituality, and the arts. His first book, 'The Restoration of the Gild System' (1906), did much to inspire the guild socialist movement that found expression in the National Guilds League after 1915. Penty broke with the league in 1920 over its increasingly Marxist ideology and its acceptance of industrial production methods following the Bolshevik revolution of 1917. 
The organizations to which Penty was subsequently affiliated included the Christian socialist Crusader League, which he helped to launch in 1923. In 1926 he contributed to the formation of the Rural Reconstruction Association, which championed agrarian revivalism as a programme of job creation and social reform. He was intrigued by the distributist ideas of Chesterton and Belloc, but criticized the Distributist League for its belief in unqualified private property rights. By the early 1930s Penty was attracted to the anti-modernism of the far right. He admired the corporatist economic organization of Mussolini's Italy, supported the nationalists in the Spanish Civil War, and interested himself in the ideas of Oswald Mosley. At the same time he denounced Italian imperialism in Abyssinia and rejected Nazism for its racial doctrines and its statism. 
Penty died of heart disease at his home, 59 Church Street, Old Isleworth, Middlesex, on 19 January 1937; his wife survived him. In the academic literature he appears mainly as an original but ultimately marginal figure in the history of guild socialism. More positive assessments came from contemporaries outside the socialist fold. G. K. Chesterton in his preface to Penty's 'Post-Industrialism' described him as 'one of the two or three truly original minds of the modern world' (1922, 7), and T. S. Eliot in 'The Idea of a Christian Society' admiringly referred to him as a vigorous twentieth-century proponent of the Ruskinian tradition (Eliot, 31). 


@@@@@


doc= 53510


Greenall, Peter (1796-1845), brewer, was born on 25 April 1796 at Wilderspool, Warrington, the second son of Edward Greenall (1758-1835), brewer, and his wife, Betty (died 1835), daughter of John Pratt of Liverpool. His grandfather, Thomas Greenall (1733-1805), taking advantage of the opening up of the south Lancashire coalfield by canal in 1757, set up as common brewer four years later in Hardshaw. Over the course of the next century this hamlet developed into the town of St Helens. Before his death Thomas Greenall had bought 350 acres of land in the neighbourhood as well as 14 public houses and other properties. In 1786 he became associated with others in the brewery at Wilderspool, which his son Edward managed from 1792. Edward in his turn acquired all the business interests of his brothers Peter (died 1815) and William (died 1817). In 1818 Edward sent his son Peter, not yet twenty-two years old, to take charge of the brewery at St Helens and the considerable family possessions there. On 6 March 1821 Peter Greenall married Eleanor Pilkington (1798-1846), who brought a dowry of $1000. Eleanor was sister of Richard and William Pilkington, already partners with their father in the little town's flourishing wine and spirit business. The couple had two daughters. 
Peter Greenall accepted his responsibilities as leading local resident in an industrial district which by then numbered ten thousand people, of whom about four thousand lived in the town itself. Pipes were laid from the brewery's ponds to supply water to those inhabitants who could afford to pay for it. The first (terminating) building society in the area was formed at his instigation and helped to put up houses, many of them on his land. By 1830 Greenall's rents in the area totalled nearly $2500 a year. He headed the local Oddfellows lodge, Manchester Unity, when it was opened in 1825; when St Helens was raised to district status he became its grand master. His signature appeared on share certificates of the local Gas Light Company, formed in 1832, and, more importantly, he took the lead in the creation of the St Helens and Runcorn Gap Railway in 1830. This provided transport down to the River Mersey, from November 1832, in competition with the canal. In the longer run, however, it was Greenall's involvement in what was to become Pilkington Brothers glassworks which was to be of much greater significance. Greenall held only three of the eleven shares in the partnership -- his two brothers-in-law, who had reluctantly forsaken the prosperous wine and spirit business, held the rest. Nevertheless, it was undoubtedly his influence at the Warrington bank of Parr, Lyon, and Greenall that saved the struggling firm from going under before it had grown strong enough to survive unaided; by 1842, at the depth of the worst depression of the century, the overdraft had reached $20,000, when all eleven shares were valued at only $22,600. 
Greenall, a confirmed tory, contested one of the Wigan borough seats unsuccessfully in 1837, but he was returned in 1841. He then used his influence as an MP to get the 'St Helens Waterworks Bill' through parliament in 1844 and, in 1845, the 'St Helens Improvement Bill', which gave the town's population, then just under 12,000, its first effective local government. Greenall died soon afterwards, on 18 September 1845, at his own house in St Helens, of 'apoplexy -- first attack of five minutes duration', according to the death certificate. The shops half-closed their shutters. On the day of the funeral six days later at the parish church, the shops closed altogether. Many people flocked into the town to pay their last respects to the man who had so dominated the town's early growth and had died so unexpectedly, before his fiftieth birthday. His great reputation, however, was entirely local: the very brief notice in 'The Times' merely drew attention to a tory vacancy in the Commons. 


@@@@@


doc= 53511


Linge, Bernard van (b. 1598, d. in or after 1644), glass painter, was born in Emden, East Friesland, close to the United Provinces, the eldest child of Bernard van Lingen ('fl'. 1595-1627) and his wife, Gerret Jacobs van Damn. He learned his trade from his father and possibly his grandfather, both of whom were masters of the Emden glaziers' guild. 
Bernard worked in Paris 'upon great or history work' (Jackson, 163) from 1617 to 1621. That year religious conflict broke out again in France and Bernard's protestant sympathies led him to flee to London. He utilized family connections within the Dutch stranger community to obtain employment in the studio of a glazier, Thomas Langton. However, the traditional rivalry between English and Dutch glaziers made it difficult to find work in the capital and that July Langton recommended him to the warden and fellows of Wadham College, Oxford, as being 'an excellent pencil man and of sober and good carriage not given to drink' (ibid.) for the execution of their chapel's east window. The scheme, completed in 1622, depicts in the main lights ten scenes from Christ's passion. These were modelled on engravings by Hieronymus Wierix (after Maarten de Vos) in a work of Jesuit theology, Hieronymus Natalis's 'Adnotationes et meditationes in evangelia' (2nd edn, Antwerp, 1595), and featured 'Old Testament' anti-types awkwardly crammed into the upper tracery lights in a manner similar to that of a 1530s scheme at Balliol College. The choice of precedents was probably dictated by the strong Catholic influences then current at Wadham. Further undocumented prophet figures in van Linge's style occur in the chapel's north windows, and are perhaps inspired by the medieval antechapel windows at New College. The project's cartoons were later reused on a smaller scale for the passion cycle at Wroxton Abbey, near Banbury, though whether this work was by Bernard or by his younger brother Abraham ['see below'] is unclear. 
Apostle figures bearing Bernard van Linge's signature also survive on the south side of Lincoln's Inn chapel, London, facing a set of prophets which is stylistically attributable to Abraham; the latter has been incomplete since air-raid damage in 1915. Other pieces, including decorative quarries at Gorhambury, Hertfordshire ('c'.1622-1626), ornamental, heraldic, and figure work at Lydiard Park and Lydiard Tregoze, Wiltshire ('c'.1628-1631), and the glass portrait of the doctrinal trimmer Bishop Robert King (died 1557) in Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, have been attributed to Bernard, but he left England in 1623, and the style of the pieces is more reminiscent of his brother's work. In 1625 Bernard was admitted a master in the glaziers' guild at Emden, where he fathered three daughters and a son between 1629 and 1644. The family remained active in both the guild and civic government for the rest of the century. 
Bernard's brother 
Abraham's work, more stylistically accomplished than his brother's, also provides a glimpse into the complex relationship of developments in art and in religious sentiment through the 1630s. On the one hand the work exemplified the genesis of a new, distinctly protestant iconography, which substituted biblical figures for Catholic saints. Abraham's Hampton Court 'Deposition' inscription boldly proclaims that 'The truth hereof is historicall devine and not superstissious' (N. Tyacke, 'Anti-Calvinists: the Rise of English Arminianism, c.1590-1640', 1987, 219). On the other hand, especially in the context of an Oxford bitterly divided under Archbishop William Laud's authoritarian chancellorship, while van Linge's Christ Church glass was eulogized by poets in the circle of the dean (and from 1628 to 1632 bishop of Oxford), Richard Corbett, it encountered the hostility of those who found in the drive to beautify churches and chapels evidence of creeping cryptopopery. Like some other examples of church decoration in the city, his University College pieces were hidden in the 1640s and 1650s for fear of iconophobic vandalism. 
From the end of the seventeenth century Joshua Price and William Price the elder carried out with unusual sensitivity extensive repairs and reordering of the van Linge brothers' work at Wadham, Queen's, and Wroxton. This perhaps indicates the esteem in which they were then held. The nineteenth and twentieth centuries were more critical, their work being at one point described as 'remembered but not with much kindness' (Garrod, 30). However, Abraham's work is now appreciated as the most sophisticated of his generation, although a detailed study of his iconography remains to be written. At one time nearly all the seventeenth-century glass surviving in England was attributed to the van Linge brothers. The corpus remains fluid, with debate continuing over a number of works, including the glazing of Peterhouse chapel, Cambridge. In 2002 significant lost fragments of the Christ Church scheme were rediscovered; electronic reconstruction was still in progress in 2004. 


@@@@@


doc= 53512


Abraham van Linge (fl. 1623-1642), glass painter, the fourth child of Bernard van Lingen and Gerret Jacobs van Damn, probably arrived in England in 1623, and although less well documented is better represented in surviving work. Apart from projects on which he collaborated or in which he has been confused with his brother, he has been convincingly connected to a number of schemes, of which the most accomplished and extensive were 'The Deposition from the Cross' (1629), originally at Hampton Court, Herefordshire, but now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; a cycle of biblical themes in Christ Church Cathedral (1630-40), of which only the 'Jonah' window remains 'in situ'; prophet and apostle side windows, closely related to his Lincoln's Inn work, and a typological east window at Lincoln College, Oxford (1631); 'The Life of Christ', 'Last Judgment', and a portrait group at Queen's College, Oxford (1635-7); and an 'Old' and 'New Testament' programme at University College, Oxford (1641). Abraham is last mentioned in correspondence relating to the final project in 1642. As the religious and political establishment (together with its art patronage) came under ever-increasing attack, care was taken to arrange for payment in the event of involuntary incompletion and Abraham's hasty departure for the continent. Although he fulfilled his contract, it appears that he emigrated in that year: no further record of him survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 53516


Solomon, Edward (1855-1895), composer, was born on 25 July 1855 at 29 Ann Street, Waterloo Road, Lambeth, London, one of the eleven children (of whom five or six survived to maturity) of Jewish parents, Charles Solomon (1817/18-1890), musician, and his wife, Cesira Marinina Mirandoli (1834-1891), sometimes called Sarah. Family life revolved around the music halls where his father worked as a pianist, conductor, arranger, and composer. Having helped in the orchestra pit from infancy, Edward rapidly graduated to accompanist and then musical director, first with touring companies and then at West End theatres. He married the fifteen-year-old Jane Isaacs in 1873 but deserted her after fathering a daughter, the actress Claire Romaine (1873-1964). 
With great facility Solomon started composing humorous songs and one-act operettas in emulation of Arthur Sullivan and Robert Planquette. His scores contained echoes not only of music hall but also of traditional ballads, a stylistic influence encouraged by his principal librettist, the Irish journalist Henry Pottinger (Pot) Stephens (1850-1903). Their first full-length collaboration was 'Billee Taylor', a 'nautical comic opera' about a press-ganged gardener. Premiered at the Imperial Theatre in 1880, it became a favourite of Victorian audiences, especially the bass song 'All on Account of Eliza'. 
Teddy Solomon, a diminutive clean-shaven young man, was henceforth a recognized 'character' in British musical theatre: whimsical, flamboyant, superstitious, hardly to be trusted with money or women, but brimming with melodic invention and able to compose at speed -- so long as somebody sat with him and sustained a conversation. Despite the high hopes of their backers, however, Stephens and Solomon could not match the extraordinary run of operetta triumphs concurrently registered by Gilbert and Sullivan. 'Claude Duval' (1881) was a mild success, 'Lord Bateman' (1882) a fiasco, and 'The Vicar of Bray' (1882) offended some with its combination of clergy and corps de ballet. 
While visiting New York in the winter of 1882-3 to supervise Broadway productions, Solomon met the singer Lillian Russell (1861-1922), whose real name was Helen Louise Braham, 'nee' Leonard. She supplanted Edith Blande as his mistress and sailed to London to perform in 'Virginia and Paul', the first of five shows that he composed for her. Its failure forced him into receivership in October 1883, citing liabilities of $1400 and assets of $75. After neither 'Polly' nor 'Pocohontas' substantially improved his finances, Solomon went in February 1885 to try them on American audiences, who responded enthusiastically to Miss Russell. They married at Hoboken, New Jersey, on 11 May 1885, a year after the birth of their daughter Dorothy, but the marriage soon went sour on account of extravagance, a hostile mother-in-law, intrusive press coverage, and professional tensions. Though 'Pepita' fared well in 1886, 'The Maid and the Moonshiner' flopped. Solomon displayed a cavalier attitude to contractual obligations. When sued by creditors for $4175 he absconded and never saw Lillian Russell again. 
The police arrested Solomon for bigamy on his return to Britain in September 1886; he spent three weeks in prison and seven on bail before the case against him collapsed for want of American witnesses. Jane Solomon (who now sang on stage as Lily Grey) secured a divorce in January 1887. After a near-fatal bout of rheumatic fever left him too weak to work, he finally went bankrupt in May, paying 1's'. in the pound. Even harum-scarum Teddy temporarily lost his cheery insouciance. Family and friends supported him through two grim unproductive years. 
Solomon restored his musical reputation in 1889, when 'The Red Hussar', an operetta set in Queen Anne's time, ran for six months at the Lyric Theatre. Inured to civil court appearances, he saw off former creditors (who claimed the profits) and rival impresarios (who accused him of selling the rights to the score under three different titles). Undeterred, Richard D'Oyly Carte commissioned 'The Nautch Girl, or, The Rajah of Chutneypore' (1891) for the Savoy Theatre. George Dance supplied the libretto about a temple idol coming to life in order to recover his stolen diamond eye. It received 200 performances, despite Bernard Shaw's complaint that one 'Mikado' was enough for any reasonable generation. Carte followed it with a revision of 'The Vicar of Bray'. 
Resuming his career as a musical director, Solomon lived at 13 Albert Road, Regent's Park, London, with the actress Kate Everleigh. He collaborated with F. C. Burnand and Rutland Barrington on some short pieces but did not embrace the new lighter form of musical comedy. His death at 9 Sussex Mansions, Maiden Lane, London, on 22 January 1895 was due to typhoid. The burial took place three days later at the Jewish cemetery in Willesden. A versatile popular composer, Solomon appeared the brightest of Sullivan's satellites; 'Punch' had seen 'Prince Edward' as heir to 'King Arthur' in the realm of British operetta. Within a few decades his music was all but forgotten. 


@@@@@


doc= 53517


Clarkson, Thomas (1760-1846), slavery abolitionist, was born on 28 March 1760 in the free grammar school, Wisbech, Cambridgeshire, of which his father, the Revd John Clarkson (1710-1766), was headmaster. His mother, Anne (1735-1799), was the daughter of Alpe Ward, a well-off and well-connected physician of Royston, Hertfordshire; her mother was one of the Banyers, a leading Wisbech family of Huguenot descent with many connections in the gentry of Essex, including the naval Rowley family. John Clarkson was a Yorkshireman; his sons believed that through him they were distant cousins of the father of English abolitionism, Granville Sharp. Thomas was the eldest of three children; there was a second boy, John Clarkson (1764-1828), who was born on 4 April 1764, and a daughter, Anne; both sons were born in the grammar school. After the headmaster's death the family continued to live in Wisbech, but paid frequent visits to their Essex relations. Thanks to the Rowleys, and after completing his schooling at the grammar school, John joined the Royal Navy in 1777 as a 'young gentleman' in Captain Joshua Rowley's ship, HMS 'Monarch'. 
Thomas Clarkson also attended the grammar school, and in 1775 was sent to St Paul's School, London; in 1779 he was admitted as an exhibitioner to his father's college, St John's, Cambridge. He was raised to a scholarship the next year, and with these awards, or private money, was described as 'rather a gay man', keeping two horses. It is unlikely that he was really frivolous: he was a devout, assiduous soul, taking after his father, a notably conscientious parson. He seems to have had no sense of humour at all, though he liked others to be merry. Physically, he was tall and heavy, with a strong constitution. His brother John, by contrast, was small and lively, but was as strongly religious, and shared to the full his brother's strong human sympathy: he detested the navy's use of flogging as a punishment. 
Thomas Clarkson graduated BA in 1783 with a solid rather than a distinguished degree in mathematics, but remained at Cambridge to prepare himself to be a clergyman. He was decidedly ambitious; after winning a university Latin essay prize in 1784 he resolved to win it again the following year. The essay topic for 1785, set by the vice-chancellor, Peter Peckard, was 'Anne liceat invitos in servitutem dare' ('Is it lawful to enslave the unconsenting?'). Clarkson once more engaged in what he thought of as 'an innocent contest for literary honour' (Clarkson, 'History', vol. 1); but it changed his life. 
Clarkson took the title to be an invitation to consider the Atlantic slave trade, and read up the subject as well as he could in the few weeks available to him, beginning with Anthony Benezet's 'Historical Account of Guinea'. What he discovered appalled him and oppressed him, both as a man and a Christian. He won the prize, but that now seemed a little thing, and after reading the essay in the Senate House in June he rode off to London, meditating the horrors of slavery all the way. While resting his horse at Wadesmill, Hertfordshire, he underwent a moment of conversion: 'a thought came into my mind, that if the contents of the Essay were true, it was time some person should see these calamities to their end' (Clarkson, 'History', vol. 1). In later years a small monument was erected to mark the spot. After twelve months of understandable hesitation, he accepted the call and gave up all idea of a church career, though he had already taken deacon's orders. 
A Wisbech Quaker introduced Clarkson to the anti-slavery movement which, unknown to him, had been gathering strength for some years among Quakers in both Britain and America. They strengthened his sense of vocation and helped to publish a translation of his essay: it was brought out by the Quaker bookseller James Phillips (who became a close associate) in 1786 as 'An Essay of the Slavery and Commerce of the Human Species, Particularly the African'. This was the first work in what was to be a lifetime of pamphleteering: in all he published twenty-three works, most of which dealt with slavery. The 'Essay' had a great success and led to the creation of an informal committee to lobby MPs; its most important achievement was the recruiting of William Wilberforce, in which Clarkson played the chief part. Wilberforce was already sympathetic to anti-slavery; by the spring of 1787 he had committed himself to laying the question before the House of Commons, and on 22 May the committee for effecting the abolition of the slave trade was set up formally, with the object of giving Wilberforce every possible assistance. All the original twelve members were Quakers, except for Clarkson, Granville Sharp, and Philip Sansom. They voted the slave trade to be unjust and impolitic, and these two themes were to be constant in Clarkson's work until abolition was achieved. 
The committee was absolutely opposed to slavery itself, but decided that it could best proceed by attacking the slave trade alone, even to the extent of professing that its abolition would leave plantation slavery unaffected. Clarkson, the only committee member without professional commitments (he had a small private fortune), took on the essential job of seeking out every possible source of information, with an eye to an impending inquiry by the privy council and later proceedings in parliament. He had already made investigations in the port of London. Now he got on his horse again and set off for Bristol. He was to ride some 35,000 miles in the next seven years. 
Initially Clarkson visited not only Bristol but Liverpool (the other main slaving port), Manchester, Bath, Gloucester, Worcester, Chester, Lancaster, and Birmingham. Wherever he went he received enthusiastic assistance from the Society of Friends; anti-slave-trade societies sprang up in his wake, and boroughs began to petition parliament for abolition -- in the long run perhaps his most important achievement. His researches, pursued to the point of physical and mental exhaustion, and at substantial personal risk (an attempt was made to drown him at Liverpool) empowered the abolitionists for the first time with a comprehensive and irrefutable knowledge of the trade. Clarkson's findings filled his writings, such as his 'Essay on the Impolicy of the African Slave Trade' (1788), which the committee assiduously printed and distributed in large numbers, and lay behind the twelve propositions which Wilberforce put to parliament in his first great abolitionist speech on 12 May 1789; Clarkson's influence was especially apparent in the point that the trade, far from being the nursery of British seamen, as its friends asserted, was in fact its graveyard, more seamen dying in that trade in one year than in the whole remaining trade of the country in two, and in the argument that slaves were not a necessary commodity for a flourishing trade with Africa. 
This last doctrine had important consequences for Thomas's brother John. In 1783 he had returned from six years of war in the West Indies. A half-pay lieutenant with scant prospects of promotion in the peacetime navy, he was drawn inevitably into the great crusade. He acted as his brother's secretary and then as one of his agents; he spent six months at Le Havre in 1788-9, studying the French slave trade, and was elected to the committee in 1791. It was to him that his colleagues turned on receiving the appeal of the black loyalists of Nova Scotia. These were former American slaves who had fought for the British in the war of independence, having been promised freedom and land in return; but they had received little of either. In 1790, hearing of Granville Sharp's 'province of freedom' in Sierra Leone, they asked the abolitionists for help in getting there. As a result the Sierra Leone Company was established, and John Clarkson was sent to Halifax to recruit settlers for the abolitionist colony. Aided by Thomas Peters, the black loyalist leader, he did so with immense success, and on 15 January 1792 led a fleet of fifteen vessels, carrying 1196 settlers, to Sierra Leone, which they reached on 6 March. 
Although sixty-five of the Nova Scotians died during the voyage (John Clarkson nearly died himself) and Peters mutinied against Clarkson's leadership, the devotion of most of the migrants to Clarkson was unbounded: they called him their Moses. He was equally devoted to them, and laboured incessantly for their welfare, as superintendent and then as the colony's first governor, until his return on leave to England on 29 December 1792. For good or ill (Sierra Leone was the instrument by which official British imperialism gained a foothold in west Africa, and became a crown colony in 1808) it was the understanding between Clarkson and the Nova Scotians that got the colony through its very difficult first year. Clarkson's services were at first generally recognized. But great strains arose between him and the company directors, partly religious (he was not sympathetic to the insistent evangelicalism of Henry Thornton, the company chairman), partly because of the usual tension between head office and the man on the spot, and above all because Clarkson insisted on putting the views and interests of the Nova Scotians first, whereas the directors wanted the enterprise to show an early profit, so that they could compete successfully with the slave traders and bring to Africa Christianity and 'the Blessings of Industry and Civilization'. So Governor Clarkson never returned to Sierra Leone: the directors dismissed him on 23 April 1793, he having refused to resign. Thomas Clarkson resigned from the directorate soon afterwards, on the ostensible grounds that the company was getting too dependent on the British government. 
Thomas Clarkson's other affairs had not been going well. Year after year Wilberforce had introduced his motion for abolition in the House of Commons, and Clarkson had ridden up and down the land. Between them they had generated a national movement, but parliament never passed the bill, and the outbreak of the war with revolutionary France transformed the national temper. Clarkson's sympathy with the revolution soon became notorious (he had spent five months in Paris in 1789-90 trying to persuade the national assembly to abolish the slave trade) and brought hostility on the cause. His health was collapsing, and he had spent more than half his small capital in the cause of abolition. He decided to retire from the work; led by Wilberforce his friends raised $1500 in 1794 to compensate him for his disbursements. 
On 24 April 1793, the day after his dismissal as governor of Sierra Leone, John Clarkson married Susan Lee (1769-1837), daughter of a successful banker. He became the manager of the Whitbreads' huge chalk and lime quarry at Purfleet in Essex, prospered, and in 1820 himself became a banker at Woodbridge, Suffolk. There were ten children of the marriage, but six predeceased their father, and only through one daughter, Sophia Maynard, did the Clarkson line survive into the twentieth century. His daughter Mary married Thomas Clarkson's son. John continued to take a keen if unobtrusive interest in Sierra Leone, and departed from the pursuits of his youth so far as to become in 1816 one of the principal founders of the Society for the Promotion of Permanent and Universal Peace. He never resumed an active part in the anti-slavery movement: nevertheless, he was having an abolitionist article read to him when he died of heart disease on 2 April 1828: his last words were, 'It is dreadful to think, after my brother and his friends have been labouring for forty years, that such things should still be.' He was buried in St Mary's churchyard, Woodbridge. 
Thomas Clarkson's retirement was transitory. He used it to re-establish his health, to buy for $1000 a small estate at Eusemere on Ullswater, to take up farming, and to marry Catherine Buck (1772-1856) of Bury St Edmunds in 1796. She shared Clarkson's radicalism (they had got to know each other through anti-slavery work) but her real value to her husband lay in her charm and intelligence, which captivated Crabb Robinson, her townsman, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, and William Wordsworth. She became one of Dorothy Wordsworth's closest friends, and Wordsworth admired Thomas so much that on the abolition of the slave trade in 1807 he addressed a sonnet to him ('Clarkson! it was an obstinate hill to climb'). Before then the Clarksons' only child, Thomas, was born, and they had returned to the south, as Catherine's health was thought to need a warmer climate. They lived at Bury St Edmunds from 1806 to 1816, and thereafter at Playford Hall, halfway between Ipswich and Woodbridge. 
Clarkson's partnership with the Quakers strongly affected his religion. By 1795 he had renounced his Anglican orders, though he never submitted to the discipline of the Society of Friends. In 1815 he told Tsar Alexander I that he was 'nine parts in ten of their way of thinking' (Wilson, 'Thomas Clarkson', 145). In 1806 he published 'A Portraiture of Quakerism', which enjoyed great success, and in 1813 a biography of William Penn, which did not: it was the first scholarly treatment of its subject, but Clarkson had let the seventeenth century infect his style with its prolixity. 
Clarkson returned with all his old vigour to the fight against the slave trade when, in 1804, the cause revived. He made another long journey on horseback, reviving old enthusiasm and obtaining new evidence, but his chief role, until the act abolishing the trade was passed in 1807, seems to have been in keeping sympathetic MPs up to the mark. At the climax, Wilberforce and the elder James Stephen were the most essential activists. In 1808 Clarkson published an invaluable two-volume 'History of the rise, progress, and accomplishment of the abolition of the African slave-trade by the British parliament'. It contains much essential autobiographical and other information, but unfortunately its treatment of the 1804-7 period is incomplete and superficial. 
The years between 1808 and 1823 were largely taken up in attempts to ensure that the abolition act was enforced and, after the defeat of Napoleon, in forwarding the cause internationally. Clarkson became an occasional unofficial ambassador for anti-slavery: he was in Paris in 1814 and at the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1818. Universal abolition of the slave trade had become one of the main objects of British diplomacy, but it became clear to the agitators that they would have to reverse their policy: the trade would not die until slavery itself did. So in 1823 the Anti-Slavery Society was formed. Its purpose was to rouse public opinion to bring as much pressure as possible on parliament, and the new generation realized that for this they still needed Clarkson. He travelled again, though this time the network he activated was predominantly Anglican. He rode some 10,000 miles and achieved his masterpiece: by the summer of 1824, 777 petitions had been sent to parliament demanding gradual emancipation. When in 1830 the society adopted a policy of immediate emancipation Clarkson and Wilberforce appeared together for the last time to give their support. 
Clarkson wrote incessantly in the cause until the act abolishing slavery in the British empire was passed in 1833. He lived for thirteen years more, troubled by failing eyesight and his son's premature death. Otherwise he was happy and never ceased to work for anti-slavery, lending his pen and his prestige particularly to the cause of abolition in the United States. He presided at the opening session of the grand anti-slavery convention in the Freemasons Hall on 12 June 1840; the moment when he blessed the proceedings was immortalized in a bad, if famous, painting by Benjamin Haydon. He died a pious, fairly easy death on 26 September 1846 at Playford, where he was buried on 2 October at St Mary's Church. Alone among the leading abolitionists he was not immediately commemorated in Westminster Abbey, apparently out of consideration for the susceptibilities of his Quaker friends; but a large monument to his memory, designed by Gilbert Scott, was erected in 1880 at Wisbech; and in 1996, to mark his sesquicentenary, a tablet was placed in Westminster Abbey close to the Wilberforce monument. 
Clarkson was meanly attacked by R. I. and S. Wilberforce in their 1838 life of their father, William, but he effectively defended himself in his tract 'Strictures on a Life of William Wilberforce'; Crabb Robinson had the last word when he wrote of the brothers, 'Such is their blindness that they see not even this -- that to have been the forerunner, associate, and friend of Mr. Wilberforce is much more than to be the fruit of his loins' (Griggs, 177). More damaging to the fame of all the abolitionists was the view put forward in the mid-twentieth century by Eric Williams and his followers that slave emancipation owed little to the moralizing abolitionists, since slavery had become an obsolete economic system which British capitalists ended to suit themselves. This extreme view has been generally rejected. If it is now conceded that abolition would have been impossible but for the forces at work in the age of revolution, it is also understood that the abolitionists were themselves one of those forces, and without Wilberforce, Clarkson, and the rest slavery would not have been ended so soon and so completely, and perhaps not so peacefully. But nor should it be forgotten that British abolitionism was part of the great imperialist impulse of the age, as the story of Sierra Leone demonstrates. 


@@@@@


doc= 53518


Sturmey, (John James) Henry (1857-1930), cycle and automobile writer and promoter, was born at Norton-sub-Hamdon, Somerset, on 28 February 1857, the son of Henry Gundry Sturmey, a master mariner and merchant navy captain, and his wife, Mary Ann Trask. He was educated at Melcombe Regis School and Weymouth College. His first career as a schoolmaster, in mathematics and science, soon mingled with, and ultimately gave way to, his passion for cycling. This enthusiasm initially took the form of touring, attempts to sell bicycles made to his own specification, and the compilation and publication of a handbook for bicyclists. By 1879 he was a 'chief consul' of the infant Bicycle Touring Club, which became the Cyclists Touring Club in 1883. After Sturmey had published the first edition of the ''Indispensable' Bicyclist's Handbook' (1877), he established contact with William Iliffe, of a Coventry family printing firm, a meeting which was to be a significant event for both. 
Sturmey suggested a new weekly periodical, the ''Cyclist', to replace 'Bicycle World', which Iliffes already printed. Sturmey edited the new periodical and Iliffes published the next edition of Sturmey's 'Handbook'. Another of Sturmey's technical interests gave rise to a new periodical in 1888, 'Photography' (later 'Amateur Photographer'). Seven years later his intense interest in another technical innovation, the horseless carriage, resulted in the launch of another Iliffe periodical which Sturmey edited, 'Autocar'. (While 'autocar' did not gain currency, except as the title of a successful and long-lived periodical, the term 'cyclist' did. It seems that it is to Sturmey's choice of this title that the word which entered common parlance is owed.) In the view of one of the contributors to a booklet commemorating Sturmey's life and work, 'Autocar' in 1930 still bore the imprint of his personality and it was 'hardly an exaggeration to say as much of technical journals generally' ('H. S. Some Tributes', 3). Sturmey also began a quarterly periodical, 'Flying', but this proved to be before its time. 
The extension of Sturmey's interests from the cycle to the automobile paralleled the evolution of part of the motor industry from cycle manufacture. Sturmey invested heavily in the Great Horseless Carriage Company, one of the numerous companies promoted by the inventor turned financier, H. J. Lawson (1852-1925), whom Sturmey succeeded as chairman of the Daimler Motor Company. In October 1897 Sturmey successfully drove from John o' Groats to Land's End in a Daimler with Mulliner body, which he had designed. Three years later, in November 1900, Sturmey became an early victim of a motor accident, when he was seriously injured in a Dawson car in which he was a passenger. After a slow recovery, he broke with Iliffe in 1901, as a result of the latter's belief that Sturmey's editorial position was incompatible with his active involvement in the motor industry. 
Sturmey then began the import of the American Duryea car, having visited the principal American motor manufacturers in 1899. In 1902 Sturmey set up the British Duryea Company, which built under licence in Coventry for a few years, utilizing a Rugby-made engine. The Duryea was a light runabout in the American buggy style. It was popular for a time, but the Duryea brothers split up and an enduring marque did not emerge from their pioneering efforts. St John Nixon described the Duryea, with its tiller steering, as very unconventional, and was also somewhat dismissive of Sturmey, describing his reputation as a 'high authority' on motor vehicles as 'largely unjustified' (St John Nixon, 127). Sturmey Motors Ltd made the Napier-Parsons light van for one year, 1907, before inaugurating the Lotis marque of cars and commercial vehicles. The range included taxicabs and lasted from 1908 to 1911. The collapse of Lotis has been attributed to the failure of the Brazilian importer for whom a car for the Brazilian market had been produced. It appears that Sturmey failed to benefit from his own insights, for in 1902 he had identified lack of capital resources as one of the reasons why British manufacturers had failed to make headway. 
His break with Iliffe did not mean the end of Sturmey's involvement in motoring journalism, for he became a major contributor to 'Autocar's' rival, 'Motor', which was launched in 1903. His contribution to cycling continued indirectly through the Sturmey-Archer three-speed hub gear. This device had a complex background. Although manufactured by Frank Bowden's Three-Speed Gear Syndicate from 1903, numerous initiatives were involved. It owed something to Sturmey, but in practical terms probably more to the mechanic William Reilly, whose designs were patented in the name of a colleague, James Archer, to avoid a restrictive contract Reilly had entered into with the Hub Two-Speed Gear Company Ltd. The gear was used in an experimental light car that Sturmey built in 1900 and was subsequently used for motorcycles for a few years, but found its appropriate application in the cycle. Sturmey appears to have had no significant involvement with the syndicate after 1904, when he sold it his foreign patent rights. 
By the time Lotis collapsed, Sturmey was in middle age. His American contacts were further made use of in the establishment of Bramco Ltd (whose name was derived from 'British American components'), a business importing car components from the USA. Sturmey remained in his adopted city of Coventry, a tall and by all accounts somewhat forbidding figure, with an air of authority unrelieved by humour, at least in the company of strangers. He was said to have taken little part in the civic and social life of the city, but he 'had a penchant for expressing his very decided views upon a wide range of subjects' in letters to the press ('Midland Daily Telegraph', 9 Jan 1930). In the 1920s Sturmey returned to the topic of cycle gears, advocating in the cycling press the hub as opposed to the bracket gear. With John Peart, a Coventry engineer, he took out a patent (118, 178 of 1922) for the first five-speed hub gear, but failed to interest a manufacturer. 
Sturmey never married, and died at his Coventry home, Quarry Close, St Nicholas Street, on 8 January 1930. His funeral at St Nicholas Church, Radford, Coventry, was attended by the Iliffes and staff members of Bramco Ltd, but the local press remarked that otherwise the motor and cycle industries were scarcely represented. 


@@@@@


doc= 53519


Ethe, (Carl) Hermann (1844-1917), orientalist, was born in Germany at Stralsund, Pomerania (Prussia), on 13 February 1844, the son of Franz Ethe, an official land surveyor, and his wife, Mathilde, 'nee' Lappe. He read classics at the University of Greifswald and then oriental philology at Leipzig with Heinrich L. Fleischer, one of the leading Arabic scholars of that period. In 1868 he presented his final thesis to the University of Munich, and was thereby admitted as a private lecturer. During his Munich years he translated from Arabic, Persian, and Turkish, and contributed essays on oriental subjects and German literature to general magazines, selections from which were published in 'Morgenlaendische Studien' (1870) and 'Essays und Studien' (1872). 
In 1872 Ethe was invited by the Bodleian Library, Oxford, to continue the cataloguing of its oriental manuscripts. At the same time, he was entrusted with the preparation of a catalogue of the Persian manuscripts in the library of the India Office. First volumes of each catalogue appeared respectively in 1889 and 1903, but the printing was in both cases only completed after Ethe's death. He was married to Anna Francisca (1848/9-1897), also of Prussian origin; they had a daughter, who died in infancy. In 1875 Ethe was appointed as professor at University College, Aberystwyth. For nearly forty years there he taught not only several oriental languages, but also German and Italian. 
Meanwhile, Ethe continued to work on the manuscripts in Oxford and London, and contributed many articles on Persian literature to learned journals in Germany. Apart from his articles on Persian subjects in the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1885), nearly all his publications were written in German. During the 1880s he applied in vain for academic chairs in Germany and for the Laudian chair of Arabic at Oxford University. After the death of his first wife he married, on 11 July 1899 at Llanbadarn Fawr, Cardiganshire, Harriet Dora (1869-1947), daughter of Abraham Phillips, fish and game dealer. 
Though he had settled down permanently in Britain, Ethe kept his German nationality, which brought him into great difficulty at the outbreak of the First World War. In Munich when war broke out, he was invited by the college authorities to return to Aberystwyth, but anti-German demonstrations against him by the town's residents forced him to leave. He was defended by T. F. Roberts, the college's principal, and received private financial assistance from his colleagues at Aberystwyth until, in June 1915, he agreed to resign on a small pension. Although an application for naturalization as a British subject was unsuccessful, he was able to remain in Britain, and lived with his brother-in-law's family in Reading. When, in 1916, it became known that Ethe was still allowed to work on the India Office manuscripts, the government was accused in the House of Commons of being too lenient to a German who might very well be a spy. 
Ethe left a vivid impression on the minds of several students and colleagues at Aberystwyth. They remembered him as a short, thickset man, who was witty and good-humoured in spite of disappointments in his academic career. Though he never bothered to adapt himself to his foreign environment, he was generally respected for his great learning. He died at 29 Royal York Crescent, Clifton, Bristol, on 7 June 1917, and was buried four days later in Canford cemetery, Bristol. 
Ethe's catalogues, which cover two of the largest collections of Persian manuscripts in the world, are his greatest scholarly achievement. They are particularly valuable because of the meticulous descriptions which laid a solid foundation for further studies. Yet his ambition went beyond the mere recording of philological data. Many of his publications deal with important questions of literary history, which he was often the first to raise. The long article which he wrote for the 'Grundriss der iranischen Philologie' (1894-1904) is an authoritative survey of western knowledge about Persian literature at the end of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 53520


Schindler, Sir Albert Ashershund Houtum- (1846-1916), Persian scholar and employee of the Persian government, was born in Germany on 24 September 1846. No details are known of his family background, early life, or education. Some sources suggest that he was in fact Dutch, though educated at Leipzig University, but during his own lifetime he divulged no information to biographical dictionaries, and in a brief obituary note his son was unable, or reluctant, to add any details. His extraordinary career in Persia began in 1868 as an employee in the Indo-European telegraph company, which recruited several of its engineers and superintendents from Germany. In 1876 he joined the Persian telegraph service as inspector-general of Persian telegraphs and was given the rank of general in the Persian army, though he was never in any sense a soldier. He established a close relationship with the minister of telegraphs, 'Ali Quli Khan, Mukhbir al-Dauleh. He was responsible for extending the telegraph system to some of the regional centres. He was also employed by the shah in mining for gold in Azarbaijan, and by Mukhbir al-Dauleh in managing the turquoise mines in Khorasan. In 1870 he married Louise, who was the eldest daughter of a Swedish physician, Conrad Fagergen (1818-1879), resident for many years in Tehran and Shiraz, and the granddaughter of an Italian general in the Persian army, Barthelemy Semino. She died about 1879, and a few years later, in 1884, he married an English woman, Florence. 
From the late 1880s Houtum-Schindler played an important part in the more systematic attempts of Persian and European capitalists and entrepreneurs to explore and develop the country's natural resources. His advice was important in establishing the Imperial Bank of Persia in 1889, and he was subsequently appointed as its inspector of branches, as well as inspector-general of the Persian Bank mining rights corporation. He was also nominally in charge of the road concessions held by the bank. Neither of these subsidiaries flourished, and he was dismissed in May 1894. Thereafter he was nominally director of Persia's foreign office control department but, as he put it himself, 'used as advisor to the Government in nearly all matters' (RGS, correspondence, block 1881-1910. Houtum-Schindler to John Scott Keltie, secretary of the RGS, 4 Sept 1896), or, in Curzon's description, 'a sort of 'deus ex machina' required to assist in the solution of most Persian problems' (Curzon, 1.477). He stayed on in Tehran through the years of the 'constitutional revolution', living in his house situated between the Austrian legation and Mukhbir al-Mulk's property just north of Lalehzar. For a time he was in charge of the passport office in the ministry of foreign affairs, and was the honorary Swedish consul-general. He eventually left Persia in the spring of 1911, disappointed at what he felt was the lack of appreciation of his years of long service to the Persian government. The government of India made him a CIE in 1900, and a KCIE in 1911. 
In the course of the forty-two years that he had spent in Persia, Houtum-Schindler acquired more precise information about the state of the country than any other European had ever done, either before or most probably since. While supervising the telegraph and mining operations he travelled extensively throughout the Persian empire, across the central plateau, into the tribal areas and the most remote border regions, often leaving Tehran for months at a time. Everywhere he went he collected precise details of distances, routes, archaeological and historical sites, dialects, ethnography, flora and fauna, and population and revenue statistics. He frequently surveyed the territory, and his accurate readings helped to produce maps of the regions through which he travelled. As a result of his friendship with leading Persian notables and ministers he had access to official government records and used them in the many published descriptions of his itineraries. His unique access to these sources of information made him invaluable to the European commercial organizations for whom he worked, foreign legations, and the governments of India and Persia. Unusually self-effacing himself, he allowed others to make use of his remarkable knowledge, notably Lord Curzon who obtained from Houtum-Schindler most of the detailed statistical information on the army, population, distances, revenue, and much else in his great work, 'Persia and the Persian Question' (1892), and generously acknowledged that 'few men so excellently qualified to write a first-rate book themselves would have lent such unselfish exertion to improve the quality of another man's work' (Curzon, 1.xiii). 
To his study of Persia, Houtum-Schindler brought the exactitude and industry of a genuine scholar 'manque'. His understanding of literary and colloquial Persian was impressive; he built up a valuable library, and published over fifty articles in the leading English, German, and Austrian orientalist and geographical journals of the day, as well as encyclopaedias and reference works. His most important study was the one book which he compiled himself, 'Eastern Persian Irak' (1896), a meticulous account of the region between Tehran and Esfahan. His work on the Zoroastrian community in Yazd and Kerman, 'Die Parsen in Persien, ihre Sprache und einige ihrer Gebrauche' ('Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft', 36, 1882), and his pioneering studies on dialect, are still of value, as is the accurate information provided in the many succinct, exact accounts of his travels. Some of the rare manuscripts he collected came from the libraries of great nineteenth-century Persian bibliophiles and scholars such as Bahman Mirza, Farhad Mirza, and I'timad al-Saltaneh. The best of those manuscripts and lithographs, with some of his translations and annotations, were bought after his death by E. G. Browne, and subsequently went to the Cambridge University Library. 
After his return from Persia in 1911, Houtum-Schindler, who had become a naturalized British subject (probably in 1884, but certainly by 1888), settled at first in Wimbledon and then at Fenstanton, a few miles outside Cambridge. Although crippled by gout and increasingly house-bound, he re-established his acquaintance with the two Cambridge orientalists, E. G. Browne and Guy Le Strange, both of whom he had met many years earlier in Persia. He died at his home, Petersfield, Fenstanton, Huntingdonshire, on 15 June 1916, leaving his wife, Florence, and two sons, Alexander, who had joined the Imperial Bank of Persia, and Leonard. 


@@@@@


doc= 53521


Minorsky, Vladimir Fyodorovich (1877-1966), orientalist and Persian scholar, the son of Fyodor M. Minorsky and his wife, Olga, 'nee' Golubitskaya, was born on 5 February 1877 at Korcheva, on the upper Volga to the north-west of Moscow. He was educated at Moscow University from 1896 to 1903, studying law and oriental languages. In 1903 he entered the imperial Russian ministry of foreign affairs, serving in Persia, St Petersburg, central Asia, and Turkey. He represented Russia on the Turco-Persian Frontier Commission, and eventually became charge d'affaires at the Russian legation in Tehran. In 1913 he married Tatyana Shebunina (died 27 Dec 1987); their only son died in 1950. With the Russian Revolution, Minorsky and his wife settled in Paris. Moving from an official and diplomatic career to an academic one, in 1923 he became lecturer in Persian at the Ecole des Langues Orientales Vivantes in Paris. In 1932 he began teaching at the School of Oriental Studies, London, where in 1937 he became professor of Persian. The school was evacuated to Cambridge during the first part of the Second World War, and the Minorskys settled there permanently after he retired in 1944. He died at Cambridge on 25 March 1966 at the age of eighty-nine, still in the plenitude of his intellectual powers, and in 1969 his ashes were interred in the cemetery of the Novodevichye monastery at Moscow. He had by the time of his death received many honours from academies and universities of Europe and Asia, including the triennial gold medal of the Royal Asiatic Society, London. 
Minorsky was a scholar of outstanding calibre, who dominated historical, topographical, and ethnological studies in the Turco-Persian regions of western Asia and beyond as the worthy successor of his compatriot V. V. Bartold and the German Josef Markwart. The focus of his interests was Persia and the Iranian cultural world in general, including component peoples such as the Kurds, Armenians, and Afghans. But he was also interested in adjacent regions such as the Caucasus and Turkish central Asia. Much of his work, and especially that in the fields of historical geography and ethnography, was informed by personal experience; thus he had surveyed on horseback the whole 700 miles of the Turco-Persian frontier from the Persian Gulf to Mount Ararat as part of his delimitation duties of 1913-14. His 'magnum opus' was the 'Hudud al- 'alam. 'The Regions of the World'' (1936), a medieval Persian geography which he translated with a commentary of amazing complexity and insight. Other works included a translation and edition of an Arabic work, 'Sharaf al-Zaman Tahir Marvazi on China, the Turks and India' (1942), dealing with the ethnography and history of inner, south, and east Asia; a facsimile edition of and commentary on a Safavid Persian manual of administration (1944); two books on the history of the Caucasus (1953, 1958); an edition and translation of a work by a tenth-century Arab traveller in Persia (1955); and an abridged translation of a history of the Turkmen dynasties of Persia in the fifteenth century. His aesthetic sensibilities (he had, among other interests, a great love of music and was himself a pianist) showed themselves in works on Persian art. He had been oriental secretary for the Persian Art Exhibition of 1930-31 in London, and contributed to the exhibition catalogue; later he produced two books on Turkish and Persian miniature painters and calligraphers (1958, 1959). All this was in addition to hundreds of articles, many of them studies of major significance; some of these were in the further field of Persian literature. 
Minorsky was a kindly and hospitable person, ever ready to encourage younger scholars; in his later years, his stocky figure gave him something of the appearance of a genial teddy bear. As a teacher he was better with individuals than with larger groups. He saw his own scholarly task as the recovery and elucidation of information about regions whose history, topography, and ethnology were often profoundly obscure. He did not think that the groundwork had yet been done for more general works of synthesis, as was possible for historians of Europe. Noteworthy, too, was his firm Russian patriotism, even though events had compelled him to spend the second half of his life outside his native country. 


@@@@@


doc= 53522


Sheppard, Katherine Wilson (1847-1934), suffragist in New Zealand, was born probably on 10 March 1847 in Liverpool, the second of the five children of Andrew Wilson Malcolm (1819-1862), a clerk, and his wife, Jemima Crawford Souter (1821/2-1881). Although named Catherine at birth after her paternal grandmother, she called herself Katherine or Kate throughout her adult life. Her parents, both Scottish, were married on the Isle of Islay in the Hebrides in 1842. After Kate's birth the family shifted residence in England several times, as her father took a series of jobs. Following his death in 1862, the family separated for periods of time. Family tradition holds that Kate lived for a while in Nairn, Scotland, with an uncle who was a minister of the Free Church of Scotland and a Christian socialist, and who probably shaped her own adult political views. Nothing is known of her formal education, but her subsequent writings indicate wide reading, a fluent literary style, and an interest in the social issues of her day. 
In 1869 Kate Malcolm emigrated to the city of Christchurch in New Zealand, with her mother, her sister Isabella, and two brothers, Frank and Robert. They joined Marie Beath, her elder sister, who had already settled in Christchurch and married a draper. Two years later, on 21 July 1871, Kate married Walter Allen Sheppard (1836-1915). Born in Bath, England, the son of a flour-miller, Walter Sheppard had established himself as a general merchant in Christchurch, where he became active in local government. The couple had one child, a son named Douglas, who was born in Christchurch on 8 October 1880. 
Kate Sheppard and her husband were comfortably well off and built a pleasant home in the suburb of Riccarton. Fair-complexioned, and stylishly dressed, Kate was widely judged good looking. Her activities outside the domestic circle were initially confined to parish work for the Trinity Congregational Church in Christchurch. She assisted in fund-raising, taught in Sunday school, and served as secretary of the ladies' association, which co-ordinated parish visiting. In the mid-1880s, however, her life changed dramatically when, with her sisters Marie Beath and Isabella May, she helped to form the Women's Christian Temperance Union in New Zealand. Under the leadership of Frances Willard, an advocate of women's emancipation and a Christian socialist, the parent body in the United States of America demanded a curb on men's excessive alcohol consumption, and an extension of women's civil rights. In New Zealand the union became an increasingly forceful campaigning group. From 1887 Kate Sheppard led the campaign for the union's central demand, namely women's attainment of full citizenship through parliamentary franchise. Drawing on theoretical and polemical literature from the United States and England, and attentive to the strategies of northern countries' campaigns, she shrewdly tailored New Zealand activism to the local demands of a small, rural, and relatively egalitarian white British colony. Just as Maori men had been enfranchised alongside European men, Kate Sheppard campaigned to enfranchise European and Maori women, although few Maori initially were members of the union. 
Kate Sheppard's skilful direction of the fight for the vote marshalled the colony's Liberal and secular pro-suffrage forces to the women's banner alongside the temperance lobby. She herself became an able public speaker, newspaper columnist, and journalist, co-operated with sympathetic politicians of whatever political affiliation, and oversaw the presentation of well-supported petitions to the colonial legislature. In September 1893 suffrage for all women, European and Maori, twenty-one years of age and over, became law. Urged by Kate Sheppard to show their approval by voting in the forthcoming election, a large number of women registered and voted to return the Liberal government that had enfranchised them in November of the same year. 
During the suffrage campaign Kate Sheppard had been in touch with many women reformers in northern countries and, following her success in New Zealand, she found herself in demand as a speaker at meetings and international conferences when she and her husband visited Britain in 1894-5 and again in 1903-4. While women throughout Europe and in all except a few western states of the United States of America remained voteless, Kate was distinctive and compelling on a public platform. Back in New Zealand she helped establish the National Council of Women and, drawing on international links through the International Council of Women, worked to further women's and children's legal and welfare reforms. She also edited the 'White Ribbon' from 1895 to 1903, continued for several years as superintendent of franchise and legislative concerns for the Women's Christian Temperance Union, and worked on the committee of the Canterbury Women's Institute. 
Kate Sheppard subsequently faced many personal sadnesses: her son died in 1910; her husband in 1915; her only grandchild also died at an early age. Her later years were clouded by ill health and the disapproval aroused by her unconventional relationship with a printer and suffrage supporter, William Sidney Lovell-Smith (1852-1929). Increasingly she withdrew from public life. She married Lovell-Smith on 15 August 1925 following the death of his wife the previous year, to be widowed once more four years later. She died of bronchitis at the Lovell-Smith home in Riccarton, Christchurch, on 13 July 1934, and was buried three days later in the city's Addington cemetery beside her mother, brother, sister, nephew, and niece. 


@@@@@


doc= 53523


Badger, Charlotte (b. 1778?, d. in or after 1816), escaped convict, was one of the first European women to live in New Zealand. She may have been the child of Ann and Thomas Badger baptized on 31 July 1778 at the parish church of St John, Bromsgrove, Worcestershire. In July 1796 a Charlotte Badger was convicted at the Worcester assizes for housebreaking and theft in Bromsgrove. She was sentenced to seven years' transportation. After delays she arrived in 1801 at Port Jackson (Sydney), New South Wales, on the 'Earl Cornwallis'. By 1806 she had two years of her sentence to serve and was an inmate of the women's prison at Parramatta, where she gave birth to a child. In April, with a friend, Catherine Hagerty, she was assigned as a servant to a settler in Tasmania. Later events suggest they shared the resentment of many convict women to enforced service. 
On 29 April Charlotte Badger sailed for Hobart on the 'Venus' with her child, Catherine Hagerty, and a crew including male convicts. During the following five weeks, while loading stores 'en route', the captain's authority was undermined. The captain later accused the crew and convicts of drunkenness, vandalism, and immorality. Badger's and Hagerty's behaviour was defiant. They threw property overboard and entertained the intoxicated crew with a dance. 
On 17 June, at Port Dalrymple, Tasmania, the convicts seized control of the ship, assisted by crew members including the first mate, Benjamin Kelly. Accounts of Badger's part in the rebellion vary. One claims that, with Hagerty, she incited the men to mutiny. Another states she flogged the captain and, dressed as a man, armed herself with a pistol and raided another vessel for supplies and weapons. At the time she was described as very corpulent with thick lips and light hair. The captain acknowledged the influence of the women, but claimed Kelly was the ringleader. Judgement would have been harsh had he admitted losing his ship to a woman. 
With a full cargo intended for Hobart, the mutineers sailed across the Tasman. During the voyage Badger is believed to have formed a liaison with John Lancashire, a fellow convict, and Hagerty with Kelly. On reaching New Zealand these four, and the child, settled in huts on the shore at Rangihoua in the Bay of Islands. The 'Venus' left stores and sailed south. By April 1807 Hagerty was dead, and soon after Lancashire and Kelly appear to have left New Zealand. 
There is no information on how Charlotte Badger and the child survived after her shipmates left and her supplies were exhausted. She may have been the convict woman reported living with a lesser chief at the Bay of Islands some years later. For a time she was accepted by the Maori of the area. On two occasions she is known to have been offered passage back to Port Jackson. She refused and in 1808 said she would rather die with the Maori. 
Maori attitudes to Charlotte Badger changed, probably when it became known that Maori women kidnapped by the crew of the 'Venus' had been killed by tribal enemies. Her freedom was threatened as contact with missionaries and other Europeans increased and Maori co-operated in the return of runaway convicts to New South Wales. The last sighting of her was in Tonga. About 1816 an English woman and a young girl landed there, and the woman said she was escaping from the Maori of New Zealand. Her description, a big stout woman, matched Badger's. Tonga was a port of call for ships crossing the Pacific, and one account of her life claims she finally found freedom in America. 


@@@@@


doc= 53524


Vavasour, Thomas (d. 1585), physician and recusant, was a younger son of Sir Peter Vavasour (died in or after 1556) of Spaldington, Yorkshire, and Elizabeth Windsor; the family was a cadet branch of the Vavasours of Hazelwood Castle. Thomas Vavasour was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, in the 1530s (BA, 1536; MA, 1538). Elected a fellow of Clare College in 1539, he transferred to Henry VIII's new foundation of Trinity College in 1547, serving first as steward and then as junior bursar. His religious commitment first became apparent in the course of Nicholas Ridley's visitation of the university in June 1549, during which Vavasour was a thorn in the bishop of Rochester's flesh. He was listed second among eight senior fellows of Trinity who were described as a nest of papists, posted a Latin pasquinade against the visitors, and extemporized a marvellous counter to one of Ridley's arguments during the famous public disputation about the eucharist. Ridley advanced a pointed sorites: 'what Christ took, that he blessed; what he blessed, that he brake; what he brake, that he gave; ergo, what he received [that is, bread], he gave, etc.' Vavasour immediately cut in: 'God took a rib out of Adam's side; what he took, he built; what he built, he brought; what he brought, he gave to Adam to be his wife; but he took a rib: ergo, he gave a rib to Adam to wife. ('Acts and Monuments', 6.331)' Many years later, Edmund Grindal, then archbishop of York, was to remind William Cecil of the character of this man -- they had been contemporaries at St John's in the 1530s. Vavasour was now making trouble for him in York, and Grindal recalled him as 'sophistical, disdainful, and eluding arguments with irrision' (Nicholson, 350). 
Soon after the disputation Vavasour left England for Italy. While his later career suggests that his motives may have been as much religious as professional, his avowed purpose -- to study medicine -- was legitimate enough for him to remain in receipt of his stipend from Trinity. Having graduated MD at Venice in December 1553 he returned to England with Mary Tudor upon the throne and the mass once more upon the altar. He continues to appear in the Trinity College accounts until 1555 (the accounts for 1556-9 are unfortunately lost), but presumably resigned his fellowship by November 1556, when he was licensed for medical practice by the recently founded Royal College of Physicians. By 1561 he was married to Dorothy Kent, and in the 1560s took up residence with his wife in the parish of Holy Trinity Goodramgate, York. Their house stood on Common School Lane, beside Archbishop Holgate's School. 
The 'alteration of religion' under Queen Elizabeth was coolly received in York, and Thomas Vavasour was from the start a ringleader of Catholic survival and resistance. The arrival of more determined ecclesiastical leadership in the later 1560s, beginning with Matthew Hutton's appointment as dean in 1567, led to a clamp-down on Catholic activities. Vavasour was summoned before the York high commission in 1568, but, as later reported to William Cecil, his influential friends ensured that officials turned a blind eye, and the oft-repeated summons proved impossible to serve. In due course he was excommunicated for contumacy, and no doubt savoured the irony of the penalty. With the outbreak of the rising of the northern earls (1569), however, he found it expedient to go into hiding. Eventually, in 1574, he was pinned down at his York residence in what seems to have been England's earliest priest's hole. He was in effect starved out, and after his arrest he was in due course brought before the high commission. In Grindal's words, the commissioners: 'knowing his disposition to talk, thought it not good to commit the said Dr Vavasour to the castle of York, where some other like affected remain prisoners; but rather to a solitary prison in the Queen's majesty's castle at Hull, where he shall only talk to the walls. (Nicholson, 351)' Apart from a period of house arrest in 1575-7 and a brief release on parole in 1579, he spent the rest of his life there. Ministering to the sick of the gaol during an outbreak of disease, he himself fell ill and died on 12 May 1585. He was buried in Drypool churchyard, Hull. 
Under Vavasour's wife, Dorothy, the household remained a centre of York Catholicism until the 1580s. Edmund Campion said mass there during his sensational tour of England in 1580. Two of their sons, Thomas and James, went abroad to study for the priesthood in the Catholic seminaries. Thomas died tragically in 1587, murdered by his guide in Puglia while on a fund-raising trip for the English College at Rome. Dorothy herself was arrested in 1581, in the aftermath of Campion's tour, and spent the rest of her life in the gaols of the Ousegate Bridge in York, together with other female recusants. There she contracted gaol fever, and died on 26 October 1587, with her companions Mary Hutton and Alice Oldcorne dying the day before and the day after. Those who die in gaol are not usually accorded the title of martyr, but there can be little doubt that the Vavasours gave up everything for their faith, undergoing not a short agony, but years of hardship and suffering and the disintegration of their immediate family. Yet not in vain: descendants and relatives of the Vavasours remained prominent in Yorkshire recusancy well into the seventeenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 53526


Pormort, Thomas (c.1560-1592), Roman Catholic priest and martyr, was born at Little Limber, Lincolnshire, the son of Gregory and Anne Pormort. He matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1575, when John Whitgift was master, but apparently left the university without proceeding to a degree. His decision to become a Roman Catholic priest may have resulted from the inspiring mission of Edmund Campion around England in 1580, for on 15 January 1581 Pormort arrived at the English College in Rheims. He soon left for the English College in Rome, where he was received on 8 May. In October 1582 he took the spiritual exercises of Ignatius of Loyola, but by 1586 he had fallen out with the Jesuits, who directed studies at the college, refusing to sign a petition in their favour. He only made up the quarrel some years later. 
Having been papally dispensed from the impediment of his early education in 'heresy', Pormort was ordained priest in August 1587. Shortly afterwards, on 6 March 1588, he left the English College, ostensibly for reasons of health, but more probably because of tensions with the Jesuits. At first he joined the household of Owen Lewis, bishop of Cassano, but by 23 April 1590 he was in Milan, where he became prefect of studies at the Swiss College. There he incurred the disfavour of the rector of the college, and by September was on his way to Lucerne, heading for England to serve as a missionary priest. November saw him pass through Rheims, and then Brussels (where he stayed briefly with the Jesuit Henry Walpole) and soon he crossed from Antwerp into England. Of course he entered the country under an alias, and revealed an unexpected sense of humour in adopting the name of John Whitgift, his former master at Trinity, by then archbishop of Canterbury. 
On arriving in England, Pormort stayed with the Jesuit Robert Southwell in London, repairing a friendship which he himself had broken off some time before (perhaps when he left the English College in Rome). Pormort was captured in August 1591, and after a short stay in the Bridewell was taken to the house of the infamous Topcliffe for torture. There Pormort's whimsical choice of alias backfired as Topcliffe, who harboured an intense hatred for the archbishop of Canterbury, offered him life and liberty in exchange for admitting that he was Whitgift's godson or even his bastard and that the archbishop had financed his studies beyond the seas. On 8 February 1592 Pormort was charged with having been ordained a Catholic priest abroad and of having converted a haberdasher, John Barwys, to the Roman Catholic church. During the proceedings Pormort informed the court not only of Topcliffe's proposed deal, but also about the bizarre sexual fantasies with which his tormentor had regaled him: fantasies which focused on the person of Queen Elizabeth, whose legs, breasts, and belly Topcliffe claimed to have frequently fondled. Pormort was condemned to death. On the day of his execution in St Paul's Churchyard, 20 February 1592, he was 'enforced to stand in his shirt almost two hours upon the ladder in Lent time upon a very cold day' (Pollen, 209) while Topcliffe ranted at him in a vain attempt to make him retract the accusations he had made in court. Pormort was hanged, drawn, and quartered. He was beatified on 22 November 1987. 


@@@@@


doc= 53527


Dingley, Sir Thomas (1506x8-1539), knight of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem, was the son of John Dingley of the Isle of Wight and Mabel, or Mabell, Weston of Rozel, Jersey. His mother was the sister of Sir William Weston, a prominent hospitaller who became prior of the order of St John in England in 1527. Weston granted Dingley a pension of 125 ecus on his reception into the order in 1526, when he would have been at least eighteen, and continued to favour him throughout his career. Although licensed to return home almost immediately, between 1528 and 1532 the young knight remained with the order's convent as it migrated between Italy, southern France, and Malta. In 1531 he was rewarded with the preceptory of North Baddesley, Hampshire, and was retained in the service of the grand master, a sign that further advancement was likely. Shortly after this he returned to England, where Weston granted him the prioral estate of Stansgate, and secured royal letters asking the grand master that he should receive further preferment. In 1535-6 he shuttled back and forth between England and Malta, and passing through southern France during one of these journeys he managed to persuade the grand master elect, Didier de Sainct-Jailhe, to collate him to another preceptory, Shingay (Cambridgeshire). Sainct-Jailhe, however, had no right to confer any benefices until he should reach the convent, and died before he could make the journey. In the meantime Ambrose Cave had been appointed to Shingay from Malta. A bitter row developed, with the prior taking Dingley's side, refusing to obey conventual mandates to put Cave in possession, and securing royal confirmation of his nephew's appointment. 
The situation was completely transformed in September 1537, when an envoy of the order and three English brethren gained access to court. On 18 September, probably as a result of accusations advanced by his brethren, Dingley was committed to the Tower under suspicion of treason. It was alleged that at Richard Pate's house in Genoa he had openly discussed the possibility of Henry VIII losing his throne, had accused the king of bloodthirstiness before a prominent French hospitaller, and had committed youthful misdemeanours of which Henry was reminded by Clement West, the head of the English brethren in Malta. Soon after Dingley's arrest Baddesley and Shingay were granted to Thomas Seymour and Richard Longe. On 18 May 1539 Dingley was attainted, on the grounds that he had 'moved divers outward princes to levy war' against the king ('LP Henry VIII', 14/1, 867(15)), and on 9 July he was beheaded on Tower Hill, along with Sir Adrian Fortescue. 


@@@@@


doc= 53528


Scheener, Edward Schencker (1789-1853), civil servant and half-brother of Queen Victoria, was born in Geneva, Switzerland, on 24 November 1789, the natural son of Edward, duke of Kent, and Anne Gabrielle Alexandrine More. Scheener passed his youth in Geneva in the family of his ostensible father, Thimothee Schencker. Kent undertook to find a place for Scheener in the civil service, and in 1809 he was appointed a supernumerary clerk in the Foreign Office, having previously occupied a position in the council office as an assistant examiner of public accounts. He was appointed to the regular establishment in 1814 and was promoted to the second class in 1823. After being ordered to absent himself permanently from the Foreign Office in September 1826 he was retired on a pension of $272 10's'. 0died on 5 July 1830. 
Royal patronage was at this time fairly common in the Foreign Office; Richard Mellish and Adolfus Kent Oom both had court connections, so Scheener was hardly exceptional. However, it has always been supposed that the duke of Kent, unlike his brothers who had many acknowledged natural children, had just one child, Queen Victoria. Whatever may be the real story of Kent's long liaison with Mme Julie St Laurent and their 'invisible' children, there can be no doubt that Kent fathered two children in Geneva shortly before his sudden and unexplained departure in January 1790; one was Edward Scheener, and the other Adelaide Victoire Auguste Dubus, whose mother died in childbirth. 
As soon as Scheener appeared in the Foreign Office in 1809, one of the clerks reported that before George Canning left office he had put Scheener on the establishment as an extra clerk and that 'he had the interest of the Duke of Kent to whom he bears a strong resemblance and whom report says to have a nearer relation to him than their being both sons of Adam' (FO, 95/8/14, fol. 900). The duke of Clarence, always the most solicitous of Kent's elder brothers, took Scheener on his staff as private secretary in 1814, in which capacity he accompanied Europe's royalties to and fro across the channel. 
Scheener went abroad again in 1818 but was never able to recover to his satisfaction his expenses from Castlereagh's Foreign Office. After Canning returned to office in 1822, Scheener took up the cause again, but so completely lost his head that Canning declared that he 'would rather copy all the Foreign Office despatches himself than rely upon an individual so wrong-headed, of a nature so suspicious and of a temper so ungovernable' (Bourne, 447). The duke of Clarence was called upon to remind Canning that Scheener was the natural son of the duke of Kent, and that Clarence wished to save Scheener from utter ruin. Scheener was in consequence only suspended (1826), but in 1830, with his patron now king, Scheener succeeded, by dint of publicizing his case in two pamphlets, 'Memoirs of an Employee' and 'Statement of Facts to his Majesty's Ministers', in getting his case reviewed by Lord Palmerston. Palmerston refused to take Scheener back and he was placed on the pension list. 
It may not be entirely coincidental that Scheener returned to Geneva with his wife, Harriet ('b'. 1781), daughter of David Boyn of London, in 1837, the same year that Victoria ascended the throne. Harriet died on 20 January 1852; they had no children. Scheener died at his home, 280 rue Verdaine, Geneva, on 31 January 1853, a pall of official silence then falling over his very existence. 


@@@@@


doc= 53529


Jones, Reginald Teague- (1889-1988), intelligence officer, was born on 30 July 1889 in Walton, Liverpool, the eldest of four children and only son of Frederick Jones, schoolmaster, and his wife, Elizabeth Deeley Smith. His father, who taught languages, died when he was about thirteen, leaving his mother in straitened circumstances. Friends living in St Petersburg, Russia, offered to take him there and oversee his education. He attended St Anne's College in the tsarist capital and was soon fluent in German, French, and Russian. On return to England he studied at King's College, London, but left without a degree. He failed to pass the Foreign Office entry examination, instead joining the Indian police in 1910. He quickly learned some Indian languages, plus Persian, and was used for frontier intelligence work -- sometimes in disguise -- before being transferred to the foreign and political department of the British Indian government, who had spotted his unusual talents, and for whom he was working at the outbreak of the First World War. He was then commissioned into the Indian army reserve of officers. 
The nature of his duties makes Teague-Jones's career a shadowy one, but he appears to have spent most of the war as officer in charge of British intelligence in the Persian Gulf, and then as political officer in Basrah. However, following the withdrawal of Russian forces from Persia and the Caucasus as a result of the Bolshevik coup in October 1917 and the peace treaty of Brest Litovsk, he was engaged in the urgent task of assessing which groups, if any, of non-Bolshevik Russians or of the indigenous peoples would support the allies in keeping the Germans and Turks from overrunning Persia, the Caucasus, and Transcaspia -- and ultimately India. 
Teague-Jones himself crossed into Transcaspia disguised as a Persian merchant and travelled along the Transcaspian railway -- assessing the possibility of blowing it up if necessary -- to Krasnovodsk on the eastern side of the Caspian. After successfully foiling German plans to acquire a large consignment of cotton from the Bolsheviks (for use in the manufacture of explosives), he crossed by ferry to Baku to liaise with the British representative there and to organize a network of intelligence agents in the area, before reporting back to Major-General Wilfrid Malleson in Mashhad. The Bolsheviks' brutality in Transcaspia led to their being overthrown there in July 1918 by social revolutionaries and the local Turcomans, and the new government, the 'Ashkhabad committee', sought British help from Malleson, via Teague-Jones, who sent an urgent report to Mashhad before returning to Baku, which was being hard pressed by the Turks. After a few weeks, however, Teague-Jones was summoned back to Transcaspia, where a Bolshevik force from Tashkent in Turkestan was fighting its way westwards along the railway and seemed likely to recapture the province. 
A few days later Teague-Jones was hit in the thigh by a machine-gun bullet at a battle 80 miles east of Ashkhabad. He was removed to hospital in Ashkhabad and, as soon as he was able to hobble around, was appointed British political representative there. In the meantime Baku had fallen to the Turks, and in the frenzied exodus a large party of Bolshevik commissars who were making for Astrakhan, which was still in Bolshevik hands, had the misfortune to be delivered instead to Krasnovodsk, where they were seized by their enemies the social revolutionaries. The gaols of Transcaspia were already overflowing with the hated local Bolsheviks and there was little room for these new arrivals, so the Ashkhabad committee asked Malleson whether the British could take them over. Malleson suggested to his authorities that the commissars might be useful in an exchange of prisoners with the Bolsheviks, but was unsure how he could transport them to India when he was very short of men. While the debate was proceeding the social revolutionaries pre-empted any decision by taking twenty-six of the prisoners out into the desert at dead of night, summarily executing them, and shovelling their bodies into a shallow grave (20 September 1918). 
At the time this seemed just one more atrocity in the Russian civil war, but it was to have the gravest repercussions for Teague-Jones. Once the First World War was over and the British had withdrawn from the region in 1919, the Bolsheviks soon recaptured Transcaspia and discovered the fate of their colleagues from Baku, some of whom had been personally known to Lenin. The social revolutionaries of the old Ashkhabad committee, eager to exonerate themselves, blamed Teague-Jones for the decision to execute the commissars, and the affair escalated to the point where the twenty-six Baku commissars became revered martyrs in the Soviet Union, and Teague-Jones was regarded as a war criminal, denounced by Stalin and Trotsky personally. Such were the fears for his safety that he was forced to 'disappear' in 1922 and re-emerge as Ronald Sinclair. Thereafter he led a shadowy life, still apparently working for British intelligence until his retirement, and keeping his true identity secret right up to his death at the age of ninety-nine. He received two honours: he became MBE (military) in 1919 as Reginald Teague-Jones, and OBE in 1923 as Ronald Sinclair. 
A big ebullient man with a distinctive throaty voice, Teague-Jones was twice married: first -- and very romantically -- to a Russian girl, Valentina (Valya) Alekseyeva, whom he met in Transcaspia during the war. In July 1933 they were divorced in London, but remained friends. Her parents lived in Krasnovodsk. In October 1933 he married in Cairo his second wife, Else (Taddie), daughter of Hermann Ferdinand Danecker, a German engineer. They subsequently lived in New York (where he seems to have worked for British intelligence during the Second World War), Florida, and Spain. After her death in 1986 he moved to a retirement home in Plymouth, where he was joined by Valya not long before her own death in 1988. He had no children. 
Shortly before his death at his residence, Charlton House, 55 Mannamead Road, Plymouth, on 16 November 1988, his first book, 'Adventures in Persia', appeared, under the name Sinclair, and it was as Ronald Sinclair that his obituary was published in 'The Times' on 22 November. A corrected one, revealing his real identity and the reasons for his change of name, appeared three days later. His Transcaspian journals were published in 1990 under his true name, with the title 'The Spy who Disappeared'. 
Peter Hopkirk', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 53530


Harley, Henrietta Cavendish, countess of Oxford and Mortimer (1694-1755), patron of architecture, was born on 4 February 1694 at Newcastle House, Clerkenwell, Middlesex, the only child of John Holles, duke of Newcastle upon Tyne (1662-1711), and his wife, Lady Margaret Cavendish (1661-1716), third daughter of Henry Cavendish, second duke of Newcastle upon Tyne. After the deaths of his sons, Henry Cavendish had caused family controversy by leaving his estate to Margaret at the expense of her sisters, and her husband was on this basis allowed to take the title of Newcastle on being made a duke in 1694. To Henrietta, then, descended the wealth and castles of the Cavendish and Ogle families in Derbyshire and Northumberland, and Welbeck Abbey in Nottinghamshire. Henrietta was acutely conscious of her ancestry and also inherited her family's traditional passion for horses; Horace Walpole described her homage to the 'great families from which she descended, and which centred in her' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 35.271). Her great-grandfather William Cavendish, first duke of Newcastle, had written the standard English work on horsemanship. His great-granddaughter's dun mare appears with her in portraits, and she is thought to have been the only woman whom the sporting artist John Wootton ever depicted in the saddle. 
Henrietta too endured a complicated family wrangle. In 1711 she inherited much property from her father -- unfairly, according to her mother -- and it was during an estrangement lasting until just before Margaret's death that Henrietta married Edward Harley (1689-1741), son of the tory first minister Robert Harley, first earl of Oxford and Mortimer. The wedding, 'in the Drawing Room at Wimple' on 31 August 1713, was followed the next day by the nervous dispatch of letters to 'the Dutchess of Newcastle' (BL, Add. MS 70440, 31 Aug/1 Sept 1713) informing her. Wimpole Hall, the Harley house in Cambridgeshire, expanded to form a setting for Edward Harley's famous collections, was sold in 1740 to pay debts. The couple had one surviving child, another Margaret (1715-1785) ['see 'Bentinck, Margaret Cavendish], who married William Bentinck, second duke of Portland. The Cavendish inheritance therefore passed through the female line yet again, from the Harley to the Bentinck family. 
Henrietta's husband inherited the earldom of Oxford and Mortimer in 1724 but not his father's interest in politics, concentrating instead on his extensive collection of books and manuscripts. Following her husband's death in 1741, Henrietta dispersed his collection, the transactions culminating in the sale of the manuscripts to the nation for $10,000, such a low price that it ranked as a tremendous gift, and she has often been criticized for her implied ignorance of the collection's value. In fact, her daughter communicated her spirited refusal to 'bargain with the publick' ('Bath MSS', 2.183) to the House of Commons. Henrietta was a great reader herself, as the books in the library at Welbeck marked in her handwriting 'daer tuo' (Goulding, 14: 'read out' backwards) attest. 
Henrietta's common reputation for being somewhat stiff-necked stems from a letter of Mary Pendarves (later Mrs Delany) of 1734 saying she was 'afraid Lady O. would have come' to join a party, and that 'her formality would not by any means have agreed with the liberty of this constitution' ('Autobiography... Mrs Delany', 2.230). This view survived in her description as a 'dull, worthy woman' in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. But Henrietta's supporters included her devoted correspondent Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, who would round on detractors, saying, 'Lady Oxford is not shining, but she has more in her than such giddy things as you and your companions can discern' ('Letters and Works', 1.66). Jonathan Swift's high-flown verses on Henrietta's marriage contrast with his private view, in his journal, that she was 'handsome, and has good sense, but red hair'. 
'I live as retired here as I can in this country where my ancestors had lived so long', Henrietta wrote from Welbeck Abbey to Lady Mary on 21 January 1747, 'but must see more company than I chuse' (BL, Add. MS 70432). Her widowhood was spent in furious activity improving the house for her grandson, William Henry Cavendish Cavendish-Bentinck, the future third duke of Portland. Walpole described her 'doing ten thousand right and just things... collecting and monumenting the portraits and reliques' of her family and their ancestors (Walpole, 'Corr.', 35.271). Her account books for 'the Repairing Beautifying & Ornamenting the Ancient Seat of the Cavendishe Family at Welbeck' (Nottinghamshire Archives, MS DD. P5.6.1.1) have been preserved. They record the reconstruction of the west wing of the abbey, and inside the creation of medievalizing masterpieces such as the 'Gothic Hall', whose fantastic ceiling still survives. Marble fireplaces were based -- unusually for the period -- on her great-grandfather's Jacobean models at Bolsover Castle, another ancestral house which she repaired. The architect John James helped with the work until 1746, and in 1750 Henrietta reported her impatience with its progress. 'I have now above a hundred men employ'd, and entend to have more', she wrote to her grandson, 'The stuco men work by candle light night and morning' (Goulding, 32). 
Henrietta's interests included the family documents collected by Arthur Collins, and her husband's librarian Humfrey Wanley himself was her devoted servant. She reorganized the pictures at Welbeck to create a veritable shrine to horses and to her ancestors. 'Oh! portraits!' swooned Walpole in 1756, shortly after her death: 'I went to Welbeck. It is impossible to describe the bales of Cavendishes, Harleys, Holleses, Veres, and Ogles: every chamber is tapestried with them; nay, and with ten thousand other fat morsels; all their histories inscribed; all their arms, crests, devices, sculptures on chimneys of various English marbles in ancient forms (and, to say truth, most of them ugly.) (Walpole, 'Corr.', 35.270-71)' Henrietta's death at Welbeck on 9 December 1755 of 'an apoplexy and palsy' ('Autobiography... Mrs Delany', 3.383) reunited her with her ancestors, for she was buried on 26 December 'in the old Duke of Newcastle's vault' (Chester, 389) at Westminster Abbey. Far from being a dull cipher as was once thought, she became through her intense family pride a vigorous and eccentric architectural innovator, despite -- or perhaps because of -- her reclusive later life. 


@@@@@


doc= 53531


Adams, Thomas (1807-1873), lace merchant and manufacturer, was born on 5 February 1807 at Worksop, Nottinghamshire, the son of Thomas Adams, a maltster, and his second wife, Catharine, 'nee' Smith, of Sutton-cum-Lound, Nottinghamshire. The elder Adams moved his family to Ware, Hertfordshire, but died while Thomas was still a child. His widow took her children to Sheffield, where Thomas received a modest education before being apprenticed at the age of fourteen to a draper at Newark, Nottinghamshire. Afterwards he worked for a short time in the London warehouse of Bodens, the Derby-based lace manufacturers. He was also in France for a time. In 1830 he returned to Nottingham, where he established his own business, buying plain and decorated nets from some of the 1200 or so artisans active in the district, which he then finished and sold on to wholesalers and retailers. In 1832 he began a long partnership with James Page and other small manufacturers, trading as Adams, Page & Co. at St Mary's Gate. Adams and Page discarded the lesser capitalists in 1856 but incorporated in 1862, the foundation capital being $112,000. 
On 2 September 1830 Adams married Lucy Cullen, the daughter of a Nottingham draper; they had ten children over the next twenty years. The completion of a railway line between London and Nottingham brought increased trade and prosperity for Adams. Wholesalers and exporters now travelled directly to Nottingham to buy their nets and laces, the quality and design of which had improved steadily over the previous thirty years. A few other manufacturers opened their own warehouses, but, unlike Adams, such men lacked the necessary commercial experience and capital. The 'Nottingham Daily Guardian' (19 May 1873) reported: 'We have heard it stated that he was a hard and sharp man of business, not exactly that he would do anything dishonest -- that we do not believe -- but one who would make a good bargain.' Adams seems to have concentrated on the home market but may also have been selling to Mediterranean countries. 
In the years following the 'Nottingham Enclosure Act' of 1845 the old commercial heart of the town was rebuilt as the Lace Market, and in 1855 Adams proudly opened his new palatial warehouse at its centre in Stoney Street, though it was criticized by some as too grand for commercial purposes. Before long it employed 600 people, 500 of them women, who enjoyed the amenities of a library, a schoolroom, rest rooms, a canteen, and, probably the most important to Adams, a chapel where the employees could begin their working hours by attending a daily service at his expense. During these years Adams emerged as the leading evangelical layman in Nottingham. He gave generously towards the cost of building new churches in the growing city and he promoted missionary societies and Sunday schools. He sat as a JP on both town and county benches, was elected to Nottingham corporation in 1836, and was a member of the Poor Law Board for many years, but he seldom attended these last two bodies, admitting that he found it easier to make money than to make speeches. The whig majority on the corporation denied him the opportunity of becoming alderman or mayor. 
Adams's health began to fail about 1870, and he died at his home, Lenton Firs, Lenton, Nottingham, on 16 May 1873. He was buried on 19 May in the Church cemetery at Forest Road, memorials being placed to him in Lenton parish church and St Mary's, Nottingham. His wife survived him, but his sons Samuel and John, whom he hoped would succeed him in business, both died young. The firm continued for another two generations, largely because of Adams's policy of promoting senior clerks to the board. 


@@@@@


doc= 53532


Felkin, William (1795-1874), manufacturer and historian of the lace and hosiery industries, was born on 24 April 1795 in Ilkeston, Derbyshire, the son of William Felkin (1772-1824), a framework knitter who became a Baptist minister, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Harrison. The family moved to Leicestershire, where Felkin was educated at Benjamin Wootton's school at Kegworth (1799-1805) and at his father's school in the same place (1805-7). At the age of twelve he was apprenticed to his grandfather, also a framework knitter, for a year and then to Heard and Hurst, a leading Nottingham firm of merchant hosiers, for seven years (1809-16). In 1812/1813 the partners moved him to their London warehouse to widen his experience. Ten years later he made the critical move of his career, securing employment with John Heathcoat, the patentee of the bobbin-net lace machine (1808-9), first at his London warehouse in Cheapside, then at his Tiverton factory. In 1822 he married Susannah, 'nee' Clarke. When Felkin returned to Nottingham in 1826 it was as agent for Heathcoat, who had become the colossus of the lace industry and trade. 
Apart from representing Heathcoat's interests, from 1832 Felkin was also a commission agent, buying the production of scores of small local producers, bleaching and hand-embroidering the net, and marketing it in London and elsewhere. He also began to manufacture lace net, at first in partnership with fellow Baptist William Vickers, later with one of his sons in Beeston. In the mid-1850s, when hosiery began to shift to factory production, he invested in the new circular knitting machines. The business was supported for many years by Wrights' Bank, but became insolvent in 1865. Some old friends bought him an annuity, which enabled him to retire and devote his time to research and writing. 
As Heathcoat's agent Felkin held a position of authority in the economic affairs of Nottingham and its region. Moreover, he had considerable personal qualities, acute intelligence, and an evangelical zeal in a town full of chapels, 'the manners of a Chesterfield and the oratory of a Bright' ('Nottingham Daily Express', 26 Nov 1901). He was soon heavily involved in trade politics, and in giving evidence to a sequence of government inquiries. To protect the many small lace machine owners in and about the town, he took the lead in initiatives to restrict hours of work and output, and also to reinforce the statutory prohibition on the export of machinery from Britain (English producers were particularly anxious about French rivals). When these campaigns proved ineffective, Felkin turned to the promotion of the Mechanics' Institute (1836) and the Nottingham School of Design (1842), and to industrial exhibitions, beginning in 1840. 
Meanwhile Felkin was focusing his energies too on the politics of municipal reform. His friend and fellow Baptist Absalom Barnett was the leading exponent of poor-law reform locally, advocating the labour test and the workhouse test for Nottingham's unemployed. Felkin became a poor-law guardian during the early operational years of the new poor law (1836-9), but withdrew after a long and acrimonious conflict with the tory traditionalists. He then became a councillor on the newly reformed Nottingham corporation, joining the controlling group of like-minded nonconformist progressives. In 1845 Nottingham was authoritatively stated to be the most overcrowded town in England, so there was ample scope for municipal improvement. Felkin played a leading role in the promotion of the 'Nottingham Enclosure Act' (1845) and the corporation sanitary committee (1847 onwards), which inaugurated the modern planning process in the town. The two strands of Felkin's public life, trade and municipal politics, converged in 1850 when he was elected mayor, an office he held for two consecutive terms. He was an energetic promoter of the Great Exhibition of 1851 and wrote a pamphlet, dedicated to Prince Albert, which eulogized the event as inaugurating a new age of peace and reconciliation of labour and capital. He was appointed chairman of jury no. 20 at the exhibition, which dealt with clothing, and was proud that Nottingham provided sixty exhibitors and won fourteen prize medals. 
While Felkin was an eminent public figure in the midlands during his lifetime, his main claim to the attention of posterity is as a statistician and historian of the British lace and hosiery industries. He made a lifelong study of the subject and spent years of his retirement assembling this material for his 'History of the Machine-Wrought Hosiery and Lace Manufactures' (1867). The best part of the book deals with the period in which he was actively involved in the industry and, as a contemporary account of this key period, can never be superseded. The work, however, has its limitations: its approach is technical, rather than commercial, financial, or design-oriented. Like much writing of the period, the approach is moralistic, expressing the virtues of working-class self-help and the dire consequences of prodigality, though recent scholarship confirms the existence of a strong upward social mobility in the lace industry -- one of Felkin's main themes. Inevitably there is some partiality: Nottingham is better covered than other hosiery centres (for example Leicester, Loughborough, or Hinckley), and Germany (where one of Felkin's sons worked) better than France or the USA. Similarly, the book is weak on rivals to Heathcoat's claims to have invented the bobbin-net machine, as well as on Deverill's justifiable claim to be considered the father of the fancy lace machine (D. E. Varley, 'History of the Midland Counties Lace Manufacturers Association', 1959, 21-8). 
Felkin died at his home on the Nottingham Park estate, on 26 September 1874. He was survived by his wife and a large family, and was buried in Nottingham general cemetery on 5 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 53541


Humber, Thomas (1841-1910), bicycle manufacturer, was born in Andrew Street, Brightside, Sheffield, on 16 October 1841, the son of Samuel Humber, a tailor, and his wife, Lucy, 'nee' Turton. The family later moved from Sheffield to Hull and, in 1854, to Nottingham, where Thomas worked for a blacksmith and wheelwright; although not formally apprenticed, he used the opportunity to develop his practical experience and broaden his knowledge. Around 1860 he moved to the Butterley Iron Company at Alfreton in Derbyshire where he demonstrated his entrepreneurial skills with his proposal for a low cost way of producing deck beams for two naval ships. His tender was accepted, to the satisfaction of both Humber and his employer. Within a few years he returned to Nottingham and set up in business as a blacksmith. He married in Nottingham, on 5 April 1863, Emma Elizabeth (1842/3-1903), daughter of William Freeman, tailor; they had a daughter and a son. 
Towards the end of 1868, the 'English Mechanic' magazine published a letter about the velocipede, the predecessor of the bicycle, which had been developed in Paris. This captured the interest of Humber who used a picture in the magazine as the basis for the design of a machine he built for himself at home. It took him some time to learn how to ride the new cycle but eventually he made the journey from Nottingham to Radcliffe, a distance of about six miles. His second machine incorporated a number of significant improvements but not before the first one had attracted attention, giving Humber his first sale. The same customer also bought the second one. Production of each of these velocipedes took two months, not least due to the importance that Humber attached to the quality and reliability of his products. He also continued to innovate, such as by introducing solid rubber tyres to improve the ride, by use of ball-bearings and by instituting races to attract interest to the new machines. 
In 1871 Humber produced his own version of the 'ordinary' cycle (or 'penny-farthing'), not long after James Starley had completed the first all-metal ordinary. Humber called his machine the Spider. Its durability was testified by various users in his first price list which he published in 1873. One of these testimonials was from Fred Cooper, a racing cyclist. Another contact from the sport was Thomas Marriott who joined Humber as a business partner in 1875. Two years later Fred Cooper also became a partner and the enterprise was renamed Humber, Marriott and Cooper. By that time the workforce was around eighty and their works were no longer large enough, so a new factory was constructed at Beeston. 
Ordinaries were capable of speed but they were far from safe, especially for the novice. An alternative was the tricycle, which was also used for racing. Humber developed a design using a new configuration of front steering and rear drive, an arrangement which remained in use. Robert Cripps rode this to success in races, to such an extent that Humber's tricycle became known as the Cripper. But the important goal was a 'safety' bicycle which Humber achieved in 1884. His patented design put the larger wheel at the rear, rather than at the front as was the case with the ordinary; it also made use of a diamond-shaped frame, which was to become the norm in bicycles; this was soon followed by other designs, ones that more closely resembled later models with front and rear wheels of nearly equal size. Nevertheless the ordinary and the tricycle continued in production for some years. 
In 1885 Cooper and Marriott left the partnership, establishing themselves as a wholesaler of cycles and, later, selling cycles made for them by Rudge of Coventry. Humber allowed them equal rights to the Humber name, as well as use of the old partnership's patents, which led to a legal dispute some years later, demonstrating the commercial value of the Humber brand but also giving an indication that Thomas's commercial abilities were, perhaps, not as sharp as his technical skills. 
Humber then entered into partnership with his long-standing associate T. Harrison Lambert. In 1887 Humber and Lambert's business became the subject of an early consolidation of the British cycle industry when it and three other companies were acquired by investors, who rapidly sold them all to a newly formed public company. Even though some of the constituent companies had greater production than Humber's, it was his name which was given to the new company, reflecting its association with quality and reliability. Thomas Humber agreed to become general manager of the new company for five years, including responsibility for overseeing manufacturing at all of its sites -- Coventry and Wolverhampton as well as Beeston. Although the Coventry works produced less expensive models, the Humber name and the association with Beeston were used by salesmen to imply high quality of its products. 
After he had completed the agreed term as general manager Thomas Humber retired in 1892; his son and the manager of the Beeston works left at this time too, forming a new bicycle-making company with Robert Cripps. Humber became a director of a neighbouring enterprise developing another of his interests, the pneumatic tyre. But the Humber name was jealously guarded by his old company which took Thomas Humber to court in 1896, insisting that he keep to the terms of his severance agreement, especially not to become a director of companies in related fields, in this case the British Motor Syndicate Ltd, an early motor car venture. By then the first motorcycles bearing the Humber name were being developed at Coventry and a motor car at Wolverhampton. In 1907 the whole company was concentrated in Coventry enabling Humber to become the second largest manufacturer of cars in the UK within six years. The cycle division was eventually sold to Raleigh in 1932. 
By 1881 Humber's relationship with his wife had deteriorated such that they were living apart -- he shared a house in Beeston with his younger brother, Samuel, while his wife continued to live in Nottingham. Emma unsuccessfully petitioned for divorce in 1886. By 1901 Humber had retired to Teddington, near London, living as man and wife with Eleanor Robinson ('b'. 1872), a Nottingham native and his junior by thirty years. They married at Paddington, London, on 9 September 1903, barely a month after Emma Humber's death on 8 August. They moved to Villa D'Arno, Albany Park, Kingston upon Thames, where Humber died of cancer on 24 November 1910. 
Throughout his life Thomas Humber displayed an independence of ideas, as well as supreme practical abilities which he used to improve cycle technology. His contacts with racing not only attracted business but also stimulated developments in the technology. He set high standards which were reflected in the reliability of the cycles he produced, achieved not least through his control of the production of all of the components. Through his emphasis on quality, Thomas made the Humber the aristocrat among bicycles. 


@@@@@


doc= 53544


Day, Joseph Mary (1855-1946), mechanical engineer, was born at 14 Albert Terrace, Bayswater, London, on 27 September 1855, the fourth son of the judge Sir John Charles Frederic Sigismund Day (1826-1908) and his first wife, Henrietta Rosa Mary, 'nee' Brown (1824-1893). Day attended Beaumont College, a Catholic school at Windsor, from 1868 to 1873 and then the new Crystal Palace School of Practical Engineering from 1873 to 1874. He was apprenticed at the engineering works of Stothert and Pitt in Bath from 1874 to 1877. 
In 1878 Day set up as iron-founder and engineering manufacturer in Bath, making leather-dressing and concrete-making machines (both patented by Day and his then partner, J. W. Lampard) and cranes. Day's firm was clearly then parasitic on the company to which he had been apprenticed, which had a worldwide reputation for such machinery. On 10 May 1879, at Midford Castle near Bath, Day married Margaret Anne (1853-1933), eldest daughter of James John Parfitt of Bruton. They had nine surviving children, at least two of whom were involved with their father's engineering work. 
In the 1880s Day became intensely active as an entrepreneur in Bath, in improving that city's water supply, and in devising bread- and ice-making machinery. In April 1891 he applied for his first two-stroke internal combustion engine patent, granted in 1892. The constant litigation in Britain over the validity of the patent for a four-stroke engine, held by the German Dr Nikolaus Otto, had encouraged Day to seek an alternative design. He was thus led to try to simplify existing engine designs, probably drawing on his previous manufacture of valveless air-compressors. His Day engine (as it was soon known) used an enclosed crankcase as a pumping chamber, with two ports controlled by the piston to help charge the cycle. Day could see the possibility of marketing the engine as a portable electricity generator, but his attempts to develop the engine by raising $60,000 on the stock market failed in July 1892. Later that year an employee at Day's Bath works, F. W. C. Cock (1863-1944), suggested another modification of the engine with a third piston-controlled port, which was patented on 15 October 1892. This allowed the cycle to be controlled without the need for valves and with only three moving parts: piston, rod, and crank. The engine could be run in whichever direction it was started. This ultimate simplification resulted in an internal combustion engine which became the ancestor of all later lightweight, high-speed, high-revving, portable two-stroke engines. 
However, any future which might have awaited these inventions had been sabotaged by the legal battles in which Day had become embroiled as a result of his entrepreneurial activities. New legislation to regulate joint-stock companies had encouraged both crusading journalists and predatory lawyers. Day became involved in a flurry of lawsuits, including libel actions, from December 1890, and even though he won all these actions (no doubt helped by his father's connections) the damage to his engineering activities was done. On a visit to the United States in 1894 while trying to sell his engine patents, the British secretary of state even issued instructions for Day's extradition from the USA. 
Day and his then partner were declared bankrupt in September 1893 and their manufacturing activities in Bath came to a sudden end. Their works and stock were auctioned in May 1894 and manufacture of Day engines effectively ceased in England until 1905. Engine making passed, via licence deals, to the USA, where an enormous number of engines were made, both legally and illegally, largely to power motor-boats, since the power characteristics of the Day engine proved ideal on water. In 1906 Day discharged his bankruptcy and re-established his engine making, first at Barking in Essex and then beside the Thames at Putney. His business was successful and he supplied motor-boat engines and, during the First World War, portable pumps for dewatering trenches. 
This last work brought Day into contact with members of the Ministry of Munitions who were concerned as to how Britain was to maintain its navy in the new era of oil-fuelled warships. Two camps developed, one considering that reserves of overseas oil should be sought, such as those newly discovered in the Middle East. The other, to which Day unfortunately allied himself, supported the uninformed, and ultimately criminal, activities of Dr William Forbes-Leslie (1865-1944), who claimed the answer lay in retorting oil from Jurassic oil-shales exposed in Norfolk and elsewhere in England. Day joined the board of English Oilfields Ltd but was forced to resign in 1923 when it became clear that there was no oil in these shales. Day now sank into the oblivion which surrounded him at his death, at 1 St George's Road, St Margaret's-on-Thames, Middlesex, on Christmas day 1946, aged ninety-one. He was buried on new year's day at Teddington cemetery. His career provides a fine example of the complexities facing the inventor and entrepreneur. 


@@@@@


doc= 53546


Tooley, Henry (d. 1551), merchant adventurer and burgess, about whose early life little is known, is first heard of as a merchant in 1515, but it is likely that he was born in the 1470s, possibly in Catton, near Norwich. The Tooley family marriages suggest a comfortable background, with good Suffolk and Norfolk connections. Tooley's sister Joan was married twice to Yarmouth merchants, the second of whom, Ralph Dene, was three times bailiff of Yarmouth. Another sister, Margaret, married about 1500 William Rede, a merchant of Beccles with wealthy Norwich merchant relations. Margaret's children provided Tooley with useful connections: her son, William (died 1543), became a London mercer who did business for Tooley in the Low Countries and married Anne Fernely of West Creeting; Anne Fernely's sister married Sir Nicholas Bacon and Anne herself married Thomas Gresham as her second husband. Tooley's subsequent connections with the Greshams included assistance with a court case involving Sir Richard Gresham in 1544, and financial dealings with Thomas Gresham, to whom Tooley lent money between 1547 and 1551 and left his only non-family legacy. Margaret's daughter Jane married Robert Daundy (died 1558), a member of a leading merchant family in Ipswich; he became a business colleague of Tooley's and was an executor of his will. Henry Tooley was married by 1525 to Alice Purpet (died 1566), daughter of John Purpet, a yeoman of Ipswich, and his wife, Alice. They had one son and two daughters, none of whom survived adolescence. Alice's family was sufficiently wealthy to use Sir Humphrey Wingfield (died 1545) as its lawyer. Alice's brother, John, also exported goods from Ipswich. 
Tooley's business life is exceptionally well documented. Ipswich town records show his official activities in the town from the 1520s to his death, customs accounts show his imports and exports, and taxation returns give information about his rising level of wealth. There are about twenty surviving business letters. His many legal cases illustrate the nature, scope, and problems of his dealings, in particular two cases involving his factors: the first one affected Simon Cowper, a merchant tailor of London, who traded for Tooley in Bilbao, San Sebastian, Pasajes, and Bordeaux from 1520 to 1522; the second case involved John Armiger in Antwerp between 1541 and 1544. A more unusual survival is his account book of 1521-51, which includes rare details of retail trade and the crewing, provisioning, and use of his ship, the 'Mary Walsingham', bought in Bordeaux in 1521, which Tooley used for trade with the Spanish and the French, and also for Icelandic fishing and trading. 
By 1520 Tooley was established in several areas of merchant activity. In the 1520s and 1530s his business was based on the annual import of wine and its sale to retailers and households in the Ipswich hinterland. He also dealt in fish, iron, woad, and salt. In this traditional trade the woad was used to buy coloured woollen cloth from Suffolk, and the salt was used for the fishing trade. The wine, woad, and iron were paid for by the sale of cloth in local currencies or by direct barter of the cloths. Profits came from the retail sales of the wine, fish, miscellaneous household commodities, and dyestuffs, which were distributed largely through local carriers, who also collected payments and took orders. Goods also went by local water traffic to Norfolk, Suffolk, and Essex ports. In the 1540s this trade was disrupted by the war with France. Thereafter Tooley increased his cloth exports through London, to include Antwerp. He also expanded his imports of luxury goods, hitherto a lesser interest, and acted as a middleman in the cloth trade. He lent money at interest. At all periods he traded in miscellaneous goods, dyestuffs, and grain, where the opportunity arose. 
Three business letters and entries in Tooley's account book suggest that his wife, Alice, also played an active role in his business, supervising shipments, negotiating payments and deliveries, and collecting debts. Later, as a widow in Mary's reign, Alice suffered for her protestant beliefs. Foxe's 'Actes and Monumentes' of 1563 says that Mistress Tooley, widow, was persecuted out of Ipswich and her name was on a list of the town's active protestants in 1558 who had fled the town. However, there is no evidence that Henry, who died two years before Mary came to rule, had suffered for his religious beliefs. 
Tooley was first chosen for a town office in 1521; in 1523 he was elected to the Twenty Four (as the town's governing body or corporation was called); and then he became one of the twelve portmen. In 1534 possibly, and in 1542 and 1548 definitely, he served as one of the two bailiffs. In 1546 and 1549 he was one of the six town justices. In the 1540s taxation lists he was the highest burgess taxpayer in Ipswich. 
Tooley died at Ipswich in August 1551, and was buried there in the church of St Mary Quay. At the time of his death, he was owed over $2000, and had about $400 in goods, $200 in plate, and $500 in gold money. His land was valued at $46 per annum from two manors totalling 900 acres (in 11 villages) purchased in 1548; he also had four properties let in Ipswich to two brewers, a clothmaker, and the master of the grammar school, in addition to his own house in the parish of St Mary Quay. In his will of November 1550 Tooley bequeathed about $100 to his relatives, $100 to the poor, and $220 for road and bridge repairs; he left a fifth of his income to his wife for her life, while the remainder of his wealth and all his property went to found a philanthropic trust, which became known as Tooley's Foundation. Not surprisingly, his family challenged his will, but in 1556 a start was made on almshouses for ten disabled persons. In 1562 an indenture was drawn up by Lord Keeper Bacon, setting out arrangements for the management of the trust by wardens chosen annually from the aldermen and the Twenty Four and for regular inspections by writ of chancery. In 1569 money from the Tooley fund was used to buy an old Dominican friary and in it to establish Christ's Hospital for the sick, a school for the poor, and a workhouse. Other donors to the trust contributed further almshouses and a library. The nearby grammar school eventually used part of the site. Individual grants from the fund were made for medicine, pensions, for outdoor poor relief, and for education. This provided the bulk of the social provision in the town until the 'Municipal Reform Act' of 1835. 
The almsmen thanked God daily that it pleased his 'holy spyryte to move and styrre the harte of Henry Tooley... to gyve landes and possessyons suffycent for a necessarye relesse of us thy poore servantes and to the performance of dyvers other dedes of charytie about this town' (Webb, 159). In February 1566 a memorial tomb for Henry Tooley was erected in the church of St Mary Quay, with a brass of the Tooley family and the epitaph, 'A marchant welthye, whose affayres God furtherid with successe' (ibid., 153). An important Suffolk merchant, Tooley made full use of his offices, of good lawyers, and of his family, his friends, and their connections, to amass a solid provincial fortune. 


@@@@@


doc= 53548


Joachim, Joseph (1831-1907), violinist, born in Kitsee, near Pressburg, on 28 June 1831, was the seventh of the eight children of Julius Joachim, a wool merchant, and his wife, Fanny. After the family moved to Pest in 1833 he began violin lessons with Stanislaw Serwaczynski, and he made his first public appearance in 1839, playing a double concerto by Friedrich Eck with his teacher. He then studied in Vienna with Hauser, George Hellmesberger, and Joseph Boehm, and from 1843 in Leipzig, where Mendelssohn's direct involvement in his progress profoundly influenced his musical and intellectual development. 
Joachim began his long and fruitful relationship with England in 1844. Mendelssohn's letter of recommendation referred to 'his promise of a noble service to art'. After two insignificant public appearances, Joachim made his real London debut, under Mendelssohn's conductorship, at the Philharmonic concert of 27 May in the then rarely performed Beethoven violin concerto (playing his own cadenzas). The review in the 'Illustrated London News' described him as 'a little boy of thirteen, who perhaps is the first violin player, not only of his age, but of his 'siecle'.... His tone is of the purest 'cantabile' character; his execution is most marvellous, and at the same time unembarrassed; his style is chaste, but deeply impassioned at moments; and his deportment is that of a conscious, but modest genius! (Fuller Maitland, 8)' Joachim visited England twice more (1847 and 1849) before assuming the leadership of Liszt's orchestra in Weimar in 1849; but, disillusioned with the so-called New German School, he served as Konzertmeister in Hanover from 1853 to 1866. About 1854 he converted from Judaism to Christianity. In 1863 he married the contralto Amalie Weiss 
(Schneeweiss; 1839-1899)
, from whom he separated in 1884. The great success of his visits to England in 1852, 1858, and 1859 led him, from 1862, to make them an annual event. By this time Joachim's unchallengeable pre-eminence among modern violinists was beginning to be widely acknowledged in England. Haweis, for instance, observed in 'Music and Morals' in 1871: 'M. Joachim is the greatest living violinist; no man is so nearly to the execution of music what Beethoven was to its composition. There is something massive, complete and unerring about M. Joachim that lifts him out of the list of great players, and places him on a pedestal apart. Other men have their specialities; he has none. Others rise above or fall below themselves; he is always himself, neither less nor more. He wields the sceptre of his bow with the easy royalty of one born to reign; he plays Beethoven's concerto with the rapt infallible power of a seer delivering his oracle, and he takes his seat at a quartet very much like Apollo entering his chariot to drive the horses of the sun. (Haweis, 504)' It seemed possible in the late 1860s that Joachim might make his permanent home in England. However, his assumption of the directorship of the newly established Hochschule fur Ausubende Tonkunst in 1868 established him in Berlin, where he soon founded the Joachim Quartet. In London, Joachim led another regular quartet (with Louis Ries, Ludwig Strauss, and Alfredo Piatti) for many years at the Popular Concerts. Cambridge University awarded him an honorary doctorate in music in 1877, on which occasion he conducted Brahms's first symphony. He later received doctorates from Oxford and Glasgow. In 1904 a special concert was given at the Queen's Hall to celebrate the sixtieth anniversary of his appearance in England, which included his overture 'Henry IV', and in which he played the Beethoven concerto. As a composer he made little impact, but as a musician his influence on British musical life was profound. He provided an authoritative example of 'purity of style without pedantry; fidelity of interpretation combined with a powerful individuality' (Grove, 'Dict. mus.'). From 1900 he visited London annually with his Berlin Quartet, and in 1906 they gave a series of Brahms's complete chamber music at the Queen's Hall. A planned visit the following year was prevented by Joachim's illness, and he died in Berlin on 15 August 1907. He was buried in the cemetery of the Kaiser Wilhelm Gedachtnisskirche, Charlottenburg, Berlin, on 19 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 53551


Moyes, Henry (1749/50-1807), lecturer on natural philosophy, was born near Kirkcaldy in Fife, one of three sons and a daughter of Henry Moyes (died 1774). The latter was tenant at Westmill of Abbotshall, near Kirkcaldy, and a nonconformist. Moyes was left blinded by smallpox in infancy, but he apparently distinguished himself at Kirkcaldy grammar school. In 1793 Dr James Currie described how 'when Dr Adam Smith was writing his profound work on the 'Wealth of Nations' at Kirkaldy ['sic'] in Scotland, he used to wander in the evenings -- In these excursions, a blind boy of the village of humble situation, but of great ingenuity, became his constant companion. He became attached to this boy; gave him some instruction himself, and directed his education throughout -- In due time he sent him with letters to Hume to the University of Edinburgh. Hume got him what is called a Bursary... and exerted all his characteristic benevolence in his favour. After a few years residence in Edinburgh Smith removed him to Glasgow and furnished him with letters to Dr Reid. He was again equally fortunate, and after many years residence between the two Universities, in due time, the blind man, became a Dr. of physic. This was Moyes. (Dr James Currie to Thomas Creevey, 24 Feb 1793, Lpool RO, Currie MS 920 CUR)' No record of Moyes's university attendance has been discovered. One account stated that 'in early life he undoubtedly acquired the fundamental principles of mechanics, music, and the languages; and displayed a knowledge of geometry, algebra, optics, astronomy, chemistry, and in short most of the branches of Newtonian philosophy' (Kay, 177). As his blindness precluded Moyes from practising medicine, he became, in Edinburgh, a lecturer on chemistry and natural philosophy, relying on an assistant for the demonstrations. 
In 1779 Moyes left for England, and lectured all round the country. A contemporary remarked: 'Dr Henry Moyes, the elegant reader on philosophical chemistry... excelled in the charms of conversation; was happy in his allusions to visual objects; and discoursed on the nature, composition, and beauty of colours, with pertinence and precision. Doctor Moyes was a striking instance of the power, the human soul possesses, of finding resources of satisfaction, even under the most rigorous calamities. (Bew, 168-71)' In 1783 Joseph Priestley introduced him to Sir Joseph Banks, president of the Royal Society, as: 'an excellent lecturer in philosophy... a phenomenon... being quite blind, and yet superior to most who see. He is a man of most amiable disposition, and tho' he cannot himself make many experiments, he gets them made for him by an assistant, so that none of his hearers ever complain on that account. (Joseph Priestley to Joseph Banks, 6 Feb 1783, NHM, Dawson Turner MS 3, fol. 17)' Through travel and introductions he joined the network of the men of science. From Manchester he went to Birmingham, where he encountered members of the Lunar Society, but James Watt found him argumentative. 
Perhaps Moyes's political radicalism (which may have angered Watt) was the motive behind his visit to the fledgeling United States of America (1784-6). He lectured to rapturous success in Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Princeton, and Charleston, South Carolina, before returning to England. In 1789 he gave two courses of lectures in Dublin. His lectures in Newcastle upon Tyne in 1780 and 1793 proved influential, and he was elected among the first honorary members of the local literary and philosophical society in 1795. Similarly, at Hull in 1792 Moyes appears to have been a prime mover in the formation of a Society for the Purpose of Literary Information, was elected its first president, and had his portrait done by John Russell. During his last decade Moyes travelled extensively, accompanied by his assistant, William Nicol. He spent part of each year recuperating in Fife, where he had acquired Lumbenny, a small property. He never married. He died in Doncaster, where he was holding a lecture course, on 10 December 1807, aged fifty-seven. He was buried in the town on 14 December. 
As he never published, Moyes's reputation faded with his memory. More recently, with increasing historical interest in the rise of science in British provincial culture, his role has been reassessed, in particular by Inkster: he was one of a group of itinerant lecturers who helped the ideas of the literary and philosophical movement further permeate the social spectrum, to assist the beginnings of the mechanics' institutes. 


@@@@@


doc= 53552


Robinson, Elihu (1734-1809), meteorologist and horticulturist, was born on 21 October 1734 at Kirby, near Cockermouth, Cumberland, the son of Samuel and Elizabeth Robinson of Kirby. After his marriage to Ruth Mark of Bowscale on 5 July 1757, the couple lived at Eaglesfield, Cumberland, where Robinson farmed. He also had interests in mining and business, which his diaries suggest brought him little profit. He was an educated man with an extensive library, and has been regarded as the archetypal Quaker yeoman of the period. Lonsdale described him 'decked out in his three-cocked beaver, light drab coat, vest and knee breeches, yellowish-grey ribbed stockings, and silver-buckled shoes, all in the best style of rich Quakerism, fine and spotless, and walking in sober fashion through the village with silver-headed cane in support. (Lonsdale, 35)' This flamboyant description is in direct contrast to Wigham's opinion of the man she labelled 'The Recluse of Eaglesfield' (Wigham, 'Examiner', 1890, 547). Robinson played an important role in the local Quaker community, and represented Cumberland at the London yearly meetings on eleven occasions between 1759 and 1789. 
Robinson is recognized as the first tutor to John Dalton (1766-1844), who Wigham suggests appears to have been a distant relative; in correspondence Dalton himself refers to Robinson as his 'Dear Cousin'. Dalton was born in Eaglesfield and from the age of ten regularly visited Robinson for lessons in literature, science, and mathematics, and as Elihu and Ruth had no children of their own they undoubtedly enjoyed the company of the young boy. Even when based in Manchester, where he taught from 1793, Dalton continued to consult Robinson about meteorological and other scientific matters, including his own colour blindness. 
Robinson corresponded for more than forty years with the London banker Thomas Collinson (1727-1803) on matters of scientific interest. Collinson knew Joseph Banks, Daniel Solander, and Benjamin Franklin, and sent details of his meetings with them to Robinson, including notices of voyages of exploration and interesting fossil finds. Collinson supplied Robinson with a microscope in July 1759, the accompanying letter indicating that both men were interested in 'the minute world, which testifies that nature is never more perfect than in her least performances' (Wigham, 'Examiner', 1891, 407). However, Robinson's major scientific preoccupation was meteorology: Lonsdale noted that he was 'probably one of the first of Cumberland's meteorologists... recording the readings of thermometer and barometer, marking the seasons and the crops, and many natural phenomena, moreover he had considerable manipulative skill' (Lonsdale, 35). Robinson makes little of his scientific achievements in a letter to Thomas Collinson in 1763, stating that his 'delight was greater in ethics or moral philosophy than in natural science' (Wigham, 'Examiner', 1892, 80-81). Robinson died in Eaglesfield on 20 July 1809. 


@@@@@


doc= 53560


Musker, Harold (1897-1970), banker, was born in Bootle, Lancashire, on 10 March 1897, to Charles Musker, a civil and mechanical engineer, and his wife, Lizzie Ethel. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School until the age of seventeen, when he joined London County and Westminster Bank in December 1914. He was married twice: first to Julia Agnes Draddy in 1927, from whom he was divorced, and then, on 26 December 1946, to Bertha Keith, 'nee' Strachan, a widow with two young sons. He had at least a daughter. 
Between November 1915 and May 1919, Musker served in the Royal Artillery, winning the Military Cross in France. He then spent a year working in London, studying shorthand, and working in Greece for the United States shipping board. 
In December 1920 Musker joined the Imperial Bank of Persia, later called the British Bank of the Middle East (BBME), and he was soon posted to Bombay. When he left in 1923, he worked for nearly two years in the bank's London office, before becoming manager of the small Barforush branch in Persia in March 1925. Reputedly one of the brightest of the bank's juniors, he rose rapidly in its service, despite an apparently abrasive and argumentative manner. 
After experience in Duzdab, Basrah, Khorramshahr, Kermanshah, Shiraz, and Tehran, where he was assistant and later travelling inspector, Musker became acting deputy chief manager in April 1939. Confirmed in this post in July 1939, he spent the war years in London, serving as acting chief manager between May and October of 1945. In June 1946 he requested a transfer from the bank's foreign service to the London office for personal reasons. Normally this would have blighted his career prospects, but he was by then an experienced member of staff, and was within reach of the chief managership. As a result, Musker joined the London office in April 1947, becoming sub-manager in October of that year. The manager-secretary was a sick man, and over the next few years Musker's influence grew. In January 1951, he was appointed acting London manager and secretary, being confirmed as such in October of that year. He became the bank's first general manager and secretary in July 1952. 
Musker has been described as a 'short, plump and introspective man, who was both decisive and dictatorial' (Jones, 38). He exerted great influence over the affairs of the bank, because of his autocratic inclinations and the fact that the average age of the board was relatively high. He was not a great innovator, however. His banking and political judgements were no different from those of most men of his time. Nor did he move in overseas banking circles. His significance lay rather in the fact that he supported and continued the expansion of the bank, which had already started, and which transformed it from a purely Persian into a Middle Eastern institution following the discovery of oil. He was prepared to take the risks of expansion in spite of the political uncertainties of the Middle East, a policy which reaped its reward when the bank was forced out of Iran in 1952. During his time as general manager, thirteen new branches were opened, and the bank went back in to Iran with a joint-venture subsidiary. 
Musker quickly established his authority over the bank's board. Members were told only enough for them to come to the decision that he wanted, and he usually got his own way. Indeed, when the then chairman espoused the cause of amalgamation with Chartered Bank, and Musker, finding out at the last minute, objected, it was the chairman who resigned, and Musker who orchestrated the failure of the plan. Musker was furious, C. F. Warr thought, 'chiefly because he had not been consulted and second because he did not like the Chartered Bank' (Jones, 76). 
Musker was, however, as enthusiastic about merger with the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank as he was obstructive over that with Chartered. He considered that Chartered, on merger with BBME, would get rid of him and other senior staff, whereas the Hong Kong Bank had had close links with BBME since the 1890s (Jones, 78). Musker's preferred option materialized and, circulating the staff the day before the merger was announced, he assured them that the BBME would keep its identity and nobody would lose their job. Musker's own position was secure, and indeed he was elected to the BBME's board in July 1960. 
Musker retired as general manager in December 1961, and from BBME's board in 1966, settling at Riverlea, Newtown Road, Warwash, Fareham, Hampshire. He died on 30 July 1970 at the General Hospital, Southampton; he was survived by his second wife. 


