@@@@@


doc= 53561


Barnes, Sir Hugh Shakespear (1853-1940), administrator in India and banker, was born in Shahjahanpur, India, the son of James Ralph Barnes of the Indian Civil Service. His mother was sister of Sir Rivers Thompson (1827-1890), sometime governor of Bengal. 
Barnes was a member of one of those families mentioned by Kipling in 'The Tomb of his Ancestors' in 'The Day's Work' as serving India 'generation after generation'. His great-grandfather on his maternal side was George Nisbet Thompson, private secretary to Warren Hastings; his father was brother of George Carnac Barnes CB, who served in the Indian mutiny as commissioner of the Cis-Sutlej states and was foreign secretary in Lord Canning's government. 
Educated at Malvern College, in 1871 Barnes came top of the list in the competitive Indian Civil Service examination. He joined the Indian Civil Service in Allahabad in 1874 and in less than two years had been selected by Sir John Strachey, then finance member of Lord Lytton's government, to be his private secretary. He married twice, first, in 1878, Winifred, daughter of Sir John Strachey; she died in Calcutta in 1892, leaving a son and a daughter, and second, in 1894, his cousin, Edith Helen, daughter of the Revd Reginald Henry Barnes, with whom he had two sons, including the radio and television director Sir George Reginald Barnes. 
A distinguished career in the Indian Civil Service, during which Barnes was revenue commissioner for Baluchistan under Sir Robert Sandeman, administrator and reformer, culminated in his being appointed foreign secretary to the government of India in 1900, president of the central committee for the Delhi durbar in 1903, and lieutenant-governor of Burma in the same year. He was created KCVO for his work for the Delhi durbar, and was credited with his KCSI earlier that year. For his service in Baluchistan -- consolidating Sandeman's work, raising the standards of administration, and conciliating in the affairs of the chiefs -- a bronze statue of Sir Hugh was unveiled in Quetta in 1904. 
During his time as lieutenant-governor of Burma, Barnes recognized that communications were an imperative for the material advance of a country so rich in natural resources. He formulated a number of development projects, and impressed on the government of India the necessity of increasing the allocation for public works in Burma. 
In 1905, on his appointment to the Council of India in Whitehall, Barnes resigned from Burma. While he was a member of the council, he was able to use his experience of India to criticize constructively the Morley-Minto reforms, which, among other improvements, broadened the basis of Indian government and allowed Indians to sit on the central legislative council. 
In 1913, before his term was due to end, Barnes resigned from the council in order to take up work in the City. He was already on the board of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (APOC), to which he was appointed in 1909; he now joined the boards of the Burmah Oil Company and the Imperial Bank of Persia. He became chairman of the bank in 1916, and served until 1937, and remained on the boards of both the bank and APOC, at that time the two most important institutions in Persia, until his death. He was also chairman of Tankers Ltd and of the Scottish-American Oil Transport Company, as well as director of many associated undertakings, and of the Anglo-Malay Rubber and Royal Insurance companies. On account of these directorships, and his chairmanship of the Imperial Bank, he became an important figure in the City. He used his considerable influence whenever required, notably in retaining Britain's commitment to Mesopotamia in 1920. Given his large interests in middle eastern oil and banking, this was not surprising. 
Sir Hugh Barnes died at his residence, 19 Sheffield Terrace, London, on 15 February 1940, aged eighty-six. He was survived by his second wife and his four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 53562


Earp, Thomas (1830-1910), maltster and politician, was born on 7 May 1830 at Muskham Grange, Muskham, near Newark-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire, the only son of William Earp, gardener at Muskham Grange, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of James Taylor. Shortly after Thomas's birth, the family moved to Osmaston Hall, near Derby. Thomas Earp was educated at the village school, where his many talents were soon evident. By the age of ten, he led the choir at Osmaston church and was a proficient violinist. Through the patronage of the vicar, he progressed to the Traffic Street School, Derby, and thence to Derby Diocesan (later Grammar) School. However, the opportunity to train for clerical orders was refused. 
At the age of sixteen Earp began his career as junior clerk with the Newark wine and spirits merchant and maltster, George Harvey. Within two years, he had replaced the firm's Manchester malt agent and was soon managing the rapidly expanding malting business. In conjunction with Joseph Richardson and W. Slater, he also leased the town's Trent Brewery and in 1862-80 was a partner in the brewing enterprise, Richardson, Earp, and Slater. In 1872 he became a partner in Harvey and Earp. When George Harvey died eight years later, the firm was amalgamated with the neighbouring business of William Gilstrap to form the most prestigious malting enterprise in Britain. Earp relinquished his brewing interests, and remained as managing partner of Gilstrap, Earp & Co. until his retirement in 1905. 
Earp was a man of tremendous energy, whose ambitions were equally realized in politics and civic life. Indeed, there are few more representative examples of a self-made Victorian businessman and politician. A staunch Liberal, he was a town councillor from 1864 until his death forty-six years later, alderman from 1889 until 1910, and mayor in 1869 and 1891-2. He was also a member of Nottinghamshire's county council on its formation in 1889. First returned as MP for Newark in 1874, he represented the town for eleven years. In the Commons he worked and voted with the extreme radicals, counting Joseph Chamberlain, Sir Charles Dilke, and the famous temperance reformer, Sir Wilfred Lawson, among his closest political allies. When in 1885 Newark lost its separate representation, despite requests to stand for Peckham, Canterbury and Grantham, Earp opted to fight the Newark division, but was soundly beaten. 
According to his obituarist, no man influenced the course of events in Newark during this period more than Earp. An 'advocate and initiator of new forces' ('Newark Advertiser', 23 Feb 1910), he was a relentless, if controversial, reformer. He resigned from the county council after failing to establish the county asylum at Newark and, a proponent of a national system of free education and opposed to sectarianism, he took his reforming zeal to the newly created school board. He was also instrumental in the town's purchase and modernization of the local waterworks, erection of the new workhouse, and acquisition of the market tolls from the duke of Newcastle. His interests were widespread: a JP, commissioner of the River Trent Navigation, and secretary of the Newark Agricultural Society, he served on the museum, library, and infirmary and workhouse committees. He was vice-president of the Newark School of Science and Art and, as chairman of the governors, donated $10,000 towards modernizing the historic Magnus School. 
Earp married Martha (died 1888), daughter of Thomas Weightman of Langford, in 1855. There were no children. He was survived by his second wife, Mary Rowland Wade, the daughter of Charles Wade of Skegsby, Nottinghamshire, and their son, Thomas. Following a severe attack of bronchitis, Earp died on 17 February 1910, at his home, White House, Millgate, Newark-on-Trent, and was buried at Newark cemetery on 22 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 53563


Gilstrap, Sir William, baronet (1816-1896), maltster, was born on 20 December 1816 at The Hotel, Kirkgate, Newark-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire, the eldest surviving son of the eight children of Joseph Gilstrap (1785-1869), wine merchant and maltster, and his first wife, Elizabeth, second daughter of William Welsh, of Leake, Lancashire. William and his brother George (1822-1864) were educated locally before joining the family business. William worked initially in the wine trade, but was soon attracted to his father's newest venture, malting. 
Situated on the River Trent, and at the heart of prime barley land, Newark had for long been an important malting centre, but the coming of the railways and the parallel expansion of the brewing industry in Burton upon Trent underpinned a rapid rise in the demand for malt. Few exploited the new opportunities better than Gilstrap. The first malting was purchased in 1834. Eight years later, Gilstrap & Sons acquired the substantial business of William Brodhurst, with maltings at Newark and Mansfield. Large modern maltings were built at Newark, and others leased at Lincoln, Retford, Wakefield, and Grimsby. Then in 1880, after the death of its senior partner, George Harvey, Gilstrap acquired the Newark business of Harvey and Earp. The new partnership of Gilstrap, Earp & Co. (of which Thomas Earp became managing partner), producing around 100,000 quarters of malt a year, was the largest in Britain. In the jubilee honours of 1887, Gilstrap was created a baronet for his services to the malting industry. 
Gilstrap was enterprising and ambitious. He remained as senior partner in Gilstrap, Earp & Co. until his death in 1896 but, from the 1860s, adopted the lifestyle of a landowning gentleman. In 1847 he married Elizabeth (1822-1891), fourth daughter of Thomas Haigh of Colnebridge House, Huddersfield, and lived in some style in South Parade, Newark. Eight years later he purchased a country house and 20 acres at nearby Winthorpe; in 1862 he bought from Lord John Manners for $85,000 the 1600 acre Fornham Park estate near Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk. The following year he added the nearby Herringswell estate -- 2400 acres of light land, which he developed as a fine shoot -- and in 1868 acquired a further 600 acres at Fornham All Saints. Gilstrap threw himself wholeheartedly into Suffolk life; he was appointed a JP, deputy lieutenant, and, in 1867, high sheriff of the county. That same year, Fornham was the venue for the Royal Agricultural Society's annual show. He was a genial host, and his wife, Elizabeth, was renowned for her charm and wit. The estate became famous for its shooting parties, and a favourite with the prince of Wales and his brothers, who for many years were regular visitors. 
Although never deeply involved in politics, Gilstrap broke with family tradition and became a lifelong supporter of the Liberal cause. He was a generous benefactor, supporting many charities and institutions, including the Newark and Bury hospitals, the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC), the Imperial Institute, and Bury Athenaeum Council. On its formation in 1882 he gave $3500 to the Royal School of Music to found the Suffolk scholarship, and in same year donated $16,000 to build and endow the Newark Free Library and create the Castle Gardens. 
William and Elizabeth Gilstrap were childless. When in 1889 his niece Isabella (1861-1949), second daughter of his deceased brother George, married John, second son of Duncan MacRae of Karnes Castle, Bute, MacRae became a partner in Gilstrap, Earp & Co. Under the terms of Gilstrap's will, MacRae assumed the additional name of Gilstrap and inherited his business interests. The Fornham estate eventually passed to Isabella's sister, Anna, and her husband, George Espee Manners, nephew of the duke of Rutland. Gilstrap died at his home, Fornham Park, on 15 February 1896, and was buried at Fornham St Martin church on 20 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 53564


Sir Joseph Terry (1828-1898), was born in York on 7 January 1828, and educated at St Peter's School. He then joined the family firm, which in 1851 had 127 employees. After an interregnum when it was run by executors, Joseph and his two younger brothers took control of the firm in 1854. That year he married Frances, the daughter of Dr Joseph Goddard of London; they had three sons before she died in 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 53565


Vining family (per. 1807-1915), actors, flourished in London during the nineteenth century. The common ancestors were Charles Vining, a silversmith in Kirby Street, Hatton Garden, and his wife, Mary. They had eight children, all of whom were connected with the theatre. The Miss E. Vining ('fl'. 1798-1806) who appears in the records at Drury Lane as a dancer and singer was probably one of them. 


@@@@@


doc= 53567


Mills, James Philip (1890-1960), anthropologist, was born on 18 February 1890 at Oak Lea, Norbury Moor, Norbury, Cheshire, the younger son of James Edward Mills, hat manufacturer and later owner of Mills steelworks and Bredbury Hall, near Stockport, and his wife, Ada Smith, who was fatally injured in a carriage accident and died the day after giving birth to her son. He was educated at Winchester College (1903-8) and at Corpus Christi College, Oxford (1909-12), and entered the Indian Civil Service in 1913. He served as a trooper in the Jumna valley light horse throughout the First World War. By 1916, however, he was working in the Naga hills in Assam, where he later became deputy commissioner. Inspired by his colleague John Henry Hutton, by his friendship with the curator of the Pitt Rivers Museum at Oxford, Henry Balfour, and by the practical necessity of advising and arbitrating issues on the borders of the British empire, he soon became interested in anthropology. 
During his numerous trips through administered and unadministered areas of the Naga hills, Mills was in a unique position to examine a vanishing world, full of extraordinary beauty and violence, among forest-dwelling groups of enormous diversity. The first of his classic monographs, 'The Lhota Nagas', was published in 1922, and was followed by 'The Ao Nagas' in 1926. In 1926 he advised the government on the administration of the Chittagong Hill Tracts. He became acting deputy commissioner of Cachar (1927-8), and was made honorary director of ethnography for Assam in 1930, when he returned to the Naga hills and worked on his monograph 'The Rengma Nagas' (1937). On 2 November 1930 he married Pamela Moira (1903-1992), daughter of John Foster-Vesey-Fitzgerald, of Moyrhea, co. Clare. They had three daughters, one of whom died at the age of fifteen. He became secretary to the government of Assam in 1932. He was made CIE (1941) and CSI (1947), and in 1942 was awarded the Rivers medal of the Royal Anthropological Institute. In 1943 he was appointed adviser to the governor of Assam for tribal areas and states. He was in Assam during the Second World War, an area engaged in some of the heaviest fighting of the war. He retired from India in 1947 and became a lecturer (1948) and then a reader (1950) in anthropology at the School of Oriental and African Studies in London. He was president of the Royal Anthropological Institute from 1951 to 1953. In 1954 he retired to Dorset, where he spent time on the gardening and fishing which had always been his hobbies. He died at his home, East House, Sydling St Nicholas, near Dorchester, on 12 May 1960, and was cremated in Weymouth. 
Mills's closest associate in Assam, J. H. Hutton, wrote of him: 'Mills made an admirable colleague in administration. Apart from his practical and intellectual ability, his never failing sense of humour, his wit and his good temper in trying circumstances made him an invaluable companion' (Hutton). His three great Naga monographs are superb examples of ethnographic writing: clear, learned, a mine of facts and interpretations. Along with his numerous articles, they constitute over 2000 pages of careful documentation of the various groups living on the borders of India and Burma. They remain an invaluable source. They are supplemented by the valuable collections of Naga objects which he gave to the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford, which, with those given by Hutton, make this perhaps the widest and deepest collection of objects on any particular people in any anthropology museum in Britain. Mills, like Hutton, was a keen amateur photographer; several hundred photographs (now at the School of Oriental and African Studies, London), which complement the collections of Hutton, Christoph von Furer-Haimendorf (whom he helped and inspired), Ursula Graham Bower, and W. G. Archer, again provide invaluable documentation of the first encounters with the Nagas. 


@@@@@


doc= 53568


Hutton, John Henry (1885-1968), anthropologist, was born on 27 June 1885 at West Heslerton, Malton, Yorkshire, the son of Joseph Henry Hutton, a Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Clarissa Marshall, 'nee' Barwick. He was educated at Chigwell School and at Worcester College, Oxford, where he took a third in modern history in 1907. He became a member of the Indian Civil Service in 1909 and spent most of his administrative career in Assam, on the border between India and Burma, particularly in the Naga hills. From 1917 to 1919 he was political officer with responsibility for the Kuki operations. He became increasingly interested in the culture and society of the peoples with whom he worked, and with the encouragement of Henry Balfour, the curator of the Pitt Rivers Museum, who visited him in the Naga hills, decided to document their lives in various ways. From 1920 onwards he wrote many articles about the Nagas, and in 1921 published two seminal monographs, 'The Angami Nagas' and 'The Sema Nagas'. On 6 March 1920 he married a widow, Stella Eleanora (died 1944), daughter of the Revd Rhys Bishop. They had two sons and a daughter. 
Hutton's most important administrative work came when he was appointed census commissioner for the census of India in 1929, a position he held until 1933. The first and third parts of the first volume of the census report bear the clear imprint of Hutton; he played a vital role in collating and organizing the mammoth undertaking. He applied the knowledge he had gained in this work in the writing of his most frequently cited book, 'Caste in India' (1946; 4th edn, 1963), which anticipated many subsequent developments in the field, for example concerning the diversity of caste groups and their hierarchical ordering. He also played an important part in the discussions which determined the treatment of the tribal populations of India in the legislation concerning scheduled castes and scheduled tribes and their rights during the fifteen years before independence. 
In 1936 Hutton resigned from the Indian Civil Service, and took up the prestigious William Wyse chair of social anthropology in Cambridge, becoming the second holder of the post and successor to another Naga expert, T. C. Hodson. He was elected a fellow of St Catharine's College at that time, and an honorary fellow in 1951. In the department of anthropology he built up connections with students being trained for the colonial civil service and encouraged, among other things, the teaching of material culture. His distinction as an anthropologist was recognized by the award of the degree of DSc by Oxford University, and his presidency of the Royal Anthropological Institute (1944-5). He had won the Rivers memorial medal of the institute in 1929. He gave the Frazer memorial lecture in 1938, and in 1932 won the silver medal of the Royal Society of Arts. His first wife died in 1944, and on 7 December 1945 Hutton married Maureen Margaret O'Reilly ('b'. 1901/2), an assistant museum curator. He retired from his professorship in 1950, and died on 23 May 1968 at his home, 4 Rectory Lane, New Radnor, in Radnorshire, the county of which he had been high sheriff in 1943. 
It is clear from a number of sources that Hutton became very involved with the lives, diverse histories, and cultures of the various tribal groups who lived in the eastern Himalayas. He became interested in their connections with other megalithic cultures in south-east Asia and Oceania, and wrote important articles on the possible links between them. He provided important clues to the function of head-hunting in the area. He worked closely with, and guided, his younger colleague John Philip Mills, and inspired the next generation of experts in the area, particularly Christoph von Furer-Haimendorf. The monographs of these three writers covered most of the major Naga tribes, the Angami, Sema, Lhota, Ao, Rengma, and Konyak. Hutton's ethnography and deep knowledge of the people he wrote about evidently set a very high standard. As well as these extensive writings, Hutton, Mills, and Haimendorf set out to collect objects, from the everyday to the ornate. Most of Hutton's extensive collections are in the Pitt Rivers Museum at Oxford, where many of his photographs and some rare wax cylinder recordings which he made are also to be found. Combined with the detailed reports of his tours and other administrative papers in the Oriental and India Office collections at the British Library, his work helped to make the Nagas one of the best documented tribal groups in the world. This is particularly important since he was working just at the point when an ancient and forest-dwelling population, enormously rich in its material culture and varied in every way, was being incorporated into the British empire. 


@@@@@


doc= 53570


Taylor, John (1808-1887), leader of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, was born on 1 November 1808 in Milnthorpe, Westmorland, the second of the ten children of James Taylor (1773-1870), excise officer and farmer, and his wife, Agnes Taylor (1787-1868), daughter of John Taylor of Pooley, Barton, Westmorland, and his wife, Agnes Whittington. John was christened at the Heversham parish church on 4 December 1808. After formal schooling at Liverpool, then at Beetham, near Hale, Westmorland, where his family moved on to a small farm in 1819, he became a skilled wood-turner and cabinet-maker. After his apprenticeship in Penrith, Cumberland, he established his trade in Hale. 
Experiencing a strong religious awakening, Taylor joined the Methodist church at the age of sixteen and shortly thereafter became an exhorter, then a local preacher. He later recalled having a 'strong impression to go to America to preach the gospel' (Taylor, 267). He followed his parents to Toronto in Upper Canada in 1832, set up his trade, and continued his preaching for Methodism. While so engaged he met the gentle and refined Leonora Cannon, whom he married on 28 January 1833. Leonora was born on 6 October 1796 in Peel, Isle of Man, the oldest child of Captain George Cannon (1766-1811) and Leonora Callister (1775-1822). She had emigrated to Canada in 1832. John and Leonora were to have four children. 
In 1836 a Latter-Day Saint apostle named Parley P. Pratt preached the message of the restored gospel to the Taylors in Toronto. After thorough investigation, John became convinced of the truth of the message and was baptized a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. Shortly thereafter he was appointed to preside over several branches in Canada. This was the beginning of a half-century of devoted and valiant service in his newly found faith. 
In 1837 the Taylors moved to Far West, Missouri, where John was ordained as one of the church's twelve apostles on 19 December 1838. He was to hold this high office for over forty years. He played a prominent role in assisting the Saints as they fled mob persecutions to a new gathering place at Commerce (later Nauvoo), Illinois. 
In 1839 Taylor accepted a call to return to his native England as a missionary. He was based in Liverpool and preached the restored gospel here and in surrounding cities, including Manchester and Preston. He introduced the same message into Ireland and the Isle of Man, and extended his labours into Scotland. He gained a reputation as a powerful speaker, debater, and writer, and his work resulted in the conversion of many to Mormonism. He was to return again on a short-term mission to England in 1846-7, at which time he also ministered for a brief period in Wales. 
In 1841 Taylor rejoined his family and the Saints in Nauvoo, where he began a career of considerable community service as he continued his spiritual ministry. He was appointed as a city councilman, regent of the Nauvoo University, and judge-advocate in the Nauvoo Legion. In recognition of his literary talents he was appointed editor of the 'Times and Seasons' (1839-46), a Latter-Day Saint periodical, and he published a weekly, the 'Nauvoo Neighbor' (1843-5). 
In June 1844 Taylor was invited to accompany Joseph and Hyrum Smith to Carthage gaol, Illinois, where the Smiths were detained while awaiting a hearing involving the destruction of an anti-Mormon newspaper. Taylor was to assist with the legal proceedings. An angry mob attacked the gaol and murdered both Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Severely wounded himself, Taylor survived to continue his ministry in the church. 
Under intense persecution, the Latter-Day Saints left Nauvoo in the winter of 1846 and headed westward under the leadership of Brigham Young. Taylor's vigorous opposition to the tyranny of persecution during this and later periods gained him the title Champion of Liberty. 'I am God's free man,' he said; 'I cannot, will not be a slave' (Roberts, 424). Later, in 1847, he led one of the companies of pioneers to the Great Salt Lake valley and the free exercise of their religion. 
In 1849 Taylor was called to open France to the preaching of the restored gospel. He preached and published extensively both in Paris and, later, in Hamburg, Germany, overseeing the production of the 'Book of Mormon' in both French and German. After nearly three years he returned to the Salt Lake valley. In the summer of 1854 Taylor responded to yet another mission call, this time to the eastern states of America, with his headquarters in New York city. Here he published 'The Mormon' (1855-7), a periodical which did much to allay harsh feelings against the church. Upon his return to Utah he was appointed speaker of the house of representatives in the Utah territorial legislature for five successive sessions and remained a member until 1876. He was also elected as territorial superintendent of schools in 1877. 
In his private life Taylor was a kind and loving husband and father. He accepted the ancient biblical order of plural marriage when it was a revealed and authorized practice among Latter-Day Saints, and married several additional women. By seven of his wives -- Leonora Cannon (1796-1868), Elizabeth Kaighin (1811-1895), Jane Ballantyne (1813-1900), Mary Ann Oakley (1826-1911), Sophia Whitaker (1825-1887), Harriet Whitaker (1825-1882), and Margaret Young (1837-1919) -- he fathered thirty-five children. He went to great lengths to be fair and impartial while caring for each of his families. 
With the passing of Brigham Young in 1877, the mantle of church leadership fell upon John Taylor. In October 1880 he was sustained as the prophet and president of the church, the only president to this day born outside America. His ministry is notable for pushing forward with increased zeal work on temples; the further definition of priesthood responsibilities, such as holding of local weekly priesthood meetings and of monthly priesthood meetings in larger areas (stakes); further development of children and youth programmes; increase in missionary effort; assistance to the poor and those in debt; and his bold defence of the restored gospel in a time of intense government prosecution. 
Besides scores of articles and pamphlets on Mormonism, Taylor wrote 'The Government of God' (1852), in which he compared and contrasted the governmental systems of God and man; 'Items on Priesthood' (1881), a treatise on priesthood and especially the duties of a bishop; and 'Mediation and Atonement of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ' (1882), an assembling of scriptural passages with his own personal witness relating to the pre-eminent role of Christ in the salvation of humankind. A number of his talks and sermons are preserved in the 'Journal of Discourses' (1854-86), especially volumes 5-26, and a compilation of many of his writings and discourses is found in 'The Gospel Kingdom' (1943). 
John Taylor was nearly 6 feet tall, weighing 180 pounds, with high forehead, deep-set grey eyes, firm chin, and silvery white hair. He seemed an English gentleman, of affable and kindly manner and noble bearing, deeply resolute, an ardent lover of liberty, and possessed of great courage and determination. He was a bold advocate and defender of the faith he espoused. 
During Taylor's administration anti-polygamy legislation and prosecution increased. For what he felt was the public good, in the interests of peace, and out of his deep-felt conviction to abide by his religious principles rather than be subject to legalized persecution, Taylor went into self-imposed exile in 1885 to continue to lead the church. The strain took a great toll on his health. On 25 July 1887, after two and a half years in exile, he died in Kaysville, Utah, of congestive heart failure. He was eulogized as a 'double martyr' for his near-fatal wounds in Carthage gaol and for his sacrifice for religious principles. He was buried on 29 July 1887 in the Salt Lake City cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 53572


Ray, Gabrielle (1883-1973), actress, was born at Bamford Grange, Cheadle, Stockport, on 28 April 1883, the daughter of an iron merchant, William Austin Cook, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Holden. She made her first stage appearances as a child. In 1893 she took the part of Eveleen in John Hollingshead's short-lived operaticized version of 'The Green Bushes', 'Miami', in the West End. She also danced in Paul Valentine's Blackpool ballet and appeared as a winsome cupid in 'Little Red Riding Hood' at Richmond before graduating to almost adult roles in the touring companies of 'The Belle of New York' and 'The Casino Girl'. While still in her teens she was taken to London by the George Edwardes organization to understudy Gertie Millar in 'The Toreador' at the Gaiety Theatre. Having been promoted to the small but visible role as a suggestible ministerial secretary, Thisbe, in the next Gaiety musical, 'The Orchid' (1903), she moved across to the Prince of Wales Theatre to take over the number three female role in 'Lady Madcap', in which she performed the latest Parisian dance craze, La Maxixe, with Dorothy Craske. By the time of the production of 'The Little Cherub' (1906, in which she played the part of Lady Dorothy Congress) Gabs had become one of the most popular picture-postcard beauties of the day, and her role in that piece -- teamed with Zena Dare and Lily Elsie as the picturesque supporting daughters to the chief comedian -- reflected her new status. She had good supporting roles in 'See See' (1906, So-Hie) and 'Les merveilleuses' (1906, Egle) and headed the grisettes as the heels-upping Frou-Frou in 'The Merry Widow' (1907) before Edwardes cast her up a notch, in a full-scale song-and-dance (and even almost acting) part as the perky Daisy in 'The Dollar Princess' (1909). Miss Ray went on to appear alongside Phyllis Dare and Olive May in the Gaiety Theatre's 'Peggy' (1911, Polly Polino), but then took her leave of the stage to marry the almost aristocratic Eric Raymond Loder (1888-1966). The marriage was celebrated at St Edward's Roman Catholic Church, Windsor, on 1 March 1912, but it was not successful. Gabs returned to the stage four years later, attempting to pick up where she had left off, and appeared in Edwardes's production of 'Betty' (1916, Estelle) and in revue at the Hippodrome, but her moment of stamped and franked fame had passed, and her career soon faded away into variety and pantomime appearances and then into a long real retirement. She died on 21 May 1973 at Holloway Sanatorium, Egham, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 53578


Clifford, Camilla Antoinetta (c.1885-1971), actress, was born in Belgium, the daughter of Reynold Clifford. She was brought up in New York and became a chorus girl, appearing in 1902 in the musical comedy 'The Defender' at the Herald Square Theater in New York. In 1903 she won a beauty contest to find a Miss New York, organized by Charles Dana Gibson, the popular illustrator, whose drawings of 'the American Girl' from 1890 onwards had idealized American womanhood and had led millions of young women to copy her 'look'. When 'The Prince of Pilsen', a musical comedy by Frank Pixley, opened at the Broadway Theater, New York, in March 1903, Camille Clifford appeared in the chorus representing New York in 'The American Girl', also known as 'The Song of the Cities', in which a succession of girls paraded across the stage, each representing a different American city: they became known as the 'Gibson girls'. 
When 'The Prince of Pilsen' opened at the Shaftesbury Theatre in London in May 1904, Camille Clifford, with her hourglass figure (and reputedly an 11 inch waist) was a sensation: after the show closed at the end of September and the company returned to the United States she remained in London to join the cast of 'The Catch of the Season' by Seymour Hicks and Cosmo Hamilton. A musical comedy based on the story of Cinderella, this had opened a few weeks earlier at the Vaudeville Theatre. The characters included a Mr. William Gibson and his ten tall daughters, who paraded across the stage singing: '
Seeing we were proving a sensation 

We thought we might become a bigger one 

By walking in single file 

In the Dana Gibson style. 




We realize the pictures, tall and divinely fair, 

By society invited, we go everywhere, 

We've copied every detail, dress, stately walk, and curls 

And everybody calls us 'Dana Gibson Girls'. 

' Wearing very beautiful clothes designed by Lady Duff-Gordon following the fashions sketched by Charles Dana Gibson, and made by her firm, Mme Lucille of Hanover Square, the Gibson Girls became the most popular feature of the show when Camille Clifford took on the role of Miss Sylvia Gibson, appearing in a number, 'The Gibson Girl', written specially for her. Although her singing voice was non-existent, she was given a few lines to speak, and a new song, which declared: '
As she comes strolling down she sets their hearts in a whirl 

She is the cutest little pearl, Sylvia, the Gibson Girl. 

' 
'The Catch of the Season' was followed in 1906 by a new musical comedy, 'The Belle of Mayfair' by C. H. Brookfield and Cosmo Hamilton, a modern 'Romeo and Juliet', which opened at the Vaudeville Theatre in April 1906. In a part written specially for her Clifford played the Duchess of Dunmow, the American wife of an English duke, and was given a song 'Why do they Call me a Gibson Girl', and also sang 'I'm a duchess'. Her billing as 'the Original Gibson Girl' attracted so much publicity that the leading lady, Edna May, walked out of the show. 
Camille Clifford retired from the stage at the end of 1906 after touring in 'A Grand Flying Matinee', and on 11 October 1906 married the Hon. Henry Lyndhurst Bruce (1881-1914), eldest son of Henry Campbell Bruce, second Baron Aberdare. They had one daughter, Margaret, born in 1909, who died in infancy. A captain in the 3rd battalion, the Royal Scots, her husband was killed in action in December 1914. After his death she returned briefly to the stage, appearing in the music-hall 'The Girl of the Future' in 1916, but retired again in 1917 on her marriage on 9 August 1917 to Captain John Meredyth Jones Evans MC ('b'. 1894), of the Royal Welch Fusiliers, son of Owen Lloyd Jones Evans of Broom Hall, Caernarfon. She was a widow when she died on 28 June 1971 at her home, Wishanger Lodge, Headley, near Alton, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 53579


Phyllis Dare (1890-1975), Zena's younger sister, was born Phyllis Constance Haddie Dones at 18 Landridge Road, Fulham, on 15 August 1890. She played the Brother in 'Babes in the Wood' at nine years old. Martin Harvey engaged her to appear in 'Ib and Little Christina', by Basil Hood, in 1900 and she played Mab in 'Bluebell in Fairyland' for Seymour Hicks in 1901. Seasons in pantomime, some with Zena, some playing Cinderella herself across the UK, alternated with formal education and the study of stage skills. Her debut in musical comedy -- 'The Catch of the Season', by S. Hicks and C. Hamilton (1905) -- was a great success. In 1906 she went to the Ardennes to complete her education, returning almost immediately to take over the lead in 'The Belle of Mayfair', by C. H. Brookfield and C. Hamilton, with just four days to learn the script as she travelled home. 'Her delightful dancing and winsome manner won all hearts' ('Popular Favourites', 2, 1922). Her instantaneous success led to a tour with 'The Dairymaids', by A. M. Thompson and R. Courtneidge, and a year's run in 'The Arcadians', by M. Ambient and A. M. Thompson (1909). By 1907, aged sixteen and a star, she was asked to write a short book about herself. In 1909 she played Gonda Van der Loo in 'The Girl on the Train', by V. Leon, and went on to create a series of 'girls' including Prudence in 'The Quaker Girl', by J. J. Tanner (Chatelet Theatre, Paris, 1911), Delia Dale in 'The Sunshine Girl', by Paul Rubens and Cecil Raleigh (1912), and Sally Hook in 'Miss Hook of Holland' (1914), by Paul Alfred Rubens and Austen Hurgon. 


@@@@@


doc= 53580


Dare, Zena (1886-1975), actress, was born at 18 Oakley Crescent, Chelsea, London, on 4 February 1886, the eldest daughter of Arthur Albert Dones, a barrister's clerk, and his wife, Harriette Amelia Wheeler. Educated at Maida Vale high school, she alternated schooling with pantomime from the age of twelve. Her first appearance was at the Coronet Theatre, understudying in 'Babes in the Wood' (1899), after which she appeared in pantomimes in Edinburgh, Manchester, and Glasgow, and Seymour Hicks chose her for the title role in 'An English Daisy' (1902). In 1903 she returned from learning French in Brussels to play Cinderella in Liverpool. Her performance in 'Sergeant Brue' at the Strand -- 'Miss Zena Dare... as Mabel Widgett... combines refinement of style with dainty archness and quiet drollery' ('The Era', 18 June 1904) -- set her firmly on her path in musical comedy. 
Zena's dramatic style impressed critics: it was praised as 'distinctive and quite original' by the 'Play Pictorial' (1904). By casting her opposite himself in a large part Hicks recognized her quality. 'She was remarkably intelligent,' he said; 'her performance... spelt her name in golden letters of success which she has made brighter each year by the whole-heartedness and sincerity of all she undertakes' (Hicks, 259). She created Angela in 'The Catch of the Season', by Seymour Hicks and Cosmo Hamilton, at the Vaudeville in 1904. 'The Era' found this modern Cinderella 'positively bewitching, playing with a sweetness and delicacy that are beyond all praise... the gaiety of the young actress is irresistible' (17 Sept 1904). In 1905 she played the title role in 'Lady Madcap', by Paul Rubens and N. Newnham Davis, for George Edwardes. Until 1910 she played leading roles in major shows, including Owen Hall's 'The Little Cherub' (1906), 'The Beauty of Bath', by S. Hicks and C. Hamilton (1906), and Hicks's 'The Gay Gordons' (1907). On 23 January 1911 she married Lieutenant-Colonel the Hon. Maurice Vyner Baliol Brett (1882-1934), second son of Reginald Baliol Brett, second Viscount Esher, and a captain in the Coldstream Guards, and retired from the stage. They had one son and two daughters. 
Edwardian musical comedy was insouciant and glamorous. Light-hearted to the point of being nonsensical, its ephemeral pleasures relied on the personality and superb technical accomplishments of its stars. When Zena returned to the theatre in 1926 in 'The Last of Mrs. Cheyney', by Frederick Lonsdale, this escapist world had vanished, but her distinguished career was not restricted to a single genre. She worked in London and toured with her own company to South Africa (1928-9). There were musical comedies and reviews with Ivor Novello and Noel Coward. John Gielgud cast her in 'Spring Meeting', by M. J. Farrell and J. Perry (1939), and in J. M. Barrie's 'Dear Brutus' (1941). She toured in Lilian Hellman's 'Watch on the Rhine' (1943) and played Julia Ward McKinlock in Samuel Taylor's 'Sabrina Fair' (1954) and Isabel Sorodin in Noel Coward's 'Nude with Violin' (1957). Her sophistication, warmth, and sincerity culminated in the creation of Mrs Higgins in Alan Jay Lerner's 'My Fair Lady' (Drury Lane, 1958), a part that she played for over five years, subsequently touring with the company in 1964-5. It seems unjust that when the play was filmed in 1964 her part was played by Gladys Cooper. 
Her husband died on 18 August 1934. Zena Dare died on 11 March 1975 in Chelsea. 


A talented composer, Rubens (1875-1917) adored Phyllis; only his ill health prevented their engagement from leading to marriage. Her contribution to the tango craze came from his 'The Sunshine Girl' (she later filmed 'The Argentine Tango and other Dances', 1913). He wrote notes for his best ballad ('I Love the Moon') for her on his dirty shirt-cuff while at dinner and then had to retrieve it from the laundry. During 1914 she sang his 'Your King and Country Want You' in recruiting campaigns. Rubens died in 1917, leaving her a small fortune. 
After the war Phyllis's talent matured. In Frederick Lonsdale's 'The Lady of the Rose' (1922) and 'Lido Lady', by Ronald Jeans (1926), she was queen of the romantic musical play. James Agate reported wryly of Lonsdale's 'The Street Singer' (1924) that 'she received an ovation never accorded to Bernhardt, Duse or Ellen Terry' (Trewin, 67). A new career might have opened with Edgar Wallace's dramatic 'The Yellow Mask' (1928); unfortunately she was generally offered trivial comedies, with the exception of Stella Trent, in 'Cheated' (1930), where she acted with 'a depth of feeling that was astonishingly impressive' (B. Oulton, 'The Stage', 8 May 1975). Her last appearance was with Zena in Ivor Novello's 'King's Rhapsody' (1949). 
The adventurous, compassionate child heroine of her children's book, 'Kitty in Fairyland' (1914), reflected its author. Phyllis Dare died on 27 April 1975 at her home, 22 Pembroke Avenue, Hove, Sussex. The Dare sisters were caught up in the picture craze of the early 1900s, signing 300 postcards a week. In these cards one glimpses the casual grace and strong stage presence that they brought to their enthralled audiences. 


@@@@@


doc= 53582


Macadam, Elizabeth (1871-1948), social worker, was born on 10 October 1871, in the village of Chryston outside Glasgow, to the Revd Thomas Macadam, a minister of the Free Church of Scotland, and his wife, Elizabeth Whyte. Her girlhood was spent partly in Canada, where her father was first minister of St Andrew's Presbyterian Church in Strathroy, Ontario, and then professor of political philosophy at Morrin College, a small Presbyterian college in Quebec City. She was educated at Strathroy high school and attended classes at Morrin College. Their mother having died and their father having retired to Toronto, Elizabeth and her sister Margaret returned to Scotland as young women, and lived for a time in the household of their maternal uncle, the Revd Alexander Whyte, then minister of St George's Free Church in Edinburgh. 
It is not known how Elizabeth Macadam came to decide upon a career in social work, or to move to London, but in 1898, having acquired some experience of kindergarten work in Germany and having lived for a time at the women's settlement in Canning Town, she was awarded one of the newly endowed Pfeiffer scholarships to train in social work at the Women's University Settlement in Southwark. She remained at the settlement for four years, taking part in district visiting and other programmes developed by the settlement, and running an evening school for about a hundred 'rough' adolescent boys and girls, for which work she was paid a salary by the local school board. 
Elizabeth Macadam's chance to make an original contribution to the development of social work as a practice and a profession came in 1902, when she was hired to take over the wardenship of the Victoria Women's Settlement in Liverpool, a position she held until 1910. Assisted by Emily Oliver Jones, who had also trained at the Women's University Settlement, and by Eleanor Rathbone, she not only improved the settlement's organization and finances but also altered its philosophy and direction. First, she began to transform the settlement into, in her words, 'a laboratory for experiments in social reform' -- and indeed the dispensaries, clinics, clubs, and classes for disabled children pioneered by the settlement both stimulated demand for and served as the core of later statutory municipal services. Second, her horror of the 'uncertain, hap-hazard efforts' of private benevolence led her to place great importance on the development of social work as a profession. In 1904 the settlement launched a training programme for social workers that combined lectures on poverty, child welfare, and civic administration with a course of practical work undertaken in collaboration with municipal and voluntary associations. In 1910 Liverpool University absorbed this programme and appointed Elizabeth Macadam as the first lecturer on the methods and practice of social work; by the outbreak of the First World War, this course had more than a hundred students. 
Having established a modest but solid reputation as an innovator in the field of social work, Elizabeth Macadam was asked by the wartime Ministry of Munitions to help devise training courses for welfare workers; she also served on the women's advisory committee to the liquor traffic control board. This work took her increasingly to London, and at the end of the war she and Eleanor Rathbone (who had become a close friend and companion) bought a house there together. From 1919 Elizabeth Macadam acted as secretary to a new Joint Universities Council for Social Science, which had been established to co-ordinate the training of social workers. She also wrote several significant works on the development of this new field, publishing an authoritative study of the evolution of training for social work in 1925 ('The Equipment of the Social Worker'), an intelligent survey of the complex and evolving relations between state and voluntary efforts in 1934 ('The New Philanthropy'), and a revised edition of the first book in 1945. 
Elizabeth Macadam assumed that the end of the First World War would inaugurate a new partnership between the state and the voluntary sector, and that trained social workers like herself would be called upon to help plan the work of reconstruction. Yet new opportunities were slow to develop, and during the last twenty-five years of her life she spent much of her time supporting Eleanor Rathbone's expanding and complex political career. Macadam's public commitments increasingly came to mirror those of Rathbone: thus, after Rathbone became president of the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship (NUSEC) in 1919, Macadam became a NUSEC officer and an editor of its paper, the 'Woman's Leader'; likewise, Macadam helped to run the campaign for family endowment (family allowances) which Rathbone spearheaded. Rathbone was the stronger intellect of the two and was often in the public eye, yet archival records show that the two friends collaborated closely; certainly some portion of Rathbone's considerable public achievement was aided by Macadam's steady support and careful organization of both Rathbone's parliamentary campaigns and their joint life. This relationship is hard to capture, for both women were reserved about their private lives and maintained officially separate public careers. Yet their personalities, dissimilar as they were, were complementary, and the two were extremely close. Elizabeth -- practical, organized, demanding, and even somewhat bossy -- kept the more abstracted and emotionally diffident Eleanor on track, and was probably the only person with whom Eleanor felt entirely comfortable. The two friends continued to share a house in London until Rathbone's sudden death in January 1946. Having never ceased to regard herself as a Scotswoman, Elizabeth Macadam returned to Edinburgh for the last two years of her life. She died of cancer at her home, 7 Nile Grove, on 25 October 1948. 


@@@@@


doc= 53586


Clegg, Sir (John) Charles (1850-1937), football administrator, was born in Sheffield on 15 June 1850, the eldest son of William Johnson Clegg (died 1895) and his wife, Mary ('nee' Sykes). His father was an ambitious solicitor and politician, active in the temperance movement, who became mayor of Sheffield. Charles's first public appearance was alongside his father on a temperance platform at the age of seven. He was educated in Sheffield and later at Gainford School, Darlington, alongside many other sons of well-to-do northerners. Clegg soon displayed unusual athletic talents and after returning to Sheffield in 1866 to train as a solicitor established himself as an unbeatable quarter-mile runner. He seems to have thought nothing of competing (usually successfully) for several different events on the same afternoon. Clegg later implied that it was the prevalence of betting that drove him out of local athletics, and football, then in its first few years as an organized sport, became his sole sporting passion. He and his brother William (W. E.) Clegg (1852-1932) were among the first local players to earn wider renown, by playing for Sheffield Wednesday and various representative sides. Charles was even chosen for the first ever football international, England v. Scotland in 1872: but it was a bitter experience. Clegg scarcely got a kick and became convinced that his mostly old school and varsity team mates were deliberately not passing to him: as he recalled, 'Some members of the England eleven were awful snobs and not much troubled about a 'man fra' Sheffield'' (J. A. H. Catton, 'Wickets and Goals', 1926, 171). 
The year 1872 was important for Clegg in other ways. He qualified as a solicitor, joined his father's firm, and married a young woman from Manchester, Mary Sayles (died 1933). He followed his father into the temperance movement, became a stern opponent of gambling, and served as a Liberal city councillor in the late 1870s and early 1880s. But it was his brother William who was to emulate the father's political successes. Charles took up a more daunting challenge: that of imposing his own vision on the new and increasingly complex phenomenon of a mass sport. The original gentlemanly and clerical patrons of football had seen it wholeheartedly embraced by the populace. At local level this infused the game with more traditional popular habits, including betting and brawling. At higher levels gate money was being taken and the players expected to be at least compensated for giving up work to play. Clegg's rise through the ranks of those controlling the sport was rapid. He refereed in 1882 the first Football Association (FA) cup final to feature a team of working-class 'de facto' professionals. In 1886 he forced through the amalgamation of Sheffield football associations and became president of the resultant Sheffield and Hallamshire Football Association (SHFA). This position brought him a seat on the national FA council. The gentlemen of the football establishment could no longer ignore the 'man fra' Sheffield': if the game were to be controlled perhaps a tough northerner with a sharp legal mind, undaunted either by gentleman or player, might be the man to do it. 
As a football administrator Clegg became identified with his favourite dictum, 'No-one gets lost on a straight road'. But he was more flexible and pragmatic than his reputation allows. A hardline opponent of professional football when it appeared in the early 1880s, he had no problems adapting when the FA recognized professionalism in 1885. Indeed he was a director when the Wednesday turned professional in 1887, was instrumental in the establishment of a second local professional club, Sheffield United, in 1889, and when in 1890 professionalization edged Major Marindin into quitting as FA president, Clegg was elected to the resultant vacancy as FA chairman -- the most powerful position in football. 
Clegg's belief was that while professionalism was there to stay, the financial side of the game should be tightly controlled so as to preserve something of the old amateur spirit and to ensure that serious corruption did not destroy the game, as he had seen happen to Sheffield athletics. He responded to evidence that Manchester City had been involved in trying to bribe opponents in 1905-6 by conducting a thorough and scrupulous investigation: the ensuing punishments were exemplary and paid no regard to the fame or status of the miscreants. He supported the maximum wage and disliked the Players' Union (PU), with its arguments that players' wages should be fixed by the market instead. Clegg believed that the maximum wage stopped the wealthy clubs from enticing all the best players their way -- which to some extent it did -- but also clearly felt there was something distasteful in the idea of players getting paid like popular entertainers rather than as sporting artisans. The FA remained firmly opposed when the PU threatened to strike in 1909: the union eventually received some concessions but the strike was averted and the maximum wage survived. 
Clegg was equally tough when some southern football associations challenged the FA's authority in the cause of amateurism by demanding the right to exclude professionals. Clegg held the FA firm and by 1914 the amateurs were suing for terms: another victory for the 'man fra' Sheffield' over the old school. The latter had their final fling against him when, after the outbreak of war, the football authorities agreed that the professional season should continue. The reaction of various mostly southern clerics and sportsmen so recently dispatched by Clegg in pursuit of a different-shaped ball was swift and hysterical: professional football, they alleged, was encouraging potential military recruits to loaf around on football terraces instead. Clegg was shaken but held firm: it was falling gate receipts rather than moral pressure that eventually persuaded professional football to suspend operations. To his relief George V, who had delighted the FA by attending the 1914 cup final, was indifferent to the controversy and was back in the royal box, when health permitted, in the post-war finals too. Finally, it was under Clegg that the FA and county equivalents established a number of disciplinary committees to deter betting, violence among players and spectators, and lesser irregularities. Clegg was actively involved on these committees. His was a forbidding presence: hair and moustache the colour of high-grade Sheffield steel, clear blue eyes, firm jaw; many players reported that facing him on these committees was always worse than any subsequent punishment. 
When Lord Kinnaird died in 1923, Clegg succeeded him as FA president, a less active position. Still president of the SHFA and on the Sheffield United and Wednesday boards, his attendance at committee meetings became more sporadic. He was in his seventies. He was bowed by personal tragedies. His eldest son, William, who had joined the family law firm, died young in 1927. Clegg himself seems to have had a stroke the same year. His younger son Colin died in 1929. His wife's death in 1933 was a particularly severe blow. But despite these setbacks he retained a massive moral influence over the game. He was knighted in 1927 for 'services to the Board of Trade and the Ministry of Labour'. This could have been for work with local youth and employment committees: most assumed that Baldwin had recommended football's first knighthood. 
Clegg's approach to football was of a piece with his Methodist beliefs and commitments. He and Lady Clegg were temperance activists: he was secretary and later president of the British Temperance League. As late as the 1940s, accordingly, Sheffield United players seeking to make a living outside the game as publicans were being driven out of the club. He remained a fierce opponent of gambling: hence football's unavailing attempts to prevent gambling on the game. He was a regular chapel-goer and inaugurated a special annual service for footballers. He was a magistrate and widely respected official receiver in bankruptcy for Sheffield. Sir Charles Clegg died at his home, Clifton House, 32 Cavendish Road, Sheffield, on 26 June 1937, and was buried four days later in Fulwood churchyard. 
One of Clegg's last appearances in public life had been to defend a match between England and the Nazi-sponsored German team near Jewish parts of north London. His view that 'politics' should be kept out of sport was looking out of touch. By the time of his death other horrors -- a rejuvenated Players' Union, the football pools -- were clearly not going to go away. But the game still, and for years later, reflected Clegg's flinty image. It was neither amateur nor fully commercialized. It was neither democratic -- Clegg's autocratic attitude to committee meetings and debates invited and received comparisons with Napoleon -- nor elitist. It was popular but respectable enough to be endorsed by royalty and prime ministers. Not for decades was the maximum wage finally removed, a deal with the pools done, or players given freedom of contract. Clegg may have been more pragmatic than he liked to let on, but that he so successfully stamped his own values on the first modern mass sport remains one of the unlikelier phenomena of twentieth-century British society. 


@@@@@


doc= 53587


Marindin, Sir Francis Arthur (1838-1900), soldier, railway inspector, and football administrator, was born in Weymouth, Dorset, on 1 May 1838. Of Huguenot descent, he was the second son of the Revd Samuel Marindin (1807-1852), originally from Chesterton in Shropshire, and his wife, Isabella, the daughter of Andrew Wedderburn Colville of Ochiltree, Craigflower, Fife. He was educated at Eton College and at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, before being commissioned into the Royal Engineers in 1854. In 1860 he married Kathleen Mary, the daughter of Sir William Stevenson, governor-general of Mauritius, whom Marindin served as aide-de-camp and private secretary between 1860 and 1863. In 1868 he was appointed as adjutant at the Chatham School of Military Engineering, and in 1869 he became brigade major, before retiring from the Royal Engineers as major in 1879. He later became an honorary colonel in the engineer and railway volunteer staff corps. 
Marindin joined the Board of Trade in 1877 as inspecting officer of railways, and it was in this field that he received most public recognition, being appointed a CMG in 1887, for services to the Egyptian State Railways, and KCMG in 1897. Marindin's inquiries into railway accidents led to the reform of working practices and the introduction of a number of safety measures designed to protect railway company employees. 
Marindin's appointment to Chatham coincided with the early dominance of the Royal Engineers in association football. On the football field Marindin was described as 'clever and shrewd', and as a 'tall, well-built, broad shouldered back' who played up 'the lines' for the 'Sappers' (Ward, 25). This team was described as the 'first to show the advantages of combination over the old style of individualism' (ibid., 24-5), and in 1873 undertook the first football tour, visiting Nottingham, Derby, and Sheffield; it thereby set a pattern of touring which was to be followed by other teams, most famously by the Corinthians. After he ceased playing, Marindin continued to referee matches, a role which he considered as part of his duties as president of the Football Association (FA). Players were said to 'dread his frown'. Professionals referred to him as 'The Majaw', but although aristocratic in upbringing, Marindin was described as 'not dandy or la-de-da' (ibid., 24). 
It was as an official that Marindin had most influence in shaping the development of the game. In 1869 he became chairman of the committee of the FA, and in 1874 he succeeded S. H. Bartholomew as FA president, a position he held until 1890. Marindin presided over a period of transition which saw the game of association football transformed from a pleasure pursuit of the few to a pastime and spectacle for the masses. Marindin was part of a powerful coalition of amateur administrators who oversaw the acceptance of open professionalism in the laws of the game. Together with such men as Arthur Kinnaird and Charles Alcock, Marindin recognized that professionalism was a part of the way the game had developed in the north, and that if the FA simply outlawed the professional player the game would split, and would cease to be a national pastime. They argued that professionalism should be accepted, but controlled, and the proposal to legalize it was passed by thirty-five votes to fifteen at a special general meeting of the FA held at Anderton's Hotel, Fleet Street, London, on 20 July 1885. 
Marindin resigned as president of the FA five years later, a decision which some contemporaries attributed to his growing disenchantment with the development of the professional game, and his dislike of imported Scottish professionals was well known. He died on 21 April 1900 at his home, 3 Hans Crescent, London, and was buried at Craigflower, Dunfermline. His wife and their only child, a daughter, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 53588


Suter, Fergus (1857-1916), footballer, the only son of David Suter, a journeyman stonemason, and his wife, Catherine ('nee' Cooke), was born at 159 Shamrock Street, Glasgow, on 21 November 1857. He began his football career with Partick Thistle in 1878, but was attracted to Turton in Lancashire for he saw, like other Scottish players, the potential in the clubs of Lancashire and Yorkshire. He appeared for Turton Football Club in a local cup competition and was paid $3 for his service. This broke the rules but within twelve months he had joined the Darwen club. 
Suter, like his father, was a stonemason by trade but when he performed his craft with Lancashire stone his hands and arms began to swell. Concentrating on football without financial payment was hard, so a benefit match between Darwen and Turton was played in the spring of 1879 to help him and a fellow Scot, Jimmy Love, to survive as the earliest 'professionals' in an amateur game. In a short period of time his captaincy of Darwen had revolutionized the side, and it was even challenging the supremacy of the top teams such as the Old Etonians. 
To the disappointment of the fans and the officials Fergie Suter, as he was known, left Darwen for Blackburn Rovers in 1880. He found a normal employment at a cotton mill but resentment at his leaving Darwen culminated in a serious disturbance when he played against his old club before a crowd of 10,000 at Alexandra Meadows on 24 November 1880. Suter was deliberately fouled by a Darwen player and a large section of the crowd invaded the pitch, forcing Sam Ormerod, as the referee, to abandon the game. 
The coming of Suter and his Scottish colleagues (known as the 'Scotch professors' on account of their technical proficiency) brought a new era to Blackburn Rovers. Within two years they were regarded as the outstanding team. Suter, a full-back, played a key role, as in the 1882 cup final, when they lost 1-0 to the Old Etonians. His magnificent exhibition on that occasion was so outstanding that the two MPs for Blackburn, W. E. Briggs and Sir William Coddington, entertained him and his colleagues to a dinner. Losing in the cup final again in 1883 to their neighbours Blackburn Olympics spurred Suter and his fellow players to a remarkable period when they won the cup final for three successive years: in 1884 beating Queen's Park, Glasgow, 2-1, in 1885 beating the same side 2-0, and in 1886 defeating West Bromwich Albion 2-0 at Derby after a goalless draw at the Oval. The 1886 final made football history as the first in which two professional clubs appeared: payments to players had been legalized that year largely through the efforts of Blackburn officials, in particular Dr E. S. Morley and T. B. Mitchell. 
Suter was in a class of his own, rarely beaten in a tackle, always decisive with his clearances, effective in the air, and dependable at all times. Without his great defensive work his side would not have beaten West Bromwich Albion. He with Herbie Arthur (the goalkeeper) performed miracles, and ensured a special shield for his club from the Football Association (FA) for three consecutive FA cup victories. His playing days came to an end in 1888, the year his club was invited to be one of the founder members of the Football League. Suter's last appearance was on 22 December 1888 against West Bromwich Albion, when he deputized for Arthur in goal. 
Suter married at the James Street Independent chapel, Blackburn, on 22 November 1883, Martha (1861-1939), daughter of John Almond, manager at a foundry. They had at least one son and one daughter. Suter's occupation was given as commercial traveller, but, like so many of the first generation of professional footballers, in his retirement from the game he kept a succession of public houses, including the Bay Horse hotel in his adopted town of Blackburn and the White Lion in Darwen. He died of cancer at his home, 8 Seafield Road, North Shore, Blackpool, on 31 July 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 53590


Kenrick family (per. c.1785-1926), hardware manufacturers, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 53591


Herbert, (Mary) Elizabeth, Lady Herbert of Lea (1822-1911), Roman Catholic convert and philanthropist, was born on 21 July 1822, the only daughter of General Charles Ashe A Court Repington (1785-1861), sometime MP for Heytesbury, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth Gibbs (died 1878), daughter of a West Indies planter. Elizabeth a Court Repington was a highly gifted young woman of considerable beauty, whose family moved in widely influential circles. She numbered among her friends Lady Dufferin and Lady Canning (both wives of future viceroys of India), and this circle was widened further after her marriage. On 12 August 1846, when she was twenty-four, she married Sidney Herbert (1810-1861), half-brother to the twelfth earl of Pembroke, whom she had known since childhood. They had four sons: George Robert Charles Herbert, who became thirteenth earl of Pembroke; Sidney, who succeeded him as fourteenth earl; Reginald, who became a naval officer and was drowned at sea in 1870; and Michael, who became ambassador in Washington in 1902. Their daughters were Mary, who married Baron Friedrich von Hugel, philosopher and mystic; Elizabeth Maude, who married Sir Hubert Parry, the composer; and Constance Gladys, who married firstly the fourth earl of Lonsdale, and, following his untimely death, Lord de Grey, who later became second marquess of Ripon. 
Following her marriage Elizabeth Herbert took a keen interest in politics and did much of her husband's secretarial work. During the winter of 1847, while on their delayed wedding tour in Rome, the Herberts met Florence Nightingale for the first time. That meeting resulted in the close friendship which later assisted Florence Nightingale in her efforts to send nurses to Scutari during the Crimean War. The early days of Elizabeth Herbert's marriage saw the formation of other important friendships, notably with Henry Manning, whom she met while he was an Anglican. An old schoolfriend of Sidney Herbert, Manning was introduced to Elizabeth as 'the holiest man I have ever met'. The friendship blossomed and he assumed the role of her spiritual director until he left the Church of England in 1851. 
Elizabeth Herbert was very concerned about the plight of the poor, especially unemployed domestic servants who were considered to be in grave moral danger. For such women, often the only alternative to the workhouse was to resort to petty crime or prostitution. Early attempts at rescue work on behalf of the Church of England, such as the Clewer House of Mercy founded near Windsor by Mariquita Tennant in 1849, received the enthusiastic support of both Elizabeth Herbert and her friend and near neighbour W. E. Gladstone. Her letters to Mrs Tennant reflect a genuine concern for the underprivileged, which was both practical and down-to-earth. The Herberts also enthusiastically supported a number of state-assisted emigration schemes for the poor. 
Elizabeth Herbert's social concern was born of her firm religious convictions. She was brought up in the Church of England and later recalled her early experience of religion as 'utterly and entirely distasteful', but with the coming of the Oxford Movement she found 'all that my heart and mind had longed for and hungered after for years -- I found life, and warmth and practice'. The secession of Archdeacon Henry Manning to the Roman Catholic church was a blow which was widely felt, indeed Gladstone commented, 'It was not a parting: it was a death.' On a personal level it meant the severance of the friendship and spiritual counsel which had been so important to Elizabeth Herbert. She later described it as a 'sort of a religious shipwreck' and from this time onwards she began to have serious doubts about Anglicanism. At first she discussed this with her husband but, finding that it worried him, ceased doing so. If she had followed Manning at that time there would have been serious repercussions for her husband politically -- the country was embroiled in the Crimean War and Sidney Herbert was secretary of state for war -- and as the heir to his half-brother, the twelfth earl of Pembroke. Elizabeth laid aside her 'wracking doubts' and channelled her energies into supporting her husband and assisting Florence Nightingale in her scheme to send a task force of female nurses to the battle front. 
Sidney Herbert never recovered from the stress his high office had placed on him: he died on 2 August 1861, just eight months after being created a baron, with the title Lord Herbert of Lea. During her mourning Lady Herbert retired at first to the south of France and subsequently to Rome. Her religious doubts increased and she once more sought counsel from Manning. Meantime, it was widely rumoured in English society that she had joined the Roman Catholic church. Her husband's family gave notice that if she took such a step they would make her children wards in chancery, her eldest son now being the heir to the earl of Pembroke. This threat greatly added to her confusion in addition to the grief of widowhood. And there were other matters to be considered too: Sidney Herbert had been a loyal Anglican and had built a magnificent church in Wilton, costing $30,000, where he was buried. Elizabeth went there daily to pray while at Wilton, and was organist in the chapel in the house which she and her husband had restored. She also knew she would be exchanging a respected position in society for 'the contempt and distrust of all those whose good opinion I most valued'. Not least among these was Gladstone, and when, after much turmoil, she finally took the step, it marked the end of a long and valued friendship, though he continued to involve himself in her children's education. 
On 5 January 1866 Lady Herbert was received into the Roman Catholic church in a private ceremony at Palermo in Sicily. Having returned to England she was advised by Archbishop Manning to visit Father (later Cardinal) Herbert Vaughan who was establishing a missionary brotherhood at Mill Hill. From their first meeting in October 1866 an extraordinary spiritual friendship developed which has been compared with that of St Francis of Sales and St Jane Frances de Chantal: it lasted until Vaughan's death in 1903. Lady Herbert's conversion had resulted in her estrangement from family and friends and severance from her Anglican charities. She now embraced the missionary cause embodied in the work of the Mill Hill Fathers, as they became known. Through her financial help, and that of her new Catholic friends, Vaughan was able to realize his vision. From its beginnings at Holcombe House, the buildings expanded down the hill with the construction of St Joseph's College, the foundation stone of which was laid on 29 June 1869. 
The college at Mill Hill took several years to complete, during which time missionary priests were being trained and sent abroad. The college chapel was consecrated in March 1875, one of the celebrants being Vaughan, by now a bishop. Vaughan's letters to Lady Herbert (her letters to him have not survived) reveal the depth of trust between them; there was also a great bond of mutual affection and a wide range of interests, as well as humour. It was a friendship of mutual need and encouragement: he consulted her widely on all his projects and respected her advice; she listened to his spiritual counsel and took comfort from it in her loss of family ties. Elizabeth Herbert's conversion to Roman Catholicism was total, her only regret being that, of her seven children, only Mary, wife of the mystic Baron Friedrich von Hugel, shared her Catholic faith (her husband's friends went to considerable lengths to see that this was so). 
As in her Anglican days, Lady Herbert's influence covered a wide spectrum. For many years she acted as honorary treasurer of St Joseph's Foreign Missionary Society, Mill Hill, and hosted its meetings at Herbert House, 38 Chesham Place, Belgrave Square. She gave considerable sums from her own resources to this work and extracted further donations from her circle. The Sisters of Charity were also closely associated with the Mill Hill mission, and Lady Herbert founded and maintained a girl's orphanage at Salisbury which the sisters ran. Another project which Lady Herbert enthusiastically embraced and financially assisted was that of Westminster Cathedral. Cardinal Manning had not favoured the idea, but his successor, Cardinal Vaughan, did so and laid the foundation-stone in 1895, although he did not live to see the project come to fruition. After her conversion Lady Herbert wrote a number of religious booklets aimed at attracting converts, one of which, 'How I Came Home' (1894), told the story of her own conversion. 
Lady Herbert died at Herbert House on Monday 30 October 1911 after a long illness. Her body lay in state at Herbert House until Friday 3 November, when a solemn requiem was celebrated at Westminster Cathedral, the absolution being pronounced by Archbishop Bourne. She was buried in the cemetery at St Joseph's College, Mill Hill, near the grave of Cardinal Vaughan. Her surviving children attended, despite the earlier difficulties. Lady Herbert had been known at Mill Hill as 'The Mother of the Mill' because of her generosity: the epithet in life became her epitaph in death. 


@@@@@


doc= 53592


Arabella Goddard (1836-1922), pianist, was born at St Servan, near St Malo, France, on 12 January 1836, the daughter of Thomas Goddard. At the age of four she played in her village, and went to Paris to take lessons from Frederic Kalkbrenner when she was six. She studied further with Lucy Anderson, and in 1844, at the age of eight, played before another of Mrs Anderson's pupils, Queen Victoria, and in the same year published 'Six Waltzes' for piano. She made her debut at the Grand National Concerts at Her Majesty's Theatre on 23 October 1850. She was then recommended by Sigismond Thalberg, who had given her some lessons, to study interpretation with J. W. Davison, and also had composition lessons with George Macfarren. Much influenced by Davison, she was one of the first to study and perform Beethoven's late works, playing his B[flat] sonata, op. 106, from memory at a concert of the Quartet Association at Willis's Rooms on 14 April 1853; and on 11 May she performed Sterndale Bennett's third piano concerto at the New Philharmonic Concerts. She then toured Germany and Italy, playing Mendelssohn's D minor concerto at the Leipzig Gewandhaus in October 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 53593


Paynel family (per. c.1086-1244), gentry, whose original home may have been Les Moutiers-Hubert in Normandy, was first represented in England by 


@@@@@


doc= 53594


Mole, Harriet Fisher (1841-1912), socialist and women's trade union organizer, was born on 2 May 1841 at Edgeworth Street, Warrington, the daughter of Evan Jones, whitesmith, and his wife, Harriet 'nee' Fisher. Following 'an exceedingly happy childhood spent in a religious home' ('Labour Annual', 180), Jeannie, as she was known, married fruit merchant Robert Frederick Willis in 1860 in Blackburn. As a young wife she visited New York, where she became concerned with social issues and worked for black rights. Returning to London with Robert, she worked with a sisterhood active among slum dwellers. However, reading Thomas Carlyle and John Ruskin alerted Jeannie to the causes of the poverty she sought to alleviate, and she converted to socialism. 
In London on 2 May 1879 Jeannie married a printer, (William) Keartland Mole, born in Liverpool, where they moved at some point in that year. She found only six other socialists there, so with Robert Frederick Evan (Fred) Willis, the son of her first marriage, she initiated propaganda meetings. These developed into the Workers' Brotherhood, Liverpool's first socialist society, much of whose small membership later helped form the Liverpool Fabian Society (1892). Committedly unsectarian, Jeannie Mole joined the Fabians, the Social Democratic Federation, and the Independent Labour Party. However, it was against the wave of new unionism which swept Merseyside from 1889 to 1891 that she began the work of organizing women's trade unions for which she subsequently became best known. She began this in May 1888, helped by Fred Willis, whose articles in 'The Liverpool Review' that month highlighted the plight of Liverpool's sweated women workers. In January 1889 she formed the Liverpool Workwomen's Society, comprising bookfolders, tailoresses, and cigarmakers. Helped by the London-based Women's Provident and Protection League, this relaunched in 1890 as the Liverpool Society for the Promotion of Women's Trade Unions (SPWTU), its membership expanding into unskilled trades. 
External organization proved a difficult task, and by October 1894 Jeannie Mole admitted that 'the call should come with the need from the women themselves' ('Liverpool Labour Chronicle', October 1894). Accordingly, the society became the Liverpool Women's Industrial Council (LWIC) in February 1895, partly inspired by the Women's Industrial Council which was formed in London in November 1894 to collect information about women's working conditions with a view to improving them. As honorary secretary, Jeannie felt the LWIC required an organizing function, and used her position to support a strike and encourage unionization among Liverpool rope-workers. This proved unpopular with the non-socialist members of the council, and by its AGM of 1897 it was in disarray, with liberal members condemning its 'advanced wing' and socialists seeking a return to the earlier SPWTU ('Liverpool Review', 13 March 1897). By 1898 Jeannie Mole had largely dissociated from the council, and was encouraging women to join the Liverpool branch of Tom Mann's Workers' Union. 
Jeannie Mole felt socialism united her in a common sisterhood with all women. Although she did not participate in local suffrage campaigns, her political work demonstrated a woman-centred approach. She initiated and edited a 'Women's Page' in the 'Liverpool Labour Chronicle' whose scope ranged from local disputes involving women to issues of women's health. She also promoted dress reform, and almost exclusively dressed in a Grecian style gown 'becomingly and without corsets' ('The Clarion', 12 March 1898). 
In 1896 Jeannie suffered a serious heart attack through overwork. She recovered sufficiently to attend an international congress that July, but further illness in 1897 effectively curtailed her organizational work. Although she largely withdrew from active life she continued to host activities such as socialist garden parties at her home at Dacre Hill, Rock Ferry, Cheshire, and to provide a home for visiting lecturers from many socialist organizations. Jeannie Mole died suddenly on 15 April 1912 in Paris during a visit intended to improve her health. She was cremated at Pere Lachaise cemetery, Paris, her subsequent funeral at Higher Bebington on 22 April being attended by local Fabians and socialists. Predeceased by her son in 1905, she was survived by her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 53595


Neville, Edward, first Baron Bergavenny (d. 1476), nobleman, was probably the youngest surviving son of Ralph Neville, first earl of Westmorland (c.1364-1425), and his second wife, Joan Beaufort (1379?-1440), legitimated daughter of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster (1340-1399). He founded the baronial house of Abergavenny (the form, adapted from Bergavenny, which was in use in the mid-sixteenth century and was used by successive holders of this title after 1730), which is the only noble branch of the Neville family to survive in the male line to the present day. 
In 1426 'dominus de Bourgevenny' was one of the young lords summoned to Leicester to be knighted by the infant Henry VI on Whitsunday (19 May). Edward Neville owed his place among the English peerage to his marriage with a great heiress, Elizabeth (1415-1448), daughter of Richard Beauchamp, earl of Worcester ('c'.1397-1422), and his wife, the Despenser heiress, Isabel (1400-1439). This advantageous match, which took place in 1424, cost Earl Ralph the sum of 2000 marks, about two years' income from Elizabeth Beauchamp's lands, which did not come into her husband's possession until March 1436. This situation arose because Richard, earl of Worcester, who died on 18 March 1422 of injuries sustained at the siege of Meaux, never had seisin of the Welsh marcher lordship of Abergavenny, or his patrimony in England. His father, William Beauchamp, first Baron Bergavenny (c.1343-1411), had given his wife, the redoubtable Lady Joan (1375-1435), a life interest in all his lands. Royal favour and the extinction of a great magnate family, that of the Hastings earls of Pembroke, had enabled Sir William to found and endow a cadet branch of the Beauchamp family. By an entail made on 20 February 1396 he settled the lordship of Abergavenny on the male line of his elder brother, Thomas Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (1337x9-1401), in default of male issue among his own descendants; this settlement excluded Elizabeth Beauchamp and enabled Sir William's nephew, Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (1382-1439), to inherit the lordship of Abergavenny on the death of Lady Joan in 1435. He was Elizabeth's stepfather, as he had married the Despenser heiress, Isabel, as his second wife in 1423. The English manors inherited by Edward Neville's wife, Elizabeth, had been formerly owned by the Hastings and Arundel families and were declared to have a taxable value of 1000 marks a year in 1436. After 1450 the Neville barons of Abergavenny ranked with the English higher nobility in landed wealth, but promotion to an earldom did not take place until 1784. 
The male line of the Beauchamp earls of Warwick was extinguished by the death on 11 June 1446 of Earl Richard's only son, Henry, first (and last) duke of Warwick (1425-1446). His heir was his only child, the Lady Anne of Warwick, who was three years old when her father died. Edward Neville and his wife, Elizabeth, saw this girl's minority as an opportunity to lay claim to the lordship of Abergavenny, but they did not resort to litigation. Probably in the autumn of 1446 Neville took possession of Abergavenny Castle by force and in October Henry VI ordered Richard, duke of York (the greatest of the Welsh marcher lords and Neville's brother-in-law), to expel him. Elizabeth Beauchamp died on 18 June 1448, but, despite his wife's death, Neville continued to pursue his claim to the disputed lordship. Following the death of the child heiress, Anne, on 3 January 1449, Neville obtained royal licence on 14 July to enter on the lordship of Abergavenny, but he could not defeat the well-founded title of his powerful nephew, the earl of Salisbury's eldest son and heir, the newly created earl of Warwick, Richard Neville (1428-1471), who had married Anne Beauchamp (1426-1493), Duke Henry's sister, in 1436. Despite his failure to make good his claims, Edward Neville was summoned to parliament as Baron Bergavenny in September 1450, and his heirs inherited that dignity. Between 1450 and 1512, by a remarkable anomaly, the barons of Abergavenny were not in possession of the Welsh marcher lordship from which they took their peerage title. 
Edward Neville did not have the abilities of his capable elder brothers, Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury (1400-1460), and William Neville, Lord Fauconberg, afterwards earl of Kent (1401?-1463), and he took little part in war or politics. He supported the government headed by Richard, duke of York, as lord protector in 1454, when Salisbury was made (on 1 April) lord chancellor. As a landowner in Kent, where he had his principal residence at Birling, near Maidstone, he could not escape involvement in the civil war when his nephews, the earls of Warwick and March (the future Edward IV), invaded England from Calais in June 1460. He was with them at the battle of Northampton, fought on 10 July, which ended the rule of the house of Lancaster. After the change of dynasty in 1461 Neville helped to put down Lancastrian resistance in northern England late in 1462, but he held aloof from the political and dynastic upheavals of 1469-71. After Edward IV's final victory Bergavenny was one of the peers who, on 3 July 1471, in the parliament chamber at Westminster, swore an oath of loyalty to the infant Edward, prince of Wales (afterwards Edward V), as his father's heir. His public activities in his later years appear to have been confined to serving on commissions in Kent, and he died on 18 October 1476. 
Shortly after the death of his first wife, Elizabeth, Neville married his kinswoman (and mistress) Katherine (died 'c'.1478), daughter of Sir Robert Howard, and sister of John, Lord Howard (died 1485), created duke of Norfolk by Richard III in 1483. The papal dispensation needed for this union was granted by Pope Nicholas V on 15 October 1448. From his second marriage Neville had two sons who died childless, and three daughters. 
Neville's heir, George Neville (1436-1492), his second but only surviving son with Elizabeth Beauchamp, succeeded him as the second Baron Bergavenny. As a child, he had been in the household of Edmund Beaufort, duke of Somerset (died 1455), who became lieutenant-general in France, and George was one of the hostages given to the victorious French when Rouen was surrendered in October 1449. After the death early in 1449 of the infant Beauchamp heir, Anne, he was found to be coheir, with the late Duke Henry's sister, Anne Beauchamp (1426-1493), of the Despenser lands formerly held by his grandmother, Isabel, countess of Warwick (died 1439). Except perhaps for a brief interlude during the summer of 1470, when Warwick had been forced into exile in France, George Neville was never able to obtain seisin of that part of his family inheritance, which included the valuable lordships of Glamorgan and Morgannwg. His cousin Richard Neville, earl of Warwick, succeeded in keeping control of the whole of the Despenser estates, in the right of his wife, Anne. Shortly before Henry VI became insane in July 1453, Somerset's attempt to gain custody of George Neville's share of the Despenser lands led to conflict with Warwick, who supported Richard, duke of York, at the first battle of St Albans, fought on 22 May 1455. George Neville came of age in 1457; he fought on the Yorkist side at the battle of Tewkesbury on 4 May 1471, and was knighted by Edward IV. The second Lord Bergavenny was a supporter of Richard III, whose territorial possessions included the lordships of Abergavenny and Glamorgan and Morgannwg. Like most of the English peerage he was absent from the battle of Bosworth and he proved loyal to Henry VII. His heir, George Neville, third Baron Bergavenny (c.1469-1535), was granted the castle and lordship of Abergavenny by Henry VIII on 18 December 1512. Other sons with his first wife, Margaret Fenne (died 1485), were Sir Edward Neville (b. in or before 1482, d. 1538) and Sir Thomas Neville (b. in or before 1484, d. 1542). 


@@@@@


doc= 53596


Amphlett, John (1845-1918), historian and diarist, was born at Sydenham, Kent, on 22 March 1845, the eldest of the three children of John Amphlett (1839-1868) of Clent and his wife, Jane (1812-1888), daughter of Robert Smithson of Skipwith, Yorkshire. John Amphlett was seventh in nine successive generations of John Amphletts of Clent, a parish annexed to Worcestershire from Staffordshire in 1842. The first John Amphlett of Hadzor and Clent died without children, and it was from his youngest brother, Joseph (1672-1720), that the eight successive generations descended. 
John Amphlett was sent to a dame-school at Kidderminster, but cried; after a week he returned home for private tuition until May 1854 when he became a weekly boarder at Stourbridge grammar school. An early example of a propensity for noting what he saw and did was his recording the number of birds' eggs he collected annually from 1852 to 1855, and on 1 January 1854 he began his first diary, entering: 'Went to church.' On 19 January he wrote: 'Hunted at Island Pool with foxhounds; had no run.' He continued his diary until a few days before his death in 1918, thus providing a mine of information and gossip for social historians. He later moved to Bromsgrove School, and went from there to Worcester College, Oxford, as a commoner in October 1864. He did not work, and failed most of his examinations. Leaving Oxford in 1867 he became a student in the Inner Temple and continued his life of pleasure in Paris. 
In 1868 Amphlett's father who, having parted from his wife, was living at Lydney, Gloucestershire, was thrown from his dog cart when driving home from viewing the ruins of Tintern Abbey by moonlight (his companion said he was the worse for drink) and died from his injuries. The new, financially independent, squire of Clent took on further responsibilities when on 18 August 1869 he married Eliza Anne (died 1919), only child of Edward Biven Baylie, a former Quaker who had retired to Clent from his chain manufacturing and iron merchant's business in Stourbridge. After a continental honeymoon Amphlett settled down at Clent Cottage, and in 1870, having skimped his legal studies but paid his dues, he was called to the bar. Although a qualified barrister he practised for only a few years, but was called on from time to time to deputize for the judge in west midlands county courts. He returned to Oxford and took his MA in 1871. 
A son and heir (also John), the first of three children, was born on 18 March 1872, but Amphlett's health caused concern and in December he sailed for Jamaica. His long letters home to his wife consisted almost entirely of notes about what he had observed, and these he turned into his first book, 'Under a Tropical Sky' (1873). A novel, 'Warnton Kings', was published in 1874 after his return. An enthusiastic member of the Worcestershire Naturalists' Club, he was elected president for 1876-9. He edited the botany section for the 'Victoria county history' of Worcestershire and compiled for it the list of the county's flowering plants. His major contribution to botanical studies was 'The Botany of Worcestershire' (1909), compiled with Carleton Rea, another Worcester barrister. He made a worthy contribution to geological studies, notably in mapping the erratic boulders he located in Worcestershire; he was president of the Dudley and Midland Geological Society in 1885 and 1886. His research into the history of Clent and the Amphletts led not merely to the publication of 'A Short History of Clent' (1890) and 'Amphlett of Clent' (1905) but to substantial works of scholarship and to his becoming a moving spirit in founding the Worcestershire Historical Society. Greatly impressed by the volumes of 'Collections for a History of Staffordshire', published from 1880 by the William Salt Archaeological Society (which he joined when it was formed in 1879), he pressed for a publishing society in Worcestershire, and the Worcestershire Historical Society was established in 1893. For one year joint editor with J. W. Willis Bund, Amphlett continued as sole editor until 1908; to the society's list of publications he personally contributed a number of volumes, including a series of Worcestershire lay subsidy rolls (between 1893 and 1902), a biographical introduction and index to Nash's 'Collections for the History of Worcestershire' (1894-5), the churchwardens' accounts of St Michael's in Bedwardine, Worcester, 1539-1603 (1896), and an index of Worcestershire fines 1649-1714 (1896-7). He also collated the manuscripts of Habington's survey of Worcestershire (1893-9), and published the Kyre Park charters (1905) and the rolls of Hales manor (1272-1307). The latter, deciphered with the help of the Revd S. G. Hamilton, was published in two volumes (1910 and 1912), a work of exceptional value to students of medieval history. 
Amphlett was a member of Worcestershire county council for over twenty years, chairman of Bromsgrove poor-law union and of Clent parish council, and a magistrate and chairman of the Stourbridge bench from 1902 to 1918; he also served many local committees and organizations. His later years were troubled by a lengthy dispute over his encroachment onto Clent Hill Common; he had been involved in setting up a board of conservators for the area and had chaired the board in 1881, and was consequently deeply embarrassed to be accused of moving his boundary fence onto the common land. His case went on appeal to the House of Lords after his death, the lords finding for the conservators. 
For several years Amphlett spent most of his time on the continent, but at the outbreak of war in 1914 he left Rome for Kensington. His health had declined over some years and he returned to Clent, where he died on 23 June 1918 and was buried on 26 June in the family vault under Clent church chancel. His grandchild John Amphlett was killed in the western desert while serving with the RAF in 1942, and the line of John Amphletts of Clent ended. 
John Amphlett had continued his diary until 19 June 1918, when he wrote, 'After tea Lord Cobham called, and we had a long natter, hill common and everything included; but I shall allow nothing to interfere with our life long friendship.' His portrait bookplate, inserted in each of the thirty-six morocco-bound volumes and six volumes of index, shows him in 1895 as bald, heavily bearded, beetle-browed, and tight-lipped, belying his amiable nature. The diary was willed to Worcester College by his son, John Amphlett (1872-1949), and the family archives, historical manuscripts, and transcripts were deposited in Worcestershire Record Office in 1950. 


@@@@@


doc= 53599


Woodall, George (1850-1925), cameo glass artist, was born at Barnett Lane, Kingswinford, Staffordshire, on 15 August 1850, the second son of Thomas Woodall (1827/8-1898), a nail maker, and his wife, Emma, 'nee' Bott (1827/8-1902), whose younger brother Thomas Bott became an important decorator at the Worcester porcelain factory. With his elder brother, Thomas Woodall (1849-1925), he attended the Wordsley national (Church of England) schools until the age of twelve, when both brothers were apprenticed to the glass decorating firm of J. and J. Northwood. In 1866 they both enrolled at the Stourbridge School of Art. During their time at the Northwood works they would have been aware of, and learnt from, the engraving work of their employer John Northwood and the launch of his effort to revive the art of cameo glass. George Woodall married, on 11 February 1872, Pamela (1852-1937), daughter of Joseph Parkes, a miner. They had four daughters and two sons. 
George Woodall and his brother, Thomas, both left the Northwood works between 1874 and 1877, and by 1878 they had moved to the nearby glassworks of Thomas Webb & Sons, which, under the guidance of Thomas Wilkes Webb, was to become one of the great nineteenth-century Stourbridge glass factories. When Stevens and Williams began to produce cameo glass under John Northwood's directorship, Wilkes Webb decided to set up his own cameo decorating shop and placed George and Thomas Woodall in charge of it. Until 1899 the brothers produced some work jointly and signed their work 'T. & G. Woodall', but Thomas's greater interest in music and the church, plus family disagreements between the two, led them to abandon their joint efforts. 
During the 1880s the amount of cameo work produced at Webbs, including vases, plaques, bowls, scent bottles, candlesticks, inkwells, and menu card holders, was enormous. To cope with demand George Woodall set up the Woodall team consisting of himself, his brother, Thomas, Tom Farmer, Harry Davies, William Hill, and J. T. Fereday. The team also had access to another seventy engravers at Webbs to do much of the repetitive task of carving the decorative borders and panels. The cameo glass produced by George and his team is some of the finest ever created, usually in two layers, but special pieces consisted of as many as seven layers. Subject matter was drawn from many sources. George's main inspiration was classical, and influences came from sculptors such as Antonio Canova; he owned a copy of 'The Works of Antonia Canova' (1876) and a number of his vases can be traced to designs in that book. Other books of the time which provided floral designs included Owen Jones, 'Examples of Chinese Ornament' (1867). Alongside his cameo work Woodall was also a professional photographer, recording scenes and people around Kingswinford between 1885 to 1910, but also photographing his own work, which Webbs sent to galleries and dealers to further promote it. 
The first public exhibition of Webbs cameo glass was at the Worcestershire Exhibition in 1882. For the next thirty years their cameo work, especially by George Woodall, was shown at international exhibitions around the world, winning endless awards and gold medals including Paris (1878); Melbourne (1880); the International Health Exhibition, London (1884); the Melbourne Centennial (1888); Paris (1889); Launceston, Tasmania (1891-2); Chicago (1893); the Franco-British Exhibition, London (1908); and Brussels and Turin (1910). 
Through these exhibitions George Woodall's work became collected internationally, especially in America, and even in his own lifetime he was acknowledged as the greatest cameo carver of the period. He used the same techniques as John Northwood -- acid to etch away unwanted glass and steel-pointed tools for carving -- but he also used the copper-wheel engraving lathe to engrave details and polish the glass. His self-acknowledged masterpiece, completed in 1898, is 'The Moorish Bathers' (Corning Museum of Glass), an 18 inch diameter plaque in a raisin-coloured body cased with white and carved with a scene of six female bathers surrounded by buildings not dissimilar to the Alhambra. In this stunning display of carving he shows off the two important characteristics of his work, first the white cased glass with a bluish tinge, unique to Webbs, which allowed for a greater range of shading, and second his creation of pictorial depth and perspective. Woodall's subject matter is similar to that of contemporary British and French painters including Jean Leon Gerome, Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema, and Frederic, Lord Leighton, and he regarded himself as a fine artist and sculptor rather than as a mere decorator of glass. In 1899 his exhibition of work at the galleries of Phillips in Mount Street, London, was called 'Sculptured Glass'. In some of his glass plaques Woodall even used Leighton's device of framing his work between classical columns and pediments, but in glass rather than wood. 
George Woodall retired officially from Webbs in 1911 but continued to carve cameo glass for the company and for himself. His later work, from 1900 onwards, used public events for his subject matter. His admiration for Gladstone and the politician's condemnation of the atrocities against the Armenian people led him to carve two portrait medallions, one of Gladstone and one entitled 'The Armenian Girl' (Dudley Museums Service). The fascination with polar exploration at the beginning of the twentieth century inspired him to create a series of three Polar Vases, the third of which, entitled 'The Antarctic Vase' (Chrysler Museum), made after 1914 and possibly as late as 1918, is Woodall's final masterpiece. 
George Woodall seems to have stopped carving glass by 1922, when the insurance on his studio was not renewed. He died on 27 February 1925 and is buried at St Mary's Church in Kingswinford. But his legacy continues undiminished. Every cameo carver since Woodall has acknowledged their debt to the master, and his creations when they appear on the open market fetch considerable prices. 


@@@@@


doc= 53601


Dalrymple, Sir Adolphus John, second baronet (1784-1866), army officer and politician, was born on 3 February 1784, probably at his parents' house, 29 Somerset Street, St Marylebone, Middlesex. He was the first child and eldest son of Sir Hew Whitefoord Dalrymple (1750-1830), army officer, and his wife, Frances, Lady Dalrymple (1753-1835), daughter of Lieutenant-General Francis Leighton (1696-1773) and his wife, Renea, 'nee' Pinfold. At the time of his birth Dalrymple's father was a captain and lieutenant-colonel in the 1st regiment of foot guards. Adolphus was christened in March 1784 in the parish church of St Mary in Marylebone High Street, and was educated at Harrow School from September 1796 until the spring of 1799. 
Dalrymple was connected by birth to both military and political society in southern Scotland. His father procured his first commission and his first promotion, and a family friend provided a safe and decorative posting. When his military career faltered, his father-in-law set him on a parliamentary career, one furthered by his family connections in East Lothian. Once out of parliament, sheer longevity secured him a steady progress to the rank of general. 
On 25 October 1799 Dalrymple was gazetted ensign in the 55th (Westmorland) regiment of foot, the regiment having its headquarters on Guernsey, of which Sir Hew Dalrymple was lieutenant-governor. On 12 June 1800 he was promoted lieutenant in the 37th (North Hampshire) regiment of foot, of which Sir Hew was colonel. He served as aide-de-camp to his father, then a lieutenant-general, on Guernsey from being first commissioned until 5 February 1801, when he exchanged to the 1st (King's) dragoon guards. 
Dalrymple served with the 1st dragoon guards in England until being appointed, in July 1802, aide-de-camp to Lieutenant-General Sir James Craig (1748-1812), who was then commanding the eastern district of England. He obtained his captaincy in the 18th (light) dragoons on 7 January 1803 and served with that regiment in England until being reappointed aide-de-camp to Craig on 24 July 1803. On 19 May 1803 he and his younger brother, Leighton Cathcart Dalrymple -- a lieutenant in the 15th (King's) regiment of (light) dragoons -- served as esquires to Craig at his installation as a knight companion in the Order of the Bath. Dalrymple remained Craig's aide-de-camp until May 1806, serving with him in Malta, Sicily, and Naples as part of the force sent under Craig's command to reinforce the kingdom of Naples against France. In June 1806 he was appointed military secretary to his father, who had been ordered to Gibraltar as lieutenant-governor. He served with Sir Hew as military secretary on Gibraltar and in Portugal in 1808 when Sir Hew was appointed to command the British expeditionary force there. Following the armistice, or convention, agreed at Cintra at the end of August 1808, Dalrymple brought home his father's dispatches announcing the news to government. He obtained a majority in the 3rd (East Kent) regiment of foot (the Buffs) on 15 September 1808 and exchanged to the 19th (light) dragoons on 17 November 1808. He may have been stigmatized by his association with the convention of Cintra, and his father's subsequent disgrace, because he never saw active service again. 
On 23 June 1812 he married Anne (1782-1858), only daughter of Sir James Graham, bt, MP, of Kirkstall, Yorkshire (1753-1825); they had no children. On 1 June 1814 he obtained a lieutenant-colonelcy in the 60th (Royal American) regiment of foot, soon afterwards transferring to the half-pay list of the 2nd garrison battalion; he remained on the half-pay list until 1841. 
On 14 February 1817 Dalrymple began his parliamentary career, coming temporarily into parliament for Weymouth and Melcombe Regis with the assistance of his father-in-law. He lost his seat at the general election of 1818 but returned to the Commons on 5 April 1819 as member for Appleby, a borough of which his father-in-law was recorder. He represented Appleby until 1826, when he was elected to the Haddington burghs, a seat previously represented by his kinsman Sir Hew Hamilton Dalrymple (later Dalrymple Hamilton), bt (1774-1834); he remained MP for Haddington until 1832. On 9 April 1830 he succeeded his father as second baronet and inherited the property at High Mark, Wigtownshire, that Sir Hew had inherited in 1753 from his father, Captain John Dalrymple (1692-1753), late 6th dragoons. On 22 July 1830 he was promoted colonel and appointed aide-de-camp to William IV. Losing his seat in 1832, he was elected to represent Brighton in 1837 and appointed aide-de-camp to Queen Victoria, an appointment and seat which he retained until 1841. He left parliament in 1841 and was promoted major-general on 23 November 1841. On 11 November 1851 he was promoted lieutenant-general, and on 11 April 1860 general. As well as Delrow House and High Mark, which he inherited from his father, Dalrymple owned or occupied houses at 129 Park Street, Grosvenor Square, London, and in Brunswick Terrace, Brighton. He was also a founder member of the United Services Club. He died at Delrow House, Aldenham, Hertfordshire, on 3 March 1866, and was buried in the family vault in the churchyard of the church of St John the Baptist, Aldenham. 


@@@@@


doc= 53605


Sir Adolphus Oughton, baronet (1684/5-1736), army officer and politician, and Miss Frances Dickenson ('b'. 1697) of St Giles-in-the-Fields. In his early years he was known as James Adolphus Dickenson. His father was the son of Adolphus Oughton (died 1684) of Fillongley, Warwickshire, and Great Harborough, Leicestershire, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Richard Samwell of Upton, Northamptonshire. He matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, on 19 March 1702, aged seventeen. He entered the Middle Temple in 1703, but did not follow a legal career. Oughton served under Marlborough at Blenheim in 1705 and was commissioned captain and lieutenant-colonel in the 1st foot guards in 1706, seeing further action at Oudenarde in 1708. About 1712 he married his cousin Frances Bagot (died 1714), daughter of his mother's sister Frances and her husband, Sir Thomas Wagstaffe, and widow of Sir Edward Bagot. That year he accompanied Marlborough into exile, but he returned in 1714 at the accession of George I, when he became groom of the bedchamber to the prince of Wales (afterwards George II). He inherited a lease of twenty-five years on an estate in Bishop's Tachbrook in Warwickshire on his wife's death in 1714, and later married Elizabeth, daughter of John Baber and his wife, Mary Draper. 


@@@@@


doc= 53608


Russ, Sidney (1879-1963), physicist, was born on 2 December 1879 at 27 Clifton Hill, St John's Wood, London, the fourth son of Charles Russ, a furrier, and his wife, Emily, formerly Callaway. He went to Shebbear College, north Devon, and graduated BSc with first-class honours from University College, London, in 1905, after which he became a demonstrator at the University of Manchester, working under Rutherford after the latter arrived there in 1907. In 1909 he obtained a DSc from University College, London, in 1910 he became Beit memorial fellow at the cancer research laboratories, Middlesex Hospital, and in 1913 he was appointed physicist to the hospital. In 1919 he changed to the medical school and in 1920 he accepted the newly instituted Joel chair of physics which he held to his retirement in 1946. He joined the Rontgen Society in 1910, of which he was president in 1919-20. Russ was a member of the British radium and X-ray protection committee, secretary of the Medical Research Council radiology committee, and scientific secretary of the National Radium Commission from 1928 to 1934. He was an original member of the King Edward's Hospital Fund radium committee which kept a stock of radium at the Middlesex in the care of Russ. This was loaned to other hospitals in London as required, together with help and advice on applications and dosimetry. The Medical Research Council also put Russ in charge of a radon organization which supplied nine facilities in the United Kingdom from 1924 to 1939. Russ served on various committees of the British Empire Cancer Campaign in its early years. He was appointed CBE in 1931 for his services to radium work, and he became the first chairman of the Hospital Physicists' Association, which was launched in 1943. Russ was married to Mary Priestley, eldest daughter of Major F. N. Priestley of Leeds; they had three children. 
When diploma courses were established for radiology after the First World War, Russ became responsible for the physics syllabus of the courses at Cambridge University and the University of London, thus teaching a substantial part of a generation of British radiologists. He wrote two textbooks, 'Physics for Medical Students' (1928) and 'Physics in Medical Radiology' (1928). He has been called a hard taskmaster, and his teaching style has been called conscientious, concise, pedantic, firm but always sympathetic, precise and autocratic but genuinely kind and understanding. 
Russ's main role was in certification of radiation and people. He worked to spread precision measurement throughout medicine in general, and radiology in particular. Dosage problems and radiation protection were the immediate motivations for precision measurement, creating a need for quality instrumentation, safe practices, and constant control and calibration. Before the age of clinical trials this kind of work can be seen as facilitating the replication of clinical practices and the communication of clinical results. However, Russ, along with most physicists working in medicine, thought of his work not merely as a handmaiden for clinicians but rather as bringing science to bear upon the whimsical and unmethodical work of medical doctors. Russ's ambitions for the role of medical physics must be said to have failed in the sense that it is now a mere tool upon which clinical medicine can draw. 
Russ was a driving force at the centre of the diffusion of precision measurement of radiation in Britain both of X-rays and of radioactive radiation. The two were very different. When contained in airtight vials radioactive samples were known to radiate constantly (or at least to come to do so after radioactive equilibrium was achieved). Thus they had to be measured only once, after which they could travel with a certificate designating the value. A certificate was meaningful only if this singular measurement was not doubted; the onus was on Russ to inspire trust. X-ray dosage was necessarily different because X-ray tubes do not emit unchanging radiation. Trustworthy measurement in any given location required the presence on the ground of reliable instruments and people. Russ measured, educated people in measurement, and lobbied for routine calibration of instruments, centred upon the National Physical Laboratory (this is one of the points of the co-authored book with Hector Colwell: 'X-Ray and Radium Injuries', 1934). His research, teaching, and committee work were all a part of this building of an infrastructure. 
Early on Russ also did research on irradiation of human tissue, especially cancer. He attempted to categorize the clinical effect of particular kinds of radiation (different wavelengths and intensities of X-rays; different intensities of gamma rays). His collaboration with Hector Colwell, 'Radium, X-Rays, and the Living Cell' (1915 and 1924), is an indication that work could still span both physics and medicine. By contrast the foundation of the Hospital Physicists' Association was symptomatic of a division of labour where physicists deal with measurement of radiation only and not with diagnosis, therapy, or clinical research. 
After his retirement to Bognor Regis in 1946 Russ wrote popular books on cancer. 'Cancer: Where we Stand' (1950) was supported by the British Empire Cancer Campaign. It was thought to reduce the resistance in the public to cancer examinations, and thus to the application of therapy at an earlier stage when chances of success would be markedly increased. 'Smoking and its Effects' (1955) is an argument that a strict causation of lung cancer by tobacco had not been proven. In it Russ declared himself a keen smoker, marshalled statistical evidence, and discussed the problems of statistical inference at length. Russ died of carcinoma of the bronchus at his home, The Hut, Fish Lane, on 27 July 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 53609


Gilbert, Joseph (1732?-1820/21), seaman and hydrographer, was baptized on 1 June 1732 in Kirton in Holland, near Boston, Lincolnshire, the eighth and youngest child of John Gilbert ('bap'. 1697, died 1782), farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth ('bap'. 1695, died 1759), daughter of Thomas and Elizabeth Armstrong of Bicker. Nothing is known of Gilbert's early life, except that soon after he was born his father moved from Kirton to Freiston, about 6 miles to the north-east. On 16 November 1758 at Freiston he married Frances Plant (died 1784). 
It is not known at what age Gilbert went to sea, but from 1764 to 1769 he was master of HMS 'Guernsey' (32 guns), one of the ships engaged under Hugh Palliser in the hydrographical survey of the coasts of Newfoundland and Labrador which consolidated the reputation of James Cook and which for over a century served as a model of hydrographical accuracy under the most adverse conditions. Gilbert River and Gilbert Lake in Labrador (lat. 52 degree 41'N, long. 56 degree 10'W) still bear witness to Gilbert's part in this great work; some of his charts, together with those of Cook, Michael Lane, and others, were engraved and published by Thomas Jefferys, later reappearing in 'The North American Pilot' (1775). 
Gilbert subsequently became master of HMS 'Pearl' (32 guns), in which he surveyed Plymouth Sound in 1769 (BL, Maps M.T.11.h.1(8)), and of HMS 'Asia' (64 guns), until at the unusually advanced age of forty he was selected by Cook to serve as master of the 'Resolution' on his second great Pacific voyage (1772-5). Cook thought highly of Gilbert both as a seaman and as a surveyor and draughtsman, paying tribute particularly to his judgement ('whose judgement and assiduity in this [surveying] as well as every other branch of his profession is exceeded by none'; letter to Philip Stephens, secretary to the Admiralty, 22 March 1775; TNA: PRO, ADM 1/1610) and named after him Gilbert Isle (lat. 55 degree 20'S, long. 71 degree 15'W), a small island off Tierra del Fuego, 'the most desolate coast I ever saw' ('Journals', 2.589-90), although a compliment was presumably intended. During the voyage, Gilbert produced not only a terse log (TNA: PRO, ADM 55/107), but many finely executed charts, as well as a number of charming watercolour drawings and perspective views. Perhaps the most vivid is on the largest scale, a chart of the Pacific and Southern oceans showing the track of the 'Resolution' (NMM, G201, 3/4 (HO A859)), but Gilbert's charts of Table Bay and Dusky Sound (TNA: PRO, ADM 55/107) are better evidence of his skill as a hydrographer. 
On his return to England, Gilbert was rewarded with the gift of Cook's watch and, on the recommendation of Palliser, with the position of master attendant at Sheerness Dockyard, whence he soon moved, briefly to Woolwich, and then to the more prestigious equivalent position at Portsmouth, where he served from 1776 to 1791. This was a period of great change and modernization in the dockyards and Gilbert earned praise from the controller of the navy, Sir Henry Martin, for his 'diligence and activity' (NMM, Portsmouth Dockyard records F/18, 1783). His last post, a promotion, was as master attendant at Deptford from 1791 until 1803. He then retired, with his unmarried daughter Frances ('b'. 1764), to Fareham, Hampshire. Surviving letters of this period show him as a touchingly humble man in affectionate awe of his learned nephew, the Congregational minister Revd Joseph Gilbert. 
Joseph and Frances Gilbert had at least four children, all born in Freiston. Two further children, Matthew and Barzena, born to Frances in 1774 and 1775 while her husband was in the south seas were illegitimate. Gilbert's eldest child, George (1759-1786), sailed with Cook on his third voyage and produced a journal (now in BL, Add. MS 38530) which supplements that of Cook himself; having served as a lieutenant in the West Indies, he died of smallpox on the threshold of a promising naval career. Joseph Gilbert's second son, Richard (1767-1845), also entered the navy, apparently retiring as a post captain; Richard Gilbert's daughter Emma married the writer John Doran. Joseph Gilbert died, a man of modest affluence, probably at Fareham, aged eighty-eight or eighty-nine, and was buried at Fareham on 20 January 1821. 


@@@@@


doc= 53610


Willans, (Herbert) Geoffrey (1911-1958), humorist, was born on 4 February 1911, the second of the three children of George Herbert Willans (died before 1945), a senior engineer. He was educated at Glyngarth preparatory school in Cheltenham and, from 1924 to 1929, at Blundell's School, Tiverton. After leaving school Geoffrey Willans spent a period as a preparatory-school master at Woodcote House School in Surrey, before being able to make a living from journalism. His friend the artist Ronald Searle remembered him as 'shortish, dapper -- a careful dresser. Very accessible, with a splendidly broad smile. Slightly clownlike... But there was nothing clownish about him. Entirely professional. Friendly but not a dupe... Must have been a jolly nice schoolmaster' (private information, R. Searle). 
Willans's first books were urbane humorous novels: 'Shallow Dive' (1934) and 'Romantic Manner' (1936). Pre-war small-boat sailing led to a wartime temporary commission in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, serving on convoy escorts, which he wrote up as 'One Eye on the Clock' (1943). On 9 November 1940 at St Mary Abbots, Kensington, London, he married Pamela Wyndham Gibbes ('b'. 1911/12), daughter of Lewes Nicholas Gibbes, a physician of Kensington Church Street, and his wife, Mignonette Middlemass. The couple had two sons, born in 1943 and 1947. Willans's wartime writing included comic articles for 'Punch' magazine using his preparatory-school experience. After demobilization he worked briefly for PA Reuter Features then, from 1945, for the BBC European Service, while continuing to contribute to magazines. A contemporary summary of his journalism noted his coverage of the 1948 Olympic games, an interview with President Eisenhower, and articles on human rights for all. 
In 1952 Willans consulted Ronald Searle, whose St Trinian's wicked-schoolgirl cartoon books were then at the height of their success, about his plan to write a full-length humorous book with a preparatory-school theme. This plan coincided with Searle's being 'sick to death' of St Trinian's, though his publisher was pressing him to supply similarly best-selling material for the Christmas book market. Willans's text appealed to Searle, and the first Molesworth book, 'Down with Skool!', was published in October 1953. It was hugely popular, with 53,848 copies sold before the end of the year. Searle's was the ready-made reputation, and the text provided ideal prompts for his caricatures. But Willans's creations, the knowing schoolboy-narrator Nigel Molesworth together with the other St Custard's School boys and staff, rapidly became celebrated in their own right. 
The next two Molesworth books with Searle illustrations, 'How to be Topp' and 'Whizz for Atomms', appeared for the 1954 and 1956 autumn publishing seasons, and Willans also published in quick succession several other journalistic and humorous books, though none achieved the same lasting fame. In the spring of 1958 Willans left the staff of the BBC to earn his living from freelance writing. A compilation, 'The Compleet Molesworth', was in proof and the text of the fourth Molesworth book, 'Back in the Jug Agane', was ready for publication the following year when Willans died suddenly, at the London Hospital, Stepney, on 6 August 1958, aged forty-seven, of a heart attack. 'The Compleet Molesworth' was published in 1958 with an introduction by Ronald Searle, and subsequent editions have been in both separate and 'compleet' form. 
In the decades following publication the name 'Molesworth' became a byword for the books' best-known features -- the narrator's artfully bad spelling, schoolboys such as 'uterly wet and sissy' fotherington-tomas declaiming 'Hello clouds, hello sky', venal schoolmasters, and the whole shambolic institution of St Custard's itself as a proxy for the adult world: 'Wot would everyone say if we skoolboys behaved like the nations of the globe? I will tell you. They would sa we were stupid, crass, ignorant, hopeless, weedy and sans un clue. And yet it still go on. It is time i took over. I can see it all. (G. Willans, 'Back in the Jug Agane')' The Molesworth books were at first widely seen simply as sophisticated schoolboy comedy, and the 'Time Magazine' review in October 1955 accused them of 'whimsy, which has long been the curse of British humour', but their reputation as classics grew quickly. In 1958 the 'Times' obituarist wrote that Willans's 'early and tragic death is a bitter loss to his innumerable friends and has robbed the field of English humour of one of its most stimulating and refreshing writers', and by 1992 the 'Independent' review of the reissue claimed that 'these books are classics of humour in the English language. To classify them simply as schoolboy yarns is to confuse setting for theme.' In 1999 Philip Hensher's introduction to the 'Penguin Modern Classics' edition set the books alongside other English classics of the late 1940s and 1950s whose stance was post-war cynicism, exploring 'a single disaffected mind within a depressing and faintly gothic setting': they were books with 'a ferocious satirical bite... not about school, nor about childhood, but about England'. 


@@@@@


doc= 53612


Brown, Albert Richard (1839-1913), shipping agent and consul for Japan, was born on 29 August 1839 at Ringwood, in Hampshire, the son of Richard Brown, wine merchant and clerk to the Ringwood board of guardians, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Pritchard. In 1853 he went to sea as a cabin-boy on the brig 'Industrious', leaving the vessel four years later as an able seaman. In 1860 he obtained his second mate's certificate, and the following year joined the 'Malta', of the Peninsular and Oriental Steamship Company (P. & O.), as fourth officer. He obtained a first mate's certificate in 1866, and joined the P. & O.'s 'Malacca' as first officer. He married on 19 May 1866 Louisa, 'nee' Pyne ('b'. 1840/41). His only son, Edward Albert, was born in 1867. 
The voyages of the 'Malacca' took Brown to the Far East, and he obtained his master's certificate in Hong Kong. In February 1869 Richard H. Brunton (1841-1901), the engineer supervising the construction of a network of lighthouses on the Japanese coast (and who had sailed to Japan on Brown's ship), advised the lighthouse section of Japan's department of public works to engage Brown as the master of the lighthouse-tender 'Tomio Maru'. The steamer transported supplies and equipment to lighthouse sites, and Brown assisted on numerous survey expeditions around the coast of Japan and in the investigation of potential sites for lighthouses and beacons -- work which was vital in the development of Japan's coastal and foreign trade. In March 1870 Brown took command of a new ship, the 'Thabor'. His seamanship impressed the Japanese authorities, and in 1871 he was asked to train Japanese students in the skills of navigation. His pupils went on to form the core of the country's mercantile marine service. 
In 1874 the Japanese government launched an expedition to Taiwan to punish the Botan population for atrocities committed on shipwrecked Japanese sailors. The American and British governments refused to permit the chartering of ships for the expedition, and there was a danger that, as the Japanese did not have suitable transports to carry men and material, the expedition would result in humiliating failure. The 'Thabor' was requisitioned as a transport, and Brown was asked to purchase and fit out five other ships for the purpose. He personally commanded one, the former P. & O. steamer 'Delta' (renamed 'Takasago Maru'), and carried General Saigo and 1500 men to a landing at Lingkiao Bay. The expedition was successful, and the grateful Japanese government announced that Brown would be rewarded with the payment of 3000 yen and invested with the order of the Rising Sun, fourth class. Although the British government initially refused to give its approval, he was finally permitted to accept the honour in April 1881. 
In late August 1874 Brown was commanded to return to Britain to take delivery of a new lighthouse-tender, 'Meiji Maru', from Robert Napier & Sons' shipyard in Glasgow. While in Britain he received instructions to purchase two more steamers for the shipping company Mitsubishi Shokai. He returned to Japan in 1875, and was invited to help form a marine bureau and to take charge of its shipbuilding and mercantile marine activities. While holding this government office he continued to act for Mitsubishi, and returned to Britain in 1877 to supervise the construction of new ships for the company. In 1883 he returned again to supervise the construction of ships for the Kiodo Unyu Kaisha (the 'National transportation company'), and another for Mitsubishi. 
In 1885 Kiodo Unyu Kaisha and Mitsubishi merged to form the Nippon Yusen Kaisha (the 'Japanese mail steamship company') (NYK), Japan's leading shipping line. Brown was appointed general manager, and travelled extensively in the Far East in 1886 to investigate the company's existing services and the potential for expansion. The following year he returned to Britain to supervise the construction of ships for NYK, and in March 1889 he resigned as NYK's general manager in order to stay in Britain to supervise the company's building programme and other business affairs there. Before he left, in the summer, he was awarded the order of the Rising Sun, third class, and appointed consul for Japan in Glasgow. 
In 1889 Brown formed his own company, A. R. Brown, to handle his agency work for the Japanese and to trade as Japan merchants and consulting engineers. In 1899 his son joined him as a partner in A. R. Brown & Co., and in 1900 they formed a private limited liability company, A. R. Brown, McFarlane & Co. Ltd, in partnership with George McFarlane, a consulting engineer and naval architect. The firm designed, placed contracts for, and supervised the construction of most of the warships and merchant vessels built in Britain for Japanese customers prior to the First World War. 
As Japan's consul in Glasgow, Brown was responsible for the welfare of Japanese students who visited the city, and his young charges included the sons of some of Japan's leading families. In 1909 he was awarded the order of the Sacred Treasure, second class. 
Brown was a keen yachtsman and a member of the Royal Clyde and Clyde Corinthian yacht clubs. His Scottish home, Summerhill, was in the village of Shandon, on the Gareloch, and he was a member of the executive -- and from 1909 until his death the chairman -- of the Clyde training ship for boys, the 'Empress'. The Browns had a home, Furlong House, in Ringwood, Hampshire, and also spent long holidays in Bournemouth. 
Albert Brown died at Parkstone, Dorset, on 7 March 1913, and was buried five days later at Ringwood. He was survived by his wife and son. He is remembered in Japan as a pioneer of that country's steam navigation, a hero of the Taiwan expedition, and one of the founders of the Japanese mercantile marine. 


@@@@@


doc= 53613


Butler, John (1728-1796), army officer in America, was born in Connecticut. Little is certain of his early life except that he married Catherine Bratt, with whom he had at least one son, Walter Butler (1752-1781). By the eve of the American War of Independence, he had long established himself as a prominent landholder, merchant, and liaison with Native Americans in the Mohawk valley, New York. In the climate of rising tensions between Britain and its North American colonies, he also established himself as a leading loyalist in a divided region. 
When war erupted in 1775, most of Butler's family was held in Albany, while he and his son, Walter, managed to flee to Montreal. A region that was crucial to both sides in the war was the area between Albany and Canada; the Mohawk valley was a significant part of this, because it offered the American patriots the most feasible route into Canada and the British a passage through which to strike at the centre of the rebellious colonies. Any success in the region could be won, however, only with the assistance of the power of the Iroquois confederacy and its tributaries. Britain's department of Indian affairs, however, had been thrown into disarray the previous year with the death of its northern superintendent, Sir William Johnson, who for two decades dominated the scene and placed the affection of the Iroquois above all else. Matters were worsened with the departure of Johnson's heirs and closest allies for England, where they would secure his former position and wealth as a benefit to be passed down to the next Johnson generation. In their absence the Iroquois confederacy, along with the vast majority of Native Americans in the region, declared their neutrality. Butler was given the unhappy position of acting superintendent of Indian affairs by Quebec's military governor, General Guy Carleton, and assigned the difficult task of persuading the Iroquois to fight with the British until Johnson's replacement arrived in July 1776. 
Butler's competence, either as a diplomatist or as a military commander, is unclear. He certainly had the confidence of Carleton, but Johnson's heirs, which included Sir William's official replacement and probable nephew, Guy Johnson, and Joseph Brant, Sir William's brother-in-law and a prominent leader of the Mohawk (a component of the Iroquois confederacy), clearly had a low opinion of him. Operating primarily out of Niagara, Butler certainly abused his position, allowing merchants such as Edward Pollard to exercise lucrative monopolies over the distribution of supplies to Native Americans, but such activities were par for the course. His tactics of recruiting the wary Iroquois were equally unsavoury. His primary device was said to have been rum, which he distributed freely before signing up young braves, and in diplomatic encounters he mixed lies about American patriot intentions to annihilate the natives with threats of British military might. On one such occasion, in May 1776, he concluded: 'You had better recall your resolutions and determine to keep the Kings peace, and the King will then be glad to hear from you. What a wretched situation must you be in when the King attacks all the seaports in America and comes in earnest to sweep off the Americans, if he finds you supporting the Americans. (Graymont, 96)' It should be noted, however, that such tactics were not unique to either the British or the whites.After the return of Sir William's heirs, who were far more familiar and trusted by the Iroquois leaders (and in fact included a number of them), recruiting drives met with much greater success. The jealous Butler continued his efforts to rally the Iroquois to the British cause, but his intoxicated and ill-equipped recruits were more of an annoyance to Brant and the Johnsons than a help. Nevertheless, in the following year Butler was assigned the charge of raising a new corps of loyalists, aptly called Butler's rangers, who were to be used as special forces units on the New York frontier. They were expected to be highly mobile guerrilla fighters who spoke Native American languages and used native methods of wilderness warfare. Such skills were essential, as these men were expected to fight side by side with Native Americans. They took the scalps of the enemy dead and wounded, tortured captives, and even used the chilling war whoop of native warriors as their battle cry. As leader of this force Butler rose to the rank of lieutenant-colonel. 
Butler's rangers were used in the brutal engagements that were the hallmark of the New York frontier campaigns fought by divided communities and families that were intent on dealing out the most brutal punishments for perceived disloyalty. Nor was this a white affair, as the Iroquois confederacy itself was drawn indecisively into the conflict and consequently torn apart, and its warriors found themselves defending their homes against former relatives and allies. The rangers were at virtually all of the major engagements in the region, among them the infamous attack on Cherry valley, commanded by Walter Butler, in November 1777, in which thirty-two civilians, mostly women and children, were massacred. Butler himself commanded the assault on Wyoming valley, Pennsylvania, in the following summer; there his rangers and native allies, primarily Seneca and Mohawk warriors of the now broken Iroquois confederacy, boasted taking 227 scalps. Despite capitulation terms to the contrary, Butler's victorious forces plundered the area's settlements, which included upwards of a thousand abodes, a greater number of cattle, and all of the mills. Recounting the events after withdrawing to Niagara, as was the case each autumn after a spring and summer of raids, Butler proudly remarked to Carleton: 'But what gives me the sincerest satisfaction is that I can with great truth assure you that in the destruction of this settlement not a single person has been hurt of the Inhabitants, but such as were in arms, to those indeed the Indians gave no Quarter. (Graymont, 172)' At the conclusion of the war Butler and his rangers were justly wary of returning home to the frontier communities they had pillaged, and so most of them accepted royal land grants in the Niagara peninsula once the corps was disbanded in June 1784. Butler retained his leadership role, serving as the district judge and deputy superintendent of Indian affairs. He died there in 1796. 


@@@@@


doc= 53614


Glover, Thomas Blake (1838-1911), merchant, was born on 6 June 1838 at 15 Commerce Street, Fraserburgh, in Aberdeenshire, the fifth of the eight children of Thomas Berry Glover (1805-1878), a civilian chief officer of the coastguard at Fraserburgh, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Findley (1807-1887), of Fordyce, Banffshire. He probably attended the parish school at Fraserburgh, and his name appears on the register of Channonry House School (The Gymnasium), Old Aberdeen, for the year 1854. 
Glover arrived in Nagasaki via Shanghai on 19 September 1859, soon after the opening of Japan to foreign trade. In May 1861 he became established as a general commission agent, representing among others Jardine, Matheson & Co., and in February 1862 he formed Glover & Co. At first he mainly exported refined Japanese tea, but this was not profitable. 
Glover's fortunes began to change in late 1863, when he started to take advantage of the business opportunities offered by the domestic political rivalries of late Tokugawa Japan. With funds loaned from Jardine, Matheson & Co., he switched his major interests to more speculative activities, such as the sale of ships, and arms and ammunition. Glover & Co. became the biggest Western firm in Nagasaki, opening branches in Shanghai and Yokohama in 1864. In 1865 Glover ordered munitions from Armstrong & Co. on behalf of the shogunate; he sold ships and even arranged for some domains to have ships built in Britain. Such orders were generally made through Glover Brothers, the Aberdeen firm of his brother Charles (1830-1877). 
Glover later claimed that he had been the most rebellious of all the rebels against the Tokugawa shogunate. Although he had dealings with the shogunate, and there is no contemporary evidence as to his political convictions, his links with the Satsuma domain did grow closer as it developed an increasingly pro-trade and pro-British stance. He arranged for young samurai from Satsuma, some of whom played prominent roles in the early Meiji government, to study in England in 1865, and persuaded Sir Harry Parkes to visit the capital of Satsuma in July 1866. 
Ironically, Glover & Co. found it difficult to adjust to the changes in trade which occurred with the Meiji restoration of 1868, including the economic decline of Nagasaki. Glover attempted to shift to entrepreneurial activities, constructing a patent slip dock and developing the Takashima coalmine. He also started branches in the newly opened Hyogo and Osaka, anticipating good trading prospects. However, he was seriously undercapitalized and his new ventures did not produce results quickly enough. The firm was declared bankrupt in August 1870 and the Netherland Trading Society acted as trustees. This failure is attributable to a lack of managerial ability, probably linked to his optimistic outlook on life, as well as to the disappearance of the circumstances which had earlier brought him prosperity. After the bankruptcy he continued to work at the Takashima coalmine, which was eventually bought by Mitsubishi. Mitsubishi was founded by Yataro Iwasaki, a former Tosa samurai, who had had business dealings with Glover before the restoration. Glover acted as a consultant for Mitsubishi in various ways, playing a crucial role in the founding of what became the Kirin Brewery Company. 
Glover was married, probably in 1867, to Tsuru Awajiya (1848-1899), who is said to have been one of the models for Arthur de Long's 'Madam Butterfly'. Although this story was the inspiration behind Puccini's opera, Tsuru was never a geisha and it is unlikely that the character of Lieutenant Pinkerton was based on Glover. They had two children, Hana (1868-1938) and Tomisaburo (1870-1945). In 1908 he was awarded the order of the Rising Sun (second class) by the Japanese emperor for his contribution to the establishment of the Meiji government. 
Glover's residence in Nagasaki became a famous tourist spot and he remains a well-known historical figure in Japan, although his role in the Meiji restoration has been exaggerated. He is criticized for his arms-dealing activities and praised for his attempts to introduce Western technology. In Britain his behind-the-scenes role in liaising with anti-shogunate domains before the restoration was valued by Lord Redesdale, a diplomatic contemporary (Redesdale, 377), but he was largely forgotten. In the late 1980s, however, local historians in the Aberdeen area, aware of his fame in Japan, began to revive his memory. Glover died of Bright's disease on 16 December 1911 at his home, 8 Fujimi-cho, Azabu, Tokyo. He was buried at Sakamoto international cemetery in Nagasaki beside his wife, Tsuru. 


@@@@@


doc= 53615


Butler, Walter (1752-1781), army officer in America, was born in Butlersbury (now Fonda), New York, the son of John Butler (1728-1796), an army officer and official in the British department of Indian affairs, and his wife, Catherine Bratt. Little is known of his early life, but having been brought up in his father's well-to-do household he would have enjoyed the maximum comforts allowed by New York frontier life; he would also have been exposed to the Native Americans who populated his native Mohawk valley and dealt with his father. In the early 1770s he was sent to Albany to study law, and in 1775 he was admitted to the New York bar. However, his legal skills proved of little use in the difficult struggle that lay ahead. 
The same year that he was admitted to the bar, Butler and his father, prominent declared loyalists, were forced to flee to Montreal. The rest of the family was rounded up and held by force in Albany. Butler, like most of the young loyalists of the New York frontier, sought to avenge his losses through service in the king's army. In autumn 1775 he was with the combined white and Native American force that captured Ethan Allen near Montreal. If British success on the middle colonies' frontier was to be lasting, however, the full co-operation of the region's Native Americans, most notably the powerful Iroquois confederacy, was essential. Unfortunately, Britain's department of Indian affairs had been thrown into disarray in the previous year with the death of its northern superintendent, Sir William Johnson, who for two decades dominated the scene and placed the affection of the Iroquois above all else. A group of his closest allies and heirs soon departed for England to secure Sir William's position and power. In their absence Butler's father, who was something of a rival to the group, was named acting superintendent. Walter, however, accompanied the party to England. The reasons for his journey are unclear, as there was no love lost between the Butlers and Johnson's heirs, particularly Joseph Brant, who was the brother of Sir William's Mohawk wife, Molly. Perhaps Butler was sent to ensure that the group did not ostracize the Butlers from any affection of the king. Nevertheless, Colonel Guy Johnson, Sir William's nephew, returned with the superintendency, and Butler returned as an ensign in the King's 8th regiment of foot. 
Britain's strategy on the middle colonies' frontier was to conduct a series of annual raids with Native American support, which were intended to support the movement of the main armies and drain American patriot resources. This frontier saw some of the most brutal fighting of the conflict, as divided colonial and Native American communities turned on former neighbours, friends, and family members. Butler played an integral part in this. By summer 1777 he had risen to the rank of lieutenant and fought under Sir John Johnson, Sir William's son, in the assault on Fort Stanwix, located in Butler's native Mohawk valley. The siege of the fort failed, but not before the British force, dominated by loyalists from the region and Mohawk and Seneca braves (members of the Iroquois confederacy), attacked an American patriot relief column at Oriskany on 6 August. In the intense fighting that followed, the rebels lost several hundred men, many of whom were scalped, and the British lost a number of key Seneca war leaders. In the aftermath of the battle, a contingent of the British-led force broke away and avenged the loss of the Seneca by burning a village of the neutral Oneida (also a component nation of the Iroquois confederacy) -- an action which plunged the already fragile confederacy into civil war. 
Butler soon returned to the Mohawk valley on a recruiting campaign, but was captured and taken to Albany. Although he was declared a spy and given a death sentence, he escaped eight months later and fled to the British stronghold at Niagara. Meanwhile his father had been assigned the charge of raising a new corps of loyalists, aptly called Butler's rangers, who were to be used as special forces units on the New York frontier. They were expected to be highly mobile guerrilla fighters who spoke Native American languages and used native methods of wilderness warfare. Such skills were essential, as these men were expected to fight side by side with Native Americans. They took the scalps of the enemy dead and wounded; tortured captives; and even used the chilling war whoop of native warriors as their battle cry. As the major commandant of this force, John Butler could choose his officers, and so his recently returned son was made a captain. 
Butler's most remembered service in the rangers was as the leader of the expedition in November 1778 against Cherry Valley, New York. In his command were 321 natives (mostly Seneca), 150 rangers, and 50 British regulars from the 8th regiment of foot. Butler ill-advisedly insulted and mistreated Joseph Brant, who, unlike Butler, had long since earned the respect of Native American war chiefs. Moreover, many of the whites in Brant's party refused to serve under the novice commander, which left Butler at the head of a force that generally wanted confidence in his abilities and wholly lacked respect for him. Unfortunately, Cherry Valley was defended by an equally incompetent force, which had ordered inhabitants to withdraw their possessions from the local fort and had billeted its officers in comfortable houses outside the fort's protection. Butler attacked on 11 November, sending a large body composed mostly of Seneca to deal with the officers in the houses and leading his most disciplined troops to assault the fort. In the chaos that followed, the natives and whites who had little respect for Butler's authority proceeded to pillage the settlement and massacre anyone, loyalist or patriot, who resisted. Despite Butler's pleas, when the force departed the next day the settlement had been destroyed, and thirty-two loyalist and patriot civilians, mostly women and children, lay dead. Only through the intervention of Brant and a handful of other respected men was an even worse atrocity prevented. 
Butler vehemently rejected accusations that he could have prevented events at Cherry Valley, but his superiors nevertheless never put so large a force under his command again. He continued to participate in the raids along the frontier until 30 October 1781, when, covering the retreat of the British force, he was shot and scalped at West Canada Creek by an Oneida warrior serving with the American patriots. 


@@@@@


doc= 53616


Shand, Alexander Allan (1844-1930), banker, was born on 11 February 1844 at Turriff, Aberdeenshire, son of James Shand, surgeon, and his wife, Margaret Allan. According to his 'Times' obituary he was trained in a Scottish bank before he joined the Chartered Mercantile Bank of India, London, and China in the early 1860s in Hong Kong. By 1864, at the age of twenty, he had arrived in Yokohama, Japan, as acting manager of the bank's sub-branch. Takayoshi Kido (1833-1877), one of the most influential and gifted of the newly empowered Japanese oligarchs, anxious to set the new Japan on a sound financial basis, made friends with Shand and, impressed by his clear discussion of banking problems, recommended him to the Japanese ministry of finance. 
Tempted by the extraordinarily high salary of 450 yen a month (a Japanese cabinet minister earned 500 yen a month), Shand started work for the ministry by writing, in English, a book on bank accountancy. 'The Detailed Account of Bank Bookkeeping' was published, in Japanese, by the ministry in December 1873. 
In November 1874 Shand, who had earlier been on home leave in Britain, organized lecture courses on economics and public finance in the ministry. More than 300 aspiring young Japanese bankers attended. Joseph Heco 
(Hikozo Hamada; 1837-1897)
was Shand's chief interpreter and translator. Early in 1875 he undertook the first Western-style bank inspections, following the collapse of a long-standing finance house, Ono. Shand advised the Japanese to establish a central bank, but this was a concept the Japanese were then unable to accept. (The Bank of Japan was established in 1882 by Masayoshi Matsukata.) Shand recommended that Japanese bankers follow English and Scottish banking rules. Before leaving Japanese service Shand himself produced another two books, 'On Banking' (1877) and the 'Manual of National Banking' (1877-8). He left Japan in March 1877; his sponsor, Takayoshi Kido, died, aged forty-three, in May 1877. 
During his stay in Japan, Shand married Emmeline Christmas (1848-1913). They had eight children, including Montague, who died as a child of dysentery in Japan. The other children were Margaret, Helen, Ida, Winifred, Norman, Evan, and Hubert. 
Back in London by 1878 Shand entered the service of the Alliance Bank in London. On the amalgamation of the bank with Parr's Bank in 1892 he assumed the managership of the Lombard Street branch. From 1896 Shand was head office manager of Parr's Bank at Bartholomew Lane. In the early years of the twentieth century, especially during the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-5, Shand was a crucial figure in forming syndicates to launch successful Japanese loans on the London money market. His Japanese partner in this endeavour was Korekiyo Takahashi (1854-1936), then deputy governor of the Bank of Japan and later finance and prime minister, who had in the 1860s been messenger boy for Shand in Yokohama. For these services, over several years, particularly during the Russo-Japanese War, the emperor Meiji conferred on him the fourth order of the Rising Sun in 1902, the third order of the Sacred Treasure in 1904, the third order of the Rising Sun in 1906, and the second order of the Sacred Treasure in 1908. Parr's Bank also expressed its thanks to Shand by awarding him several substantial gifts of money. In 1908 Shand was elected to the board of directors; he finally retired from Parr's Bank in 1918, when it merged with the Westminster Bank. 
Shand retired to Ardmore, Ardmore Road, Parkstone, Dorset, with his daughters Ida and Winifred. His wife, Emmeline, had died in 1913 in Upper Norwood. On 12 April 1930 he died at his Dorset home from influenza; he was cremated on 16 April at Woking crematorium, Surrey. Shand's estate (his will was probated at $7582) was not great, probably the result of losses he sustained following the great earthquake in Yokohama and Tokyo in September 1923. 


@@@@@


doc= 53618


Carleton, Thomas (c.1735-1817), army officer and colonial governor, was born in Ireland, the youngest son of Christopher Carleton of Newry, co. Down, and Catherine, daughter of Henry Ball of co. Donegal. He was the brother of Guy Carleton, first Baron Dorchester (1724-1808). Following his childhood in Ireland, Thomas Carleton joined the 20th foot in 1753, achieving the rank of lieutenant and adjutant by early 1756, and that of captain on 27 August 1759, after considerable service in Europe during the Seven Years' War. He continued his military career after the peace. Several leaves of absence allowed him to tour throughout Europe and, at times, to observe other armies in combat, such as the Russians in 1774 then battling 'with the Turks on the Lower Danube' ('Statement of the services of General T. Carleton', 8 Feb 1810, Carleton collection). 
The outbreak of the American War of Independence brought Carleton, now a lieutenant-colonel in the 29th foot, to his brother's side in Quebec, where Guy Carleton was governor, to serve as quartermaster-general to the British forces stationed there. Like his brother, Thomas became increasingly critical of Lord North's handling of the war effort, commenting at one point: 'this letter contains the worst kind of Treason against the Minister so I shant put my name to it' (Carleton to Lord Shelburne, 23 Oct 1779, Carleton collection). Although Carleton's patron Lord Shelburne later slipped from power, Thomas was fortunate enough to be offered, after two others had declined the office, appointment as governor of the newly created colony of New Brunswick. He took the oaths of office on 28 July 1784 and with his wife, Hannah Foy ('nee' Van Horn), whom he had married in London on 2 May 1783, reached his temporary capital Parrtown, soon to be renamed St John, in November 1784. Carleton had achieved colonel's rank on 20 November 1782 and journeyed to New Brunswick with two major assumptions: that his military responsibilities would continue, since the war office promised two regiments would be stationed in New Brunswick, and that his New Brunswick appointment would be a stepping-stone to higher colonial office in Quebec. He was to be disappointed on both counts. 
During the colony's first year Carleton governed by prerogative, choosing not to call any elected assembly. The governor and the appointed council, almost entirely loyalist in composition, made Fredericton, well up the St John River, the capital, dispensed land and offices, incorporated St John as a city, established the colony's boundaries to protect against American claims, and in general carefully oversaw every aspect of the colony's development. The creation of a deferential, well-ordered society, dominated by a landed gentry and without the 'American spirit of innovation' was the goal, along with the 'strengthening [of] the executive powers of Government [to] discountenance its leaning so much on the popular part of the Constitution' (25 June 1785, National Archives of Canada, M.G. 11, N.B. Ser. A, 2/132-7). Officials in England as well as rank-and-file loyalists in New Brunswick had reservations about some of Carleton's decisions and inclinations. 
In St John the first election in November 1785, finally called to choose an assembly, was marked by riots and strong opposition to the governor's party, but Carleton and the loyalist elite prevailed. Recounts, arrests, and military intervention produced loyalist elite domination of the assembly until the 1790s, when an even stronger opposition to the Carleton regime emerged. Meanwhile, the French menace forced considerable focus on the defences of Britain's remaining North American colonies. In the maritimes it was the senior colony of Nova Scotia that attracted most of London's attention. Carleton witnessed the loss of both regiments within his colony. The culmination of New Brunswick's military neglect came in September 1799 when Prince Edward, duke of Kent and Strathearn, assumed command of the forces in British North America with headquarters in Halifax. Somewhat softening these blows but by no means removing Carleton's military frustrations, he had been granted a major-general's rank on 12 October 1793 as well as an appointment as colonel commandant of a battalion of the 60th foot in August 1794. 
Despite his promotions Carleton remained disappointed with his shrinking military responsibilities and found his efforts as governor increasingly disconcerting and burdensome. While counties were established and substantial portions of New Brunswick were settled and developed by the loyalist newcomers and old settlers (pre-loyalists and Acadians), the political, social, and economic blueprint applied by Carleton and his supportive loyalist leaders came under heavy fire in the 1790s. A second assembly, elected in 1793, challenged the authority and decisions of the lieutenant-governor, his title as of 1786, and his appointed council. The confrontation resulted in deadlock and government ground to a halt from 1795 to 1799. Measures passed by the assembly were routinely turned back by the lieutenant-governor and council while legislation initiated at the upper levels of government suffered the same fate in the assembly. Hints from the British government concerning the need to compromise, along with divisions in the opposition faction led by James Glenie, eventually achieved concessions from both sides. Normal government resumed although assembly rights and privileges had been successfully asserted at the expense of executive authority. 
Carleton did not believe that 'to reign is worth ambition tho' in Hell' (Raymond, 'Winslow Papers', Carleton to Edward Winslow, 3 Jan 1805, 530). Capitalizing upon a temporary peace between France and England, in June 1802 he requested and was granted a leave of absence to return to England. Early in October 1803, accompanied by his wife, son William, daughters Emma and Anne, and stepson Captain Nathaniel Foy, Carleton sailed for England. He never returned to New Brunswick. Carleton tried to keep informed about his colony's needs but his advice was frequently ignored, and he became increasingly aware of 'the little prospect of being able to draw the attention of Ministers towards our part of the world' (ibid., 6 July 1804, 516). At the same time, his family was quickly seduced by residence at Ramsgate, winter visits to Bath, periods with Lord Dorchester at Stubbings House, near Maidenhead, and sojourns in London. Although several times pressed to return to his colonial post, Carleton declined and was allowed to continue as absentee governor until his death on 2 February 1817. He was buried beside his brother in St Swithin's Church at Nately Scures, near Basingstoke. 
Thomas Carleton's career has been overshadowed by the exploits of his brother Guy. The younger Carleton's administration of the governorship of New Brunswick also suffers in historical studies which assume that the newly arrived members of the loyalist elite shaped and directed the infant colony with the governor merely following their lead. But Thomas Carleton achieved at least some of the loyalists' aims and, while present in New Brunswick, actively directed its development. He 'deserves to be acknowledged as the key figure among the founding fathers of New Brunswick' ('DCB') although his governorship after 1803 was largely ineffective and inactive. 


@@@@@


doc= 53621


Dalling, Sir John, first baronet (c.1731-1798), army officer and colonial governor, was born at Earsham Street, Bungay, Suffolk, the son of John Dalling (died 1744), who owned the staithe and navigation of Bungay and the nearby manor of Bardolph, and Anne, daughter of Colonel William Windham of Earsham Hall, near Bungay. His mother's elder brother, William Windham, who inherited Earsham Hall, was comptroller of the household to William Augustus, duke of Cumberland, when Cumberland was commander-in-chief in Flanders, and it is likely that Windham used his influence to secure for Dalling an ensign's commission in the army (dated 24 February 1747). He was promoted captain in the 4th King's Own regiment of foot on 21 January 1753, and then major in the 28th foot on 2 February 1757. In March 1757 he sailed with the 28th foot for North America to join the campaign against the French. Again, his path had been eased by his uncle's connections, in this case his friendship with Sir Jeffrey Amherst, commander of the British forces in North America. Dalling's regiment was part of the failed expedition against Louisbourg, led by John Campbell, fourth earl of Loudoun, and in October 1757 joined the garrison at Fort Cumberland. 
Early in 1758 Dalling took part in the successful expedition against Louisbourg under Amherst. After the capitulation of the town, on 27 July 1758, he was sent by Amherst with 300 troops to reduce French fishing settlements along the coast of Prince Edward Island, returning to camp on 20 August with a large quantity of materials to build winter quarters. Still a major, though now second in command of his regiment, Dalling took part in James Wolfe's expedition to capture Quebec in 1759 and was given command of a body of light infantry. During the stalemate of July fighting patrols were sent out to scour and ravage the countryside. Dalling's raiding party of 25 July was one of the more successful, returning with 250 prisoners and some 500 horses, sheep, and cows. 
Following the capture of Quebec in September, Dalling joined the garrison, where his light infantry were employed in the petty warfare of the winter months, skirmishing with forces sent by the French commander, de Levis, to capture British outposts. In February, during a sharp exchange in the snow near the settlement of Church at Point Levi, Dalling was injured in the foot, a troublesome wound which required several operations. However, on 27 February 1760, before returning to England to convalesce with his uncle at the house of the duke of Cumberland, he was made lieutenant colonel of the 43rd foot, and on 28 April 1760, at the battle of St Foy, he commanded the light infantry stationed on Lieutenant-Colonel James Murray's right flank. The arrival of British naval forces in May forced the French to retreat. 
Dalling took command of the 43rd foot in 1761, while it was encamped on Staten Island in readiness for the descent on the French West Indies. He led his regiment in the capture of Martinique, Grenada, St Lucia, and St Vincent and its dependencies in late 1761 and early 1762. From garrison duty on Martinique, in May 1762, his regiment was ordered to join the expedition against Havana, Cuba; the siege lasted until mid-August. Afterwards Dalling was ordered with his regiment to Jamaica, where, apart from visits to England, he remained for the next twenty years. About 1767 he married Grace (1746/1747-1768), the eldest daughter of Philip Pinnock (1720-1778), speaker in the Jamaican assembly in 1768-9 and from 1775 to 1778. The Pinnocks, a wealthy and influential family, assisted Dalling's social and professional rise in the colony. On 4 December 1767 Dalling transferred his lieutenant-colonelcy to the 36th regiment, which had replaced the 43rd foot on garrison duty, and about 1768 he was made governor of Fort Charles and lieutenant-governor of the island. However, his wife died on 6 July 1768, aged twenty-one, leaving an infant daughter, Elizabeth Windham Dalling -- who in turn died at sea on 1 November 1768. In or possibly before 1770 Dalling married, secondly, Louisa (died 1824), the daughter of Excelles Lawford, of Burwood, Surrey. 
Dalling was promoted to the brevet rank of colonel on 25 May 1772 and on 14 August 1772 transferred his lieutenant-colonel's commission to the 50th foot, that regiment having succeeded the 36th foot on garrison duty. Upon the death of Sir William Trelawny in December 1772, Dalling acted as governor until the arrival of Sir Basil Keith in January 1774. During this brief interlude Dalling took an interest in the small British settlement on the Mosquito Coast. He imposed a new constitution on the settlers which strengthened the position of the superintendent, Thomas Hodgson. When in November 1773 Dalling, at the superintendent's request, dissolved the local council, alarm was raised in London, where the government, mindful of the weakness of British claims to the Mosquito Coast, recalled Hodgson. When Keith arrived in Jamaica, he annulled Dalling's policy and entered into new negotiations with the settlers. Dalling later renewed his interest in Central America with disastrous consequences. 
Upon the arrival of the 3rd battalion of the 60th (Royal American) regiment Dalling was made its colonel commandant (16 January 1776). Following the death of Keith in 1777, on 29 August 1777 Dalling was promoted to the rank of major-general and on 1 September 1777 was confirmed as governor of Jamaica. He was expected by the British government to prepare the island's defences for the possibility of French attack, should France intervene in the War of American Independence. 
Dalling often seemed a reluctant governor. He reported somewhat prophetically to Lord George Germain, secretary of state for the colonies, in 1779 that: 'through his wound, gout and the effect of the climate on his nerves, he will soon find himself not equal to the charge... and would therefore wish to be considered an old woman at home than to prove himself so in office abroad. ('Stopford-Sackville MSS', 95a)' The threat of French invasion in 1778 was averted temporarily by the arrival of reinforcements. When Spain entered the war in June 1779, Dalling was instructed to consider offensive action against the coast of Central America. However, the Spanish moved more quickly, destroying the British settlement of St Georges Key in the Bay of Honduras in mid-September. A small force sent by Dalling under the command of Major William Dalrymple was unable to recapture the key, but took instead the Spanish port of Omoa in the Bay of Honduras and with it 3 million dollars of Guatemalan gold. 
Although lacking experience of independent command, Dalling was now emboldened to carry out a grandiose scheme to capture Fort St Juan, which guarded the entrance to Lake Nicaragua, and then to establish a series of forts across the isthmus of Central America. He sent a force of 400 soldiers, which sailed on 3 February 1780 on the 'Hinchingbrook', under the naval command of Captain Horatio Nelson. However, owing to constant delays and a lack of knowledge of the terrain, the fort was not captured until 29 April and the onset of the rainy season. Sickness and disease began to deplete the force, which was forced to return to the coast, leaving behind a small garrison. 
Dalling refused to believe that the expedition was effectively ruined and continued to send reinforcements to the coast during the summer. In total, some 1400 men were sent, of whom just 320 survived. In November Dalling finally gave the order to blow up the fort and evacuate the remaining troops. His position was now precarious in the extreme. Military failure and the renewed threat of invasion were compounded by a series of natural disasters in the colony. On 2 October 1780 a tidal wave destroyed the town of Savanna La Mar, and this was followed by a hurricane and an earthquake. In 1781 there was another hurricane and a catastrophic fire in Kingston. A financial crisis caused by a lack of specie in the colony only worsened the economic distress of wartime. Moreover the death of his father-in-law, Philip Pinnock, in 1778 had removed an important source of support in the assembly, with whom relations had rapidly deteriorated following Dalling's imposition of martial law in 1779. 
With an all too evident want of judgement, Dalling became embroiled in a quarrel with Admiral Sir Peter Parker over the division of the spoils from the raid on Omoa. This escalated to the point where he ignored a direct order from the government and was removed from office. When Dalling dismissed the attorney-general, Thomas Harrison, for refusing his request to prosecute Parker for trespassing on the crown's possessions, Harrison took the matter to the lords of the Admiralty. Their report of 5 April 1780 ordering Harrison's reinstatement (as advocate-general) was ignored by Dalling, who then suspended members of the local judiciary after they also supported Harrison. A Board of Trade inquiry later criticized Dalling's abuse of power and ordered the reinstatement of the judges. 
Growing doubts over Dalling's conduct as governor were heightened by the fall of Mobile in March 1780 and Pensacola in May 1781, though delays in sending reinforcements were due partly to a lack of transports. Thus in March 1781 Germain was ready to yield to Dalling's earlier request to return home. Perversely, however, Dalling had changed his mind, having conceived a desperate plan to conquer the Dutch possession of Curacao. Germain sent two further orders in June and December recalling him to Britain. Dalling left before receiving the second, handing over his commission as governor to Lieutenant-Governor Archibald Campbell and boarding ship on 24 November 1781. Notwithstanding evident failings, Dalling was promoted (under the rule of strict seniority) to the rank of lieutenant-general on 20 November 1782. He was made a baronet on 11 March 1783. On 1 November 1783 he transferred to the colonelcy of the 37th regiment, a commission he held until his death. He was never given an active military command after his Central American adventure, though between 1784 and 1786 he was commander-in-chief at Madras and a member of the council. Upon his recall he was granted an annuity of $1000 for life. On 3 May 1796 he was promoted to the rank of general. 
Dalling died on 16 January 1798 at Clifton, near Bristol. His fifth but eldest surviving son and heir from his second marriage, William Windham Dalling (1774-1864), who inherited the Windham estate at Earsham, succeeded him as second and last baronet. His other children included John Windham Dalling, his youngest son, who served as a midshipman on the 'Defence' at Trafalgar in 1805, and Anne Louise (died 1853), who married General Robert Meade; their son John eventually inherited Earsham. 


@@@@@


doc= 53628


Garrett, Agnes (1845-1935), interior designer and suffragist, was born on 12 July 1845 at The Uplands, Aldeburgh, Suffolk, the seventh of eleven children of Newson Garrett (1812-1893), merchant, and his wife, Louisa (1813-1903), daughter of John Dunnell of Marylebone, Middlesex. She was educated at a boarding-school in Blackheath, near London. 
The Garrett family played a pivotal role in the development of women's rights in Britain: Agnes, with her cousin Rhoda, established the first interior design business run by women and thereby contributed to the opening up of the professions to women; Agnes's older sister Elizabeth Garrett Anderson (1836-1917) was the first British woman to qualify as a doctor; and her younger sister Millicent Fawcett (1847-1929) was president of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies from its foundation in 1897 until 1918 when the vote was secured for women. 


Rhoda Garrett went to London in 1867 intending to train as an architect, an intention shared by Agnes. As this was not a profession considered suitable for women, it took several years before they found an architect prepared to take them on as clerks. Eventually, in 1871, J. M. Brydon, who was later to design the new women's hospital in Euston Road, London, for Elizabeth Garrett Anderson, employed them as apprentices for eighteen months. 
This training was followed by a walking tour around England, visiting and sketching old buildings and interiors, after which the Garretts set up their own interior decorating business, designing furniture, chimney-pieces, and wallpapers in the Queen Anne style and aiming at middle-class people with moderate incomes. Among their commissions were the new women's university colleges and in 1874 they advised on the furnishings of Elizabeth Garrett Anderson's new home in 4 Upper Berkeley Street. These were among a number of projects that established them as leaders in their field. 
The composer Ethel Smyth became friends with the two designers, whom she described in her memoirs, 'Impressions that Remained' (1919). Smyth recalled 'The beauty of the relation between the cousins', and the sanctuary they gave to 'waifs and strays of art' in their home at 2 Gower Street, London. However, it was with Rhoda that Ethel Smyth formed a particular bond: 'How shall one describe that magic personality of hers, at once elusive and clear-cut, shy and audacious? -- a dark cloud with a burning heart -- something that smoulders in repose and bursts into flame at a touch... though the most alive, amusing, and amused of people, to me at least the sombre background was always there -- perhaps because the shell was obviously too frail for the spirit. (Smyth, 7)' The work of Agnes and Rhoda Garrett was considered as influential as that of Morris & Co. in spreading new and artistic ideas of taste in the home from the 1870s. In 1876 they published 'Suggestions for House Decoration in Painting, Woodwork and Furniture', one of the 'Art at Home' series published by Macmillan and edited by the journalist W. J. Loftie. Enormously successful, the book had gone into six editions by 1879. In 1878 the Garretts exhibited furniture and a cottage room at the Universal Exhibition in Paris and ten years later Agnes designed a complete interior consisting of carpets, furniture, metalwork, wallpaper, and woodwork for the first exhibition of the new Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society. Alongside this work they also ran a school of interior decoration. In addition to their Gower Street house they rented an old thatched cottage at Rustington in Sussex. A friend later recalled their 'art-y clothes' (Smyth, 54). Rhoda was a member of the Royal Archaeological Institute, and also served on the committee of the Society for the Preservation of Ancient Buildings. 
The Garretts were not only the best-known women designers and decorators of the period, but they also campaigned actively for women's rights. They were both active in the London National Society for Women's Suffrage set up in 1867. They spoke regularly at meetings in support of the cause of women's rights and Rhoda was considered to be one of the most effective of the early suffrage speakers. In 1871 they both joined the central committee of the National Society for Women's Suffrage when it was set up to campaign both for women's suffrage and for the repeal of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts', and Agnes for a time was one of its honorary secretaries. 
Neither Agnes nor Rhoda married and they shared a house together until Rhoda's early death from typhoid fever and bronchitis on 22 November 1882 at 2 Gower Street, London. Her death certificate was, fittingly, signed by Elizabeth Garrett Anderson; she was buried in the churchyard at Rustington. Agnes continued with the interior decorating business; after the death of her husband, Harry Fawcett, Millicent moved in to share the Gower Street house. Agnes died on 19 March 1935 at 2 Gower Street, London, having outlived all of her siblings. 


@@@@@


doc= 53629


Rhoda Garrett (1841-1882) was born on 28 March 1841 at Elton in Derbyshire, the daughter of the Revd John Fisher Garrett and his first wife, Elizabeth Henry Pillcock. Her father married again, and his second wife was said to have 'practically turned her predecessor's children out of the house to fend for themselves' (Smyth, 7). Rhoda had a 'terrible struggle' to support herself and her younger brothers and sisters, and was 'dogged by ill-health as well as poverty' (ibid.). Rhoda's younger half-brother was Fydell Edmund Garrett (1865-1907), an associate of Cecil Rhodes. 


@@@@@


doc= 53630


Cook, Cecily Mary (1889/90-1962), trade unionist and suffrage campaigner, daughter of Alfred Graves, was probably born in London, but little else is known about her early life. She married Herbert G. N. Cook, a secretary, on 6 November 1909. The couple's only child, a son, died at about the age of nineteen. Following Herbert Cook's early death, Cecily lived for many years with Arthur Thomas Hagg, a professional artist. 
Active in the labour and women's movements for around half a century, in her early years Cecily Cook was an ardent trade unionist and prominent suffrage campaigner. She later joined the information and research department of the Independent Labour Party (ILP), where she prepared weekly notes for speakers and memoranda for the use of MPs, as well as articles and pamphlets. Cecily Cook was also active in constituency politics, serving as Clement Attlee's chief woman worker when he contested Limehouse for Labour in 1922 and 1923, and standing herself as a Co-operative Women's Guild nominee for a seat on the London county council at Wandsworth in 1925. 
Cecily Cook joined the Earlsfield branch (London) of the Co-operative Women's Guild in 1920. She later moved to the Marylebone branch where she held the offices of president and secretary. Following the break with Labour, Mrs Cook left the ILP, and from 1933 to 1938 worked as member of the guild head office staff. After one unsuccessful attempt, she was elected guild secretary in 1940, a position she retained until her retirement thirteen years later. Cecily Cook was strongly internationalist in outlook and in 1951 was made president of the International Co-operative Women's Guild. She was honoured for her co-operative work when she was appointed OBE in 1948. 
The guild's most successful period as a radical organization campaigning for women's rights was over before Cecily Cook was elected to a position of national leadership. Nevertheless, she was an important voice in emphasizing the guild's traditional role in educating for citizenship, and became a significant promoter of the benefits of peace and reconstruction. Guild membership fell during wartime but by 1950 had recovered some of its losses, an achievement in part explained by Cecily Cook's enthusiasm and devotion to duty. Her work with the guild was characterized by her belief in the centrality of the spirit of co-operation to the democratic ideal. 
Cecily Cook had many recreational interests, including gardening, poetry, and archaeology. She was said to be an indomitable and inspiring figure, although essentially modest in character. She died on 28 June 1962 at the Whittington Hospital, Archway, London, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 3 July 1962. Mrs Cook left little money, and probate of her will was granted to Arthur Hagg. 


@@@@@


doc= 53632


Statham, Henry Heathcote (1839-1924), architectural writer and journal editor, was born at Everton, Lancashire, on 11 January 1839, the eldest son of Henry Heathcote Statham, a solicitor, and his wife, Irene Elisa, 'nee' Horner. The journalist Francis Reginald Statham was his younger brother. He was educated at Liverpool Collegiate Institution and trained as an architect in the office of George Williams of Liverpool; he became secretary of the Liverpool Architectural Society in 1866. The passion of his early years was for music, particularly the organ, and he received advice from W. T. Best, the organist at St George's Hall, Liverpool. Statham practised briefly as an architect in Liverpool but in the early 1870s was invited by George Godwin -- the editor of 'The Builder', a leading weekly architectural magazine -- to move to London and devote himself to writing. Apart from 'The Builder', his literary work included articles for the 'Edinburgh Review', 'The Fortnightly', and the 'Musical Times', on musical and literary questions, written lucidly but with forthright opinions, including a strong aversion to the music of Richard Wagner. 
Statham succeeded Godwin as editor in 1883 and retired in 1908. He became an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1871 and a fellow in 1878. He made designs for architectural competitions, such as the refronting of the National Gallery, London, the layout of Trafalgar Square, and the redesign of Thames bridges. Statham designed a new front for the offices of 'The Builder' and other small works. He would often spend boxing day drawing an architectural fantasy for publication in 'The Builder', based on a passage of poetry, often Browning, whose 'Sordello' he was able to quote extensively. He married on 17 February 1887 Florence Elizabeth Dicken, daughter of William Stephen Dicken, with whom he had four sons and two daughters. 
Statham's work as an editor was valued for raising the cultural level of architecture by his quality of thought and language. He stood aside from contemporary debate about style, representing a conservative viewpoint and an appreciation of the structural logic of French architecture. In his writings on architecture, such as 'A Short Critical History of Architecture' (1912), he stressed universal themes of construction and symbolism rather than the opposing characteristics of different styles and periods. He expressed his dissatisfaction with current trends in 'Modern Architecture' (1897). His contribution on 'Modern architecture' (from 1800) to the article 'Architecture' in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1910) was a lively summary of the international scene, biased towards an artistic expression of classicism. 
Statham did not abandon his musical career. He played the organ at St Luke's, Whitechapel, for many years for Canon Henry Barnett, and gave recitals of Bach in the East End. In 1879 and for at least two subsequent years, on the recommendation of George Godwin, he voluntarily played for Sunday afternoon recitals at the Albert Hall, London, and attracted an audience of 4000. His repertory was based on Bach, Handel, and Mendelssohn. He died at Torbay Hospital, Devon, on 29 May 1924. 


@@@@@


doc= 53633


Norton, James Lansdowne (1869-1925), motorcycle designer and manufacturer, was born at 37 Spon Terrace, Aston, Birmingham, on 8 January 1869, the son of James Norton, a journeyman cabinet-maker, and his wife, Elizabeth Chinn. The family were members of the Salvation Army, in which Norton remained active throughout his life. He demonstrated mechanical aptitude at an early age, being apprenticed as a toolmaker and working on bicycle chains. In 1888 he suffered a severe attack of rheumatic fever; a transatlantic voyage helped him to recuperate, but he was prematurely aged, earning the nickname 'Pa', in honour of his white hair and beard. 
In 1898 Norton set up the Norton Manufacturing Company in Bromsgrove Street, Birmingham. On 30 October that year he married Sarah, daughter of Charles Henry Saxelby, a clockmaker, at the Salvation Army Citadel. There were five children of the marriage. Norton's small company, employing only a few men and boys, initially made bicycle chains but he was quick to see the potential of the motorized bicycle. In 1902 his friend Charles Garrard began to import French Clement engines for Clement-Garrard machines. Norton built Garrard's frames and advertised his own Clement-engined machine. The following year he expanded the manufacturing capacity of the company and in 1904 adopted larger engines when the Garrard work ended. Although initially committed to lightweight machines, Norton responded to public demand for more powerful engines. 
Norton motorcycles reflected the fact that the designer and manufacturer was also an active competition rider. Norton's experience was reflected in machines that relied on simple proven systems, light weight, and good road-holding. The emphasis on competition and improvement came at the expense of production and profit, but brought its own pay-off with a win at the inaugural Isle of Man Tourist Trophy (TT) races in 1907. Norton used the resulting orders and publicity to fund the design of his own engine, the single-cylinder type that would be the basis of Norton production until 1963. This engine demonstrated a practical appreciation of metallurgical problems and the need to dissipate heat from the exhaust port. Nortons competed in the TT every year from 1907, but without success. By 1910 Norton was seen as the father figure of the industry, despite the small size of his company. 
Unfortunately poor financial management forced Norton in 1913 to sell the company to his major component suppliers, R. T. Shelley. Recognizing that Norton was the company, Shelley retained him as managing director, with a nominee finance director. Competition remained the basis of development and several world records were secured at Brooklands. As a result the simple Norton side-valve machine was faster than its more complex, and apparently more advanced, rivals, reflecting Norton's design philosophy. He was the last manufacturer to fit a conventional gearbox, in 1915. 
In 1914 the Norton company was too small for direct sales to the armed forces, so it was able to continue supplying the civilian market, where greater profits could be made. By 1919 the company had a reputation for fast and reliable machines. Norton, anticipating the roller-coaster trading conditions of the early 1920s, and fearful that trade unions and restrictive practices would destroy business, suffered a nervous breakdown in mid-1919. In 1920 the company moved to Bracebridge Street, its home for the next forty-three years. Second place in the 1920 TT encouraged Norton to pursue another win, which he realized would be the key to strong sales. To this end he developed an overhead-valve engine and experimented with mechanically closed valves, the desmodromic system, for which he patented a design in 1924. The simple overhead-valve engine proved adequate, breaking the 500 cc world speed record on its first outing in 1922. 
Over the winter of 1921-2 Norton spent six months in South Africa, where he visited his brother and rode 3000 miles on a sales trip. Shortly after his return to England terminal cancer of the bowel was diagnosed. His machines, however, continued to perform well: two second places at the 1923 TT on standard machines boosted sales. Finally in 1924 the company, prompted by Castrol Oils, agreed to hire a professional racer, Alec Bennett, who secured the elusive win. Bennett also won the other major events that year, the Belgian and French grands prix. In July Norton was the guest of honour at a civic reception in Birmingham, his last public appearance. His machines were now acknowledged to be the best in the world. 
Norton died from cancer at his home, 24 Sampson Road, Birmingham, on 21 April 1925, aged fifty-six. He was buried at Lodge Hill cemetery, Birmingham, on 24 April. Within days Norton Motors marked the passing of a man loved and respected by all who knew him, and of whom 'Motor Cycling' could say, in its obituary notice of 29 April 1925, 'the advanced design of motorcycles of today has been largely due to his skill and knowledge', by sacking his eldest son and cutting off all connection with the Norton family. Norton had an enormous influence on the development of motorcycles and the industry that built them, an area where Britain was the world leader for fifty years. His name still commands worldwide recognition. 


@@@@@


doc= 53634


Wimborne, Walter of (fl. 1261-1266), Franciscan friar and poet, began his career at Wimborne Minster, Dorset, where he was first a schoolteacher and then joined the newly arrived Franciscan order. His up-to-date knowledge of Aristotle suggests that he may have attended lectures at Oxford, but he became Franciscan lector at Cambridge (between 1261 and 1266), and is finally associated with the friary at Norwich. A series of cumulative misunderstandings, beginning in the sixteenth century, led to the division of his works between two poets, of the thirteenth and fourteenth century respectively. 
Walter's poems include satire ('De palpone', 'De symonia', 'De mundi vanitate', 'De mundi scelere') and devotional works to the Virgin Mary ('Ave Virgo', 'Marie Carmina'). He employed several metres, all involving rhyme, and is notable for striking images and an exotic vocabulary, much of his own coining. He influenced, or was influenced by, John of Howden. The length of his poems caused some to be abbreviated, and passages from the 'Marie Carmina' were adapted as hymns by Richard Ledred in the fourteenth century. His prose 'Tractatus moralis super quatuor elementa' (of which only part survives) is an allegorical interpretation of the physical world. He had read widely in classical writings (especially the satirists and Solinus), patristic authors, medieval poets (Jean de Hauville, John of Howden), Marian devotees (Richard de St Laurent), and the new translations of Averroes and Aristotle. His greatest skill was in weaving these disparate strands into a highly affective and effective poetic style. 


@@@@@


doc= 53635


London, John (d. 1428), Benedictine monk and recluse, entered Westminster Abbey in 1377-8 and said his first mass in 1379. The toponym may indicate his place of origin; his family is unknown. As keeper of the shrine of St Edward the Confessor, an office which he held as a junior monk, he was thrown into contact with pilgrims and sightseers. As the second of the two treasurers of Eleanor of Castile's manors in 1388-90 and 1391-3, he acquired experience of moneybags and the care of property, but without carrying the weight of responsibility falling on his senior colleague. A potentially useful, if not high-flying, career as an office-holder was terminated when he became a recluse. He probably took this step in or soon after 1393, when the monastery's 'reclusorium', formerly situated near the infirmary but now in the angle between the south transept and south ambulatory of the church, became vacant on the death of John Murymouth, its previous occupant. Murymouth was, it appears, the recluse to whom Richard II confessed on 14 June 1381, before his meeting with the rebels at Mile End, and whom Thomas Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (died 1401), the former appellant, mentioned in his confession of treason in 1397. 
In the later middle ages, the life of a recluse at Westminster was compatible with changes of scene, and London, accompanied by a servant, spent most of the year 1401-2, and possibly a longer period, at Little Malvern Priory, Worcestershire. Abbot William Colchester's willingness to pay the cost of his board there underlines the special status he now enjoyed in the community: an abbot would not normally do this for a monk. There appears to be no good reason to doubt that London, long since in residence again at Westminster, was the recluse to whom Henry V confessed on the night of his father's death. The claims of William Alnwick, later the first confessor-general of the Bridgettine order, to this distinction depend on the St Albans chronicler's reference to him as a monk and recluse of Westminster. But no one of this name occurs in either capacity in Westminster sources for the period. Like many other recluses, London was sought out by devout, if in some cases politically deviant, members of the aristocracy. The bequest to him by Henry, Lord Scrope of Masham, executed for treason in 1415, of a rosary and the sum of $5, a substantial legacy, points to more than a passing acquaintance between the two. A desire for greater solitude than could be enjoyed at Westminster may explain London's second absence, in 1416-19, but this time his whereabouts are unknown. The bequest to him of $10 by Thomas Beaufort, duke of Exeter (died 1426), suggests that he again attracted an aristocratic clientele after his return to Westminster. 
The St Albans chronicler believed that London died on or about the feast of St Scholastica (10 February), 1429. From Westminster sources, however, it appears that he died in 1428, in the late summer or autumn. He was probably buried in the monks' cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 53636


Flete, William (fl. 1352-1380), Augustinian friar and hermit, always called himself Brother William of England. He was first designated 'of Flete', which presumably refers to Fleet in Lincolnshire, when the prior-general of his order granted him conventual status at the priory of Lecceto, near Siena, in September 1359. His native connections were clearly with eastern England. He was licensed in February 1352 to preach for the diocese of Ely, and studied theology at Cambridge as a member of the Augustinian community there. A note in the manuscript of a sermon in commemoration of Catherine of Siena, perhaps dubiously attributed to him, says that he composed it around 1382 when he was 'about seventy' and that he survived the saint 'for several years'. More exact dates cannot be determined for his birth or for the landmarks of his early life. 
Flete was known in Catherine's circle as 'il baccelliere' ('the bachelor'). He had entered upon the stages preparatory to receiving the master's degree at Cambridge, but decided not to proceed and in July 1359 left England to spend the rest of his life at Lecceto, hallowed in Augustinian tradition as the very heart of the order and supposedly associated with Augustine himself. He thus detached himself totally from his native land, eschewing careerism and seeking spiritual perfection. At Lecceto he acquired a reputation for asceticism exceeding the requirements of the rule, and won the regard of two prominent holy men, Giovanni Colombini, founder of the Gesuati, and the Vallombrosan Giovanni dalle Celle. He has however attracted most attention as an associate of Catherine of Benincasa (St Catherine of Siena). On the evidence of a witness at the canonical process of investigation into Catherine's sanctity initiated in 1410, they knew each other already by early 1368, but another source intimates that they did not actually meet before January 1377, when Catherine visited Lecceto and Flete took down at her dictation a statement of her 'spiritual doctrine'. Benedict Hackett has argued for Augustinian influence on Catherine's early development and suggests that Flete may have been her guide. 
There is some indication that Catherine thought Flete inclined to overvalue the ascetic's total seclusion. Perhaps influenced by her activist piety, he shared with her, between 1373 and 1375, in successful efforts to reform certain Sienese reprobates. His sole recorded excursion outside Lecceto was to attend the consecration of a conventual church founded by Catherine in the castle of Belcaro, donated to her by one of these penitents. In 1379, however, he refused to obey the summons to Rome which Urban VI (probably at Catherine's instigation) issued to him and other holy men in order to gain support in the early stages of the schism. Catherine was severely displeased, but at her death in 1380 she wished Flete none the less to share in the direction of her 'family' of devotees. It is not known where or when he himself died and was buried. 
Flete's letters to Catherine do not survive; a handful of hers to him do. In 1377 he wrote to her confessor Raymond of Capua extolling her virtues, and he urged the public profession of obedience to Urban VI in letters to the rulers of Siena and to his Augustinian brethren in England; to the latter, breaking the silence of his self-imposed exile, he addressed other salutary spiritual counsels. The treatise 'De remediis contra temptaciones', which he may have composed before leaving England, achieved a considerable manuscript circulation, in England and elsewhere: Hackett lists twenty-one complete Latin and fourteen English extant manuscripts. Its influence has been detected on Walter Hilton and also perhaps on Thomas More. 


@@@@@


doc= 53637


Sutton, Katherine (d. 1376), abbess of Barking and supposed liturgical dramatist, owes her importance solely to a tantalizing reference in the Barking customary drawn up by Sibille Felton, abbess from 1394 to 1419, and presented to the abbey in 1404: 'the venerable lady Katherine de Sutton, who then had pastoral charge [of the abbey,]... with the unanimous consent of the sisters, ordained that, immediately after the third responsory of Matins on Easter day, the celebration of the Lord's Resurrection would take place, and that the procession would be established [ordered?] in this manner. (Tolhurst, 107)' There then follows an unusual piece of Latin liturgical drama, depicting the harrowing of hell, in which the nuns, representing the souls of the patriarchs in limbo, are led out of a side chapel by the officiating priest. Each carrying a palm and a candle, they go in triumphant procession to a side-altar, the 'sepulchre'. Here a crucifix-figure and a communion-host, concealed on Good Friday to represent the burial of Christ, are now 'raised', and the host carried in a monstrance to the main altar of the Holy Trinity, with appropriate liturgical antiphons being sung at each stage. Not only is this piece of drama an unusual variant of the 'elevatio', the symbolic raising of Christ's body on Easter morning which was a standard part of medieval church practice, but it affords a rare glimpse of a female, non-clerical experience of liturgy. On both counts the Barking 'Harrowing of Hell' has attracted much interest and Katherine Sutton has been hailed as the first known female dramatist in England. While this may be correct, the evidence is not conclusive and needs careful scrutiny. 
Almost nothing is known about Katherine. The only other documents concerning her, the royal assent to her election as abbess on 15 March 1358, and the royal leave (date 16 April 1376) to elect a new abbess on her death, do not give her parentage, as such documents often do, nor is there any indication of her date of birth or date of profession as a nun. The lack of information about Katherine Sutton is therefore unusual for the head of an abbey of such powerful standing as Barking, which claimed to be the oldest community of women in England (after the destruction of other communities by the Danes), ranked as a royal foundation. Its abbess took precedence over other abbesses and was considered to hold her lands by barony. Despite impoverishment caused by repeated flooding of its lands along the Thames, at the dissolution Barking was found to be the third richest abbey of nuns in England. 
Since many abbesses of Barking were princesses or members of the most powerful families in the country, the relative anonymity of Katherine Sutton requires explanation. She may have had family connections for which evidence does not survive, or may have been elected solely for her personal qualities of leadership. The existence of a previous abbess of the same surname, Yolande Sutton, could be purely coincidental, but suggests that there was an established family association with the abbey. These two abbesses might have come from the Suttons of Dudley Castle, Staffordshire, or from the Suttons of Cheshire, who were later among the founders of Brasenose College, Oxford. On the other hand, the entry in the customary suggests a forceful personality, and Sibille Felton mentions no one else among her recent predecessors. 
When it comes to claiming Katherine Sutton as a dramatist, problems arise from the nature of the material. Liturgical drama, drawing most of its dialogue from pre-existing antiphons and scriptural texts, does not usually have named authors, however distinctive the play. In contrast, religious plays performed outside the liturgy, as entertainment rather than worship, are sometimes ascribed to individuals. In addition, the Barking play, although unique in itself, is but one elaboration on an antiphon about the harrowing of hell which formed a standard part of the 'elevatio' right across western Europe. Furthermore, there seems to have been an established tradition of lively liturgical drama at Barking: in 1279 Archbishop Peckham had had to admonish the nuns about maintaining the decorum of their Holy Innocents' play, and some of their other rituals have unusual elaborations, such as the washing of the crucifix-figure in wine at its 'burial' on Good Friday. Against all this, there is the Barking customary's unique emphasis on Katherine's decrees about the Easter celebration. The text itself stresses her daring break with universal tradition in moving the 'elevatio' from before to after matins. How much she contributed to the form of the 'elevatio' itself depends on how much weight is given to the last phrase of the passage from the customary, how closely it may be linked with Katherine, and whether the Latin means that she ordained that the procession 'be ordered' or 'be established': the latter would suggest the setting up of a new piece of liturgical action. It can be said with confidence, however, that Katherine struck her contemporaries as a woman of notable energy and decisiveness, and that they associated her name, in whatever way, with an interesting and unusual piece of liturgical drama. 


@@@@@


doc= 53638


Caracalla (188-217), Roman emperor, was Severus's elder son, who was born Septimius Bassianus on 4 April 188. He was known by his common nickname, which derived from his favourite dress, the Gallic cloak or 'caracullus'. He succeeded Severus in 211, along with his brother Publius Septimius Geta. Despite the efforts of their mother, the brothers ignored their father's advice to work together, until Geta was murdered in the palace at Rome the following year, after which Caracalla ruled alone for a further five years, until his death on 8 April 217. On becoming emperor Caracalla immediately gave up the effort against the Britons: 'he made a settlement with the enemy, withdrew from their territory and evacuated the forts' ('Dio's Roman History', 77.1.1) and with his brother rapidly headed back to Rome with the army 'as if they were returning as conquerors of Britain' (Herodian, 3.15.8). Nevertheless, Caracalla may have completed the campaign his father had planned for 211, while an inscription set over the east gate at Carpow seems to belong to the period when he was ruling alone. The division of Britain into two separate provinces, which Severus may have decided upon in 197, was now carried into effect, with the larger Upper Britain (Britannia Superior) in the south under a consular governor with two legions and in the north the smaller Lower Britain (Britannia Inferior) containing the remaining legion based at Eboracum. In the event, Caracalla's settlement proved lasting. The reconstruction of Hadrian's Wall defined permanently the northern limit of the Roman province, though effective control extended further north to roughly the line of the later England-Scotland border. 


@@@@@


doc= 53639


Aspinall, Arthur (1901-1972), historian, was born at Co-operative Terrace, Stainland, near Halifax in the West Riding of Yorkshire, on 11 July 1901. His mother was Sarah Hannah Aspinall, a cotton reeler. His father's name was not recorded on his birth certificate but on his marriage certificate in 1931 it was given as Oliver Aspinall, deceased, described as a 'woollen operative'. He was educated at Elland secondary school, Halifax, from where he made his way to the Victoria University of Manchester, matriculating in October 1919. At that time his mother resided at Holywell Green, Stainland, near Halifax. His first intention was to read science. However, those were the great days of the rising Manchester school of history under such figures as H. W. C. Davis, T. F. Tout, and F. M. Powicke; Aspinall immediately fell under that spell, seeing in history, as he did throughout his life, a subject that was both a scientific discipline, a field for investigative research demanding strict accuracy and based on evidence that could be verified, and also a human study of the quirks and foibles of men's characters. 
Aspinall's characteristic industry was already in evidence when he completed his doctorate, under Davis, in less than two of the statutory three years, having chosen as his subject the political career of Henry Brougham, another northerner despite coming from the 'wrong' side of the Pennines. This study became Aspinall's first book, 'Lord Brougham and the Whig Party' (1927), described by the compilers of the standard bibliography of British history as 'thorough and masterly in treatment' (Brown and Christie, 37) and still an authority on its subject. The solid foundation of scholarship which underlay his career was already in evidence. 
Aspinall was clearly a candidate for a university post, but they were scarce in the 1920s when universities were far fewer and much smaller than they became in the late twentieth century, and he was fortunate to secure a lectureship in Burma at the University of Rangoon from 1925 to 1931. While there, though isolated from standard historical sources for much of the time, he wrote a monograph, 'Cornwallis in Bengal'. He afterwards told, with evident relish, stories of his experiences as examiner of degree candidates who not infrequently hoped (vainly) to smooth their passage by interleaving their scripts with rupee notes. 
Aspinall returned to England in 1931 and shortly afterwards, on 3 September at the Wesleyan Methodist chapel on South Drive, St Anne's-on-Sea, Lancashire, married Gladys, 'nee' Shaw (died 1965), two years his junior, the daughter of a company director from St Anne's-on-Sea. The witnesses who signed the marriage certificate were the bride's parents, so his mother may have been deceased by then. There were two children of the marriage, a daughter followed by a son. 
Aspinall's opportunity to pursue serious scholarship arrived in 1931 when the University of Reading advertised a lectureship in modern history and he was appointed, to work under the revered figure F. M. Stenton, the founder of the history school there and one of the greatest British historians. Aspinall was later (1947) to succeed Stenton in the chair, a destiny of which he was always proud, and like his predecessor he was to spend the remainder of his career there, even refusing offers of chairs elsewhere -- including Manchester -- to stay at what was then a minor though respectable English university. One of its chief virtues, in Aspinall's eyes, was its proximity to both London and Oxford, especially its excellent railway service to the capital, which enabled him to spend whole days in the British Museum or the Public Record Office after fulfilling his lecturing duties at 9 a.m. at Reading -- a requirement which the history department timetable had to accommodate. He was naturally a researcher rather than a teacher, and though his lectures were comprehensive and detailed, they were read rather than delivered, without much recourse to digression or impromptu humour. He had little use for university administration (or administrators, it must be said) and claimed that he avoided serving on committees by posing as stupid. Nor did he favour the tutorial method, which was not introduced into his department until shortly before his retirement, for he believed that his colleagues were better occupied in research than in any other activity. He set the example, visiting archives and country houses throughout the land to build up an unrivalled knowledge of sources for his period. Even family seaside holidays might be planned with an eye to proximity to a newly discovered cache of correspondence. During the Second World War he rescued more than one valuable family collection from disposal for salvage and ensured their preservation in record offices. 
Aspinall devoted his academic life to the publication of impeccably edited texts of the major documentary sources of his chosen period, English history in the reigns of George III and George IV, and especially the letters of those two monarchs. His editorial skills and his detailed knowledge of the period, as well as his intimate acquaintance with almost all the manuscript as well as the printed sources available, ensured work of lasting value: he once declared to the present author that the only enduring fame a historian could expect, or desire, came from the editing of materials in so comprehensive and accurate a manner that they would never need to be done again. Everything else would be superseded, generation after generation. In this truth lies the key to Aspinall as a scholar. 
Aspinall made his reputation in 1938 with his edition of 'The Letters of King George IV, 1812-30', which was immediately recognized as a lasting achievement. He gained admission to the Royal Archives at Windsor through the good offices of Sir Charles Webster, who had met him while he was at Rangoon and was impressed by his book on Brougham and by a paper which Aspinall had recently read at the Royal Historical Society. On these grounds Webster recommended him to the then registrar of the archives, Miss Mackenzie, and to the royal librarian, Sir Owen Morshead. It was envisaged that Webster and Aspinall should be joint editors, but Aspinall pleaded to be allowed to undertake the sole editorship on the ground that 'such a position would contribute so much to his credit and assist his career'. Webster drily remarked that 'I do not think he would have lost much in reputation by acting with me on equal terms' (Webster to Morshead, 24 Nov 1934; Royal Archives), but he agreed on condition that he wrote the preface and was credited with it on the title-page, and acted as consultant. Aspinall was already showing that he was an ambitious man, with plenty of confidence in his own ability. 
Aspinall's work in the Royal Archives continued to the end of his career; the sight of his majestic Daimler (with pre-selector gearbox to avoid the difficult technique of manual gear-changing) moving up the hill past St George's Chapel (and occasionally scattering tourists as it charged back down) became a familiar one to members of the royal household, and so much did he become almost a member of that body that he was sometimes allowed to remove numbers of boxes of letters to be copied and worked on at home or in the department at Reading -- a story that horrifies the present staff of the archives. 
Aspinall followed the 'Letters of King George IV' with 'The Later Correspondence of George III' (covering the years 1783-1810), published in five volumes (1962-70), and the companion 'Correspondence of George, Prince of Wales, 1770-1810', which filled the gap in the series with eight volumes in 1963-71, completed after retirement. Towards the end of his life he contemplated re-editing the earlier correspondence of George III, Sir John Fortescue's edition having been severely criticized for inaccuracy, but failing eyesight compelled him to relinquish the project. He also published the correspondence of Princess Charlotte and of Mrs Jordan, mistress of William IV as duke of Clarence. His editing of the latter was criticized by her modern biographer, who asserts that he made several unacknowledged omissions and mistook some dates, but mainly on the grounds that he found her an unsympathetic character and did not do justice to her good qualities (C. Tomalin, 'Mrs Jordan's Profession', 1994, xix-xx). He also edited the letters of Charles Arbuthnot, a Treasury politician of the time, and the 'Diary of Henry Hobhouse, 1820-47'. A comparatively rare venture into secondary interpretation was 'Politics and the Press, 1780-1850', which was characteristically founded on the scrutiny of government tax records as well as of newspapers and journalists. Its detailed coverage reflected its author's preoccupation with contemporary evidence rather than with impressionistic opinions but it contains a wealth of not otherwise easily accessible information. Aspinall was invited to give the British Academy Raleigh lecture in 1952 and chose to explore the difficult subject of the history of the cabinet in his period; as always, his diligence and enthusiasm far outran the available space for publication. His monograph 'The Cabinet Council, 1783-1835', is a much enlarged version of the lecture and still the best authority on its subject. He was also invited to edit a volume in the series 'English Historical Documents', in this case the volume for 1783 to 1832, for which he enlisted the help of a (then) young colleague at Reading, the present author. Characteristically, he was only really interested in the political sections of the book, especially on the central government and, in view of his current work on the cabinet, on that institution: those sections grew to form a perhaps disproportionate part of the whole, and included many short extracts from contemporary correspondence and diaries which were not conventionally considered as standard documents, but he boasted that it was the only really useful research tool in the modern part at any rate of the series. He published many other minor works (in length) as articles in learned journals, all rigorously based on hard evidence and all revealing important aspects of their subjects. In his last years at Reading he undertook, under Sir Lewis Namier's general editorship, the conduct of the volume in the magisterial 'History of Parliament' for the period 1790-1820; although he had to relinquish this task on retirement in 1965, he laid a foundation of archival research for others to build on. His lasting contribution to English history and in particular to the history of the royal family was recognized on his retirement when he was made CVO, of which he was especially proud. 
Aspinall hastened his retirement by a year in 1965 when his first wife died suddenly of a stroke while they were preparing to move into a bungalow on the Isle of Man for their retirement. Despite this tragedy, he went to live alone on the island, admitting that its low rate of income tax was a greater attraction than the scenery, and in 1968 he married Beryl Johnson, whom he had known at Reading. Failing eyesight marred his last years but he retired a wealthy man, having devoted himself since his early years at Reading to playing the stock market in the evenings with flair, meticulous research, and detailed knowledge; he was not above picking up tips from the owners of stately homes he visited in search of manuscripts, and he invested riskily but shrewdly in London properties during the Second World War. He died at his home, Highlands Belle Vue, Maughold, Ramsay, Isle of Man, on 2 May 1972. 
Aspinall was a devoted son of his native county and he possessed many of its typical qualities. He was careful with his money and had a full endowment of common sense and what he used to call 'Yorkshire grit and determination', to which his achievement in rising to eminence in his profession from such a humble and disadvantaged though respectable background paid tribute. He was a big man, and could appear formidable to colleagues and students, but he was a kind man and loved a good story, the more 'risque' the better, which would trigger a loud and characteristic laugh of appreciation. He was devoted to his family. 


@@@@@


doc= 53640


Alexander Findlay the elder (1790-1870), engraver and cartographic and hydrographic publisher, was born on 7 December 1788 in Bermondsey, Surrey (where he was baptized at St Mary Magdalen on 4 January 1789), the son of Archibald Findlay ('b'. 1754), variously described as a sailmaker or victualler, originally from Leith in Edinburghshire, who had moved his business from Scotland to the Thames in the late eighteenth century, and his wife, Mary (died 1794). He married on 8 November 1810 Sarah, 'nee' Lumb. He had an engraving business in Pentonville and did much work for Richard Holmes Laurie, map publisher, son of Robert Laurie, engraver and map publisher. He was a founder fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1830 and engraved numerous charts and maps. With his wife, Sarah, he had at least three children: the younger Alexander, William Benjamin Findlay (1825-1875), who became rector of Etherley, co. Durham, and Sarah. Alexander Findlay the elder died on 7 January 1870 at Hayes Common, Kent, where he was buried at St Mary the Virgin. 


@@@@@


doc= 53642


Drower, Ethel May Stefana, Lady Drower (1879-1972), orientalist and novelist, was born on 1 December 1879 in North Road, Highgate, Middlesex, the first of the four daughters of the Revd Silas William Stevens (1856-1916), rector of Burley, Hampshire, and then St Lawrence, Southampton, and his wife, Susan Ellen (1845?-1932), formerly Dean, daughter of William Carpenter and his wife, Ann. She attended a boarding-school near Bournemouth and then worked as a freelance journalist, travel companion, and novelist. Several journeys took her to different countries in the Near East and find their reflection in her early novels: 'The Veil' (1909), 'The Mountain of God' (1911), and 'The Earthen Drum' (1911), a collection of oriental tales. On her travel to Sudan, of which she gives an account in 'My Sudan Year' (1912), she met in Khartoum Edwin Mortimer Drower (1880-1951), a lawyer whom she married in 1911. They had three children: one daughter, Margaret ('b'. 1911) and two sons, William ('b'. 1915) and Denys ('b'. 1918). Having children did not stop her from writing, and numerous novels appeared during this period, all of which were published under her maiden name. They are entertaining, but for the most part have no great literary value. However, 'The Mountain of God' does have lasting value as the story centres around the belief, cult, and political persecution of the sect of the Baha'is who have their sanctuary, the tomb of Baha' 'Ullah, on Mount Carmel in Haifa. 
This novel demonstrated an observational and descriptive talent that was also apparent in Drower's many travel books and articles on the cult and rites of various minor religious and ethnic groups in the Near East (Iraq, Persia, Syria), including 'By Tigris and Euphrates' (1923), 'Cedars, Saints and Sinners' (1926), and 'Peacock Angel' (1941). In the last book Drower describes a religious sect in northern Iraq, the Yezidis. Her husband was a British government official, stationed from 1919, in Basrah; and later he was (until 1947) adviser to the minister of justice in Baghdad; he was knighted in 1941. But Drower did not restrict herself to the role of an 'official' wife. Some of her time she devoted to travel and to learning Arabic. As a woman she had access to the women's quarters which were normally denied to men. A remarkable outcome is her collection from the vernacular of many folk and fairy tales from Baghdad, Mosul, and surroundings. A selection of those forms the well-known book 'Folk-Tales of 'Iraq' (1931). She was the first to collect stories from this area. It was just in time before modern inventions such as the gramophone and the cinema replaced this oriental art of entertainment. 
The second period of Drower's life was devoted to the only surviving gnostic group from antiquity, the Mandaeans, who are called in Arabic as-Subbis, 'baptizers', a sect of observers and owners of secret rites and knowledge who are a product of the ancient oriental and hellenistic syncretism, the gnosis. A detailed description is found in her study of this sect, 'The Mandaeans of Iraq and Iran' (1937) which by the close of the twentieth century had not been superseded. She won the trust of the Mandaeans so that some members of this sect sold her copies of manuscripts which were allowed to be read and studied only by their priests. These formed the basis of 'The Secret Adam' (1960). The fifty-four manuscripts are kept now in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, as the Drower collection. 'Water into Wine' (1956), a comparison of ritual meals, owes much to her study of different religious groups. Without any scholarly education Drower learned Aramaic and mastered the translation of very important Mandaic manuscripts; these publications are of great value for the study of the culture and language of the only remaining gnostic sect in the twentieth century: 'Book of the Zodiac' (1949), 'Diwan Abathur' (1950), 'Sarh d Qabin d Sislam Rba' (1950), 'Haran Gawaita and the Baptism of Hibil-Ziwa' (1953), 'The Canonical Prayerbook of the Mandaeans' (1959), 'The Thousand and Twelve Questions' (1960), 'The Coronation of the Great Sislam' (1962), and 'A Pair of Nasoraean Commentaries' (1963). She also contributed many articles to scholarly journals such as 'Iraq' and the 'Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society'. 'A Mandaic Dictionary' (1963) was drawn from her vast word collection, in collaboration with Rudolf Macuch. She was honoured for her scholarly achievements with several degrees, an honorary DLitt from Oxford University and an honorary DD from Uppsala University, as well as being made an honorary fellow of the School of Oriental and African Studies of London University. On 1 October 1964 she was awarded the greatest honour for a scholar in Semitic languages, the Lidzbarski gold medal, for her work on Mandaic, a very important and interesting branch of eastern Aramaic. She died on 27 January 1972 in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 53646


Toller, Thomas Northcote (1844-1930), philologist and lexicographer, was born on 1 September 1844 at Kettering, Northamptonshire. The son of Joseph Toller (1810-1903) of Kettering, a printer, and his wife, Caroline, 'nee' Wallis (1814/15-1904), he was named after his grandfather, Thomas Northcote Toller (1756-1821), minister of the Independent chapel in the same town. His only known sibling was a sister who outlived him. Having attended Kettering grammar school, he became a pensioner at Christ's College, Cambridge, on 14 April 1862, and was ranked seventh wrangler in the mathematical tripos four years later, graduating BA in 1866 and MA in 1869. He subsequently taught pupils at Cambridge until he was elected a fellow of his college in 1872, in which year he was appointed to a teaching post in English language at Owens College, Manchester (from 1880 the Victoria University of Manchester). Toller was initially appointed as assistant lecturer for a three-year term, and then promoted to a full lectureship which he held until 1880 when he became the first Smith professor of English Language. 
Toller married, on 2 November 1889, Edith (1854-1935), widow of the Hon. Henry Romilly, and eldest daughter of Benson Rathbone of Liverpool. Edith had a daughter from her previous marriage, Sophie Katharine, who predeceased her mother, dying of a cerebral haemorrhage on 8 December 1904 aged twenty-five. Later, in her memory, Toller and his wife established the Katharine Romilly scholarship, a bursary and entrance scholarship for students at Ashburne Hall, the first women's hall of residence at the University of Manchester. Toller continued to take an active interest in the hall for the rest of his life and donated his library to it at his death. He was awarded honorary doctorates by the University of Oxford in 1908 and by the University of Manchester in 1912. 
Toller resigned his chair in 1903 to devote himself to the increasing demands of his lexicographic work. In 1878 the Clarendon Press in Oxford had invited him to complete a new edition of Joseph Bosworth's 'A Dictionary of the Anglo-Saxon Language', which had been published by Longman between 1838 and 1844. At the time of his death in 1876 Bosworth was engaged on a revised dictionary, for which the delegates of the Clarendon Press had purchased the copyright. In 1878, Toller, then a young and untried scholar, set to work on Bosworth's papers and in 1882 produced 'An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary Based on the Manuscript Collections of the Late Joseph Bosworth', parts 1 and 2 (A-Hwi), his first publication of any significance. The dictionary from A to near the end of G was almost wholly based on Bosworth's own materials (the sheets for A-F having already been at press by the time of Bosworth's death in 1876), and it was severely criticized on publication by reviewers. 
As a result of the hostile reception, Toller added a great deal of new material in subsequent entries as he had done in the preparation of H in part 2, and his alterations in the arrangement of the material -- particularly in the division of meaning along etymological lines -- suggest that he was influenced by the newly emerging 'Oxford English Dictionary', which itself was to become dependent on Toller's work for its pre-conquest references. Toller's enlarged form of Bosworth's dictionary was published in two further parts, and the complete book appeared in 1898. Reviews of the finished dictionary were more favourable, but both lexicographer and publisher now having realized the shortcomings of the work on the early part of the alphabet, Toller immediately began work on a supplement which in fact consisted of a wholesale revision of A-G. The supplement, which was also published in parts, appeared between 1908 and 1921, though Toller, now a septuagenarian, continued to add material and corrections in notes in the 'Modern Language Review' (1922 and 1924). 
Some indication of the effect that criticism of his work had on Toller himself may be gauged from the concluding sentence of his preface to the main dictionary in 1898: 'To compile an Anglo-Saxon Dictionary calls for so much in the compiler that some leniency towards shortcomings may perhaps be looked for by any one who attempts the labour.' In fact he was a dedicated, exact, and exacting scholar who, after a faltering start, and having inherited materials that wiser and more experienced heads had suggested should be abandoned, produced a dictionary for which no leniency of judgement is required, one that was entirely appropriate to the period in which it was produced and that has continued to serve the academic community well for a great many years. His quiet and self-effacing manner, apparent through his surviving correspondence, suggests that he would have been the first to describe himself as both harmless and a drudge. Yet the dictionary, but for A-F of part 1, is wholly his creation, and although the work of later generations of lexicographers will progressively decrease its relevance to the modern scholar, it made a lasting contribution to the study of Anglo-Saxon throughout the twentieth century and will continue to do so for much of the twenty-first. It was, as Toller himself would have put it, a job well done. 
Toller's other publications are insignificant by comparison with the 'Anglo-Saxon Dictionary'. They consist of an inaugural lecture, 'The Oldest English Poetry' (1880), an edition of 'The Correspondence of Edward, Third Earl of Derby, during the years 24 to 31, Henry VIII' for the Chetham Society (1890), again a work begun by others, and a textbook for students, 'Outlines of the History of the English Language' (1900). He died on 2 March 1930 at Lansdowne House, Didsbury, Manchester, where he had lived since 1909, and was cremated on 5 March at Manchester crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 53647


McCulloch, Derek Ivor Breashur (1897-1967), broadcaster, was born on 18 November 1897 at 6 Sussex Place, Plymouth, Devon, the youngest child of (William) Lionel Breashur McCulloch and his wife, Bertha Russell. As he lived within sight of Plymouth Sound, his childhood ambitions lay with the Royal Navy, but a change in family circumstances following the death of his father caused him to leave his local preparatory school in 1906 for Croydon high school. In early 1915 he enlisted as a private soldier in the public schools battalion of the 16th Middlesex regiment, in which his elder brothers were serving. 
McCulloch landed in France on his eighteenth birthday, and was present at the battle of the Somme in July 1916 where he suffered near-fatal wounds: stranded in no man's land 20 yards from the German front line, he was fired on by an enemy stretcher party and lost his right eye. He lay in a shell hole for three days and nights, suffering numerous further injuries from shrapnel, before crawling back to his own lines. His war wounds, and the misfortune of a motor accident in 1938 which cost him his left leg, necessitated over fifty operations throughout his life, and he was never to be free of pain. None the less, after the war he travelled in Europe and South America. He was working for the Central Argentine Railway when his health deteriorated, and he returned to Europe where a bullet was extracted from his lung. In January 1926 McCulloch successfully applied to the British Broadcasting Company for the post of announcer. 
McCulloch's earliest years with the BBC were not entirely happy. Continuing medical problems and some dissatisfaction with his microphone style meant that he was taken away from front-line announcing and given miscellaneous work. This included sport (he was assistant commentator on the BBC's first running commentary on an association football match in 1927) and compering variety programmes. More significantly, McCulloch was first heard in 'Children's Hour' as Uncle Mac. A breakdown in health while working for the Belfast station in 1929 threatened a premature end to his BBC career, but a permanent job was found for him in 'Children's Hour'. By 1931 he was second-in-command, and on 13 June that year he married Eileen Hilda Barry ('b'. 1907/8), a BBC secretary, with whom he was to have two daughters. His wife was the daughter of a glove buyer, James Barry. In 1933 he was appointed 'Children's Hour' organizer. 

'Children's Hour' had been part of the BBC's output since 1922, and had evolved from its original dependence on spontaneous banter, fairy stories, and whimsy. McCulloch's philosophy was simple, and rigidly adhered to: 'Our established policy is that nothing but the best is good enough for children... our wish is to stimulate their imagination, direct their reading, encourage their various interests, widen their outlook, and inculcate the Christian principles of love of God and their neighbour. ('BBC Quarterly', Jan 1948, 229)' This policy was applied throughout what McCulloch saw as 'a microcosm of broadcasting' -- drama, music, talks, variety, religion, and charitable appeals. His zeal brought his department, hitherto an unlikely adjunct to features and drama, autonomy in 1938. Aside from his administrative work, he employed his gifts of humour and personality on air, both presenting programmes and appearing in them. The playwright Dennis Potter recalled 'a kind of stiff gentleness wholly suited to a favourite uncle' ('Daily Herald', 14 Feb 1964). The perennial 'Children's Hour' favourite was S. G. Hulme Beaman's series of 'Toy Town' playlets. McCulloch played the central role of Larry the Lamb, and his baa-ing vibrato was heard from the 1920s to the 1960s. 
By 1939 'Children's Hour' was a national institution with a juvenile audience of some four million. With the war came the evacuation of large numbers of this audience, and for them 'Children's Hour' acquired the added significance of a link with their home lives, emphasized by McCulloch's poignant sign-off 'Goodnight, children... everywhere'. It was a source of pride to him that, in October 1940, Princess Elizabeth made her radio debut in a 'Children's Hour' broadcast to the empire. By 1950 McCulloch was tired, and, wishing to devote more time to writing, he resigned from the BBC to become children's editor of the 'News Chronicle'. He continued to broadcast, however, as chairman of 'Nature Parliament' (a series he had started in 1946), and was a compere of the record programme 'Children's Favourites' until 1965. 
In 1964 the BBC -- citing figures which showed that the audience for children's radio had dwindled to 24,000 -- discontinued the daily programme. McCulloch was predictably saddened: 'I am surprised. I would have thought a lot of children still listened to Toy Town' ('Daily Herald', 17 Jan 1964). He did not long outlive the institution with which he was so closely identified. On 1 June 1967 he died at St Francis Hospital, Haywards Heath. He was cremated at Longview, Snowdenham Links Road, Bramley, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 53649


Hinkler, Herbert John Louis (1892-1933), aviator, was born on 8 December 1892 at Woodbine Cottage, Gavan Street, Bundaberg, Queensland, the eldest of the five children of John William Hinkler (died 1927), a stockman originally from Germany, and his wife, Frances Atkins, 'nee' Bonney. He was educated at north Bundaberg state school, 1898-1906, and at the age of fourteen went to work at Bundaberg foundry. From an early age he showed a passion for aviation and design and he travelled to Brisbane in search of other aviation enthusiasts, joining there the Queensland Aero Club and the Aerial League of Australia. He later used his savings from work in a sugar mill to pay for a correspondence course in mechanics and in 1911-12 built two gliders, one to his own design, which he flew on Mon Repos Beach near his home. 
Hinkler gained valuable practical experience while working as the ground mechanic to the American airman Arthur Burr Stone, who visited Bundaberg in his Bleriot monoplane in May 1912, and subsequently employed Hinkler during a tour of southern Australia and New Zealand. In 1913 he went to Sydney and then worked his way to England aboard ship. Upon arrival, during Easter 1914, he obtained a job with the Sopwith aviation company. After the outbreak of war he enlisted, on 7 September 1914, in the Royal Naval Air Service and underwent training at Upavon. He saw active service as an observer and air gunner with 3 wing in France and Belgium, and was awarded the DSM in November 1917. He was subsequently recommended for a commission and pilot training, which he began at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, on 30 December. In July 1918 he was posted to 28 squadron, RAF, stationed in Italy, where he flew a Sopwith Pup in operations against the Austrians. 
After his demobilization in 1919 Hinkler hoped to enter that year's air race to Australia, but his plans foundered and he went to work instead with A. V. Roe & Co. at Hamble, near Southampton, where he test-flew the 35 hp Avro Baby. He subsequently bought his own model and on 31 May 1920 he left Croydon intending to fly to Australia. Nine-and-a-half hours later he landed at Turin, having covered 650 miles non-stop. It was a remarkable achievement and although mechanical troubles forced him to end his journey at Rome, the Turin leg won him the Britannia challenge trophy. Then, as later, he shied away from the publicity that the flight generated. He returned to Hamble, where he resumed his test-flying duties. An expert aviator, he could fly an aeroplane 'to the very edge of disaster without crashing it' and his training as a mechanic made him an especially valuable test pilot ('Aeroplane', 165). At 5ft 4in. he sometimes sat on cushions to gain the necessary height in the cockpit. Always known as Bert he wore 'crumpled, double-breasted suits and a pleasant grin', and often a bowler hat, a 'pardonable affectation' for a civilian in a profession dominated by service pilots (Mackenzie, viii). 
In 1921 Hinkler shipped his Avro to Australia and on 11 April flew from Sydney to Bundaberg, covering 800 miles in nine hours. The flight enhanced Hinkler's growing reputation for long-distance solo flying. He returned to England and again to Avro, where he was chief test pilot from November 1921 until March 1927. He began his work with two remarkable first flights, in the Avro 549 Aldershot heavy bomber and Avro 555 Bison fleet spotter. Like many inter-war pilots he was an air racer and he entered competitions, usually with Avro backing. He won the Lympne light aeroplane competition in 1923 and the Grosvenor challenge cup in 1924, and in 1925 he was reserve pilot for the British Schneider trophy team in Baltimore. In 1927 he tested early autogiros for the Spanish designer Juan de la Cierva. An extraordinarily clever inventor, he contributed to the design of the new Avro Avian, and in August 1927 flew his own Avian, G-EBOV, 1200 miles non-stop from Croydon to Riga, Latvia. After a failed attempt at a record non-stop London-India flight in November 1927, with Captain R. H. McIntosh, Hinkler concentrated on fund-raising for the Australia flight that remained his dream. He later recalled: 'My agent and I went round London, and the response was as good as if I had been trying to sell rotten fruit' ('The Times', 29 Feb 1928, 18d). 
Forced to rely on his own scant funds, he left Croydon at 6.50 a.m. on 7 February 1928, and the stages of his rapid progress were noted daily in the press. He arrived at Darwin, Northern Territory, at 5.55 p.m. local time on 22 February, a little over fifteen days after his departure. With a minimum of expense and organization he had become the first man to fly solo to Australia. He had also beaten the record of twenty-eight days established by the Smith brothers, Sir Ross and Sir Keith, in November-December 1919. In the press and in parliament his flight was hailed as a landmark in aviation. The very ordinariness of his Avian, powered by a single Cirrus engine of modest horsepower, demonstrated the potential of air travel within the British empire. He was honoured at a series of civic receptions in Brisbane and Sydney, awarded the Air Force cross, made an honorary squadron leader in the Royal Australian Air Force, and later awarded a second Britannia challenge trophy. He declined, though, to capitalize on his fame and passed up the opportunity of a potentially lucrative lecture tour in Australia. Donations from well-wishers and a cash award from the Australian government nevertheless ensured that he left the country around $10,000 richer. 
He invested this money in the design and construction of his own aircraft, the Ibis, a high-winged light amphibian monoplane aimed at the private owner. In January 1930 he registered the Ibis Aircraft Co., with Rowland Bound, an Avro engineer, as his co-director. Construction went on at Hinkler's home, Mon Repos, at Thornhill, near Southampton, and a prototype, G-AAIS, was flown. The project however stalled for lack of funds and in September 1930 Hinkler travelled to Canada to promote the plane. Against the background of world economic depression this proved impossible and in April 1931 he bought a Canadian-assembled de Havilland Puss Moth, with a view to beginning an aerial taxi business. After this venture also failed Hinkler decided to fly the plane back to Britain. Without publicizing his intentions he left New York for Jamaica on 27 October 1931 making the first non-stop flight on that route. He then flew in stages to Brazil, and from there crossed the south Atlantic to west Africa. This flight would prove to be the most difficult of his career, and in many respects the greatest. Low cloud forced him to fly at wave height until darkness fell. He then climbed to 12,000 feet, but still found himself in cloud, and later a fierce thunderstorm. At dawn on 25 November he descended into clear weather and landed at Bathurst in British Gambia; in 22 hours and 40 minutes of blind flight he had drifted only 100 miles from his course. It was a remarkable feat of navigation and endurance which was recognized with the Segrave trophy, the Johnston memorial air navigation trophy, the gold medal of the Royal Aero Club, and a third Britannia challenge trophy. 
The flight brought Hinkler acclaim, but not financial gain, and on his return to England in December 1931 he faced an uncertain future. He travelled to America in 1932 contemplating a global circumnavigation, but returned to London to prepare for a new attempt on the record to Australia. He left Feltham aerodrome in his Puss Moth on 7 January 1933 and after negotiating storms over the Alps headed towards Florence. Soon afterwards his plane crashed on the northern slopes of Pratomagno, in the Apennines between Florence and Arezzo, and was covered by snow. It is possible that he was attempting an emergency landing after losing a propeller in flight. His body was eventually found by a group of charcoal burners, on 27 April, a short distance from the wreckage of the plane. On Mussolini's orders he was buried with full military honours in Florence on 1 May. Hinkler was one of the outstanding pilots of his day and his death was lamented as a particular waste. Unable to find the employment that, by common consent, his talents deserved, he was driven to undertake risky solo flights on meagre resources. A forthright and honest man, he was also highly individual, and could be outspoken and difficult to use. One of the staff of 'Flight' magazine recalled speaking to him in advance of the Turin flight in 1920: 'As usual, he insisted on no publicity before he started. His maxim always was 'Do the thing first and talk about it afterwards' -- but he usually forgot to do the subsequent talking' ('Flight', 16 Feb 1933, 151). 
Sources disagree over Hinkler's marital status. During the 1920s he appears to have lived with an Englishwoman, Nancy (or Nance), whom he may have married some time before 1923. At the time of his arrival in Australia in 1928 'The Times' made a number of references to a 'Mrs Bert Hinkler' who travelled to Fremantle 'to join her husband' ('The Times', 4 April 1928, 13g). He is known to have married one Katherine Rome in Connecticut, on 21 May 1932; there were no children by this marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 53650


Sharpe, Sam (d. 1832), rebel slave leader, was born in Jamaica. He officially belonged to Croydon estate in St James parish, but worked as a domestic slave in Montego Bay, the second largest town in the island. Literate and intelligent, he was also a passionate and charismatic speaker. Sharpe became a class leader in the Montego Bay Baptist Church; his duties included helping the British missionary Thomas Burchell with the supervision of membership classes. At the same time, Sharpe was a 'Daddy' or 'ruler' among the independent black-led Native Baptists. 
From his reading of the 'Bible', Sharpe became convinced that slavery was morally wrong. He helped to spread the view that the crown had already freed the slaves and that the local white people were withholding that freedom. Accordingly, Sharpe planned a campaign of passive resistance for the period just after Christmas in 1831: the slaves would simply cease work until their owners paid their wages and thereby conceded that the slaves were free. However, Sharpe developed an alternative strategy of armed rebellion in case passive resistance failed. His chief allies included other elite slaves, many of whom were also Baptists and Native Baptists. 
The rebellion which broke out on 27 December 1831 was massive: it involved 20,000 slaves and spread over 750 square miles of the richest sugar-growing area of Jamaica. Although the slaves enjoyed some initial successes, the rebellion was quickly and ferociously suppressed. At least 540 slaves were killed, while fourteen white inhabitants lost their lives. By the end of January 1832 Sharpe was in custody; he was tried on 19 April and hanged on 23 May. A missionary who interviewed him in gaol described Sharpe as 'certainly the most intelligent and most remarkable slave [he] ever met with' (Bleby, 115). Before his death Sharpe declared that he 'would rather die upon yonder gallows than live in slavery' (ibid., 116). Although Sharpe did not live to see the end of slavery, the rebellion had a significant effect in promoting the cause of emancipation. One week after Sharpe's death, the House of Commons established a committee to look into the best means of abolishing slavery. 


@@@@@


doc= 53653


Stubs, Peter (1756-1806), toolmaker and innkeeper, was born on 15 June 1756 at the White Bear inn, Bridge Street, Warrington, Lancashire, the only child of John Stubs (1736-1757), a currier, of Warrington, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Peter Johnson, yeoman, of Orford, near Warrington. In the second half of the eighteenth century south-west Lancashire was renowned as an area of small metal trades. If these trades had a centre, it was probably Warrington, and it was here that, as a very young man, Stubs established a small workshop as a filesmith. In 1777 he married Mary (1758-1821), daughter of Thomas Sutton of Warrington. 
By 1788 Stubs had acquired the tenancy of the White Bear inn, where the file-making business was continued upon an expanded scale. The combination of innkeeping and file making was not wholly accidental, for the dregs of the beer barrels were utilized to form a paste which, when spread into the teeth of the files, gave them greater durability and strength. In 1802 Stubs set up new workshops and warehouses in Scotland Road, Warrington, and it was with this particular manufactory that the legendary quality of his files became most closely identified. Files with the initials P. S. stamped on their heel became treasured among craftsmen: it was not just the superiority of the steel from which they were made, but the perfection with which they were cut and finished. Many orders came to him through personal recommendation and by the 1780s his files were being sold as far afield as London. Later they were finding markets with wholesalers and ironmongers in towns and cities up and down the country. They were also being sold in America. Invariably, though, it was the machine workers of Lancashire and other centres of the industrial revolution who were Stubs's largest customers, for machine making was still then largely a manual rather than a mechanical process. The high standard of his product was vividly attested by the way the P. S. stamp was illegally used by other filesmiths, particularly in Sheffield. Indeed, so serious did this counterfeiting problem become that Stubs was forced to publish a caution to filesmiths in a Sheffield newspaper in 1805. By the early nineteenth century, Stubs's annual profits were estimated at $700, no mean figure by the standards of the day. Alongside his business as an innkeeper and in brewing, he acquired property in Warrington and in 1799 became part owner of a vessel plying the Baltic trade. He was the father of eighteen children and was generous in his dealings with them. He was also given to generous support and hospitality more widely and hence was some way removed from the austere nonconformity which characterized some of his industrialist contemporaries. He died at his home on 28 February 1806 and was buried in Warrington parish churchyard. He was survived by his wife and thirteen of his children. 
What is known about Stubs as an industrialist derives from the continuity of the firm he founded for well over a century after his own death and from the concomitant survival of a mass of records relating to it. This archive subsequently came to the notice of T. S. Ashton, who recognized it as affording a unique insight into the trades which supplied the tools of the machine age. What Ashton saw was an industrial sector in transition. In the first decade or so of the firm's existence Stubs was as much merchant as industrialist in that he relied quite heavily on outworkers who combined their craft with farming. As time went by, however, he increasingly gave direct employment to filesmiths and sought ways to induce outworkers to move to Warrington. In the marketing of his product he initially used factors or middlemen. He also capitalized on trading contacts arising from his need for steel castings from which to make files and also for the supply of barley for malt for his brewing business. Later, though, middlemen were more and more replaced by direct dealing with retailers, assisted by the firm's own travellers, of whom Peter's son John became one. The measure of Ashton's insight into this single, small firm owed much to the survival of the correspondence records with the firm's clients and suppliers. 


@@@@@


doc= 53654


Marston, Edward (1825-1914), publisher, writer, and angler, was born on 14 February 1825 in Lydbury, Shropshire, the son of Richard Marston (1791-1875), a farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Bright (1793-1845). Three years later the family relocated to Montgomeryshire, and two years after that to a farm in Lucton, Herefordshire. Marston attended the Lucton School from 1832 to 1840, and then was apprenticed to a bookseller from 1840 to 1844 in a nearby town. His wife, Mary, 'nee' Pratt (died 1888), whom he married on 9 August 1851, was from the area. 
Marston is a significant figure because, more than most Victorian publishers, he was steeped in the international market for print. His first job was with the Liverpool firm of Willmer and Smith, publishers of the 'European Mail' and exporters of newspapers and magazines. In 1846 he went to London to work for Sampson Low, who had a bookshop, circulating library, and reading-room in Lamb's Conduit Street. Low also owned and edited the 'Publishers' Circular', a trade weekly: Marston was assigned to collect titles of newly published books from local publishers and Stationers' Hall, and later he would make the rounds of booksellers throughout the United Kingdom. He would eventually become chairman of Publishers' Circular Ltd. 
In 1852 Marston left Sampson Low to set up an Australian import-export business in Fenchurch Street. Shipping books to Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide proved to be a profitable sideline which blossomed into a major business. Fifty-two years later he estimated that he had sent at least 20,000 letters to overseas correspondents and dealt with as many as 10,000 authors. Since Sampson Low and his son, Sampson Low jun., had developed a similar trade with the United States, Marston became their partner on 1 January 1856. Samuel Warren Searle joined the partnership in 1872, followed by William John Rivington and, in 1883, Marston's son Robert ('b'. 1853). Sampson Low retired in 1875. 
Initially based at 47 Ludgate Hill, the firm of Sampson Low, Son, and Marston became notable for its global reach. It would specialize in books about Africa, Australasia, the American west, Canada, the Arctic, and Asia. In 1875 Marston was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. Of all his authors he corresponded most with the explorer Henry Morton Stanley: Marston met him in Egypt to bring home part of the manuscript of Stanley's 'In Darkest Africa'. 
Marston visited the United States twice. A vacation in the Rocky Mountains resulted in the popular travelogue 'Frank's Ranche' (1886). His company had a substantial list of American writers, including Harriet Beecher Stowe, Louisa May Alcott, Oliver Wendell Holmes, and Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan. Marston also travelled to Paris in order to secure the rights to Victor Hugo and other French authors. His firm published at least fifty-five works by Jules Verne, starting with 'Twenty-Thousand Leagues under the Sea' (1871). Marston also served as secretary of the Relief Fund for Paris Booksellers, a committee of publishers and booksellers which shipped food aid to the besieged city during the Franco-Prussian War. With his worldwide contacts he became an expert on international law governing intellectual property, publishing numerous journalistic articles on the subject as well as a pamphlet, 'Copyright, National and International, from the Point of View of a Publisher' (1879; new and enlarged edn, 1887). 
Marston also worked with many British authors, among them Charles Reade and G. A. Henty. Thomas Hardy published with him, though he felt that he needed a more adventurous house for 'Tess of the d'Urbervilles'. A grateful R. D. Blackmore thanked Marston for his support: 'But for you', he wrote, ''Lorna Doone' might never have seen the light' (Marston, 135). Another of his authors, W. Clark Russell, remembered him with equal fondness: 'I was struck by his good looks, his soft, dark intelligent eyes, his agreeable manner, and a pleasant reserve which as I afterwards came to know, easily thawed when you gained his acquaintanceship or friendship' (ibid., 144). 
Marston had been fond of fishing as a boy but gave it up for nearly forty years of urban life. Only in the early 1880s did he return to his old hobby. Then, starting with 'An Amateur Angler's Days in Dove Dale' (1884), he acquired some fame as the author of several light volumes on angling, all paying homage to Isaak Walton. 
Edward Marston retired from publishing in 1903 and died at Coombeheigh, The Downs, Wimbledon, Surrey, on 6 April 1914. He had been a devout though tolerant member of the Church of England. His memoir 'After Work' (1904) and his writings on copyright have some value for historians of the book trade. His 'Sketches of Booksellers of other Days' (1901) and 'Sketches of some Booksellers of the Time of Dr. Samuel Johnson' (1902) represented early attempts to popularize the history of books. 


@@@@@


doc= 53655


Allestree, Richard (b. before 1582, d. c.1643), almanac maker and mathematician, was a younger son of William Allestree ('b'. before 1520, died 1581) and his wife, Ellen. The family lived at Alvaston and Derby. Richard was an uncle of the famous royalist divine Richard Allestree. William Allestree was five times MP for Derby between 1542 and 1555, and five times bailiff of Derby (1541-79). Well educated, with a good grasp of Latin, Richard practised and probably taught mathematics, including surveying. His work 'The Arithmathematicall Treasurie' was entered in the Stationers' register in July 1650 but is otherwise unknown. He published a series of well-known almanacs between 1617 and 1643, calculated for Derby and sometimes Coventry (where his younger brother, James, was a goldsmith); two earlier editions, for 1615 and 1616, were not published. The almanacs included information on some local topics, such as Derby's annual fairs and its first mayor, and a woodcut of a quadrant to be cut out and pasted on a board for use as a simple surveying instrument. 
Allestree had practised astrology for twenty years before compiling almanacs, but came to believe -- 'God opening mine eyes' (Bretnor, sig. A3'v') -- that it was essentially fraudulent. His almanacs reflect this view and have a pious, even puritan flavour, with numerous biblical citations and attacks on popish idolatry. He conceded that the stars had some influence as secondary causes, for instance by altering the balance of the four humours, but judged it ungodly and unlawful to seek to predict the future. He stressed instead the role of free will and of divine providence. While accepting astrology's value in physic, especially for deciding the best time to draw blood from patients, he dismissed as heathenish the notion that parts of the body were governed by different zodiacal signs, and he brushed aside the use of astrology in farming as superstitious. In 1618 Thomas Bretnor, the leading almanac maker of the time, poured scorn on so-called 'Christian Almanackes', an allusion to Allestree's works; Allestree responded in his edition for 1619, repudiating the ten extreme positions Bretnor had fathered on him but repeating his condemnation of judicial astrology. On astronomical matters Allestree was a traditionalist, mocking the ideas of Copernicus and Tycho Brahe. His friend Robert Woodford, who wrote admiring verses in many editions, may have been the well-known Northamptonshire puritan diarist, who had connections with Coventry. Allestree, who is not known to have married, probably died about 1643. 


@@@@@


doc= 53656


Bate, John (fl. 1626-1635), writer on mechanics, is an obscure figure; his birth and death dates, parentage, and virtually all personal details remain unknown. Bate's 'The Mysteries of Nature and Art' (1634) is the first comprehensive illustrated English book on waterworks and hydraulic machinery. It also includes sections on drawing, painting, recipes, and folk remedies, as well as one on fireworks and incendiary devices largely derivative of earlier English and continental works on the subject. A second, greatly expanded edition in 1635 was followed by a third edition, printed in 1654, which has few changes from the second edition. 
Judging from the engraved portrait by George Gifford in the second edition, Bate was probably born in the first decade of the century, and probably died before the third edition, possibly as an Irish colonist (a John Bate died there before 1653, leaving four daughters in London, which may explain the third edition the following year). Beyond his book, the only possible hint to his career is John Smith's recommendation of a gunner's scale made by 'John Bates', an instrument maker on Tower Hill ('Seaman's Grammar', 1626). This supposition is strengthened by Bate's dedicatory poem to his 'worthy friend', the gunner John Babbington, in the latter's book on fireworks ('Pyrotechnia', 1635). Both this book and Bate's first and second editions were printed by the same printer, Ralph Mabb. Bate's influence extended to the young Isaac Newton, who owned a copy of 'Mysteries', copied extracts from Bate's section on drawing, and was probably inspired by his section on waterworks. 


@@@@@


doc= 53657


Biggs, Noah (fl. 1651), medical practitioner and social reformer, was active in the 1650s, though his identity and background remain obscure. It is possible that he was Henry Biggs, a surgeon employed at the dockyards of Deptford and Woolwich in 1649-53 to work with his father, Thomas Biggs, who had fallen ill and that 'Noah' is a pseudonym stemming from their work environment. The one publication of Noah Biggs, 'Mataeotechnia medicinae praxeos: the Vanity of the Craft of Physick' (1651), was addressed to the 'new commonwealth parliament' which, Biggs underlined, had been ordered by Cromwell to reform the professions. Although one of the introductory poems in the work is signed 'R. B. iatrophilos', the style bears little similarity with the one extant poem of the chemist Robert Boyle, even if Boyle's personal commitment in the period to such causes as open communication of medical receipts cannot be in doubt. On the other hand another introductory poem bears the signature 'W. R.', which may indeed refer to the unlicensed medical doctor William Rand, later the projector of a 'College of Graduate Physicians' to rival the established College of Physicians, though no conclusive evidence is available. 
Though Biggs has been frequently characterized as a follower of Paracelsus, his work seems more strongly to reflect the teaching of the Flemish chemical physician, J. B. van Helmont, who had modified Paracelsian teachings in significant ways. The spiritually corrupt academicians, argued Biggs, relied on ancient pagan sources for herbal medicines, sterile anatomical investigations, and the dangerous practices of purging and bloodletting. Instead, Biggs advanced the spiritual philosopher's alchemical operations, which focused on the purification of substances by fire, known as the art of pyrotechny. 
Biggs's work can be viewed as part of the puritan effort to reform natural philosophy, medicine, and education. It is not known for how long he continued to be involved with the movement for the radical reform of knowledge. If the identification with Henry Biggs is correct, then he seems to have died as early as 1653 (according to the public records, Thomas Biggs was restored as master surgeon to the shipyards in 1653 when his son died). However, this identification has not been definitely confirmed. 


@@@@@


doc= 53658


Blomfild, William (fl. 1529-1574), alchemist and priest, was born in Bury St Edmunds. He was a Benedictine monk and priest at Bury in his youth. In 1529 he was questioned at London regarding certain protestant tenets (which he abjured) although he seems later in life to have gravitated towards Calvinism. In 1543, at which time he was living in London, he was imprisoned; subsequently, in 1546, he was arraigned as a conjuror, but apparently acquitted (TNA: PRO, SP 1/222, fol. 132). In 1557 he wrote his best-known work, 'Bloomfield's Blossoms, or, The Campe of Philosophy', an alchemical work in verse, first published by Elias Ashmole in 1652 in 'Theatrum chemicum Britannicum' (pp. 305-23); numerous manuscript copies survive. The work consists of eighty-four stanzas in rhyme royal, and concludes with nine couplets. 
Blomfild was made vicar of the parish of Sts Simon and Jude at Norwich in April 1569 by Bishop John Parkhurst, but was forced out in less than a year. In a dedicatory epistle to Queen Elizabeth prefixed to another alchemical work, 'Blomefyld's Quintaessens, or, The Regiment of Lyfe' (written about 1574), he complains of being forced to 'forsake my lyvyng' by 'obstinat papistes' who 'troubled & molested me for religions sake' (Blomfild, fol. 1). These 'papistes' were presumably Anglicans who objected to Blomfild's puritanical tendencies and 'godly exercises' (Schuler, 'Blomfild', 80-85). 
Blomfild has frequently been confused with Myles Blomefylde (Blomefield) (1525-1603) who copied the 'Quintaessens'. The authorship of 'Bloomfield's Blossoms' has sometimes erroneously been attributed to Myles, but the initial letters of the first verses of each of the three sections of text spell out the name William Blomfild. Myles Blomefylde appended a brief but valuable biographical note to what is now the Cambridge Library copy of 'Quintaessens' in which he claims William was versed in many languages both ancient and modern, and 'in Alchimistri & Distillation he hath not left his lyke in this Nation'. It is probable that the two men were related (both having been born at Bury St Edmunds), as Ashmole suggested in 'Theatrum chemicum'. Blomfild was well regarded as an alchemist through the seventeenth century, and at least seven brief tracts (besides the 'Blossoms' and 'Quintaessens') are attributed to him. It is not known when he died, although the date 1585 has often been cited. 


@@@@@


doc= 53659


Bolnest, Edward (fl. 1666-1675), medical practitioner, practised medicine in London, residing on Jewen or Jewin Street (near Cripplegate) in 1665, and on Queen Street (near Guildhall) in 1672; few details of his life are known. Along with several other advocates of the 'chymical' approach to medicine, he contributed to the boisterous seventeenth-century opposition to traditional Galenic medicine, and as such could reasonably be described as a Paracelsian. His first work, 'Medicina instaurata' (1665), assailed medical authorities and promoted a rigidly spagyric approach to pharmacy, maintaining that the efficacy of medicines was impeded by 'dross and impurity' which 'choaks and overpowers' the operative principles, and proposed the separation, purification, and reconstitution of materia medica into purer and more potent forms. Marchamont Needham supplied a prefatory epistle for the work. Bolnest was a member of the 'Society of Chymical Physicians' formed partly in opposition to the established College of Physicians, and was one of those who endeavoured to prove the superiority of chemical medicines by remaining active in London during the great plague of 1665 ['see 'Society of Chemical Physicians]. 
Bolnest was involved in a dispute with the alchemist and philosopher Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes). According to Vaughan's deposition, Bolnest approached him about 1656-7 offering to pay $300 for instruction in 'naturall philosophy and Chimicall physicke' (18 May 1661, TNA: PRO, C7/354/45) but paid only $20 to $30 and then brought soldiers to plunder Vaughan's house and arrest him (Vaughan later claimed that Bolnest was a soldier for Cromwell). Vaughan offered a bond from which Bolnest offered release for 'a certain physicall receipt of great value', to which Vaughan assented. Later Bolnest sued Vaughan for $150, whereupon Vaughan subpoenaed Bolnest. Bolnest denied Vaughan's charges, claiming he lent Vaughan $250 to make the philosophers' stone, which he later found he could not do. The resolution of the case is unknown. 
Bolnest's notions were derivative of Paracelsus and van Helmont. 'Medicina instaurata''s postscript promised an 'Aurora chymica', which eventually appeared in 1672 (Latin edn, 1675), containing receipts for chemical medicines. A further work, 'Fontina salutis', was promised in a postscript to 'Aurora', but never appeared. The failure of this work to appear may suggest Bolnest's death in the mid- or late 1670s. 


@@@@@


doc= 53661


Child, Robert (1613-1654), physician and agriculturist, was born in Northfleet, Kent, the son of John Child. His brother Major John Child was commander of a Kentish regiment, and was one of the commissioned officers who took part in the Kentish insurrection of 1648. Child matriculated at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1628 and graduated BA in 1631/2 and MA in 1635. He also attended the universities of Leiden and Padua, graduating MD in 1638. He made two visits to New England, the first between 1638 and 1641, the second between 1645 and 1647. Between these two trips Child travelled across Europe visiting Spain, Flanders, Germany, and France, where he met the alchemist Pierre Jean Fabre. During his second visit to America, Child became involved in the ironworks of John Winthrop junior at Braintree and Lynn, New England. He advised Winthrop on metallurgical matters and became an investor in the Company of Undertakers of Iron Works in New England. After Winthrop was succeeded by Richard Leader as director of the company in 1645, Child helped run the ironworks. 
Child was also a central figure in the Massachusetts remonstrance of 1646. As an ardent presbyterian he was critical of the Congregational administration of Massachusetts, and was one of the co-signatories of the remonstrance and humble petition which argued that a solemn league and covenant be imposed on its inhabitants to establish presbyterianism as a state religion. 'All things would prosper in this place', Child wrote in December 1645, 'if they would give liberty of Conscience'. Child desired to see the colony 'better ordred in Church and Commonwealth' and to this end he involved himself in an attempt to revoke the original Massachusetts charter. He incurred the displeasure of the president and in November 1646 was tried at open court, where he was accused of attempting to 'undermyne the libertyes of Gods people', defaming the government, and slandering the church, and was fined $50 for refusing to retract his 'contemptuous speeches and behaviour' towards the colony. After his trial Child prepared to sail back to England but was arrested in March 1647 after he was found in possession of compromising documents including a draft appeal to the English parliament. He was sentenced to a brief period of imprisonment by the general court on 9 June 1647 but was allowed to remain under house arrest in the home of his friend Leader. On his release some time before 27 October 1647, Child returned to England. 
By May 1648 Child was lodging with a Dr Garbet in Hogsdon, near Gravesend, Kent, and busying himself with chemical experiments and medical practice. He was well known as an alchemist, possessed a personal library of over a hundred 'Chymicall books', and corresponded regularly with Winthrop and others on alchemical matters. Some contemporaries suspected that he was responsible for the influential alchemical tracts written under the pseudonym Eirenaeus Philalethes, but the actual author was his friend George Starkey, whom Child encouraged to emigrate from New England. On Starkey's arrival in 1650 Child introduced him to Robert Boyle and other chemists. In the same year Child, together with Thomas Vaughan, Thomas Henshaw, and William Webbe, proposed to establish a 'chymical club' to collect, translate, and publish significant alchemical books and manuscripts and promote open communication of alchemical secrets. From 1641 until his death Child was a regular correspondent and then close associate of Samuel Hartlib in London. He was also an acquaintance of Elias Ashmole, whom he thought 'a very good & publicke spirited man'. Hartlib published letters from Child on agriculture in his 'Legacy of Husbandry', published between 1651 and 1655. Child advocated the systematic study of scientific agricultural methods and proposed schemes for state implementation of forest management and the cultivation of potatoes, flax, and hemp. Child left London to settle in Lisburn, co. Antrim, in Ireland in May 1651. On his arrival he began a botanical and entomological survey of the locality (sending specimens to his friend, a Mr Morgan, keeper of a 'kind of Botanicke garden' close to Westminster Abbey, and an entomologist, Mr Marshall). Child encouraged innovation among the local farmers, recommending the settlement of Dutch experts on agriculture. 
Child was actively involved in preparations for an extended edition of 'Ireland's Natural History', a preliminary survey by Gerard Boate, published by Hartlib in 1652. At first Child collaborated with Gerard's brother, Arnold Boate, but after the latter's death in 1653 Child became solely responsible. This ambitious project was still incomplete when Child died at Lisburn in the early part of 1654. 


@@@@@


doc= 53664


Wood, George Arnold (1865-1928), historian, was born at Salford, Lancashire, on 7 June 1865, eldest son of George Stanley Wood (1840-1914), a cotton merchant, and Martha Pickering, 'nee' Alliott (1839/40-1871). He grew up in a nonconformist household that was strongly attached to the Liberal Party. He was educated at Mrs Hunt's school, Bowdon, Cheshire, and then went to Bowdon College before going to Owens College, Manchester, in 1882. After graduating in 1885 he entered Balliol College, Oxford, gaining a BA with first-class honours in 1888 and an MA two years later. In October 1888 he enrolled in the Congregational Mansfield College, Oxford, but while at Balliol he had begun to lose his faith. He abandoned theology and in 1890 accepted the newly established Challis chair of history at the University of Sydney, thus becoming the first occupant of a history chair in Australia. 
Wood reached Sydney in February 1891 and remained there for the next thirty-seven years. He alone taught history until 1916 when he was joined by a former student, J. F. Bruce. Life was arduous but pleasurable and stimulating, for the small university staff was composed mainly of Oxford and Cambridge graduates whose company proved congenial. Gregarious by nature and fond of sport and outdoor activities, Wood was also a devoted family man. On 27 December 1898 at Marrickville he married Eleanor Madeline Whitfeld (1876x8-1967), daughter of Edwin Whitfeld, former fellow of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and currently a master at Sydney grammar school, and his wife, Eleanor Cooke. Wood's wife, a former student and first-class honours history graduate with wide intellectual interests, proved an ideal companion. The couple had three sons and a daughter and formed a close-knit family, from which Wood drew great strength. 
Wood had attended Oxford University at a time when the study of history was being placed on a new footing by the regius professor, William Stubbs, a disciple of the German empirical school founded by von Ranke. Wood was deeply influenced by Stubbs and throughout insisted on the need for research to be based on original sources. Yet he also stressed that the writing of history was a creative process calling for the use of imaginative powers. He saw his subject as a moral force capable of influencing the present and providing direction for the future. Wood sought to develop in his students an appreciation of the 'noble and the good' and to instil them with those Liberal beliefs, particularly of a Gladstonian variety, which influenced his own outlook. Far from aiming at objectivity the historian must give full expression to his own personal feelings and political creed. 
Such an approach strongly influenced Wood's writing and teaching. The burdens of office prevented him from publishing much and he produced only two books, 'The Discovery of Australia' (1922) and the much slighter 'Voyage of the Endeavour' (1925). A manuscript dealing with early New South Wales was not accepted, but chapters did appear in the journal of the Royal Australian Historical Society, to which he contributed other articles. He also completed a chapter on oceanic exploration for the Australian volume of the 'Cambridge History of the British Empire', but it did not appear. Wood's writings were original, stimulating, thoroughly researched, and sometimes, particularly in the case of his article on convicts, controversial. It was for his work as a teacher, however, that he was most noted. He established a warm relationship with his students, excited their curiosity, and widened their intellectual horizons. His lectures, neatly written and preserved among his papers, dealt with large issues and bore testimony to the strength of his belief in liberalism. He taught mostly British and European history from the middle ages, but he also developed an interest in British imperial history and made occasional incursions into the Australian past. This was a field that engrossed his attention after he became aware of the rich documentary sources through his association with two government-sponsored projects for the publication of the historical records, first of New South Wales, then of Australia. He encouraged postgraduate research in Australian history but thought the secondary literature inadequate for undergraduate purposes. 
Wood saw his purpose as extending beyond the university into the broader community. As a professor he bore responsibilities for history in the secondary schools and he played a major role in determining the syllabus and setting, as well as examining, the two public examinations. He had well-developed ideas about how history should be taught in all levels at school and he worked hard to guide teachers. A great encourager, he involved himself in the work of the Royal Australian Historical Society and gave active assistance to a number of amateur writers. One of his first tasks after arriving in Sydney was to deliver a public inaugural lecture, 'The study of history', and thereafter he lectured regularly for community groups and the university's extension board. He was also active in the Workers' Educational Association from 1914 and displayed concern for the underprivileged. He had a strong interest in contemporary issues, served for a long time as a correspondent for the 'Manchester Guardian', and was a member of the New South Wales branch of both the Institute of International Affairs and the Institute of Pacific Relations. 
On 14 October 1928 Wood committed suicide while undergoing treatment for shingles at a private hospital in Randwick, Sydney. His death was as tragic as his life was fruitful. A man whose courage was reflected in the way he withstood public opprobrium for opposing Britain's involvement in the South African War, he was noted for his integrity and high principle. Regarded with respect and affection by students and colleagues, he added fresh dimensions to Australian culture and contributed to the professionalization of history, laying the foundations for a strong history department at Sydney University. The Wood tradition was taken to Melbourne University by Wood's student and biographer, Professor R. M. Crawford, and it also influenced others who rose to literary, academic, and professional prominence. 


@@@@@


doc= 53666


Todd, Sweeney (supp. fl. 1784), legendary murderer and barber, may have his source in a murder reported in the 'London Chronicle' of 2 December 1784. It related that a 'Journeyman Barber that lives near Hyde Park-corner, who had been a long time past jealous of his wife, but could no way bring it home to her' had shaved a gentleman who boasted of having had 'certain favours' from a young woman who lived nearby. 'The Barber concluding it to be his wife, in the height of his frenzy cut the Gentleman's throat from ear to ear, and absconded'. The story was reprinted in the 'Annual Register' for 1784-5. The murderer's fate is unreported. 
In 1823 a publication called 'The Tell-Tale' published the story of a barber in the rue de la Harpe, Paris, who murdered a gentleman visiting from the country and then had the victim's body turned into pies by his next-door neighbour, a patissier. The story was reprinted in 1841, and was supposedly based on a case in France about twenty years earlier, but also resembled a French ballad about a fourteenth-century barber who likewise murdered his victims before having them turned into pies. The legend of the murderous barber may have played on a fear of cannibalism in urban centres; in a crowded city consumers could not see where their meat was coming from. This had been demonstrated by the hysterical reaction to the publication of a broadsheet by James Catnach in London in 1818, which claimed that a butcher was selling human meat in his shop; a butcher, Thomas Pizzey, whose shop in Clare Market was besieged by a mob clutching Catnach's claims, successfully sued Catnach for malicious libel. In 1843 Charles Dickens, in 'Martin Chuzzlewit', had Tom Pinch wonder whether his friend John Westlock was 'afraid I have strayed into one of those streets where the countrymen are murdered; and that I have been made meat-pies of, or some horrible thing' (Dickens, 576). Whether or not this was a common apprehension of visitors to London it provided a commercial opportunity to a publisher associated with sensational fiction, Edward Lloyd. 'Lloyd's Penny Atlas' (vol. 2, no. 97, 1844) included a story called 'Joddrel, the Barber, or, Mystery unravelled', about a French-Irish barber in London, Lewis Joddrel of Bishopsgate, whose neighbours realize that many of his customers disappear. The bodies are discovered with stakes through their heads, but there is no mention of their flesh having been intended for human consumption. 
On 21 November 1846 Lloyd began serializing 'The String of Pearls' in 'The People's Periodical and Family Library'. The eighteen-part serial has usually been attributed to Thomas Peckett Prest, but Helen Smith has argued persuasively that it was actually the work of James Malcolm Rymer. It was set in 1785, suggesting that the author may have read the newspaper account of the murdering barber of 1784. The story concerned Sweeney Todd, a barber in Fleet Street (the name may have been borrowed from Samuel Todd, a pearl-stringer who lived near Fleet Street in the 1830s) who murders wealthy clients for their valuables by throwing them from their chairs through a trapdoor into a cellar. (The device may have been borrowed from Thomas Deloney's late sixteenth-century prose work 'Thomas of Reading'.) Todd's neighbour Mrs Lovett then cuts up the bodies to make them into pies. Todd apparently murders a customer, Mark Ingestre, for a string of pearls, but fails to account for the loyalty of Ingestre's lover Johanna or Ingestre's miraculous survival, which frightens him into confessing his crimes. Before the serial had ended a stage version of 'The String of Pearls' had begun a long run at the Britannia Theatre, Hoxton, on 1 March 1847, almost certainly dramatized by George Dibdin Pitt. There Todd gained his stage catchphrase, 'I've polished him off' (Kalikoff, 25), which entered the English language. Edward Lloyd published an enlarged 'The String of Pearls' as a stand-alone 'penny-blood' serial during 1850. Both the preface to the 1850 edition and the bills for Pitt's play insisted that the Todd story was based on fact. A further serial, which embellished the details of Pitt's version, and was possibly written by Charlton Lea, was published by Charles Fox in 1878, by which time Todd had become 'the Demon Barber of Fleet Street'. 
By 1878 it had become widely accepted that Sweeney Todd was a historical person. A correspondent to 'Notes and Queries' wrote that he could 'trace this credulity back (by report, of course) for at least seventy years' but that he had: 'searched in vain the various editions of the 'Newgate Calendar', the cognate 'Malefactors' Register', the Old Bailey Sessions papers, numerous collections of romances of London, London legends, the late Walter Thornbury's 'Old Stories Retold, &c.', but can find no trace of such a prosecution, or of any crime bearing resemblance to this one. ('N&Q', 5th ser.)' The exception was the sixteenth-century case of the cannibal Sawney Beane, who, he suggested, may have been the original of the Todd legend. The story of Sweeney Todd was returned to several times in 'Notes and Queries', where correspondents usually turned to Pitt's play and concluded that the character was entirely fictitious. However, the legend gained further embellishments. 186 Fleet Street became established as Todd's residence, an identification encouraged by the discovery of human bones under the cellar during building work in the late nineteenth century, supposedly those of Todd's victims. An alternative explanation was that the cellar of 186 Fleet Street had been built across the old vaults of St Dunstan-in-the-West. 
Todd remained part of popular culture in the twentieth century and was the subject of several cinema films, most notably 'Sweeney Todd, the Demon Barber of Fleet Street' (1935), starring Tod Slaughter, who also frequently played Todd on the stage. Theatre productions continued to claim that the story had a historical basis. The programme of one stage version, 'Todd', performed in New York in 1924, claimed that Todd was born in Stepney on 26 October 1756 and was tried for murder on 29 January 1802, citing (falsely) the 'Newgate Calendar', although there was no factual basis for these statements. By the 1930s 'the Sweeney' had become cockney rhyming slang for the Metropolitan Police's flying squad, and in the 1970s it provided the name for a television drama series about two flying-squad detectives. Malcolm Arnold composed a ballet, 'Sweeney Todd', in 1959. The story was reinterpreted for the late twentieth-century stage in 1968 by Christopher Bond, who presented Todd as a victim of society, robbed of his wife and daughter by a lustful and corrupt judge, who returned to London after many years to take a gruesome revenge. This version was adapted into the musical 'Sweeney Todd, the Demon Barber of Fleet Street', with music and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim and book by Hugh Wheeler, which opened in New York in 1979 and in London in the following year. The original productions of the musical won several awards. It was frequently revived, particularly in the United States. Although Bond declared that 'Sweeney Todd is pure fiction' (Sondheim, Wheeler, and Bond, xl), a belief persists that Todd existed, and Peter Haining has written several books arguing that Todd should be regarded as a historical figure. Todd is perhaps best described as a personification of early nineteenth-century fears of the anonymity of urban life built around some recorded events and older fictional or legendary sources. 


@@@@@


doc= 53668


Cooper, William (bap. 1639, d. 1689), bookseller and writer on the occult sciences, was born in Leicester, the son of John Cooper and his wife, Elizabeth. He was baptized on 5 June 1639 at the parish church of St Martin in Leicester. Following his father's death, Cooper moved to London and, on 29 September 1655, began an eight-year apprenticeship to William Wells, stationer, under whom he developed the occupational interests and skills that would serve him throughout his life. On 14 November 1669 Cooper married Mary Cleere at the church of St Bartholomew-the-Less, near Little Britain, the important centre of the London book trade where Cooper was to conduct his varied enterprises at a shop under the sign of the Pelican. His primary interests were occult, scientific, and medical books written in English, and his 'Catalogue of Chymicall Books', first issued in 1673, is an invaluable guide to book production in these specializations. 
Records of books printed by and for Cooper, covering the period 1669-89, and published lists of books available for purchase in his shop suggest that he enjoyed a flourishing business. He was interested in alchemy and chemical medicine and had a special preference for works by the pseudonymous Eirenaeus Philalethes, George Starkey, whose 'Secrets Reveal'd, or, An Open Entrance to the Shut-Palace of the King' (1669) was the first volume printed for sale by Cooper. It was followed by additional Philalethean works, editions of other alchemical authors, and collections of alchemical tracts, such as the 'Aurifontina chymica' (1680), dedicated to Charles II, and the 'Collectanea chymica' (1684). In addition to works ranging from ephemerides to editions of William Barton's 'Select Hymns', Cooper also published scientific and technical titles such as those of Thomas Houghton and Gabriel Plattes on mining and William Simpson's works on spas and mineral waters. 
Cooper was, in all likelihood, the author of 'A philosophicall epitaph in hierogliphicall figures... published by W. C. esq with a catalogue of chymicall bookes' (1673). This curiously complex work features an engraved title-page and symbolic illustrations for which Cooper provides interpretive commentary; these are followed by his own translations of Johann Friedrich Helvetius's 'Briefe of the Golden Calfe', Johann Rudolph Glauber's 'The Golden Ass Well Managed', and 'Jehior, the Day Dawning', usually attributed to Paul Felgenhauer. The book's addresses to the reader and dedications to Robert Boyle and Elias Ashmole, the latter alluding to past illness and unspecified 'Long troubles', reveal that Cooper seriously believed in alchemy, in both its physical and esoteric aspects. In his commentary, Christian, millenarian, cabbalistic, and neoplatonic ideas are intermingled, but his approach to physical alchemy and physic is primarily that of Paracelsus and Van Helmont. 
As the final section of the 'Philosophicall Epitaph' of 1673, Cooper added 'A catalogue of chymicall books which have been written originally, or translated into English'. Not narrowly 'chymicall' in coverage, this list includes sixteenth- and seventeenth-century books on magic, astronomy, physic, and pharmacy -- both Galenical and Paracelsian -- Rosicrucianism, and 'chemical philosophy', as well as many works which, in their empirical and inductive emphasis, were more closely allied with the 'new science'. The 'Catalogue' contains more than 180 main entries that provided the basis for two expanded and corrected versions. In 1675 he compiled a 'Second Part' containing additional book entries, and a 'Third Part' consisting of a ten-year index to items published in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' which pertain to 'Chymistry, or the Study of Nature by Art in the Animal, Vegetal or Mineral Kingdoms'. In 1688, he added a 'Continuation or Appendix to the Second Part', consisting of corrections, rectifications, or additions of books entries up to that year. Now exceedingly rare, this 'Continuation' brought the total number of main entries to approximately 430. By extending his booklist thirteen years beyond the 1675 edition, Cooper provided a much fuller inventory of books that had been published and were available for purchase in late Restoration England. The earliest work listed in the 'Catalogue' is Hieronymus von Braunschweig's 'Vertuose Boke of Distyllacyon of the Waters of All Manner of Herbes' (1527), and one of the latest, and the only entry by a female writer, is Mrs Mary Trye's 'Medicatrix, or, The Woman-Physician' (1675). 
Primarily as the result of a large number of extant sale catalogues, knowledge of Cooper's activities as England's first book auctioneer is more complete than for any other aspect of his life. His auctioneering began on 31 October 1676 with the sale of the Lazarus Seaman library, included at least twenty-two sales, and ended in June 1688; his printed catalogues contain much additional information on the frequency and dates of his sales, his clients (who included Nathan Paget, Milton's doctor, and Richard Davis, Oxford bookseller), and estimates of the number of books included in certain of the sales. He was keenly aware of his historic role in this new method of bookselling in England, which was patterned after those used in Leiden and Amsterdam, and established a format and procedures to regulate this business. His auctioneering fame and that of his sometime partner Edward Millington are humorously celebrated in George Smalridge's Latin poem 'Auctio Davisiana Oxonii habita, per Gul. Cooper & Edward Millington bibliopol' (1689). Cooper died in February 1689. His widow, Mary, succeeded to the business. 


@@@@@


doc= 53669


Evans, John (b. 1594/5?, d. in or after 1659), astrologer and medical practitioner, was of Welsh origin. He was well educated and had obtained an MA degree by 1621. He was probably the John Evans of Flint who matriculated at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in 1615, aged twenty, and proceeded BA the following year; though several namesakes attended Oxford in this period, this is the most likely identification. Evans became a minister, serving probably in the diocese of Worcester and later as curate of Enfield, Staffordshire, where his name occurs between 1620 and 1625. 
In 1625, when he was living at Four Ashes, Enfield, Evans offered tuition in English, Latin, Greek, Hebrew, writing, and mathematics. He published an almanac for 1613, calculated for Worcester and dedicated to the bishop of Worcester (Henry Parry), and others for 1625 and 1629-31, calculated for Shrewsbury. They contain pious exhortations in verse, extracts from Du Bartas's 'Divine Weeks', and astrological advice. His 'The Palace of Profitable Pleasure' (1621), dedicated to James I, was a simple dictionary and grammar with arithmetical tables, while his 'The Sacrifice of a Contrite Heart' (1630), a book of prayers and meditations, utilized some of his almanac material and included prayers for the conversion of the Jews and the overthrow of the Roman Antichrist. 
In 1633 Evans published an 'Ephemerides' for five years, based on the tables of David Origanus. About 1630 he was forced to flee Enfield 'for some Offences very scandalous' and settled in London, first in the Minories, in Aldgate, then in Gunpowder Alley near Fetter Lane, where he scraped a living by practising astrology and chemical medicine. In 1632 a friend took the young William Lilly to meet him as 'an excellent wise man' in astrology. Lilly describes finding him living in squalor and in bed with a hangover, 'if it be lawful to call that a Bed whereon he lay'. None the less he agreed to teach Lilly astrology, and did so very effectively for seven or eight weeks despite a library comprising only two books. Lilly later penned a vivid portrait of his tutor: 'of a middle Stature, broad Forehead, Beetle-brow'd, thick Shoulders, flat Nosed, full Lips, down-look'd, black curling stiff Hair, splay-footed', dishonest, and 'much addicted to Debauchery, and then very abusive and quarrelsom, seldom without a black Eye, or one Mischief or another' (Lilly, 21). They parted company when Evans gave a blatantly false resolution to a client, observing cynically that 'he had a Wife and Family to provide for' (Lilly, 23). 
Though a rogue, Evans was no impostor. Lilly admired his 'piercing Judgment' (Lilly, 21) and Richard Napier thought Evans his superior in some branches of the art. Evans also practised the invocation of spirits, both in Staffordshire and London. On one occasion, he told Lilly, he raised a spirit at the request of Sir Kenelm Digby and was transported bodily from the Minories to a field near Battersea. Evans's daughter Ellen also practised the invocation of spirits. A considerable part of Evans's income came from his antimonial cups, which he promoted in 'The Universal Medicine, or, The Vertues of the Antimoniall Cup' (1634). He claimed to have used his cup safely for three years, citing Sir Thomas Myddelton, a former lord mayor, as proof of its virtues. However, some abusive remarks about the eminent physician Sir Theodore de Mayerne brought Evans to the attention of the College of Physicians of London, and on hearing that two of Evans's patients (Sir Nathaniel Kitch and Lady Amy Blunt) had died of severe vomiting, it ruled that he was a dangerous charlatan. The college pressed Archbishop Laud to take action, and on Laud's orders all remaining copies of Evans's book were seized and destroyed. Laud also summoned him before the court of high commission in June 1635, where he proved unable to produce his holy orders and was detained for behaving 'contemptuously'. The case dragged on until November, when Evans was discharged on promising not to practise medicine in or near London. 
Little is known of Evans's later years. He is said by Anthony Wood, very plausibly, to have 'lived in several places, and in obscure conditions' (Wood). He may be the John Evans intruded as rector of Yeovilton, Somerset, in 1647. In 1659 he surfaced as rector of Littleton upon Severn, Gloucestershire, announcing in a London newspaper that his cup was still much in demand and could be obtained through a relative in the capital. Nothing more is heard of him after this date. 


@@@@@


doc= 53670


Fiske, Nicholas (1579-1659), astrologer and medical practitioner, was born on 22 July 1579 at Stadhaugh, in the parish of Laxfield, Suffolk, the oldest surviving son of Matthew and Elizabeth Fiske and from a long-established landed family. Though well educated, he chose to study astrology and physic at home instead of going to university. He was described as a 'licentiate in physick' and he practised medicine at Colchester (though he is not recorded in the roll of the College of Physicians), where he became well acquainted with the physician William Gilbert, author of 'De magnete' (1600). He later described himself as 'iatromathematicus', which suggests that he put his astrological skills to use in the practice of medicine. 
Fiske married Judith Reade, daughter of William Reade, minister of Trinity Church, Colchester (probably about 1630); they had two sons and five daughters. In 1633 he was summoned to London by Dr Thomas Winston of Gresham College, to instruct Lord Treasurer Weston's son in arithmetic and astronomy. He settled in Covent Garden, and had a good practice both in astrology and physic. One of his astrological clients was the lawyer Sir Robert Holborne, John Hampden's counsel in the 'ship money' case, who paid Fiske $100 to calculate his nativity. William Lilly, who became a close friend following Fiske's move to London, described him as 'very studious, laborious, of good Apprehension', and highly proficient in astrology, physic, astronomy, and mathematics (Lilly, 28). Fiske's standing was also recognized by Sir Francis Kynaston, who appointed him professor of astronomy at his short-lived Musaeum Minervae, a college founded on utilitarian principles in Covent Garden in the mid-1630s. 
In 1650, encouraged by his friends Lilly and Elias Ashmole, Fiske published Sir Christopher Heydon's 'An Astrological Discourse', having acquired the manuscript after the death in 1616 of Dr Richard Forster, to whom Heydon had presented it. Fiske had tried to publish it before the civil war, but had been blocked by the clerical censors. He commended the work to the newly established Society of Astrologers, in the hope that it would inaugurate an astrological renaissance in England. Lilly described Fiske as a diffident man and a poor teacher; John Gadbury, by contrast, declared him an excellent teacher despite his lack of fluency, adding that he was 'a Gentleman of a very Pious, Exemplary and vertuous Life' (Gadbury, 'Obsequium', 113). Fiske enjoyed substantial receipts from his medical and astrological practice, which he kept up for sixty years, and a rental income of $100 a year from his property in Suffolk. Gadbury records, however, that he died relatively poor, having lost most of his wealth through the malice of his enemies. He died in London 'of a lingering Consumption' (Gadbury, 'Collectio', 128) on 7 February 1659 and was buried at St Paul's Church, Covent Garden, on 9 February. His younger son Matthew was also a well-known astrologer. 


@@@@@


doc= 53671


Harding, John (bap. 1601, d. 1665), alchemist and translator, was baptized on 8 November 1601 at Great Haseley, Oxfordshire, eldest of the three sons and four daughters of John Harding ('c'.1562-1610), rector of Great Haseley, and his wife, Isabel, whose former married name was Clarke. As regius professor of Hebrew at Oxford University, Harding's father was one of the appointed translators of the 'Bible', and was president of Magdalen College in 1607-8. Harding matriculated at Magdalen on 25 October 1616; he graduated BA in 1620, held a fellowship in 1622-8, and proceeded MA in 1623. He held the offices of bursar in 1625 and of vice-president in 1626. In or after 1628 Harding married Martha (died 1682); they raised at least two sons, John (died 1690), who graduated at Magdalen in 1650, and Edward (died 1679), who graduated at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1653 and practised medicine at Northampton. 
From 1642 Harding was rector of Brinkworth, Wiltshire. In pursuit of his interest in science he had become an avid follower of Paracelsus, and while at Brinkworth he became a significant translator and disseminator of Paracelsian works. His first collection, issued in 1659, was entitled 'Paracelsus his Aurora & treasures of the philosophers, as also the water-stone of the wise men' (the third text taken from Johann Siebmacher's 'Der Wasserstein der Weisen'). The second and more important collection, 'Paracelsus his Archidoxes', together with many smaller treatises, was published in 1661 and reissued in 1663 as 'Paracelsus his Archidoxes, or Chief Teachings, Comprised in Ten Books'. Harding had drawn mainly on Huser's German edition, but incorporated material from other German sources. A third work, 'The Triumphant Chariot of Antimony' (1660), was supposedly translated from the fictional Basil Valentine. All Harding's publications were identified simply as 'by J. H. Oxon'. 
In the 'Archidoxes' Harding alludes to the frustration he was experiencing with his self-imposed task of translating and publishing Paracelsian and other medical texts which formed the canon of a more empirically orientated school than the traditional one of medical practice. Its innovative element was the wedding of chemistry with medicine, wherein the body was seen as an extension of the chemical cosmos. Harding's prefaces show him to be an advocate of empirical studies. Alchemy was a tradition dominated by the search for gold and the elixir of life. With his translation of 'Archidoxes', Harding indicated his broad knowledge of Paracelsian works as well as his own wish to guide English alchemical and medical practice away from Galenic traditionalism and towards specific cures, founded on chemical substances and knowledge. In publishing these works, Harding had more than personal and academic difficulties to surmount; in the preface to 'Archidoxes' he mentions his pleasure at publishing the tenth book of the work, its having previously been suppressed. Paracelsians were not popular figures in established medical or academic circles because they accused medical practitioners of ossification, callousness, and downright charlatanism. 
Harding's declared intention to publish a complete translation of Paracelsus's 'Paramirum' came to nought when in 1662 he was ejected from his living 'as a most violent presbyterian'. He retired to Northampton where his nephew Edward, son of Edward Reynolds, bishop of Norwich and Harding's sister Mary, held the rectory of St Peter's. He died in April 1665 and was buried at St Peter's on 19 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 53672


Kirby, Richard (1649-1693?), astrologer and medical practitioner, was born on 13 July 1649 of unknown parentage. In an early work he apologized for his mean education. Henry Coley (1633-1704), a close friend, was probably his astrological teacher. His early works, ephemerides for 1681 and 1682 and an almanac for 1684, were uncontroversial but Kirby became notorious in the mid-1680s when he responded to the threat from popery and absolutism at home and the French and Ottomans abroad by predicting sensational changes throughout Europe. His 'Vates astrologicus' (1683) promised the death of Louis XIV, the devastation of France, Italy, and Spain and the overthrow of the papacy, before the rise of a great conqueror in 1699 who would bring peace to the whole world. Many of these prophecies were drawn from John Holwell's 'Catastrophe mundi', or from the astrological works of Richard Edlin and William Lilly. Kirby found it expedient to withdraw from London in 1687-8, and was denounced by the tory astrologer John Gadbury in 1688. He was able to speak out freely once more after the revolution of 1688, and published 'Catastrophe Galliae' in 1690, in which he promised the conquest of France and Ireland and a golden age of freedom for Britain, and mocked Gadbury for predicting that the year 1688 would pass uneventfully. 
In 1681 Kirby was living in Fulham, but he worked from an address in London, advertising his services as teacher and consultant at the sign of the Iron-Jack, a smith's shop in Fetter Lane. Kirby attended from Monday to Wednesday, his partner Philip Mayle on the other days. Like several whig astrologers, Kirby wished to reform astrology by restoring its original purity, a cause championed by the Italian Ptolemaist, Placidus de Titis. In 1687 he and his friend John Bishop published 'The Marrow of Astrology', offering a Ptolemaic account of the zodiacal signs and the planets based on Placidus's work. Kirby's section was dedicated to Elias Ashmole, Bishop's to Robert Boyle. Their partnership foundered when Bishop tried to claim sole credit for the work. By this date Kirby had moved to King Street, Soho, at the sign of the Figura Mundi, complaining that the Fulham rabble had abused him as a witch or atheist. It is possible but unproven that he was the Mr Richard Kirby tried for murder at the Old Bailey in 1687 after a brawl at a gambling house in St Bride's, and acquitted on a plea of self-defence. He was still lodging in King Street when he published his last work in 1693, an account of a fourteen-year-old hysteric or epileptic, Sarah Bower of Wapping. She claimed to be possessed by the devil and the case attracted widespread interest. Kirby saw her on 19 November 1693 and used his account to advertise his success in curing bewitched patients in Norfolk and Suffolk (possibly during his retreat from London in 1687-8). He promised further details in a book then almost complete; as no such work is known, he probably did not live to finish it. The exact date of his death is unknown, but nothing is heard of him after 1693. 


@@@@@


doc= 53673


Kuffeler, Johannes Sibertus (1595-1677), chemist and inventor, was born Johannes Sibertus Koffler on 6 January 1595 at the city of Cologne in Germany, in the Holy Roman empire, the eldest son of Jacob Koffler (1569-1607), the elector of Brandenburg's resident at Cologne, and Margareta von Rendinkhoven (1575-1638). Though Cologne was a Catholic city, the family's connections with Brandenburg-Prussia make it likely that they were protestant, and probably of a Calvinist orientation. Koffler matriculated at Padua University on 11 November 1617 and graduated MD on 6 March 1618. After his graduation, he and two of his brothers settled in the Netherlands (where Koffler became Kuffeler). His younger brother Abraham (1598-1657), and a fourth brother, moved to London in 1620, where they were joined two years later by Kuffeler and his brother Gilles (1596-1658). 
On 1 May 1623 Kuffeler married Catharina Drebbel ('b'. 1609, died after 1694), daughter of the inventor Cornelis Drebbel; in the same year his brother Abraham, with whom his career was to be closely linked, married her sister, Anna Drebbel. The two brothers became closely involved in the business activities of their father-in-law, a prolific inventor who enjoyed the patronage of James I, from whom he received a house and a workshop in Trinity Minories, London. Collaborating closely, they helped to develop and promote Drebbel's inventions, possibly working with him on the Dutch reclamation of the fens, and they ran his Stratford-le-Bow dyeworks when he died in 1633. 
In June 1642, shortly before the outbreak of civil war, Kuffeler, together with his brother, left England and settled in the Netherlands, first at The Hague and subsequently at Arnhem, where they set up a dyeworks. His brother gave up his share in the business and returned to England in 1652. Kuffeler stayed behind until 1656, when, after several false starts, he signed a tripartite agreement on 20 June 1656 with Samuel Hartlib and Ezerel Tonge, offering his services to the Commonwealth as an inventor. He and his family (several of his sixteen children born between 1628 and 1649 died young) then moved to Stratford Langton, West Ham, Essex (on the opposite bank of the River Lea to Stratford-le-Bow). He declined an appointment as professor and fellow of the new Durham College (devised in 1656 and established in 1657) and he took over the management of the Stratford-le-Bow dyeworks on the death of his brother Abraham in 1657. Their dyehouse was associated with the famous Bow scarlet, or Color Kufflerianus, also sometimes known as Kuffeler's bay. This scarlet was produced using a tin or pewter mordant to dye with cochineal; according to Kuffeler, it had been invented by his father-in-law after some Dutch merchants had stumbled upon a similar process. The method of dyeing was kept secret by Kuffeler in the hope of obtaining a patent but some aspects of the discovery were publicized by Robert Boyle in his works. Many first-hand details of the process, supplied by Thomas Fletcher (died 'c'.1640), are included in a document (1669) at the Royal Society, possibly intended for a committee report on dyeing. In 1656 Kuffeler guaranteed to Hartlib the dyefastness for twenty years of the petticoats of his 'Scarlet Women of England' (Sheffield University, Hartlib MSS, fol. 29/5/91B). 
Dutch claims that Kuffeler was physician-in-ordinary to the duke of York (later James II) remain unsubstantiated, nor is he known to have practised medicine in England. Instead, he devoted himself to chemistry and alchemy in the Helmontian tradition of iatrochemistry, as attested by Boyle, Henshaw, and many other early scientists. He and his brother Abraham met and discussed alchemy with John Winthrop the younger, subsequently governor of Connecticut, in London in 1635 and in the Netherlands in 1642, and they also corresponded with him. The Hartlib papers are a particularly rich source of information about Kuffeler's inventive skills in these spheres, as well as in metallurgy, dyeing, agriculture, and chemical medicine. Peiresc wrote that Kuffeler owned Drebbel's laboratory book, and 'Collections of approved receipts of chymical operations' (Cambridge University Library, MS 2206), mostly compiled by his son Augustus in 1666, undoubtedly reflect much of Kuffeler's own experimental work. 
Kuffeler obtained no English patents for developing Drebbel's technical inventions. Chief of these was a sea-petard, or torpedo, offered by him to the Protector in 1653 during the first Anglo-Dutch War, pre-empting a bid by Louis XIV for $15,000. The device was successfully demonstrated at Deptford on 4 August 1658, making a breach 12 feet by 17 in a ship, but because Cromwell died soon afterwards the $10,000 which he had promised was never paid, despite approaches to Richard Cromwell in 1659 and the Admiralty in March 1662, and widespread interest in the weapon. He was equally unsuccessful in persuading the Dutch statesman Jan de Witt, between February and July 1659, to adopt the torpedo and two other types of grenades for the United Provinces of the Netherlands. 
Kuffeler developed and marketed a water-still and a bread oven from Drebbel's originals. In May 1633 he acquired a ten-year patent for his water-still from the states general's patent office at The Hague. The compact, portable still, consisting of a special alembic, produced 141/2 gallons of distilled water in twenty-four hours, used very little fuel, and was later tested in London; Kuffeler's son Jacob helped to make William Fitzgerald's still, patented in 1683. By 1635 Kuffeler was planning to ship ceramic models of his bread oven, made in the Netherlands, to England. He described the ovens, in his 1653 proposals to Cromwell, as iron- or copper-plated, 21/2 feet by 3, weighing only 300 lb, economic on fuel, baking 1500 lb of tasty bread in a day, and transportable on wagons (with a larger model available). Evelyn mentions that the prince of Orange's army had used the ovens; and Kuffeler told Monconys and Oldenburg, who visited an exhibition of his inventions at Stratford in 1663, that the duke of York, as head of the Admiralty, was buying his water-stills and ovens for ships sailing to the Indies. The bread oven (which also cooked meat) and Kuffeler's improved version of Drebbel's chicken-incubator oven, which intrigued his contemporaries, both operated on semi-self-regulatory, thermostatic principles. 
Kuffeler is described as loyal, persevering, and courteous. His wife, Catharina, a knowledgeable woman, assisted with his work. He died in London on 4 March 1677, but his will and burial place have not been traced. 


@@@@@


doc= 53678


Dawson, Agnes (1873-1953), feminist and headteacher, was born on 7 March 1873 at 121 East Surrey Grove, Peckham, London, the daughter of Isaac Dawson, a journeyman carpenter and later master builder, and his wife, Sarah, formerly Burford. On leaving elementary school in Peckham she became a pupil teacher and then trained at Saffron Walden College. She taught first at a school for 'mentally defective' children in east London and then at the John Ruskin School for Physically Disabled Children in Walworth. In 1913 she became headteacher of St Paul's Road infants' school in east London, transferring to Crawford Street infants' school in Camberwell in 1917. She was an enthusiastic supporter of Montessori active education for young children. She called for nursery schools to be built wherever there was a demand to assist working-class women (A. Dawson, 'Nursery Schools', n.d.). She helped establish the Parents' National Educational Union to involve parents in educational matters. 
Agnes Dawson was active in the National Federation of Women Teachers (NFWT), a pressure group inside the National Union of Teachers (NUT) before the First World War. Within the NUT she campaigned for the union to support women's suffrage and equal pay, and to oppose mixed elementary schools, since women would be denied status and promotion in male-dominated mixed schools. She was a member of the London Teachers' Association general committee and a regular delegate to the NUT conference. By 1912 she was vice-president of the East Lambeth NUT Association and a member of the London Teachers' Association women's subcommittee and education committee. She stood for the national executive of the NUT unsuccessfully in 1916 and 1917. In 1912 she became the first president of the Women Teachers' Franchise Union. She was a constitutional suffragist, and stated that the only militant act she ever undertook was to sit up all night at a friend's house during census night 1911 (Dawson, 'President, 1919', 3). 
Agnes was a member of the central council of the National Federation (later Union) of Women Teachers from 1914 to 1937. She was president of the NFWT in 1919 and helped lead the campaign for the federation to leave the NUT and become an autonomous union, the National Union of Women Teachers. Although a Labour Party member she dissuaded the central council of the NFWT from affiliating, believing that women in the Labour Party would be 'swamped' (Minutes of the central council of the NFWT, 15 Jan 1921). In 1925 she resigned her teaching post and stood successfully for the London county council (LCC) as a Labour Party candidate for North Camberwell. She undertook this post full-time, sustained by money from National Union of Women Teachers' members. She had a difficult time on the LCC, receiving little support from men who were supposed to be representing education (Miss Froud to Miss Turner, 7 May 1925, cited in Kean, 93). She served on the management committee of nursery schools, the special services subcommittee, and the teaching subcommittee of the education committee. She became senior whip of the Labour group, and in 1932 deputy chair of the council. When Labour gained control of the council for the first time in 1934 Agnes became chair of the powerful finance and general purposes subcommittee. After much campaigning she persuaded Herbert Morrison to remove the marriage bar on women teachers in 1935. 
In 1937 Agnes left her advisory post with the National Union of Women Teachers, resigned as a joint trustee of the union, and did not stand again for the LCC. She retired to Newport, Essex, where she continued public work as a JP and stood unsuccessfully in 1946 for the parish council. From 1925 she lived with Anne Munns, a former teacher at Crawford Street School, whom she called her 'pal and partner', until Anne's death in 1952 (Dawson to Muriel Pierotti, 13 Dec 1952, National Union of Women Teachers archive, box 112, file 81). She was nevertheless critical of a school atmosphere dominated by celibate teachers ([A. Dawson], 'Married women teachers', 'Times Educational Supplement', 20 July 1935, 257), and this was reflected in her sustained campaign against the marriage bar for women teachers. As a founder member of the NFWT she was a pioneer who evoked not only the admiration but the affection of many people (M. Pierotti to Mrs Tidswell, 28 April 1953, NUWT archive, box 112, file 81). Agnes Dawson died at her home, The Hut, Wicken Road, Newport, Essex, on 20 April 1953, and was cremated at Camberwell. 


@@@@@


doc= 53680


Rachman, Peter (1920?-1962), racketeer, was born at Lwow, Poland, son of David Rachman, a dental surgeon, who, together with his wife, vanished in the holocaust. After the Nazi invasion of Poland, Rachman was forced onto a road-building chain-gang and later captured by Russians, who starved him. He arrived in Britain as a stateless person about 1945-6. He endured menial jobs (including dishwashing at Bloom's kosher restaurant in Whitechapel) before setting up as a flat-letting agent. 
During the 1950s Rachman built a slum empire (chiefly in Paddington and North Kensington) by methods which, when they were exposed after his death, gave the ugly epithet of Rachmanism to the English language. At a time of severe housing shortages he bought properties occupied by tenants paying statutorily controlled rents pegged at 1939 levels. Knowing that rents became decontrolled once tenants vacated their homes, Rachman's technique with a property was to 'put in the Schwartzes and de-stat it' ('Sunday Times', 7 July 1963). He hired black hooligans to intimidate white tenants or white thugs against black tenants and forcibly obtained vacant possession. His profiteering from racial tension contributed to the Notting Hill race riots of 1958. Bullies with alsatians would wrench the doors of communal lavatories off their hinges, cut off gas, water, and electricity, break into flats, destroy furniture, rip up floorboards, and throw out tenants' possessions. Tenants who publicized their grievances were driven into hiding. Once empty, a property's value massively increased. Rachman would then 'sweat' the property, either by overcrowding it with Caribbean immigrants, or by leasing it at exorbitant rents to brothel-keepers or club-owners. Typically he was able to collect $10,000 a year in rent for a house which cost him $1500. Later the property could be sold to shady associates. Rachman exploited flaws that existed until 1961-2 in the 'Companies Act', the 'Rent Act' of 1957, and housing regulations. He controlled a proliferation of interlocking companies (fronted by nominee directors) so that sanitary notices, certificates of disrepair, and compulsory acquisitions were frustrated by the impossibility of identifying the beneficial owner of the property. Companies were wound up, and the properties reassigned to other companies, in order to keep a defective drain festering and drive out the statutory tenants. The Metropolitan Police, Ministry of Housing, borough councils, public health authorities, and rent tribunals all tried to catch him in legal nets but their mesh was too wide. In five years he made a million pounds, tax-free; with the relaxation of exchange control he was able to squirrel his fortune abroad. 
In 1959, when Rachman controlled about eighty houses, ten cases of intimidation were submitted to the director of public prosecutions, who judged there was insufficient evidence to prosecute. Rachman's application for British nationality was, however, rejected after a police investigation. As he desired the security of a British passport he began dealing in better-class flats, hotels, and offices in south Kensington after 1959, although in 1962 he still held the head leases of some dozen basement clubs. He became the principal shareholder in Streatham Hill Playhouse Ltd which sold the Streatham Hill Theatre for $200,000 and contracted to buy the Golders Green Hippodrome for $130,000. 
After his failure to obtain British nationality Rachman, on 7 March 1960, married Audrey, daughter of Frank O'Donnell, a tailor's designer, of Lancashire; her role in his business was described under cover of parliamentary privilege in the House of Commons on 22 July 1963 ('Hansard 5C', 681, 1963, 1104). Rachman's satyriasis was relieved by a daily routine of mistresses. 'Sex to Peter Rachman was like cleaning his teeth, and I was the toothpaste', remembered Christine Keeler, whom he came to hate (Keeler, 58). By contrast Mandy Rice-Davies was devoted to Rachman, who kept her in 1961-2; the two-way mirror installed in their bedroom was often pruriently mentioned at the much-publicized and controversial trial of his friend Stephen Ward (1963). 
Rachman was short, chubby-faced, plump, and balding. He habitually wore dark glasses and a gold bracelet which was locked to his wrist and inscribed with serial numbers of his Swiss bank accounts and safe-combinations. The huge stakes in his inveterate gambling laundered his cash income. He used a sunlamp daily, and dressed in silk shirts, cashmere suits, and crocodile shoes. He sported big cigars, employed a bodyguard, and kept a gun in the glove compartment of his Rolls-Royce. Despite his sinister appearance, 'Rachman, socially, was... courteous, intelligent, witty, and almost excessively generous' (Irving, Hall, and Wallington, 35). After seeing a flamboyant American limousine while in Russian captivity Rachman had vowed to become rich enough to buy similar status symbols. In his prosperity his fleet of motor cars included a red Rolls-Royce saloon and a blue Rolls-Royce convertible; he gave a Cadillac to his favourite rent collector as a birthday present. In the 1960s he still hoarded bread-crusts under his bed as security against starvation and stockpiled his homes with food. 'He was freaky about cleanliness, took several baths a day using gallons of Dettol... He suffered appalling nightmares and he would wake, screaming and sweating with fear, crying for his mother' (Rice-Davies, 'Mandy', 72). 
Rachman died after a coronary thrombosis, on 29 November 1962, at Edgware General Hospital, Edgware, Middlesex, and was buried at the Jewish cemetery in Bushey. His wife survived him. Rumours abounded in 1963 that he had assumed a new identity and was living off his Swiss fortune. Journalists had previously been deterred from publicizing his activities by fear of libel actions; his posthumous exposure was set against the resignation of John Profumo as secretary for war, and Ward's suicide. The techniques of Rachmanism were used in provincial cities like Nottingham and Newcastle, and by other London racketeers in Southwark, Lambeth, and Deptford, but in 1963 the blame was heaped 'on this particular, unhappy, dead, foreign Jew' ('Hansard 5C', 681, 1963, 1114). 


@@@@@


doc= 53681


Adams, Mary Jane Bridges- (1854-1939), socialist and educationist, was born on 19 October 1854 at Maesycwmer, Bedwas, Monmouthshire, south Wales, the daughter of William Daltry, an engine fitter, and his wife, Margaret Jones. She was born into a family of civil engineers, and her father later held an appointment at the Elswick works, Newcastle. Mary began life as a pupil teacher, but achieved success in the University of London matriculation examination, where she was placed in the first division in 1881; a year later, in June 1882, she passed the University of London's intermediate examination in arts. Mary attended classes in English language and literature, English history, French, Latin, and Greek, and passed through Bedford College with distinction in Greek and mathematics. Eventually she became headmistress in a board school, and afterwards a teacher in Birmingham and London. 
On 22 October 1887 Mary married Walter Bridges Adams (died 1902), a tutor, the son of William Bridges Adams, civil engineer and radical, and his third wife, Ellen Rendall. Marriage reinforced existing personal and political networks. Mary moved in the same progressive political circles as Peter Kropotkin and William Morris; Walter's sister, Hope, married the Bavarian socialist Dr Lehmann. 
In 1894 Mary Bridges-Adams unsuccessfully contested the Greenwich division of the London school board, supported by the Royal Arsenal Co-operative Society, sixty trade organizations, and the London Nonconformist Council. On that occasion her campaign was swamped by the interdenominational controversy over religious teaching in the board schools, and she came fifth in the poll to elect four members, receiving 16,638 votes. She was elected in 1897 and held the seat as the sole Labour member until the 1903 'London Education Act' abolished the board, transferring its responsibilities to the London county council (LCC). Her chief demands were for free, compulsory education, for a secular curriculum, and for equal educational opportunity. Adding a concern for free school meals and medical care she joined Lyulph Stanley and Stewart Headlam in supporting the development of the higher grade and evening continuation schools. 
In November 1901 Mary Bridges-Adams initiated the foundation of the National Labour Education League, which sought to give effect to the views of trade unions to strengthen and develop the educational side of the labour movement. She was active in the campaign against the Conservative 'Education Acts' of 1902-3, arguing that working people should be ready not merely with a negative policy of opposition but a positive education programme based on the scheme outlined by John Richardson in his book 'How It Can Be Done, or, Constructive Socialism' (1895). On 21 March 1903 the executive (including Ben Cooper, W. D. Steadman, and H. R. Taylor of the LCC) lobbied Lord Londonderry, president of the Board of Education, to save the school board for London, the league's last recorded political action. 
Mary Bridges-Adams was one of the few early Labour figures to be involved with the Froebel movement, and she supported what is generally recognized as the first free kindergarten in England, which opened at Woolwich in 1900. A member of the Woolwich branch of the Women's Co-operative Guild throughout the 1890s and warden of a women's settlement in Greenwich in 1897, she campaigned locally for improved housing and sanitation for the working classes, as well as the provision of such cultural facilities as public concerts, a municipal picture gallery, and free library. She was an honorary member of an association of trade union officials to facilitate the exchange of information on the legal position of trade unions; its council of management included Mona Wilson and Margaret Bondfield. 
Mary Bridges-Adams continued the fight for free school meals and in February 1905 organized a motor tour with Frances, countess of Warwick, John Clynes, Sir John Gorst, and Will Thorne to publicize the cause. As Lady Warwick's secretary and collaborator she ran a London-based office and discussion centre, visitors to which included Gorst, Thorne, and Winston Churchill. One of her lasting achievements was the establishment of the first Open Air School for Recovery in Bostall Woods, owned by the Royal Arsenal Co-operative Society. At her request in May 1907 the society offered its land to enable the London county council to investigate the therapeutic effects of open air and regular meals on debilitated children. The countess of Warwick was the main speaker at an inaugural meeting arranged by the co-operators, and the day school opened on 22 July 1907. It continued until 19 October 1907, during which time forty-nine boys and sixty-four girls benefited from the scheme. The experiment was judged a success and in June 1908 the school reopened on Shooter's Hill. Both sites predate the pioneering work of Margaret McMillan at the school clinic and open-air centre in Deptford. 
In 1909 adult education became a key focus of Mary Bridges-Adams's work. She was a fierce critic of the Workers' Educational Association, supporting the Marxist tradition of the Plebs League and the Central Labour College from a commitment to self-governing working-class adult education. Early in 1912 she began a campaign to establish a working women's labour college, and a year later established a Working Women's Movement. She installed herself as resident principal of the first of these colleges, Bebel House, and continued to live at this address, 96 Lexham Gardens, Kensington, until her death. 
In 1914 Mary Bridges-Adams's political activism gained an added dimension when she fought to preserve the right of asylum enjoyed by refugees from tsarist Russia, among them Georgy Chicherin, a future Soviet foreign minister. Her main allies in parliament were two Liberals: Joseph King and Lord Sheffield (formerly the Hon. Edward Lyulph Stanley), an old colleague from the London school board and close personal friend. Her obituary in 'The Times', written from close personal knowledge, stated that this last crusade exhausted her. It also attested to her skills both as a public speaker and as 'an inveterate flutterer of dovecotes': in March 1917 Lord Derby, the secretary of state for war, speaking in the House of Lords, denounced her activities as dangerous. 
Mary Bridges-Adams's feminist credentials are less clear. The obituary notice refers to her belief in universal adult suffrage and dismissal of Votes for Women as a small 'bourgeois' affair. She did belong to the Women's Local Government Society, but the suggestion that she was a militant suffragette is based on unreliable evidence. Speaking from the hustings in 1894 she herself said she disapproved of young mothers being school-board teachers and believed home was the best place for them. Six years later she reiterated the point, though she did not support the operation of a marriage bar. She died at Princess Beatrice Hospital, London, on 14 January 1939, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium four days later. She was survived by a son, William Bridges-Adams, the theatrical producer. 


@@@@@


doc= 53682


Homan, Ruth (1850-1938), educationist and women's welfare campaigner, was born on 8 August 1850 at 5 Gloucester Terrace, Hoxton Old Town, London, the eldest daughter of the three sons and five daughters of Sir Sydney Hedley Waterlow (1822-1906), stationer and MP, and his first wife, Anna Maria (died 1880), the younger daughter of William Hickson, London merchant and manufacturer. She spent her childhood at Waterlow Park; little else is known of her early life. On 7 May 1873 she married Francis Wilkes Homan, the son of Ebenezer Homan of Wormwood Street. Left a widow in 1880, with one daughter, she accompanied her father, sister Hilda, and brother Paul on a tour of Canada and the United States in 1881. Widely travelled, she had by 1896 been round the world three times. 
Ruth Homan's candidature for the London school board in 1891 was practically her first experience of public work, though her upbringing in a politically active family obviously facilitated the process of learning how to 'work' the existent political machinery. Her father's friends included four board members: Sir Edmund Hay Currie, T. H. Huxley, Samuel Morley, and the Revd William Rogers. Her brother, David Waterlow (1857-1924), later became a county councillor and Liberal MP. Her interest in education had been aroused while presiding over a girl teachers' club in the East End, and she took exceptional pains to qualify herself for school board work. She first became a school manager in Chelsea in 1887, then, to extend her knowledge of cookery, health, and hygiene, followed the course of artisan and scullery cooking classes at South Kensington School of Cookery, going on to serve as a probationer at St Bartholomew's Hospital, of which her father was treasurer. Finally her work for a charity called the Country Holidays Fund gave her a personal acquaintance with some of the poorest and most unfortunate children attending the board schools. 
Ruth Homan was elected at the head of the poll for Tower Hamlets division of the London school board in 1891, temporarily leaving her home at 52 Addison Mansions, Kensington, to take lodgings in the midst of the constituency. She held the seat until the 1903 'London Education Act' abolished the board, transferring its responsibilities to the London county council (LCC). A Liberal who supported the school and Progressive Party policy, she endorsed the development of the higher grade and evening continuation schools, the teaching of temperance principles in board school, and special teaching for 'afflicted' and delicate children. She took an active interest in the work of Elizabeth Miriam Burgwin, superintendent of London's special schools for physically and mentally handicapped children and was a keen advocate of the kindergarten system. She also promoted the teaching of cookery and laundry-work and went on to succeed Rosamond Davenport-Hill as chair of the domestic subjects subcommittee. Hard-working, active, and efficient, both women were frequently depicted as 'typical' women members by the contemporary media. On 16 March 1896 she gave evidence to the departmental committee on reformatory and industrial schools. She recommended industrial schools for both boys and girls, women inspectors, varied industrial training, and the cottage home system of organization. 
Ruth Homan gave all her spare time to the work of the board. This amounted to five or six days a week while the board was sitting, and incalculable time during the recess as she visited schools both at home and abroad. She also extended her charitable work in the East End -- an interest she had first displayed in the late 1880s. She continued to run a boot and clothing help society in the schools, and used her position as a member of the committee of the London School Dinners Association to supply free school meals to needy East End children during the winter months. She was also vice-president of the Pupil-Teachers Association and member of a Club of Working Girls in the City. Co-opted to the education committee of the LCC following the dissolution of the London school board in 1904, she served on the day schools and special schools subcommittee. 
In 1897 Ruth Homan was elected president of the Cornish Union of Women's Liberal Associations. Qualifying for election on the basis of her property at Tintagel (her daughter married Arthur Greig Chapman, the vicar of Tintagel), she was also president of the Hammersmith Women's Liberal Association and officer of Poplar Women's Liberal Association. A member of the Somerville Club for Women, she and four other women members of the London school board -- Margaret Eve, Susan Lawrence, Emma Maitland, and Hilda Miall-Smith -- belonged to the Women's Local Government Society (WLGS), an upper-middle-class, liberal, London-based feminist group, which supported the claims of all women to elected local office, whatever their politics. Ruth herself contributed to the fight against the 'Education Acts' of 1902-3 which, until 1907, disqualified women for election to the new local education authorities. Possessing an attractive personality and with an established reputation as an easy, fluent speaker, she was an ideal person to publicize the work of women in local government. She wrote and spoke on both school board work and public work more generally in an open letter entitled 'Women as Candidates for Local Elections', published by the WLGS in November 1908. She herself continued to act as a role model for other women. In 1910 she was elected a poor-law guardian for Ewell, Surrey, and served for eleven years. Latterly she lived mainly in Cornwall and died at Camelford on 6 November 1938. 


@@@@@


doc= 53683


Franklin, Henrietta (1866-1964), educationist and suffragist, was born on 9 April 1866 in London, the first of the eleven surviving children of Samuel Montagu, later first Baron Swaythling (1832-1911), foreign-exchange banker and Jewish philanthropist, and his wife, Ellen Cohen (1848-1919). Her brother Edwin Montagu was sometime secretary of state for India. She was educated at home, at Doreck College, and at King's College for Ladies, London. On 7 October 1885 she married her cousin Ernest Louis Franklin (1860-1950), financier son of the banker Ellis Franklin and Adelaide Montagu, in the New West End Synagogue, Bayswater. Between 1886 and 1903 she gave birth to four sons and two daughters. 
The decisive, inspiring experience for Henrietta Franklin and her life's work was her encounter, in 1890, with the educational reformer Charlotte Mason, founder of the child-centred Parents' National Educational Union (PNEU), which focused on liberal pre-school and primary education as a collaborative effort by mothers and teachers. Henrietta Franklin was honorary organizing secretary for the PNEU, 1894-1964, and in 1892 started the first PNEU school in London. The movement affirmed every child's right to be respected as a unique personality (its motto being: 'I am, I can, I ought, I will') and to have access to a 'generous curriculum' including nature study, poetry, religion, art, carpentry, gymnastics, and music. A tireless publicist and organizer for the validity of Charlotte Mason's educational philosophy and praxis as a teacher trainer, it was Henrietta Franklin who ensured that the PNEU achieved national and international exposure, not least through her writing and public lecture tours (which included most of the capitals of Europe, North America, and, in 1923, South Africa), as well as through her gift for consolidating the national network and by means of her own personal wealth. 
In religion Henrietta Franklin differed from her Orthodox father and husband and supported her sister Lily Montagu in the establishment of a Liberal Jewish path that focused on the spirit rather than on the letter of the law. This Liberal Judaism, influenced by the thought of Claude Montefiore, stressed ethics as the core of Jewish life and inaugurated a new form of religious service in which men and women sat together, prayers and hymns were in English, and which eventually enabled Lily Montagu to officiate as the first woman lay minister and preacher at a Liberal Jewish service. Together with her sister Lily, Henrietta Franklin published 'Daily Readings from the Old Testament' in 1922, stressing those psalms and passages in 'Isaiah', 'Ezekiel', 'Job', and 'Zechariah' that affirm the unity of man and peace as the culmination of the religious ideal. 
Henrietta Franklin's feminism was manifest not only in her Liberal Judaism but also in her political activism. She was an early member of the National Council of Women, and became both its vice-president and its president. She was a committed suffragist, being on the executive committee of the Jewish League for Woman Suffrage formed in 1912 and later chair of the National Council for Equal Citizenship. In 1915 she served on the executive committee of the Women's Municipal Party which encouraged the candidature of women for the London county council and London borough councils. During the First World War Henrietta Franklin was one of the courageous, unpopular 'pacifist feminists' who supported the Women's International Congress at The Hague in 1915, aiming firstly to demand that international disputes should in future be settled by some other means than war and, secondly, to claim that women should have a voice in the affairs of the nations. She was also a signatory to the open Christmas letter to German women drafted by Emily Hobhouse in December 1914, and a financial supporter of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom. 
Henrietta Franklin, or Netta, was a very able woman of immense force of character and phenomenal, restless energy. Rather than being content to become a mere society hostess, she gave herself totally to many causes of liberal progress. She could never feel that she had learned enough or had filled a day to the uttermost. For the last fifty-three years of her life she had had to fulfil all her commitments with an artificial leg. 'Well, I would sooner lose a leg than an arm,' she said. In 1950 she was made CBE. Henrietta Franklin died on 7 January 1964 at her home, 88 Carlton Hill, St John's Wood, London. Her monument is the longevity of the PNEU. 


@@@@@


doc= 53684


Hobson, William (1792-1842), naval officer and colonial governor, was born in Waterford, Ireland, on 25 September 1792, the third of the five sons of Samuel Hobson, a barrister, and his wife, Martha Jones. In 1803 he entered the Royal Navy as a gentleman volunteer. He was first involved in North Sea action during the Napoleonic wars, in 1806 was made a midshipman while in the West Indies, and by 1814 had risen to lieutenant. From August 1816 he was unemployed for eighteen months, then had a brief posting in the Mediterranean before commencing a career of service against pirates and slavers in the West Indies. He was captured in 1821 and again in 1823, when commanding an attack on pirate strongholds on the Cuban coast. Promotion to commander in 1824 and captain in 1828 was fitting recognition of a distinguished record, but years of exhausting service and illness -- three bouts of yellow fever -- left the slightly built Hobson in indifferent health. From mid-1828 he was without a command. 
At Nassau, in the Bahamas, on 17 December 1827, Hobson had married Eliza Ann (1811-1876), the only daughter of Robert Wear Elliott, a Scottish West India merchant. The Hobsons lived at Plymouth for six years until, in December 1834, through the patronage of Lord Auckland, Hobson was appointed commander of the frigate 'Rattlesnake'. Dispatched to serve in the East Indies and in Australian waters, the ship arrived at Port Jackson (Sydney) in August 1836 and helped with the foundation of Port Phillip settlement (Melbourne). 
When Maori warfare in early 1837 led to an appeal from James Busby, British resident in New Zealand, Hobson left for the Bay of Islands, charged with drawing up a report on the country. The fighting subsided without need of mediation and Hobson made brief visits to several other locations. His report proposed limited British intervention in New Zealand -- a system of trading factories similar to those in India and a treaty with the Maori to confirm purchase of land and secure jurisdiction. 
Hobson arrived in England in early 1838 and in February 1839 accepted appointment as British consul to New Zealand; a second commission as lieutenant-governor followed, with instructions provided by the Colonial Office. Prefaced by an apology for intervention, which acknowledged an 1835 declaration of the country's independence signed by northern Maori, these instructions were essentially guidelines for establishing a British colony. Land, purchased from Maori, would be sold to settlers at a profit to fund government business. 
At Port Jackson Hobson conferred with his immediate superior, Governor George Gipps of New South Wales, and selected his staff. He arrived at the Bay of Islands in the 'Herald' on 29 January 1840. The following day he read the queen's commission appointing him lieutenant-governor, cautiously adding that it was over the British settlements 'in progress'. 
With Busby's assistance a treaty was drafted and translated by Henry Williams, a member of the Church Missionary Society. Local Maori leaders met on 5 February 1840 at Busby's Waitangi residence, where Williams interpreted. Hobson wanted a cession of sovereignty but, aware that Maori suspected British motives, he presented the treaty as a limited intrusion on Maori rights; the treaty was needed so that he could better control unruly settlers and protect the Maori. Long-term implications were not raised. Heated debate followed, but the next day Hobson received assent from more than forty chiefs, twenty-six of whom had signed the 1835 declaration of independence. However, shortcomings of translation and lack of explanation left Maori leaders with inadequate understanding of the agreement. 
Anxious to press forward treaty negotiations elsewhere, Hobson sailed for Waitemata harbour, but on 1 March 1840 a stroke left him partially paralysed. Willoughby Shortland, colonial secretary, began to organize the collection of treaty signatures by sending copies of the treaty to various parts of the country. Hobson, soon resuming most duties, expanded these missions by deploying Major Thomas Bunbury, who arrived in April with the Hobson family and a detachment of troops. 
While treaty copies were circulating, Hobson became concerned about asserting British authority. Faced with an independent stance adopted by New Zealand Company settlers at Port Nicholson (Wellington), he proclaimed British sovereignty over the whole country on 21 May. Two months later, faced with a French attempt to found a settlement in the South Island, he responded with a show of occupation. Meanwhile he decided to relocate his government, and founded a new capital at Auckland on Waitemata harbour. Officials moved there in February 1841, and on 3 May Hobson took the oath as governor; by royal charter New Zealand became a crown colony. Now he was able to deal directly with the home government, rather than dealing via New South Wales as had been the case when he was lieutenant-governor, Hobson nevertheless had to rely on his own judgement: his staff, boosted by local recruits, lacked ability, and responses to dispatches took nine months to reach him. 
Aware that his administration was closely scrutinized by a Maori population that vastly outnumbered settlers, Hobson depended on missionary support to influence Maori leaders. In April 1840 he appointed the missionary George Clarke as protector of aborigines, but, since Clarke was required to be government land purchaser as well as protector, this was less than reassuring to the Maori. When revenue failed to meet official expenditure, Hobson handled the crisis poorly. Sensitive to opposition, he was overly irritated when settler unrest over land and other policies was fomented by journalists. He had been unwell since his first stroke, and he suffered another stroke and died, at Government House, Auckland, on 10 September 1842. He was given a military funeral on 13 September and interred in a vault in Grafton cemetery, Auckland. Eliza Hobson, with their four daughters and a son, returned to live at Stoke, Devon; she died in 1876. 
Hobson had enjoyed a warm family circle and was an entertaining host and speaker. A member of the Church of England, he was tolerant of other denominations. For his public office he was not well prepared, however. By training and disposition he was accustomed to exercising authority and commanding respect. The skills needed to control a constantly changing frontier situation within the parameters of unrealistic Colonial Office expectations were altogether different. The effort required of a new colonial governor strained his weakened constitution and hastened Hobson's end. 


@@@@@


doc= 53685


Burton, Mary (bap. 1819, d. 1909), educational and social reformer, was baptized on 7 February 1819 in Aberdeen, the youngest of four children of William Kinninmont Burton (died 1819), lieutenant in the Rutlandshire fencible cavalry, and Elizabeth Paton (died 1848), daughter of John Paton, laird of Grandholme, Aberdeen. The details of her early life are unknown. In 1832 she moved to Edinburgh with her widowed mother and brother, John Hill Burton, historian and advocate. Mary Burton never married. After her mother's death she considered becoming a nurse on the staff of Florence Nightingale, but found her true vocation at home: here she combined a lifetime's work on behalf of women with her responsibilities to raise orphaned nephews and nieces 'and to see that they were trained alike on the intellectual and practical side of life' ('The Scotsman', 22 March 1909). This commitment to practical as well as academic attainment was the hallmark of her contribution to education in Edinburgh. 
In 1869 she persuaded the directors of the Watt Institution and School of Arts of Edinburgh, a pioneering technical college and forerunner of Heriot-Watt University, to open its classes to female students for the first time. Her niece, Ella, daughter of John Hill Burton, was one of the pioneering intake. Mary Burton followed up this achievement by becoming the first woman director of the Watt Institution in 1874. When the Watt Institution merged with George Heriot's trust to form Heriot-Watt College in 1885, she became a life governor of the college. She was an active supporter and honorary president of the Watt Literary Society. As befitted the governor of an institution that described itself as a 'people's college', she maintained that universities should open in the evening to admit working people. 
Mary Burton was among the first women to be elected to public bodies responsible for money raised from local rates. From 1884 she served for many years on the St Cuthbert's parochial board, later Edinburgh parish council. The board managed poorhouses, asylums, and the allocation of clothing grants, school fees, apprenticeships, widows' pensions, and other provisions to poor and destitute people. In 1889 she unsuccessfully urged the board to petition parliament to enable county and town councils to provide schooling free of charge. This was typical of the then radical proposals she championed as a member, from 1885 to 1897, of the Edinburgh school board, which provided compulsory education for the city's children. On the election hustings she made a robust case for providing practical training for domestic responsibilities. Girls, she argued, should learn to use a sewing machine and boys the use of a saw and plane, adding that 'she herself could work with these tools and she had mended a floor before now' ('Edinburgh Evening News', 24 March 1885). Once elected, she promoted classes in cookery and laundry, and the teaching of knitting and sewing to boys. She helped increase provision of school evening classes and argued that they should be open to all. Despite persistent opposition from some of her colleagues, she ensured that the board met in the evenings, so that 'working men' members could attend. 
An energetic landlord of tenement properties in Edinburgh's old town, Burton encouraged her tenants to embrace thrift and cleanliness and abstain from alcohol. In summer she held parties for them at her home, Liberton Bank, south of the city. A kindly, spare figure with 'fresh bright face and Quaker like garb', often seen driving her pony cart to meetings, Mary Burton was well known and fondly regarded by her contemporaries ('Edinburgh Evening News', 22 March 1909). She died at Elmhill House Royal Asylum, Aberdeen, on 19 March 1909, and was buried in Dean cemetery, Edinburgh, three days later. Her lifelong commitments were reflected in her will. This included legacies of $100 to provide prizes for students attending evening classes at Heriot-Watt College, and to the Edinburgh Women's Suffrage Society to campaign 'for the admission of women to sit as members of parliament, either at Westminster or in a Scottish Parliament' (ibid., 23 March 1909). 


@@@@@


doc= 53686


Carnegie, Susan (1743-1821), writer and benefactor, was born on 7 August 1743 in Edinburgh, the daughter of David Scott of Benholm (1700-1768), director and treasurer of the Bank of Scotland, and Mary Brown (1712-1794). She was tutored at home and gained a wide and deep knowledge of French and Italian literature and of philosophy, a proficiency in drawing (which she was taught by a relative Sir Alexander Ramsay of Balmain), and an interest in social and economic affairs. From her reading of Rousseau's 'Emile' she learned to challenge the idea that women were intellectually less able than men, choosing instead to explain discrepancies in terms of women's educational opportunities and their general treatment in a patriarchal society. Certainly in her correspondence Susan was fearless in drawing attention to a lack of respect or of rudeness on the part of male writers. Prior to her marriage (contract signed on 17 March 1769) to George Carnegie of Pitarrow (1726-1799), the son of Sir John Carnegie and Mary Burnett, she acknowledged her future husband's right to command her, but hoped 'that he never will have [the] occasion or inclination to exercise it'. 
As a young woman Carnegie published a number of poems under the pseudonym Juliette North, and took the name Arethusa in her correspondence with James Beattie, the Aberdeen poet and moral philosopher. Carnegie's own interest in moral philosophy led her to the belief that the most important motive for doing good was not to please God but the innate propriety of an action. It was this which proved the foundation of her philanthropic activities in which she was involved while bringing up a family of six sons and three daughters. Following her marriage she moved from the family home at Benholm Castle to Charleton House, Montrose, where she lived for the rest of her life. 
In 1779 Carnegie began work with Provost Alexander Christie on the project for which she is now best known: the construction at Montrose of Scotland's first lunatic asylum. Prior to this date the mentally ill had been held at the town's prison with little or no chance of rehabilitation. Carnegie's desire to treat such people humanely and to provide them with the chance of reintegration within the community proved a principal motivation throughout the programme. Having secured the approval of the kirk session of the town council in March 1779, Carnegie engaged in fund-raising through her numerous social connections and from revenue of the estates she received from her husband at their marriage. By March 1781 subscriptions had reached $679 18's'. 9died; building work now began and was completed in budget later that year. Within a decade Carnegie had established the asylum's place as a refuge for patients in and beyond Montrose which was staffed -- in what was then a new innovation -- by a resident medical superintendent. Carnegie's asylum became a model for similar institutions both in Scotland and in Goteborg in Sweden (the Sahlgranska sickhouse opened 1782), where her husband worked for the Swedish East India Company during the 1750s. 
In addition to her work for the asylum Carnegie was also involved in raising funds for the kirk at Montrose, helped the kirk session to organize local poor relief (for which she wrote 'An Appeal to the Inhabitants of the Town and Parish of Montrose' in 1803), and assisted many widows, orphans, and bankrupts in the parish. In 1814 she was praised by one local man for 'Mr Carnegie's little work on the poor of her parish. I say 'Mr', for it is 'une production male''. During the Napoleonic wars she made use of the friendly society and the savings bank in the general organization of poor relief, as well as founding a female friendly society in Montrose. 
Carnegie's tolerance of all aspects of her local community was also evident in her religious faith. Originally from an episcopalian family (which converted to presbyterianism following the revolution of 1688) she prayed regularly with her husband, whose own enduring episcopalianism led him to support the Jacobite challenge at Culloden before spending his decade as a merchant in Sweden. Susan Carnegie died on 14 April 1821 at Charleton, and was buried in the family vault at Howff, Charleton. The asylum at Montrose, Carnegie's lasting achievement, was used for this purpose until 1966, when it was sold to the War Office. 


@@@@@


doc= 53689


Houldsworth, Margaret Marshall (1839-1909), educationist and philanthropist, was born in Manchester on 14 September 1839, only daughter of Henry Houldsworth (1797-1868), a cotton manufacturer, of Coltness and his second wife, Marianne (died 1865), daughter of James Burt from Chorlton, near Manchester. Her grandfather, also named Henry Houldsworth, and great-uncle, Thomas Houldsworth, founded a flourishing cotton-spinning business in Manchester. The family also opened a mill in Glasgow before diversifying into the coal and iron industries in Lanarkshire. 
Little is known of Margaret Houldsworth's early life but the evidence suggests that it was spent in Manchester, first at the family residence at Ardwick Green and then Oak Hill, Cheetham Hill, with her brothers Walter (1845-1903) and Arthur (1847-1890). When her great-uncle Thomas Houldsworth died in 1852 and her grandfather, Henry, died in 1853 her father, now in his sixties, was freed from the restrictions of a sometimes difficult working relationship with his uncle. He went on to expand the cotton mills in Manchester, was involved in the partnership of the Coltness Iron Company, and became the new laird of the Coltness estate in Lanarkshire, where the family settled. After the deaths of her parents Margaret Houldsworth lived with her brother Arthur at Springfield House, Polton, near Lasswade in Midlothian. 
Margaret Houldsworth's move to the east of Scotland led to her involvement in the movement for promoting women's education. In April 1871 she joined the Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association (ELEA), an association set up in 1867 to further the cause of higher education of women with a view to gaining admission to the universities. She was on the executive of the association in 1876. After the death in 1877 of Mary Crudelius, the pioneering secretary of the association, and its reconstitution as the Edinburgh Association for the University Education of Women, Margaret Houldsworth became the vice-president. Once the work of the association was completed, when women were admitted to the Scottish universities in 1892, she was one of the main instigators in the setting up of Masson Hall, a hall of residence for women students at Edinburgh University. 
From 1872 Margaret Houldsworth was a member of the Edinburgh Ladies' Debating Society, which brought together many of the women who led the Scottish campaigns for women's suffrage and education in the second half of the nineteenth century. With Sarah Siddons Mair, the founder of the debating society and member of the ELEA, and two other members of the association, Ann Dundas and Mary Jane Urquhart, she helped to set up in 1876 the St George's Hall oral and correspondence classes to prepare girls for local examinations. The inadequacy of training for women teachers led the hall committee to set up St George's Training College in 1886. The need for women teachers to have practical experience in an appropriate setting and the desire to set up a school modelled on the Girls' Public Day School Company saw the foundation in 1888 of St George's School for Girls. At the centre of this new venture were the founding pioneers of Margaret Houldsworth, Sarah Siddons Mair, and Miss Urquhart. 
As a comparatively wealthy woman in a family whose male members were steeped in entrepreneurial and business acumen, Margaret Houldsworth was able to provide practical, and particularly financial, help for the women's causes she promoted. She took a much less public role than some. Sarah Mair noted: 'she was very quiet and unassuming, very shy and diffident -- the heart of the enterprise -- but I could never persuade her to speak' (Welsh, 38). She supported other causes including the Edinburgh National Society for Women's Suffrage, the Edinburgh Hospital and Dispensary for women and children, and the Scottish Central Bureau for the Employment of Women. Margaret Houldsworth died on 29 October 1909 at 3 Ainslie Place, Edinburgh, where she had lived for the previous twenty years. She was buried at Cambusnethan cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 53690


Hope, Louisa Octavia Augusta (1814-1893), promoter of household science teaching, was the youngest of the twelve children of Charles Hope, Lord Granton (1763-1851), the tory politician and lord president of the court of session, and of his wife (and cousin), Lady Charlotte Hope (1771-1834), second daughter of John, second earl of Hopetoun. John Hope (1794-1858) and James Hope were her elder brothers. Most of Louisa's childhood seems to have been spent at the family home at Granton, north of Edinburgh, where she was educated mainly by her oldest sister. Like six of her seven sisters, Louisa remained unmarried. 
Louisa Hope was an evangelical who, during the Disruption crisis, shared her family's prominent commitment to the Church of Scotland. The church subsequently became the vehicle through which she advanced many of her educational ideas. In the 1840s she ran evening classes for 'maid servants and female apprentices' and she became convinced of the need for working-class girls to be provided with a more useful education. At the time less than 20 per cent of Scottish girls received school training in sewing and almost none were given guidance in cooking. 
In 1849 the Church of Scotland called for the creation of female 'schools of industry', and in 1852 Louisa Hope played a leading part in the establishment of the Scottish Ladies Association for Promoting Female Industrial Education. This was an influential society composed largely of wealthy women associated with the church. Its object was to encourage the instruction of working-class girls in appropriate domestic and industrial skills and Christian beliefs, and it sought to persuade upper-class women to promote such a programme in their localities. In 1853 the association established a boarding-house in Edinburgh for young women training to become teachers. Louisa Hope published her opinions on this movement in her book 'The Female Teacher: Ideas Suggestive of her Qualifications and Duties' (1853). 
From childhood Louisa Hope was a close friend of Lord Aberdeen's family and it may have been her connection with the prime minister (1852-5) which resulted in her being given the 'urgent and very worrying mission [of] training nurses' in the latter part of the Crimean War. During her stay in London at this time she assisted the Revd William Gill at the National, Industrial and Sunday School in Fitzroy Square. In 1858 she organized a petition of 130 of 'the principal ladies of Scotland' protesting at the lack of needlework instruction for Scottish schoolgirls, and she wrote many letters to the press on this and related subjects (see, especially, 'The Scotsman', 18 Feb 1865). In 1860 she submitted a paper to the Social Science Association calling for improved domestic education for girls and female teachers (see 'Transactions of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, Glasgow Meeting' 1860, 397-404). 
The activities of Louisa Hope and her friends were more influential than has sometimes been appreciated. An act of 1861 enabled grants to be made to parish schools which employed a woman to teach girls household skills, and by 1872, when Scottish elementary education came under secular control, almost 70 per cent of girls in inspected schools were being taught sewing. Moreover a tradition had been established whereby upper-class ladies lent support to female domestic training in local schools. These developments formed the foundation for the eventual full introduction of domestic science. 
For many years Louisa Hope was a notable Edinburgh character. Her nephew described her as 'a strange mixture -- so odd, so ugly and sometimes so disagreeable -- but the cleverest of the sisters' (Hope Family MSS). Yet her delightful private memoir of her childhood shows that she was also a woman of real wit and charm. She died at her home, 11 Gloucester Place, Edinburgh, on 23 October 1893. 


@@@@@


doc= 53692


Warrack, Harriet (bap. 1825, d. 1910), headmistress, was baptized on 14 December 1825, at Old Machar, Aberdeen. Her father, James Warrack (died 1863), an Aberdeen tea dealer and grocer, later a commission agent, was well known in Aberdeen business circles. Her mother, Harriet (died 1857), was the daughter of George Morren, an Aberdeen stocking manufacturer. Harriet was the fifth child in a family of four brothers and two sisters. Three brothers were educated at the Aberdeen grammar school, but nothing definite is known of her education, though her obituarist referred to it as 'sound'. She may have attended the female Lancasterian school in Aberdeen, where one of her aunts was a teacher. Miss Warrack's father suffered financial difficulties and moved house a number of times, but even so the family lived on fashionable streets and were probably all brought up in reasonably comfortable middle-class surroundings. The two eldest brothers, John and James, went on to found shipping companies in Leith and Montrose; the youngest, Alexander, became a minister. Shortly after the death of her father in 1863 Harriet Warrack also found it necessary to support herself. 
Accordingly, about 1867, when she was over forty, Miss Warrack opened in Aberdeen a private school for upper-middle-class girls, later to be known as Albyn School. Two years later the school moved to Union Place. An able woman, Miss Warrack ran her school with success, attracting boarders from the country as well as day girls from the town. She was in the vanguard in promoting better academic standards for upper-middle-class girls in Aberdeen, a cause advanced by the Aberdeen Ladies' Educational Association. She organized a private class for more advanced courses at the school and in the 1870s was the first Aberdeen school proprietor to persuade girls to sit the university local examinations. She also organized correspondence tutorial classes and not only held quarterly examinations of the pupils but published examples of them. By the time Miss Warrack retired in 1886 Albyn Place School was by far the largest and most academic private girls' school in Aberdeen, and the foundations had been laid for it to continue for more than another hundred years. In no small part this was owing to her wise selection of staff and, in particular, of her successor, Alexander Mackie, a brilliant teacher, to whom she gave full management and control after he had been at the school for six years. 
Harriet Warrack was good-looking in a somewhat severe fashion, an admirable organizer, and a woman of strong character. She was a member of the Free Church of Scotland, attending the Free West Church while Revd Laidlaw was minister there and later the Queen's Cross Free Church. She died on 23 April 1910 at her home, 2 Queen's Gate, Aberdeen, and was buried at Allenvale cemetery, Aberdeen. 


@@@@@


doc= 53693


Russell, Richard (b. before 1640, d. 1686x97), translator of alchemical and iatrochemical treatises, prepared chemical medicines with his brother William Russell (1634-c.1696) who was chemist-in-ordinary to Charles II and author of 'A Physical Treatise, Grounded, not upon Tradition, nor Phancy, but Experience' (1684). While there is no positive evidence to identify him with any one of the Richard Russells who matriculated from various colleges at Oxford between about 1620 and 1666, he may have been so affiliated. 
The primary source of information on Russell's work as translator is his address to the reader included in 'The works of Geber, the most famous Arabian prince and philosopher, faithfully Englished by Richard Russel a lover of chymistry' (1678, reissued 1686). In this preface, dated 'May 3d. 1678, 'From my House at the' Star 'in' New-Market 'in' Wapping, 'near the' Dock', Russell states that it had been his original intention to conceal his identity as Geber's translator, as he had done in four previously published translations: Oswald Croll's 'Bazilica chymica, & praxis chymiatricae, or, Royal and Practical Chymistry' (1670), described as his 'first 'Essay' in that kind of 'Learning''; the 'Tyrocinium chymicum, or, Chymical essays, acquired from the fountaine of nature, and manuall experience, by John Beguinus' (1669); 'The golden calf, which the world adores, and desires:... written in Latin by John Frederick Helvetius doctor and practitioner of medicine' (1670); and 'Basil Valentine, his triumphant chariot of antimony, with annotations of Theodore Kirkringius, MD' (1678). He further notes that a volume of the works of Ramon Lull is ready for printing and that he has 'compleated two of [Paracelsus's] three 'Volumes', and about half the third'. The translations of Lull and Paracelsus were never printed. However, even without these, Russell's published works represent an important contribution to the store of alchemical and iatrochemical translations that were appearing in the last half of the seventeenth century in response to the increasing popularity of chemical medicines and the growing number of practitioners who were not expert in Latin. 
Russell was married but his wife's name is not known. Valuable information on his practice of iatrochemistry in association with his brother William is included in 'Arcana philosophia, or, Chymical secrets, containing the noted and useful chymical medicines of Dr Wil. and Rich. Russel chymists... publish'd by John Headrich, philo-chymicus, and formerly operator to Dr. Richard Russel' (1697). Published after the deaths of the Russells and avowedly Paracelsian in orientation, Headrich's book speaks of the high regard enjoyed by the Russells, whose clients included 'that discerning Monarch K. 'Charles' the II' and other members of the court. As one who had learned the secret of the Russells' tincture through assisting in Richard's laboratory, Headrich seeks to vindicate their reputations from possible debasement resulting from circulation of counterfeit medicines following their deaths; clearly his assertion of the authenticity of his own preparations was an attempt to promote their sale. Richard Russell died at some time between 1686 and 1697. Headrich also reports that he continued to serve as laboratory operator for Russell's widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 53694


Season, Henry (1693-1775), almanac writer and medical practitioner, was born on 23 January 1693, in the village of Broomham (now Bromham), near Chippenham in Wiltshire. His mother died in childbirth, and he was raised by his maternal grandmother, who also provided his early education. By the age of five he was reading the 'Bible', but he was not able to enter into full-time education, being obliged to earn a living early on. By the age of eleven he was employed in 'a mechanick business' ('Speculum Anni', 1734, A2'r'), spending his spare time reading in divinity, history, and philosophy, and writing poetry. At seventeen he joined his father in London for four months, working as an assistant funeral undertaker. However, he disliked metropolitan life and soon returned to settle in Bones Lane, Broomham. By now, encouraged by the local squire, John Nicholson, he was studying physic and astronomy, to which he then added astrology. 
Season described himself as a 'licenced Physician and surgeon' ('Speculum Anni', 1751, title-page). It seems that about 1721 he agreed (though not without initial misgivings) to take over from the deceased local physician. He found that it suited him, and maintained for the rest of his life an evidently successful medical practice which included the sale of various powders, tinctures, and remedies. For purposes of both diagnosis and prescription, he availed himself of the ancient tradition of medical, herbal, and humoral astrology, thus integrating his studies of astronomy and cosmology with those of physic. Of more recent authorities, he drew some comfort and sanction from the theories of Richard Mead concerning planetary effects, via the earth's atmosphere, on disease. 
Season combined his medical practice with that of straightforward judicial astrologer, giving astral advice on personal problems. In that role he was respected and feared by the village commoners as a cunning- or wise-man, or 'conjurer' -- an appellation that irritated Season, who saw his astrology as perfectly consistent with Anglican Christianity and reason. While admitting that the superstition of both some astrologers and their clients had resulted in casting magic spells and the like -- while many others 'do ridicule an Art they are entirely ignorant of' -- he stoutly maintained that 'The ancient Astrology is a Branch of natural Philosophy, no way inconsistent or impugned by Scripture' ('Speculum Anni', 1774, C2'r'-3'r'). He thus rejected the more openly divinatory and inexplicable practices such as elections (choosing the most propitious time to begin an enterprise) and horary judgements (answering a query on the basis of the planetary positions at the time of its asking, or reception by the astrologer), and derided overly precise predictions as crude and illegitimate. Thanks to such degeneracy, he complained, astrologers now were 'scarce ever half so much rewarded or regarded as a French Cook, Italian Songster, or even an English Dapper-witted Dancing-master' ('Speculum Anni', 1751, A2). 
In 1732 Season was offered the editorship of an annual almanac, hitherto produced by Thomas Lane, called 'Speculum Anni'. He accepted, and from his first issue (for 1733) until his last (for 1774) stamped his own distinctive personality on a frequently bland and repetitive medium in a way that is the reason why he still has, and deserves, our attention. It certainly seems to have received that of his contemporaries, including the back-handed compliment of an abusive attack on 'Nostradamus Season', as 'an illiterate scurrilous Quack', in the 1756 edition of the anti-astrological almanac 'Poor Robin'. 
The typical 'Speculum Anni' consisted principally of a rather idiosyncratic chronology, from ancient times until the present; an 'Enigma', challenging readers for its resolution, with successful answers to be carried the next year; a section in which the astronomical and astrological phenomena for each day of the year were presented, and their implications, whether social or natural, briefly discussed; and a few pages devoted to a topic of Season's choice. The whole was leavened with his forceful reflections and assertions. In religion, he was vigorously Anglican. This adherence entailed no contradiction with his astrology: 'All Eclipses, great Conjunctions, Comets and Configurations of Planets, are all Oracles of Divine Providence; which, whosoever despiseth, contemneth the Admonitions of God', he wrote ('Speculum Anni', 1774, C3'r'). His Anglicanism also overlapped with a firm conviction of English national superiority. He thus lashed out at papists, Jews, and atheists as corrupting foreign influences, and bewailed the corruption of morals resulting from the decline in attendance at church and observation of the Sabbath. 
Season also repeatedly denounced the vices of smoking, snuff, and gambling, and especially the availability of cheap liquor. This low opinion of people's natural probity applied equally to their intelligence. On non-compliers with the new-style calendar, for example, who felt that they were being cheated of eleven days, Season remarked contemptuously that 'some such Apes we have in my own Parish, who are altogether incorrigible, and whose Understanding is scarce a degree above that of a Hottentot' ('Speculum Anni', 1761, 2-3). (His opinion of other races may also be inferred.) 
Nevertheless, Season could not afford entirely to do without the rural poor. Indeed, in one year, in an effort to render his almanac more readily comprehensible to his semi-literate readers, he replaced the symbols of moon's signs with drawings of the corresponding parts of the body (the head for Aries, and so on). His contempt coexisted, however paradoxically, with a genuine concern for their welfare, just as his patriotism was of the progressive kind. His radical politics, evident in his constant urging of reforms to help the common people and criticizing the government for its corruption, was a dominant theme in his almanac. He was a friend of the earl of Shelburne, the radical whig leader, and of Sir Edward Holt, MP for Chippenham. He extolled Shelburne, Pitt, and especially John Wilkes for championing English liberty and justice. 
Season died on 10 November 1775. There is a plaque on the wall of the parish church of St Nicholas, Bromham, commemorating him. Thomas Wright, in Leicestershire, took over editing the 'Speculum Anni' with the issue of 1775, but failed to maintain its interest. 


@@@@@


doc= 53695


Foxcroft, Elizabeth (1600-1679), theosophist, was born at Stoke, Shropshire, the daughter of Christopher Whichcote of Whichcote Hall, Stoke, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Fox. Some time before 1629 she married George Foxcroft, London merchant and subsequently agent for the East India Company at Fort St George. It was through her brother, Benjamin Whichcote (1609-1683), sometime provost of King's College, Cambridge, and her son Ezekiel ['see below'] that she became acquainted with Henry More, a leading member of the group known as the Cambridge Platonists. It was probably through More that she came to know the philosopher Lady Anne Conway (1631-1679). During the absence of her husband in India, from 1666 to 1672, Elizabeth Foxcroft lived with Anne Conway as companion and amanuensis, residing at the Conway home, Ragley Hall, Warwickshire. Her correspondence with More and with John Worthington (1618-1671), husband of her niece Mary, shows that she shared Anne Conway's interests, especially in religious matters. It was probably for her that More wrote his treatise on the thought of the German mystic Jakob Boehme, his 'Philosophiae Teutonicae censura'. Worthington bequeathed to her his books on Boehme and the Flemish prophet Hendrik Niclaes. A few letters to her survive, but, as far as is known, no writings by her. She died in 1679 and was buried at Clapham on 25 August 1679. 


Foxcroft was affiliated to the circle of the Cambridge Platonists, whom he came to know through his uncle, Benjamin Whichcote, and through John Worthington, who bequeathed books to Foxcroft as well as to his mother. Foxcroft knew Robert Boyle, and as 'a great Chymist' was linked to the circle of Samuel Hartlib. His main claim to fame is his masterly translation of Johann Valentin Andreae's 'Chymische Hochzeit' (1616) which was published posthumously with the English title of 'The Hermetick Romance, or, The Chemical Wedding' (1690). Foxcroft's translation of this Rosicrusian text links him with the educational aims of the Hartlib circle, as well as with the Platonic and religious ideals of the Cambridge Platonists. His interest in Rosicrusianism may be linked with his mother's interest in Boehme. In 1666 Foxcroft witnessed and defended the cures effected by the Irish healer Valentine Greatrakes. He was also one of the likely sources for Isaac Newton's knowledge of alchemy. Foxcroft did not marry, and remained in Cambridge until his death in 1674. 


@@@@@


doc= 53696


Ezekiel Foxcroft (bap. 1629, d. 1674), mathematician and alchemist, son of George and Elizabeth Foxcroft, was born in London and baptized at St Stephen, Coleman Street on 29 October 1629. He was educated at Eton College and matriculated at King's College, Cambridge, in 1649. He graduated BA in 1652/3, was elected fellow of King's in 1652, and proceeded MA in 1656. He lectured in mathematics at King's College, and served as senior proctor of the university in 1673. 


@@@@@


doc= 53697


Clod, Frederick (b. 1625x35, d. in or after 1661), physician and alchemist, was born between 1625 and 1635 in Holstein in Germany, where his father, Johann Clod (an itinerant experimenter), had agricultural interests. Clod had travelled widely in Germany and the Low Countries before arriving in London, probably early in 1652, when he became acquainted with Samuel Hartlib. On 18 August 1652 he was co-signatory (with Hartlib and the ecclesiastical negotiator John Durie) of the 'Christianae societatis pactum', a manifesto for a protestant fraternity devoted to the reformation of religion and the 'rational sciences'. In the summer of 1653 he married Hartlib's daughter Mary (with whom he had a son, born early in 1655). Early in 1654 Clod established a 'goodly laboratory' in the kitchen of his father-in-law, dedicated to alchemical and iatrochemical experiments. The 'Laboratorium Clodianum' was to be a centre for medical and pharmaceutical reform, dedicated to public health including the distribution of medicines to the poor. It was part of a scheme to establish a 'general chymical council' with his friend and correspondent Sir Kenelm Digby, who promised to provide $600 of funding per year for the venture, and Robert Boyle was approached to sponsor a new and larger laboratory. Clod was a regular scientific correspondent of Boyle, Digby, Joachim Polemann, Johann Morian, Peter Staehl, and other English and continental chemists and physicians, with whom he exchanged information on alchemical processes and chemical and herbal medicines. His medical and alchemical knowledge seems to have been well-regarded by some of his peers, but he developed bad relations with his competitor George Starkey. In addition strong doubts about his character were expressed by John Evelyn and Henry More: Evelyn later dismissed him as 'a profess'd adeptus, who by... pretence of extraordinary arcana insinuated himselfe into acquaintance of his father-in-law' ('Diary of John Evelyn', 3.391). Evelyn's judgement may reflect Clod's fraudulent dealings with patients. In 1653, on More's recommendation, Clod treated Anne, Viscountess Conway, for debilitating headaches, and also promised to convey a portrait of her to her brother John Finch in Padua. According to More, Clod received sixteen pieces of gold for his services but purloined the picture and provided the viscountess with an ineffectual or dangerous medicine. He was, according to More, a 'snap' (swindler), a 'misshapen monster' whom it was 'impossible ever to prove honest', and 'as accurs'd a Raskall as ever trod on English ground' ('Conway Letters' and Hutton, 88, 94-5). Clod's shady reputation persisted. In May 1661 Durie wrote to Hartlib during the latter's last, fatal illness, lamenting 'the continuance of your son Clod's misdemeanours' which made him 'incapable of the love of honest friends who will not... trust or assist him.' On the other hand, writing only a few weeks earlier, Hartlib had commented to John Worthington that William Brereton 'would use no other physician but Clodius' ('Diary and Correspondence of Dr John Worthington', 1.304). Clod's subsequent fortunes and the date and place of his death are not known for certain, but he may have died during the plague of 1665. 


@@@@@


doc= 53699


Moffat, Robert (1795-1883), missionary in Africa and linguist, was born on 21 December 1795 in Ormiston, East Lothian, near Haddington, Scotland, the third of seven children of Robert Moffat (1768-1847), and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Gardiner (1767-1854). A pioneer of protestant missionary activity among the Tswana of southern Africa under the aegis of the London Missionary Society (LMS) and the first transcriber of seTswana, Robert Moffat had an important influence in Africa during his long sojourn there between 1817 and 1870. He helped to open the 'missionary road' from the Cape north-eastward, which was important in southern African imperial politics from the middle to the late nineteenth century. In later life he helped to shape British conceptions of southern Africa before the South African War, extolling British imperial rule, criticizing Afrikaners (Boers), and portraying Africans as in need of Christianity and civilization. His voluminous private and official papers are an important record of the southern African interior before colonial rule. 
Moffat's parents were stern Calvinists of modest means; his mother came from a poor Ormiston family and his father became a customs official in 1797 and moved his family to Portsoy, near Banff, to take up his first appointment. In 1806 the family moved to Carronshore, near Falkirk. Robert received a fairly sketchy education, particularly as he interrupted schooling to work on a coasting vessel. Giving up the sea, to his parents' relief, he was sent at the age of eleven with his elder brother Alexander for a final six months' education with a Mr Paton of Falkirk. About 1809 he was apprenticed as a gardener to the demanding John Robertson of Parkhill, Polmont. In 1811 his parents moved again, to Inverness, and in 1812 Moffat worked in the gardens of the earl of Moray, near Aberdour. The following year he became an under-gardener to Mr Leigh of High Leigh, Cheshire, and left Scotland for good. 
In High Leigh, Moffat alarmed his parents by worshipping with Wesleyan Methodists. In nearby Warrington in 1815 he saw an advertisement for a missionary meeting; although the meeting was over, Moffat travelled to Manchester to consult the meeting's chairman, the Revd William Roby, about becoming a missionary. Roby became Moffat's mentor and found him a job in a nursery garden in Dukinfield, Lancashire, in order to spend a year instructing and observing him. Roby ultimately recommended Moffat to the directors of the interdenominational London Missionary Society (LMS), then in its early phase of accepting relatively uneducated candidates. After an initial refusal and some delay, the directors agreed to take on Moffat. In October 1816 he was ordained as an LMS missionary and set apart for Africa. He left the same month for the Cape of Good Hope and arrived on 13 January 1817. 
The LMS directors then did not employ female missionaries, but they felt strongly that their missionaries ought to be accompanied by wives. Contrary to his employers' suggestions Moffat left for Africa alone, in love with Mary Smith, the daughter of his Dukinfield employer. In 1818 Mary was able to overcome her parents' objections to her marriage to Robert in distant Africa; she sailed in 1819 and the couple married in St George's Church, Cape Town, on 27 December 1819. They had ten children between 1821 and 1840; two died in early infancy and one aged seven. Mary Moffat ['see below'] also proved an indispensable partner in her husband's missionary endeavours. 
The British administration of Cape Colony viewed missionaries as troublemakers, thanks partly to LMS concern for the legal rights of non-Europeans. The British officials also worried about their seeming inability to control Khoi-Khoi (Hottentot) and coloured (mixed race) groups under missionary patronage to the north of the colony. So Governor Charles Somerset denied Moffat and three other recently arrived missionaries permission to leave Cape Colony. Moffat refused a position as government resident with a Xhosa chief and began to learn Dutch instead. Meanwhile he participated in a synod in 1817 run by a dissident faction of the LMS, which uncovered sexual scandals among its fellows. Among other things the synod revealed that the LMS southern African superintendent, the radical James Read, had an illegitimate child, having betrayed his Khoi-Khoi wife with the Khoi-Khoi daughter of a church deacon. A series of bitter quarrels split the LMS, presaging Moffat's lifelong opposition to the more politically radical wing of the LMS represented by Read and, later, John Philip. 
In late 1817 Moffat was at last permitted to depart for Great Nama Land (in south-west Africa, later Namibia); he arrived in January 1818. He spent a year working with a Khoi-Khoi chief named Jaeger (Christian) Afrikaner in the vicinity of Warmbad. Like many others Afrikaner had fled Cape Colony, where he had been pressed into service; beyond the Cape boundaries he and his followers survived by raiding. He became a feared figure with a price on his head, though he had already fallen under missionary influence by the time Moffat was stationed with him, and had abandoned raiding. Moffat accompanied Afrikaner to Cape Town to meet Governor Somerset in a brilliant publicity coup which advertised the potential of missionaries for creating peaceful relations in the interior. During his time in south-west Africa Moffat also travelled extensively to the north with Afrikaner and to the east to visit Griquatown and Dithakong. 
Back in Cape Town, Moffat met John Philip and John Campbell, sent out by the LMS to investigate the southern African mission's growing problems. The delegates persuaded Moffat to accompany them on a tour of inspection of the interior, which was truncated by frontier warfare. 
Philip appointed Moffat to replace the disgraced Read as mission head at Dithakong in Transorangia, among the Tlhaping, a southern Tswana group headed by Mothibi. Read, Ann and Robert Hamilton, and a number of converts from Read's mission station Bethelsdorp had pioneered this mission in 1815; it was about a hundred miles from Griquatown, and within the ambit of the Griqua. A multi-ethnic group including many immigrants, especially coloureds from Cape Colony with Khoi-Khoi mothers and white fathers, the Griqua had formed new polities, were professing Christians in contact with the LMS, and were allowed to buy arms from the colony. Colonial Khoi-Khoi assistance and LMS links to the powerful Griqua were thus essential to the survival of the mission. 
At the outset neither the colonial government nor the Tlhaping themselves evinced much enthusiasm for the mission. Indeed the Moffats returned from an expedition to westerly Tswana villages to discover that Somerset had rescinded permission to settle at Dithakong. The couple waited in Griquatown until Somerset permitted them to return for good to Dithakong, on 17 May 1821. They found the Tlhaping angry about Read's dismissal. Furthermore, Mothibi's acceptance of missionaries stemmed mostly from a hope for material and diplomatic benefit, including access to the colonial arms trade. Inhabitants were relatively uninterested in Christianity throughout the 1820s, and many worried that the missionary presence was deterring rain. Moffat quite quickly established white control over the mission administration and undercut Read's influence by dismissing for moral turpitude certain Khoi-Khoi agents (by one of whom the Moffats' maid had become pregnant, for example) and establishing others firmly as servants rather than as the assistant missionaries James Read had designated them. Moffat also quarrelled with Mrs Hamilton, who was refusing to sleep with her husband, and encouraged her departure. 
Throughout the 1820s regional conflict affected the Tswana mission. Late twentieth-century historians have debated this early nineteenth-century upheaval and the 'Cobbing thesis' proposed by Julian Cobbing and others, which maintained that the destabilization formerly attributed to Zulu expansion was in fact fostered by white colonialism and by slave trading carried out in the Delagoa region by the Portuguese and, covertly, further south by the British, the Boers, and the Griqua. Moffat's actions loomed large in these debates because Cobbing contended that Moffat himself was trading slaves and that a key confrontation, the 1823 battle of Dithakong, fought in defence of the Kuruman mission, was in fact a slave raid co-ordinated by Moffat and other missionaries. So consideration of Moffat necessarily involves reference to local warfare and the historians' debates. 
The region around Dithakong suffered in the 1820s from drought, hunger, the destabilizing impact of imported guns, and the competition of small mobile groups for survival, which disrupted the more settled communities. Moffat's mission escaped direct attacks in the early 1820s probably only because it was protected by the powerful Griqua. This was exemplified by the battle of Dithakong in 1823. When a mixed group of fugitives that Moffat called the Mantatees drove the more northerly BaRolong Tswana from their homes and seemed to threaten the mission, Moffat hastily gathered an armed and mounted Griqua commando under the leadership of Andries Waterboer. The resulting rout left some 400-500 Mantatees dead. A number of women and children who had surrendered during this battle, and whom Moffat described as starving, were subsequently taken to Cape Town and to Griquatown and employed as labourers; Moffat himself added four servants to his household from among the women of the defeated group. There is no known evidence, however, that this battle was organized as a slave raid nor that Moffat was involved in slaving. By late 1823 his journals reported the Mantatees fleeing in all directions, apparently dying of hunger. 
At the end of 1823 the Moffat family travelled to Cape Town to obtain medical advice for the ailing Mary and to consult with Dr Philip, now southern African superintendent. They took with them a local chief named Teysho, and Mothibi's heir Peclu; Moffat's hopes that Peclu would cement alliances between missionaries, the colony, and the Tlhaping were later to be dashed, on Peclu's death in 1825. On the group's return from the Cape in 1824, Moffat moved the mission to New Dithakong, later called Kuruman, by the Kuruman fountain. He began the arduous work of building houses, church, and gardens, and channelling the abundant waters of the Kuruman to irrigate the station. He saw this as a key step in 'civilizing' the African landscape. 
Over the next five years internecine conflict affected both the southern Tswana and the Griqua, and new raiding groups emerged, such as the dissident Griqua faction known as the Bergenaars. Violent political struggle marked the period. In 1825, for example, the Bergenaars threatened to drive the missionaries from Kuruman, though they never made the attempt. Other roving forces made serious depredations on the outskirts of Kuruman, one capturing and raping young Tswana women. Mothibi moved away from the station in 1825, his place temporarily taken by his brother Mahura as the Tlhaping chieftaincy fractured; Mothibi was to return in 1826 after being attacked by San (bushmen). Meanwhile, the powerful Ndebele (Matabele) left the ambit of Shaka Zulu to conquer new territory in the region, thereby sparking new conflicts. In 1827, the year in which the Moffats' first son, Robert, was born, the Bergenaars assaulted Griquatown itself, leading the newly vulnerable Moffats to flee Kuruman for a time. Internecine Griqua conflict quietened down once Waterboer's Griqua had defeated the Bergenaars, bolstered by renewed colonial support. In 1828 the inhabitants of Kuruman drove off an attack by armed Kora bandits. In December Kuruman was targeted by another, larger force, which sought revenge against a group sheltering at the station; Moffat persuaded the leader, a Nama chief known to him from Nama Land, to abandon the attack. 
By now Moffat suspected that the Tlhaping saw the missionaries as barriers to their participation in the extensive illicit colonial trade in guns and ammunition. Certainly, missionary preaching was unpopular and attendance at the school had dwindled severely by the late 1820s. Even relationships with Griquatown proved fragile. By the beginning of 1829 Moffat had still baptized no converts. In 1829, however, Mothibi left the station permanently. Kuruman then became a haven for a mixed group of refugees, many of whom turned to Christianity in an emotional atmosphere. Also in 1829 the Ndebele chief Mzilikazi sent two of his head people to investigate Kuruman. Moffat gave them an escort through dangerous territory, and was then persuaded to continue on to meet Mzilikazi, with whom he was to form a lifelong bond. 
Another turning point was Moffat's departure in 1830 for Cape Town, to have printed his translation into seTswana of the gospel of 'St Luke'. Moffat had first produced a seTswana spelling book, printed in London in 1826, but had not until now made steady progress in 'Bible' translation -- and indeed does not seem to have become fully fluent in seTswana until at best 1827. At Cape Town he was frustrated in his attempts to find a printer until the government lent its press, albeit without operating staff, to Moffat and his fellow missionary Rogers Edwards. The two colleagues printed their edition of 'St Luke' themselves, under the supervision of B. J. Van der Sandt, though the effort so exhausted Moffat that he became ill and had to be carried on board ship for the return journey. When he and Mary returned to Kuruman in June 1831 they brought with them some tools to entrench Christianity and 'civilization': a hand printing-press which Moffat was now able to use, cloth from Manchester with which Mary began to fashion long dresses for Tswana women, and a mason, Mr Millen, who helped to build a permanent church. 
The early 1830s were calmer than the 1820s, despite fighting between Griqua groups and the Ndebele, and the death in 1832 of the Moffats' infant daughter Elizabeth, who had been born in Cape Town. In 1835 an expedition led by the scientific explorer Dr Andrew Smith reached Kuruman. Smith cared for Mary Moffat, herself close to death after the birth of another son. Moffat then accompanied Smith on another visit to Mzilikazi's headquarters, during which he persuaded Mzilikazi to accept American protestant missionaries. 
By the mid-1830s disaffected Afrikaner groups trekking away from British hegemony at the Cape had begun to disrupt the interior. In 1837 serious conflict broke out between Afrikaners and the Ndebele. When the American missionaries left with an Afrikaner raiding party, Mzilikazi's suspicion that they were spies deepened and the mission was doomed. Under a dual threat from the Zulu king Dingaan, Shaka's murderer and successor, and from trekking Afrikaners, the Ndebele migrated to the territory which became named after them, Matabeleland. The 1830s were also marked by bitter conflict between LMS missionaries and Christianized Griqua over who should spearhead missions in the region, as the Griqua sought to expand their political influence through Christianization of the Tswana. 
In 1838 the Moffats left for Cape Town, where they hoped to recuperate their failing health and to print a seTswana 'New Testament'. When printing there proved impossible they decided to go to England. Just after they boarded ship another daughter was born; three days later, their six-year-old son James died, a victim of a measles epidemic. After a three-month sea voyage the family arrived in Britain in June 1839 to find that Robert Moffat had become a public figure. He was lionized in evangelical circles, as he travelled the country proselytizing for missions, and he persuaded the young David Livingstone to undertake missionary work among the Tswana. In 1840 Livingstone and another young missionary, William Ross, left to reinforce the Tswana mission. 
During this fruitful three-year sojourn Moffat printed his seTswana 'New Testament' and 'Psalms'. In 1842 his 'Missionary Labours and Scenes in Southern Africa' appeared, to become a widely read Victorian missionary classic. Moffat also published several missionary sermons, including his 'African Scenes' (1843). 
The Moffats sailed again for South Africa on 30 January 1843, following valedictory services, addresses, and presentations, and accompanied by a further two young men going out as missionaries. They left some of their children in Britain for education. During a pause on their return journey, Moffat took a tour of the eastern Cape missions of the LMS. The party was met by David Livingstone at the Vaal River, and returned to Kuruman at last in December 1843. 
By the time the Moffat party returned to Kuruman, it was home to several other white missionaries. Indeed, Livingstone would soon be complaining of poor relationships among the quarrelsome denizens of Kuruman. Once most of this group dispersed to work among the Tswana elsewhere, Kuruman became its members' base of operations, as well as the source of a wide range of religious material in seTswana as literacy grew in importance among the Tswana. Kuruman spearheaded the missionary, and ultimately imperial, expansion into Tswana territory. 
In 1844 Livingstone was attacked by a lion and returned to Kuruman to convalesce. In January 1845 he married Moffat's eldest daughter, Mary. In 1846, after a bitter quarrel between Livingstone and Rogers Edwards, the Livingstones established a new station at Chonuane where David worked (and quarrelled) with the Tswana chief Sechele. Mary Livingstone soon fell seriously ill; her mother travelled to Chonuane to nurse her. In 1847 Moffat's elderly father died in Scotland. 
Meanwhile the displacement and subjugation of Tswana groups by Afrikaner trekkers from the Cape accelerated, from the mid-1840s onward. In 1848 Sir Harry Smith proclaimed the Orange River Sovereignty, giving the British putative control over the region between the Orange and Vaal rivers; this lent impetus to Afrikaner migration to the Transvaal region, to land which had recently been vacated by the Ndebele. The Sand River Convention (1852) between the British government and the Transvaal settlers directly threatened LMS mission fields by guaranteeing settlers internal self-government (on condition that they did not participate in slaving nor move south of the Vaal), as well as by granting them an open market in gunpowder. Groups among whom the LMS were working, including Sechele's Kwena, were attacked and in some cases dispersed by the trekkers, while Livingstone's new station at Kolobeng was a casualty of conflict. Moffat argued passionately in letters to the LMS and to the press that the Transvaalers used the Sand River Convention to claim hegemony over a vast area of land, and that the convention permitted them to kill, dispossess, and rape with impunity. Conflict between the LMS and Afrikaner communities in the region was exacerbated by the attempt of nascent Afrikaner polities to enforce an embargo on the sale of arms and ammunition to non-European groups; both Livingstone and Moffat had provided guns, gunpowder, and gun repair to Africans in the past, albeit on a much smaller scale than Afrikaners alleged. Many Afrikaners accused missionaries of continuing a long LMS tradition of illegitimate interference in Afrikaner affairs; many black Africans attacked the missionaries as, at best, powerless pawns of a British government which tacitly acquiesced in the Afrikaner takeover, and, at worst, as having opened the door to white incursions. 
By 1853 the British had decided to withdraw from the abortive Orange River Sovereignty. Moffat chaired an LMS committee which produced a memorial pleading with the newly arrived British representative, Sir George Clark, that the British not abandon the sovereignty and that Christian missions be permitted to continue their work. Moffat travelled to Bloemfontein to present this memorial to Clark, but predictably it had little effect. In 1854 the Bloemfontein Convention established the Afrikaner Orange Free State. Conflict shut down the possibility of LMS expansion into the Transvaal region and compelled missionaries to withdraw from some existing stations. By the mid-1850s Moffat was also reporting a falling away of converts and influence at Kuruman. The British were widely hated, he claimed, and the influence of British missionaries was declining. 
Throughout these trials Moffat continued to translate the 'Bible'. It was indeed with the partial aim of rectifying the health problems he attributed to excessive study that Moffat set out in May 1854 with Tswana attendants and two young British traders to visit Mzilikazi once again and to contact the peripatetic Livingstone. Once Moffat's party reached Mzilikazi, the Ndebele monarch gave further unusual displays of affection towards Moffat, who was able to spend much of his visit in the king's presence observing his management of the kingdom. Moffat also tried to cure Mzilikazi of a debilitating illness which the missionary diagnosed as dropsy. When Moffat tried to leave to deliver supplies to Livingstone, Mzilikazi at first sought to detain Moffat and then decided to accompany Moffat himself. On the verge of dangerous tsetse fly country, Mzilikazi dispatched a Ndebele team to transport Livingstone's effects to him and the larger group turned back. 
In 1857 Moffat at last completed his translation of the 'Bible'. Meanwhile the LMS had decided to establish new stations among two antagonistic groups, the Kololo and the Ndebele, and Moffat was asked to spend a year founding the Ndebele mission. Moffat made a further journey to Mzilikazi, obtaining grudging permission to establish a station. He also won from Mzilikazi the return of the putative heir to the Ngwato kingdom, Macheng, whom the Ndebele had captured in battle many years before; what Moffat did not know, however, was that the dispute over Macheng's chieftainship would lead to extensive factional conflict among the Ngwaketse. 
In 1858 the Moffats travelled to Cape Town with Livingstone, about to leave on his Zambezi expedition. There they met three of their children returning from study in England, including John Smith Moffat, recently hired by the LMS as a missionary to the Ndebele, and his new wife, Emily. After a difficult and thirsty journey back, Robert Moffat found conflict raging between Tlhaping and Afrikaner groups. He petitioned Governor Grey on behalf of the Tlhaping, whose land he felt the Afrikaners were trying to steal. In return he was accused of gun-running by Afrikaner leaders, and threats were made against Kuruman. Intervention by Grey on Moffat's behalf forced settlers to permit Moffat to travel to the Ndebele, despite initial threats to stop the expedition. 
In late 1858 missionaries designated for the Ndebele and the Kololo converged on Kuruman, to set out in 1859 with Tswana assistants. Once the Ndebele mission had reached Mzilikazi, however, Moffat discovered that, as he had feared, the chief had not thought his earlier vague concessions to Moffat would amount to much in practice. Indeed, the intense conflict among the Ndebele (fuelled by recent contact with disaffected Tlhaping), over whether to accept the missionaries, indicates the contemporary controversy among the Africans over the costs and benefits of missions; it was argued that mission stations opened the way to Afrikaner incursions and compelled converts to abandon polygamy. None the less, Mzilikazi finally (though reluctantly) agreed to the establishment of the Inyati mission -- a critical step in developing the relationships between the Ndebele and the British, and which eventually included the incorporation of the Ndebele into British Rhodesia. Moffat remained for some months, helping to build houses and to plant food for the mission. Meanwhile fever killed a young Tswana assistant, Marelole. 
Shortly after Moffat's return in August 1860 to Kuruman, he heard that the Kololo mission had ended in disaster: three children and one missionary couple had died at the station, some said of fever and others said of poisoning at the hands of Chief Sekeletu. The surviving white missionary, Richard Price, who believed the poison story, had fled the station with his wife, the two children of the dead couple, and his Tswana assistants. Mrs Price had died on 5 July, before the survivors met their colleague John Mackenzie. Moffat rushed to escort the returning party back to Kuruman. 
In 1861 Moffat's daughter Elizabeth married Price and went to work with him among the Kwena. Missions in the southern African interior were a Moffat family enterprise: in addition to Mary's marriage to Livingstone and John Smith Moffat's work at Inyati, another daughter, Ann, was married to the French missionary Jean Fredoux. However, in 1862 Mary Livingstone died of fever in the Zambezi, for which her mother blamed Livingstone; another Moffat child, Charles, died in the same year; and in 1866 Jean Fredoux was accidentally killed during an altercation with a white trader, and the Moffats became responsible for Ann and her seven children. 
In 1870 Robert and Mary Moffat finally and reluctantly retired to Britain in the company of their youngest daughter, feeling unsure whether or not it was really their home. After a tour of friends and relations, they settled for six months in Brixton, London, at the home of Henry Vavasseur. In January 1871 Mary Moffat died, in Brixton, following a very brief illness. 
Moffat then spent two and a half years without a permanent address, travelling around Britain with his daughter, preaching and raising money for the missionary cause, including the Moffat Institute, a Tswana seminary. In 1872 the University of Edinburgh made him an honorary doctor of divinity. In January 1873 he settled at last at 64 Knowle Road, Brixton, his residence for the next seven years. Despite advancing age he nevertheless continued to travel around Britain to popularize missions. He also continued to work on seTswana material, producing a hymn book. 
In 1874 Moffat travelled to Southampton to meet the ship bearing David Livingstone's remains and to identify his body. In 1877 he went to Paris for three weeks, and spoke to four thousand French schoolchildren. In November 1879 he left London for the countryside, finding pleasure in his garden and in village life, at Leigh, near Tonbridge. He followed southern African affairs closely, and often longed to return; the British retrocession of the Transvaal to Afrikaners after the 1881 Anglo-Transvaal War depressed him deeply. Moffat was much honoured throughout these final years. In 1873 a subscription for him raised some $5000. He had a brief meeting with Queen Victoria at the unveiling of a statue of David Livingstone in 1876, and he breakfasted with Gladstone in 1876 and 1878. 
Robert Moffat died peacefully at Park Cottage, Leigh, on 8 August 1883. He was buried in Norwood cemetery, London, on 16 August, alongside his wife, Mary. 
Robert Moffat's wife, Mary Moffat (1795-1871), was born in New Windsor, Lancashire, the eldest of the four children of James Smith (1763-1853), a Scottish gardener, and his English wife, Mary 'nee' Gray, from York. Mary, like her father, was an Independent (her mother was Anglican); her brother John became a pastor near Manchester and later a missionary at Madras. She was educated at a Moravian school at Fairfield, Lancashire, and fell in love with Robert Moffat when he was working as a gardener in her father's nursery garden at Dukinfield, Lancashire. Moffat was then under the tutelage of William Roby in anticipation of his future posting with the LMS. Mary Smith felt herself torn on the one hand between her family obligations as a dutiful only daughter and on the other her love for Robert and strong sense of religious obligation to work as a missionary. In this she confronted some of the contradictions of evangelical prescriptions for women, as well as the problem of whether evangelical marriage was primarily for love or duty. She had a painful two years during which she was her parents' companion but with the understanding with Robert that she would join him at some unspecified time. At one point she broke off the relationship, consumed by guilt towards her mother and worried by news of various sexual scandals among the southern African missionaries. Ultimately, however, the difficult decision to part with her parents was made and her marriage to Robert took place. She never saw her mother again, nor saw her father for some twenty years: being a woman missionary in the early nineteenth century demanded an abrogation of certain family duties as contemporaries perceived them. 
Mary Moffat was indispensable to the family missionary enterprise and became well known in evangelical circles as the archetypal missionary wife, dispensing domesticity and 'civilization' to Africa. This image was later bolstered by John Smith Moffat's biography of his parents, 'The Lives of Robert and Mary Moffat' (1886) and by Mary Moffat's status as David Livingstone's mother-in-law. She embodied some of the contradictions of certain evangelical ideas about women: she took a public role as a protestant evangelist in Africa, and yet was celebrated in Britain as an angel of the domestic sphere -- as support to her husband, as a teacher of sewing and model of domestic virtue to Tswana girls and women, and as dispenser of food and home comforts to travelling male missionaries. However, it is unclear whether the Tswana so perceived her, and her long-term significance perhaps lay as much in her image among the Victorians as in her actual daily work. Nevertheless, Mary Moffat was important in fostering Christian proselytization in southern Africa. She led and taught women's groups, educated her own children when young, planted the garden, made food, took care of Robert when he was sick, and kept the mission station going when he was absent. She also corresponded extensively with people in England and Scotland, and with Robert during his frequent absences; moreover, her letters furnish an important source of information about the southern African interior in the mid-nineteenth century. From 1839 to 1842, when the family were in Britain, she not only took care of the children but also fostered female evangelical networks. 
During the thirty years before the Moffats' final return to Britain, Mary remained based at Kuruman. She travelled extensively without Robert, mostly to visit her children. She had a cordial but vexed relationship with David Livingstone, who had married her eldest daughter, Mary, in 1845. John Smith Moffat later recalled that in 1858 his mother was convinced that Mary Livingstone would not return alive from the Zambezi expedition planned by Livingstone, and she had travelled to Cape Town to say goodbye to her. After Mary Livingstone died of fever in the Zambezi in 1862, her mother blamed Livingstone for having brought her there, just as she had many years earlier blamed Livingstone for the death of his six-week-old daughter Elizabeth. Despite internal tensions, however, Mary Moffat was a lynchpin of the Moffat and Livingstone family missionary enterprise, and several of her own children became missionaries in Africa, and many of their descendants became important figures in the white settler communities of Rhodesia and South Africa. 
Mary Moffat's life also illustrates some of the difficulties of childbirth and child rearing then faced by women. Her first child, Mary, was born in 1821; her tenth, Jane Gardiner, in 1840, by which time she had suffered miscarriages and the deaths of three of her children. Shortly after the death of her first son, Robert, she adopted and nursed a Tswana baby girl abandoned near Kuruman, whom she and her husband named Sarah Roby, after Robert's mentor William Roby. Like other white missionary women of the period, Mary Moffat sent her children away for education for long periods -- a particular irony, given her status as an iconic mother and proffered gender role-model for the Tswana. She was convinced that this was God's will, just as she herself had left her parents. Her eldest children, Mary and Ann, were sent to school in Grahamstown in 1830 aged nine and seven respectively, and they saw their parents only sporadically during their several-year sojourn there. Many years later, in 1847, the year of her father-in-law's death, Mary Moffat took her three youngest children, aged about thirteen, eight, and seven, by ox-wagon to Cape Colony in search of opportunities for education; one of them, John Smith Moffat, attested in his joint biography of his parents that this was an excruciating task for his mother, to which she was reluctantly persuaded by her husband and by David Livingstone; 'there was a pathetic tenderness', he claimed, 'in the interest which the mother took in the wild flowers and curious pebbles which the children gathered on the hill-sides and in the stoney river-beds' on the long journey to the Cape (J. S. Moffat, 261). Mary Moffat eventually put the children on a ship to England, and did not see her daughter Bessie again for eight years, nor John and Jane for eleven. 
By the time Mary and Robert Moffat left Kuruman in 1870 to retire to Britain, Mary had become increasingly feeble; she had needed help in running the domestic side of the station for some time. She died shortly after arriving in Britain, at Brixton, London, on 9 January 1871, and was buried in Norwood cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 53700


Arthur Orton (b. 1834) was born on 20 March 1834 in Wapping, the youngest son of George Orton, a shipping butcher. As a sailor he had visited Chile in 1849-51 and then in 1852 had embarked for Australia, where he mysteriously disappeared. The Claimant always said he knew Orton and that they had worked as cattle ranchers together. He also hinted that they had been outlaws, frequently exchanging names, and had even been involved in a murder, which explained why Orton could no longer be found and why the Claimant did not want to talk about his past. The trail then led back to Wapping, where the Claimant's visit to the Ortons in 1866 was discovered. A former sweetheart of Orton's identified the Claimant as Orton, although most of the Orton family denied that he was their relative. 


@@@@@


doc= 53701


Roger Charles Doughty-Tichborne (1829-1854?) was born in Paris on 5 January 1829, the elder of the two sons of Sir James Tichborne, tenth baronet (1784-1862), and his wife, Harriette-Felicite (1808/9-1868), the daughter of Henry Seymour of Knoyle and his French mistress, Felicite Dailly-Brimont, daughter of Louis Francois, duc de Bourbon Conti. He was educated privately and at Stonyhurst College, after which he joined the 6th dragoon guards. A romance with his cousin Katherine Doughty was marred by her family's resistance to a possible marriage because of Roger's drunkenness. In 1852, after the engagement was delayed, Roger abandoned the army and sailed for South America. Before leaving he entrusted a 'sealed packet' to Vincent Gosford, the steward of the Tichborne estate, a document which was later destroyed but was to assume considerable significance. He toured Chile, crossed the Andes, and was last sighted alive on a ship called the 'Bella', which left Rio de Janeiro on 20 April 1854, bound for Kingston, Jamaica. It was never seen again. 


@@@@@


doc= 53704


Harriet Cradock (1809-1884), novelist, was born on 18 June 1809 at Armitage, near Lichfield, the daughter of Thomas Lister and his second wife, Mary, daughter of William Grove of Honileigh, Warwickshire. Harriet Lister was a maid of honour to Queen Victoria for six years, from 1 July 1837, and was the only one to hold the post who was not the daughter or granddaughter of a peer. She left the queen's service to marry her cousin, the Revd Edward Hartopp Grove DD (1810-1886), on 9 July 1844. He took the surname Cradock in 1849, and was the rector of Tedstone Delamere in Herefordshire, canon of Worcester, and afterwards principal of Brasenose College, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 53706


Marie, Nathaniel (1577-1642), Reformed minister, was born in Beaumont, in Leicestershire, the son of Jean Marie (died 'c'.1589x93), minister of the protestant church at Lion-sur-Mer in Normandy, France, and of the French and Walloon refugee congregation in Norwich, and his wife, Marie le Noble (died 1620). By 1593 the French and Walloon refugee churches in England were raising money to have Nathaniel educated for the ministry and in July 1595 he signed a formal agreement promising his services to the churches. He entered the University of Leiden to study theology in October 1597, and in August 1601 he was inducted as a third pastor of the French church of London, joining Robert le Macon de la Fontaine and Aaron Cappel. Shortly thereafter, on 10 November 1603, he married Ester or Esther Delaune, daughter of the physician and minister William Delaune (c.1530-1611) (who appointed him a co-executor in his will) and sister of the physicians Gideon Delaune and Paul Delaune and of Peter Delaune, minister of the French church at Norwich. Over the succeeding several years they had ten children. 
Marie's career does not appear to have been exceptional outside of the normal performance of his pastoral duties. Indeed Isaac Casaubon, for one, does not appear to have thought highly of Marie's theology or preaching ability (Casaubon, 854, 965). However, as a minister of the presbyterian French church in London, he was at the heart of the movement for Calvinist reform in England and of English support for the European Calvinist churches. He maintained constant contact with leading English puritans, Scottish presbyterians, and representatives of the Calvinist churches on the continent. All the events surrounding the stranger churches in England in the early Stuart period directly involved him, and in particular he played a leading role in the churches' defence of their ecclesiastical liberties and separate status in the face of Archbishop Laud's attack on them between 1634 and 1636. He appears also to have written extensively on theology, although without ever publishing his works, for in his will of 25 May 1639 he bequeaths to his son John 'my seven hand written bookes in folio guilt upon the leafes' and exhorts him 'to show them unto learned men to see if any of them bee worthy of printing' (Guildhall Library, 9171/28, fol. 404'v'); nothing is known of the fate of these manuscripts. 
Marie died on 3 or 4 August 1642, and was buried at St Botolph without Bishopsgate, London, on 5 August. He was survived by his second wife, Esther le Fevre, whom he had married on 16 April 1637, and by many of his children. 


@@@@@


doc= 53707


Bodley, John (c.1520-1591), religious radical and publisher, was born in St Stephen's parish, Exeter, the son of the merchant John Bodley (died 1527), of Exeter, and Alice Gale (died 1558), of Dartmouth. About 1543 he married Joan (died 1586), the daughter of the prominent merchant Robert Hone of Ottery St Mary. Bodley and his kin were some of the leading merchants of Exeter and, perhaps because of their trade links with Bristol, London, and other centres of religious radicalism, were at the forefront of the burgeoning protestant movement in that city, one of the few in the south-west in which protestantism found popular support in the first half of the sixteenth century. During the 1549 rebellion against Edward VI's new prayer book, Bodley and his stepfather, Thomas Prestwood, and brother-in-law John Periam provided the funds required to finance Lord John Russell's lifting of the siege of Exeter, and his eventual suppression of the revolt. It was probably also at this time that Bodley met Miles Coverdale, then chaplain to Lord Russell, who was to remain a close colleague during their various travels over the following several years. 
The presence of Coverdale as bishop of Exeter from 1551 no doubt further encouraged Bodley in his support of the protestant cause, and to his own peril he maintained his activities even after the accession of Mary I. He appears to have been one of the few people in the south-west involved in Sir Peter Carew's abortive uprising in 1554, and the Exeter chronicler John Hooker recounts how Bodley and John Periam were the special targets of William Smith, mayor of Exeter in 1553-4 and 'an enemy to all such as were known or suspected to be true professors of the gospel' (J. Hooker, commonplace book, Devon RO, book 51, fol. 350). Sir Thomas Bodley in his autobiography writes, 'my Father in the time of Queen Mary, being noted and knowne to be an enemy to Popery, was so cruelly threatened, and so narrowly observed, by those that maliced his Religion, that for the safeguard of himselfe and my Mother, who was wholly affected as my Father, he knew no way so secure, as to fly into Germany; where after a while he found meanes to call over my Mother, with all his children and family. ('Life', 1-2)' Bodley probably left England in 1555 (it has been suggested with Coverdale) and settled first in the English colony in Wesel, subsequently moving on to Frankfurt. There he was of the party opposed to the use of the English prayer book, and eventually left for Geneva, arriving in that city in May 1557. He served as elder for the English congregation there from December 1557 until his return to England. In 1558 he was made a citizen of Geneva, and established a printing press to produce William Whittingham's and Miles Coverdale's English translation of the 'Bible', known as the Geneva 'Bible'. Bodley provided the principal financial backing behind the Geneva 'Bible' and, after returning to England in September 1559, he was granted on 8 January 1561 a licence from Elizabeth I to have sole rights of publishing and importing the 'Bible' for a period of seven years. Editions of this 'Bible' were produced and imported from Geneva, presumably under Bodley's licence, in 1560, 1562, and 1570. In 1565-6 Bodley tried to have this licence renewed for a further twelve years, but appears to have dropped his suit, in objection to Archbishop Parker's condition that the bishops examine and approve of the translation and its strongly Calvinist marginal annotations. 
According to Thomas Bodley, his father settled in London upon his return to England from exile, 'within the first [year] of the Queen' ('Life', 3), and certainly by 1568 he was living at 'the Three Cranes' in the London parish of St Michael Paternoster Royal, also the parish of his old friend Coverdale. Throughout this period in London he actively maintained his connections and involvement in the international Calvinist cause. He served as an elder in the French and Walloon refugee church in London from 1571, or perhaps earlier, until his death. In 1583-4 he acted as the conduit through which money collected nationally for the relief of Geneva was directed to that city. Thomas Sampson, a leading puritan divine, relied on him to bear his letters to Burleigh and other officials, and to act as his spokesman before them. He was closely aligned with the Culverwell family, another Devon family who were principal figures among the 'godly' in Elizabethan London. He was an overseer for the wills of the brothers Nicholas and Richard Culverwell; an executor for Nicholas's widow, Elizabeth; and in his own will gave generous privileges to his son-in-law Anthony Culverwell ['see under 'Culverwell family (per. c.1545-c.1640)], nephew of Richard and Nicholas, who had married Bodley's daughter Sybil in 1582. Moreover he was a patron and protector of the artist Nicholas Hilliard, also from Exeter, who as a youth had been part of his household in Geneva. 
Bodley was also a prominent merchant in London. He was a freeman of the Drapers' Company from 1575, a merchant adventurer, and a founding member of the Eastland Company. Through trade, and perhaps secondarily through publishing, he was very wealthy, assessed at $160 for the 1577 lay subsidy and able to contribute $200 for the defence of London during the Armada scare of 1588. In his will of 7 July 1591 he left small charitable bequests to the poor in his parish, in the French church, and in the hospitals and prisons of London, but gave the bulk of his large fortune (his bequests amounted to $2425) to his numerous children: $1000 to his eldest son, Thomas, $500 and his house at Three Cranes to another son, Sir Josias Bodley, and $100 to each of his other children -- Laurence Bodley and Miles Bodley, and his married daughters Prothesia (Prothesy) Bogan, Alice Helman, Sybil Culverwell, Elizabeth Willis, and Susan Shute. John Bodley died shortly after making this will, and was buried on 14 October 1591 in the parish of St Michael Paternoster Royal. 


@@@@@


doc= 53708


Cappel, Aaron (1560-1620), Reformed minister, was born on 9 October 1560 in London, the son of Anthoine Cappel, an immigrant silkweaver who had arrived from Antwerp in 1559, and who went on to be one of the first and longest-serving elders of the French church of London, and his wife, Barbara. Cappel was a pensioner at Peterhouse, Cambridge, from an unknown date until 1581, and then went on to study at Geneva from 1583 to 1585, funded by the French church of London, to which he had promised his services upon the completion of his studies. He spent a few more years on the continent, studying at Heidelberg in 1586, but was recalled by the French church of London in September 1590. On 28 May 1591 he was accepted as a full minister of the church, joining Robert le Macon de la Fontaine and Jean Castol. On 10 October that year he married, in the French church of Canterbury, Esther (or Hester) Maurois, the daughter of one of the elders of that church. He also had connections with the other principal Francophone refugee church in England, in Norwich, which he temporarily served as minister from November 1597 to June 1598. 
As a pastor, Cappel gained the approval of Isaac Casaubon for his theology and preaching. Outside the immediate concerns of his own church, he was involved in larger protestant causes through his friendship and correspondence with Andrew Melville, the Scottish presbyterian leader. He supported in England the request of the Huguenot grandee the duc de Bouillon to have Melville freed from the Tower of London to take up a position at the Academy of Sedan. In a letter of 1611, after he had finally been permitted to go to Sedan, Melville commented in passing on this friendship to his son James, writing, 'The excellent Cappel has in the most friendly manner recommended you by letter to the Duke of Bouillon, but has as yet received no answer.... In the mean time write to me frequently by Cappel concerning every thing' (M'Crie, 1.275). 
Cappel died in 1620, and was buried in his London parish of St Katharine Coleman on 1 February, survived by his wife, Esther (who was still living in January 1626), and several of his children, including Aaron (died 1625) and Hester (died after 1645). 


@@@@@


doc= 53709


Savage family (per. 1333-1519), landowners and administrators, styled in the late middle ages lords of Lecale, in co. Down, came from an old Anglo-Norman family of Ulster. The William Savage who witnessed a charter of John de Courcy, first lord of Ulster, was probably related to the twelfth-century Cheshire landholders of that name. Courcy's charter establishing Black Abbey on the Ards peninsula ('c'.1183) mentions the nearby castle of Ardkeen, later recorded as 'caput' of the Savage family's estates. After the assassination of William de Burgh, third earl of Ulster, in 1333 the influential post of seneschal of the liberty of Ulster passed from the guilty Mandevilles to Sir Robert Savage (d. 1360), who earned a legendary reputation among the Anglo-Irish for his defence of the neglected colony against Irish attacks. Later the office of seneschal was held by Edmund Savage (fl. c.1385-c.1398), named with dislike and fear in letters of Irish chiefs to Richard II. From 'c'.1452 Janico Savage (d. 1468), styled 'captain of his nation', was seneschal. He instigated a dramatic appeal for support to Edward IV about 1467, comparing the Ulster colonists to the children of Israel in bondage to the pharaoh. The annals of Ulster (1469-70) equate the title of seneschal with that of lord of Lecale, the last remnant of English Ulster, by stating that the great O Neill, Einri son of Eoghan, assisted Patrick White to capture Patrick Savage (d. in or after 1481), expel his family, and seize the lordship of Lecale, but that the Savages took back Lecale and the seneschalcy from Patrick White the following year. Patrick Savage was still seneschal in 1481, but in that year he was blinded and exiled. On 2 August 1482 Roland Savage (d. 1519) was appointed seneschal by the Dublin government. However, an anonymous tract of about 1515 lists Roland as 'one of the English great rebels' living outside Dublin's control. The ninth earl of Kildare expelled him from the lordship of Lecale, substituting the Prior Mag Aonghusa. Roland died soon after, of grief, the annals suggest, leaving an attenuated patrimony to his son Edmund, who was inaugurated chief in his place. 


@@@@@


doc= 53710


Savage family (per. 1333-1519), landowners and administrators, styled in the late middle ages lords of Lecale, in co. Down, came from an old Anglo-Norman family of Ulster. The William Savage who witnessed a charter of John de Courcy, first lord of Ulster, was probably related to the twelfth-century Cheshire landholders of that name. Courcy's charter establishing Black Abbey on the Ards peninsula ('c'.1183) mentions the nearby castle of Ardkeen, later recorded as 'caput' of the Savage family's estates. After the assassination of William de Burgh, third earl of Ulster, in 1333 the influential post of seneschal of the liberty of Ulster passed from the guilty Mandevilles to Sir Robert Savage (d. 1360), who earned a legendary reputation among the Anglo-Irish for his defence of the neglected colony against Irish attacks. Later the office of seneschal was held by Edmund Savage (fl. c.1385-c.1398), named with dislike and fear in letters of Irish chiefs to Richard II. From 'c'.1452 Janico Savage (d. 1468), styled 'captain of his nation', was seneschal. He instigated a dramatic appeal for support to Edward IV about 1467, comparing the Ulster colonists to the children of Israel in bondage to the pharaoh. The annals of Ulster (1469-70) equate the title of seneschal with that of lord of Lecale, the last remnant of English Ulster, by stating that the great O Neill, Einri son of Eoghan, assisted Patrick White to capture Patrick Savage (d. in or after 1481), expel his family, and seize the lordship of Lecale, but that the Savages took back Lecale and the seneschalcy from Patrick White the following year. Patrick Savage was still seneschal in 1481, but in that year he was blinded and exiled. On 2 August 1482 Roland Savage (d. 1519) was appointed seneschal by the Dublin government. However, an anonymous tract of about 1515 lists Roland as 'one of the English great rebels' living outside Dublin's control. The ninth earl of Kildare expelled him from the lordship of Lecale, substituting the Prior Mag Aonghusa. Roland died soon after, of grief, the annals suggest, leaving an attenuated patrimony to his son Edmund, who was inaugurated chief in his place. 


@@@@@


doc= 53711


Savage family (per. 1333-1519), landowners and administrators, styled in the late middle ages lords of Lecale, in co. Down, came from an old Anglo-Norman family of Ulster. The William Savage who witnessed a charter of John de Courcy, first lord of Ulster, was probably related to the twelfth-century Cheshire landholders of that name. Courcy's charter establishing Black Abbey on the Ards peninsula ('c'.1183) mentions the nearby castle of Ardkeen, later recorded as 'caput' of the Savage family's estates. After the assassination of William de Burgh, third earl of Ulster, in 1333 the influential post of seneschal of the liberty of Ulster passed from the guilty Mandevilles to Sir Robert Savage (d. 1360), who earned a legendary reputation among the Anglo-Irish for his defence of the neglected colony against Irish attacks. Later the office of seneschal was held by Edmund Savage (fl. c.1385-c.1398), named with dislike and fear in letters of Irish chiefs to Richard II. From 'c'.1452 Janico Savage (d. 1468), styled 'captain of his nation', was seneschal. He instigated a dramatic appeal for support to Edward IV about 1467, comparing the Ulster colonists to the children of Israel in bondage to the pharaoh. The annals of Ulster (1469-70) equate the title of seneschal with that of lord of Lecale, the last remnant of English Ulster, by stating that the great O Neill, Einri son of Eoghan, assisted Patrick White to capture Patrick Savage (d. in or after 1481), expel his family, and seize the lordship of Lecale, but that the Savages took back Lecale and the seneschalcy from Patrick White the following year. Patrick Savage was still seneschal in 1481, but in that year he was blinded and exiled. On 2 August 1482 Roland Savage (d. 1519) was appointed seneschal by the Dublin government. However, an anonymous tract of about 1515 lists Roland as 'one of the English great rebels' living outside Dublin's control. The ninth earl of Kildare expelled him from the lordship of Lecale, substituting the Prior Mag Aonghusa. Roland died soon after, of grief, the annals suggest, leaving an attenuated patrimony to his son Edmund, who was inaugurated chief in his place. 


@@@@@


doc= 53712


Savage family (per. 1333-1519), landowners and administrators, styled in the late middle ages lords of Lecale, in co. Down, came from an old Anglo-Norman family of Ulster. The William Savage who witnessed a charter of John de Courcy, first lord of Ulster, was probably related to the twelfth-century Cheshire landholders of that name. Courcy's charter establishing Black Abbey on the Ards peninsula ('c'.1183) mentions the nearby castle of Ardkeen, later recorded as 'caput' of the Savage family's estates. After the assassination of William de Burgh, third earl of Ulster, in 1333 the influential post of seneschal of the liberty of Ulster passed from the guilty Mandevilles to Sir Robert Savage (d. 1360), who earned a legendary reputation among the Anglo-Irish for his defence of the neglected colony against Irish attacks. Later the office of seneschal was held by Edmund Savage (fl. c.1385-c.1398), named with dislike and fear in letters of Irish chiefs to Richard II. From 'c'.1452 Janico Savage (d. 1468), styled 'captain of his nation', was seneschal. He instigated a dramatic appeal for support to Edward IV about 1467, comparing the Ulster colonists to the children of Israel in bondage to the pharaoh. The annals of Ulster (1469-70) equate the title of seneschal with that of lord of Lecale, the last remnant of English Ulster, by stating that the great O Neill, Einri son of Eoghan, assisted Patrick White to capture Patrick Savage (d. in or after 1481), expel his family, and seize the lordship of Lecale, but that the Savages took back Lecale and the seneschalcy from Patrick White the following year. Patrick Savage was still seneschal in 1481, but in that year he was blinded and exiled. On 2 August 1482 Roland Savage (d. 1519) was appointed seneschal by the Dublin government. However, an anonymous tract of about 1515 lists Roland as 'one of the English great rebels' living outside Dublin's control. The ninth earl of Kildare expelled him from the lordship of Lecale, substituting the Prior Mag Aonghusa. Roland died soon after, of grief, the annals suggest, leaving an attenuated patrimony to his son Edmund, who was inaugurated chief in his place. 


@@@@@


doc= 53713


Savage family (per. 1333-1519), landowners and administrators, styled in the late middle ages lords of Lecale, in co. Down, came from an old Anglo-Norman family of Ulster. The William Savage who witnessed a charter of John de Courcy, first lord of Ulster, was probably related to the twelfth-century Cheshire landholders of that name. Courcy's charter establishing Black Abbey on the Ards peninsula ('c'.1183) mentions the nearby castle of Ardkeen, later recorded as 'caput' of the Savage family's estates. After the assassination of William de Burgh, third earl of Ulster, in 1333 the influential post of seneschal of the liberty of Ulster passed from the guilty Mandevilles to Sir Robert Savage (d. 1360), who earned a legendary reputation among the Anglo-Irish for his defence of the neglected colony against Irish attacks. Later the office of seneschal was held by Edmund Savage (fl. c.1385-c.1398), named with dislike and fear in letters of Irish chiefs to Richard II. From 'c'.1452 Janico Savage (d. 1468), styled 'captain of his nation', was seneschal. He instigated a dramatic appeal for support to Edward IV about 1467, comparing the Ulster colonists to the children of Israel in bondage to the pharaoh. The annals of Ulster (1469-70) equate the title of seneschal with that of lord of Lecale, the last remnant of English Ulster, by stating that the great O Neill, Einri son of Eoghan, assisted Patrick White to capture Patrick Savage (d. in or after 1481), expel his family, and seize the lordship of Lecale, but that the Savages took back Lecale and the seneschalcy from Patrick White the following year. Patrick Savage was still seneschal in 1481, but in that year he was blinded and exiled. On 2 August 1482 Roland Savage (d. 1519) was appointed seneschal by the Dublin government. However, an anonymous tract of about 1515 lists Roland as 'one of the English great rebels' living outside Dublin's control. The ninth earl of Kildare expelled him from the lordship of Lecale, substituting the Prior Mag Aonghusa. Roland died soon after, of grief, the annals suggest, leaving an attenuated patrimony to his son Edmund, who was inaugurated chief in his place. 


@@@@@


doc= 53715


Pitcairn, John (bap. 1722, d. 1775), marine officer, was born in Dysart, Fife, Scotland, the son of the Revd David Pitcairn (1673-1757), Presbyterian minister at Dysart, and Catherine Hamilton, daughter of William Hamilton of Wishaw; he was the younger brother of William Pitcairn, physician. He was baptized at St Serf's Church, Dysart, on 28 December 1722. He was commissioned lieutenant in Cornwall's 7th marines in 1746, being confirmed in that rank in 1755, and promoted captain on 8 June 1756. He served on the 'Lancaster' in 1757 and on 19 April 1771 was promoted major in the Chatham division, Royal Marines. In 1743 he married Elizabeth (1724-1809), daughter of Robert Dalrymple of Arnsfield, Dumfriesshire, and they had nine children. One of their five sons was Robert Pitcairn ['see below'], another was David Pitcairn, physician, and one of their four daughters was Anne, mother of Sir John Campbell (1780-1863). 
John Pitcairn came to prominence in the American War of Independence and is very widely known in America today, though largely forgotten in Britain. In November 1774 he arrived in Boston with some 600 marines and was put in command of a battalion of 400 marines, part of a large army and navy force sent in response to growing patriot unrest. Pitcairn gained a reputation for piety, being a regular attender at Christ Church (the 'Old North Church') in Boston, and for both demanding strong discipline of, and dealing fairly with, his men. 
The incident for which Pitcairn is famous or infamous occurred at Lexington on 19 April 1775. Pitcairn was second in command of a detachment of nearly 800 troops sent to destroy military stores at Concord, 16 miles from Boston. Patriot militiamen soon learned of the deployment of these troops, and Pitcairn was sent with six companies of light infantry to march ahead to secure the two bridges at Concord. Reaching Lexington Common, Pitcairn was confronted by militiamen. Pitcairn attempted to disarm and disperse the militiamen and his own testimony stresses that he ordered his troops not to fire. Despite his efforts, shooting broke out on both sides before Pitcairn rapidly brought it to a halt. Eight patriots had been killed and one Briton wounded and the exchange has passed into history as the first military engagement of the War of Independence. Pitcairn went on to destroy some of the arms held at Concord, but, leading his men back to their quarters, suffered with them at the hands of the now incensed militiamen. He lost his horse, which fled, wounded and allegedly carrying a brace of pistols. These were used by General Israel Putnam against the British in the ensuing war, and were later displayed at Lexington Historical Museum as the pistols which may have started the war. Severe doubt is now cast on the thesis that Pitcairn fired that first shot, and even on whether the pistols were his, since the crest they bear is not his, but the legend persists. 
In June 1775 Pitcairn commanded his marines at the battle of Bunker Hill. There he led his troops valiantly but suffered wounds which proved mortal and he died on 17 June or early the next day at Prince Street, Boston. He was buried at Christ Church, Boston. His family later sought to repatriate his body and in 1791 remains described as his were interred at the church of St Bartholomew-the-Less, London, in a vault where his brother William and son David, both physicians, were interred. There have however been suggestions that, whether by design or mistake, the reinterred remains were not Pitcairn's but those of another British officer. 
Early American historians vilified Pitcairn as the man who opened fire without justification on patriots. Later historians sought to paint a more balanced picture of the events at Lexington and it seems likely that a bystander may have fired the shot which prompted shooting on both sides. Later historians drew attention to Pitcairn's admirable personal qualities. 


The 'Swallow' paid off in May 1769 and Pitcairn appears to have joined the 'Aurora', a fifth-rate vessel of thirty-two guns, under Captain Thomas Lee, which sailed from England on 30 September. After touching at the Cape of Good Hope she was never heard of again, and it is thought that she went down in a cyclone near Mauritius in January or February 1770. Pitcairn's name does not appear in her pay book, but it is quite possible that he was entered very shortly before she sailed and was not reported to the Admiralty, or that he was supernumerary. Carteret stated that Pitcairn was lost in the 'Aurora' in his published journal of the voyage of the 'Swallow'. The island which Pitcairn discovered could not afterwards be found, the reported latitude and longitude being wrong, but it is generally identified with the island at latitude 25 degree 04' S and 130 degree 16' W, where the mutineers of the 'Bounty' landed in 1789, and where they and their survivors settled. 


@@@@@


doc= 53718


Barrimore Matthew St Leger (bap. 1733, d. 1793), army officer, was Anthony's younger brother. He was baptized on 1 May 1733, probably at or near Grangemellon, co. Kildare, like his brother, and followed his elder brother to Eton (1745-8) and Peterhouse, Cambridge (1751-5) before being commissioned an ensign in the 28th regiment of foot on 27 April 1756. His regiment sailed to America in 1757, and it was while there, on 24 March 1758, that St Leger succeeded to a captaincy in the 48th regiment of foot, serving at the capture of Louisbourg in 1758, and the victory at Quebec the following year. The lieutenant-colonel of the 48th regiment was Ralph Burton, who in 1750 had married St Leger's sister Margaret (died 1753); and when Burton was given command of the right brigade at Quebec for the advance on Montreal in July 1760, St Leger was appointed his brigade major. Similarly, after Burton received the colonelcy of the 95th regiment of foot in December 1760, St Leger eventually joined him as the regiment's major (16 September 1762). 


@@@@@


doc= 53720


Skinner, Cortlandt (1727-1799), politician and army officer in America, was born on 16 December 1727 at Perth Amboy, Middlesex county, New Jersey; he was the eldest son of the Revd William Skinner (1687-1758), Scottish-born clergyman in the Church of England, and Elizabeth Van Cortlandt (1694-1763), heir to 8900 acres in New York. On 30 November 1751 he married Elizabeth Kearny (1731-1810), daughter of a New Jersey assemblyman who was acclaimed that colony's foremost lawyer; they raised twelve children to adulthood, one of whom, Maria, was a noted diarist ['see 'Nugent, Maria]. 
Skinner received a classical education from his father, a renowned tutor; by 1776 his library held 482 volumes. He mastered the law at Newark while clerking for David Ogden, a member of the governor's council, and then began practising at Perth Amboy. He became attorney-general aged just twenty-seven, presumably through Ogden's patronage. 
Perth Amboy elected Skinner to the New Jersey assembly in 1763. Possessing gifted oratorical talent he gained such respect that he was unanimously chosen speaker two years later. He was the second youngest man to have assumed that position, which he would keep until 1776. The assembly tapped Skinner to replace a speaker who had wavered in his opposition to parliament's first inland revenue upon the American colonies, the 'Stamp Act'. Skinner detested the 'Stamp Act' and presided over the session that condemned it as having 'Endanger'd both their Liberty and Property' (Purvis, 244) but his perspective was essentially pragmatic. He dismissed the idea that George Grenville's ministry threatened American self-government but he firmly believed that parliamentary taxation and Whitehall's efforts to extend royal prerogatives were ill-conceived and counter-productive. He believed that these measures could only engender political discontent among the colonists and carried enormous risk of Britain's 'alienating a people which she might make her greatest prop and security' (Whitehead, 103) by sowing fear that their rights as Englishmen were menaced. He asserted that Britain's greatest advantage lay in encouraging growth and prosperity for the colonies, the largest market for British manufactured goods, because 'the wealth flowing from trade will be more for the Interest of Britain than all the taxes that can be imposed on the colonies' (ibid.). 
A strong sense of British patriotism also gripped Skinner, who took pride in his family's military services against the French. His aunt married Admiral Sir Peter Warren, who commanded Britain's naval forces at Louisbourg's capture in 1745. One of his three brothers died a lieutenant-colonel in the royal army and another retired a major. 
The governor of New Jersey, William Franklin, strengthened Skinner's sense of obligation to Britain by defending his brother, provincial treasurer Stephen Skinner, when the Skinners' political rivals demanded Stephen's resignation in 1768 after burglars stole $6000 in public funds from his home. The governor appointed Stephen a councillor in 1769 and helped to stave off his resignation until 1774. Franklin left the Skinners profoundly indebted to royal officialdom. 
Skinner was offered any civil or military post at the disposal of New Jersey's patriots in August 1775, and they considered his refusal a major setback. Although he still publicly opposed parliamentary taxation he privately believed that the North ministry's ineptitude had allowed incipient discontent to ripen into widespread, armed resistance. After the interception of a letter revealing his contempt for the continental congress he fled to avoid arrest in January 1776. 
Skinner was one of just three speakers of colonial assemblies, sitting or former, who actively opposed American independence. Appointed brigadier-general in the British army on 4 September 1776 he recruited the largest of the loyalist units. His 2000 New Jersey volunteers mercilessly harassed their American patriot enemies from New York's defensive outposts on Staten Island throughout 1783. Only three other Americans attained a rank equivalent to Skinner's in the loyalist American corps. 
The American patriots confiscated Skinner's estates, worth $10,382, for which parliament authorized compensation of $5169 plus a $500 pension. After the war he brought his family to England and retired in Bristol on his annuity. There he died on 15 March 1799 and was buried at St Augustine's Church. 


