@@@@@


doc= 53722


Tonyn, Patrick (1725-1804), army officer and colonial governor, was the son of Charles William Tonyn (died 1754), a colonel in the 6th dragoons. By the age of nineteen he had joined his father's unit, and rose to the rank of captain in May 1751. During the Seven Years' War this 'pugnacious Irishman' (Bailyn, 459) gained combat experience in Prussia and by 1761 had achieved the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the 104th regiment. He continued to earn promotions in subsequent decades, being appointed a colonel in 1777, a major-general four years later, and a full general in 1798, despite his withdrawal from active service with his unit more than two decades previously. 
Tonyn's departure from his regiment coincided with his appointment as royal governor of East Florida, a province created out of the southernmost lands of North America that Great Britain obtained from Spain via the treaty of Paris (1763). He arrived in the colony's capital of St Augustine on 1 March 1774, just as revolutionary sentiment was peaking among many colonists in North America. Soon after his arrival the stridently loyal governor clashed with certain members of East Florida's population over the necessity of summoning a legislative assembly, thereby alienating, among others, the colony's chief justice and principal landowners. These tensions escalated as warfare broke out in the colonies to the north, although the relatively small population, geographical isolation, and economic insufficiency of East Florida ensured that as a whole the inhabitants remained loyal to the king. 
Governor Tonyn energetically pursued measures to maintain his province's allegiance and defend it against American patriot agitators from the north. Responding to orders from the British government, he issued in November 1775 a proclamation inviting loyalists from the rebelling colonies to emigrate to East Florida, where for a ten-year period they would be eligible for land grants free of quitrents. As the number of loyalists inhabiting the province consequently increased, he initiated military preparations as well. In June 1776 Tonyn authorized the formation of the 'East Florida rangers', a loyalist regiment, to assist regular British troops in the colony's protection from opposing forces. Over the course of the war members of this regiment participated in both defensive and offensive actions, at times invading the Georgia backcountry where they stole cattle, harassed settlements, and obtained information on American troop movements and supplies. In addition the governor held several meetings with local Seminole and Creek leaders in which he enlisted American Indian support for the East Florida rangers and defence of the province. As a further precaution Tonyn issued several letters of marque to local shipowners and encouraged privateering while concurrently obtaining for the provincial navy dozens of brigs and schooners to patrol the coastal waters and inland rivers. 
Tonyn's efforts succeeded in protecting East Florida from any significant incursion from either the American patriots or Spanish forces who had entered the war in 1779 hoping to re-obtain possession of the Floridas. Nevertheless, as the conflict turned badly for British armies, the governor's superiors called for the military to evacuate the region in May 1782. Despite protests against such a move by both the governor and the loyalist citizens of East Florida, British diplomats relinquished control of the colony to Spain in the peace agreements ending the conflict. Over the next three years Tonyn presided over the relocation of loyalist residents and property to Jamaica, Nova Scotia, the Bahamas, and Britain while negotiating, often heatedly, with the incoming Spanish administrators over transference of political control in the province. Tonyn himself departed from East Florida on 19 November 1785 and returned to Britain, where he resided at Park Street in London. There, like many displaced American loyalists, he petitioned the government for compensation of property losses sustained upon evacuating North America. The almost $6000 he was awarded, along with his military pension, allowed Tonyn to live comfortably until 1804, when he died in London on 30 December at the age of seventy-nine. 


@@@@@


doc= 53724


Pearson, Sir Thomas (1782-1847), army officer, was the son of the Revd Thomas Horner Pearson (1752-1832), rector of Podimore, Milton, and vicar of Queen Camel, Somerset, and his wife, Temperance. Two younger brothers, Charles (1789-1864) and George (1792-1816), distinguished themselves as officers in the Royal Navy. On 2 October 1796 Pearson was commissioned into the 23rd foot (Royal Welch Fusiliers), joining that elite but skeleton regiment at Chatham. He was present, but not landed, for the failed raid on the Ostend lock gates in May 1798. 
Promoted first lieutenant on 25 April 1799, Pearson was first in hard infantry combat at the Netherlands (Helder) assault landings on 27 August, and twice more, at Egmont and Castricum, in that campaign. While on the Ferrol expedition, before landing against that Spanish naval base, he was promoted captain on 7 August 1800. The 23rd joined Sir Ralph Abercromby in the Mediterranean to expel the French from Egypt. After landing in Abu Qir Bay on 8 March 1801 Pearson was severely wounded in the thigh, but fought with his company for the whole campaign, and was awarded the sultan's gold order of the Crescent. 
After nine months at Gibraltar, Pearson obtained his first home leave (six months) from the duke of Kent. He rejoined the 23rd in the Isle of Wight (1803-4). In December 1804 Pearson's recruiting earned him a majority in the newly formed 2nd battalion at Chester. Over 400 strong, it was inspected there under his command on 5 December 1806. Pearson and 257 men rejoined the 1st battalion at Colchester (February 1807). On 17 August Pearson led the 23rd's advance guard in the first skirmishing of the Copenhagen campaign and was almost daily in action until the city surrendered three weeks later. 
The highlight of Pearson's 1808-10 posting to Nova Scotia was the expedition to capture Martinique. On 1 February 1809 he commanded the regiment's left wing in a seven-hour battle with the French. His 'spirited and judicious exertions' (Philippart, 2.35) were noted by Lieutenant-General Sir George Prevost on the 2nd, when Pearson took command of Prevost's division's light infantry battalion. Before Fort Desaix surrendered, Pearson was wounded by grapeshot in his leg. He was thanked for surprising a French picket. After returning to Nova Scotia, Pearson married Ann Eliza Coffin (1789-1859) the second daughter of the American loyalist Lieutenant-General John Coffin ('c'.1751-1838), on 28 June 1810, at Coffin's Alwington Manor, near Saint John, New Brunswick. 
By November 1810 Pearson had sailed to Lisbon with the fusilier brigade (7th and 23rd foot) to enter the Peninsular War. Pearson led its light battalion in Wellington's March 1811 pursuit of the French from Portugal, then turned south as part of 4th division towards Badajoz. At Olivenza the fire of Pearson's fusiliers and riflemen kept the besiegers' losses to a minimum. On the bloody day of Albuera (16 May 1811) Pearson commanded 4th division's ten light infantry companies as a right-flank hollow square against the French cavalry. This enabled the fusilier brigade to make its epic attack undisturbed. As the senior unwounded officer Pearson temporarily commanded that victorious but literally halved formation. A lieutenant-colonel from 30 May 1811, Pearson reverted to commanding the fusilier light companies. In a 27 September rearguard action at Aldea da Ponte, Spain, they twice helped retake the village, but their commander incurred a shattered thigh bone which caused his evacuation to Lisbon and England. 
Recovered, Pearson became an inspecting field officer of militia in Canada on 28 February 1812. Bound for Quebec from Halifax in July or August aboard the schooner 'Mary Ann' he, his wife and baby son were captured by the US Salem privateer 'Buckskin' but were recaptured by the frigate HMS 'Maidstone'. From late October he commanded at Prescott, a hamlet and battery (later Fort Wellington) on the vital St Lawrence River route to Kingston. 
Surgeon William Dunlop recalled Pearson as 'as good a man, and as brave a soldier as ever drew a sword, but too much of a martinet to be favourite with the militia' (Dunlop, 27). Lieutenant Le Couteur relates how a militiaman seeking leave was told ''Go to Hell!'' The man persisted, ''Has your honour any orders for the Devil?' Pearson... smiled: 'What leave do you want?' 'Six days!!!' He doubled his leave and gave him a pound to take home!' ('War of 1812 Journal', 113). 
On 9 November 1813 Pearson's 440 regulars, militia, and three 6-pounders at Prescott joined a 680-strong British-Canadian force pursuing over 7000 American troops advancing on Montreal. At the classic 'thin red line' victory of Crysler's Farm on 11 November, when Lieutenant-Colonel Joseph Morrison's second in command, he added a clasp to his army gold medal for Albuera and lost a horse. He was made a CB in January 1814. 
At the request of Lieutenant-General Gordon Drummond, Pearson sailed to Fort George in April 1814 via Oswego to command a light brigade under Major-General Phineas Riall on the Niagara frontier. At the Chippawa River (3-5, 8 July), at Lundy's Lane near Niagara Falls (25 July, wounded in the arm), and in the siege of Fort Erie (until 17 September) Pearson displayed outstanding leadership of all-arms forces numbering up to 1100 regulars, militia, and Indians. By the time an American rifle bullet in the head put Pearson 'hors de combat' (and destroyed the hearing of his right ear), Drummond's right division had fought the most formidable American army encountered to a tactical draw and a strategic victory. 
After the wars Pearson briefly commanded 2nd battalion, 43rd light infantry, before disbandment. In July 1817 he took command of his former regiment, the 23rd, then in France, for thirteen years, serving in Ireland (1818-23) and Gibraltar (until 1827-8). 
Pearson became major-general on 22 July 1830, leaving his beloved fusiliers. Knighted by William IV on 18 March 1835 he was made KCH that year. His son was Captain Thomas Aylmer Pearson (also of the 43rd), aide-de-camp to the general officer commanding northern district of Ireland, in which command his father became lieutenant-general on 23 November 1841. Pearson received the colonelcy of the 85th light infantry on 21 November 1843. Following erysipelas for six days, he died at 1 Edgar Buildings, Lansdown, Bath, on 21 May 1847. 


@@@@@


doc= 53727


Harvey, Sir John (1778-1852), army officer and administrator in Canada, was born on 23 April 1778 in England. Complete mystery surrounds his background. Rumours that he was an illegitimate son of the first marquess of Anglesey are undoubtedly untrue. Nothing certain is known about his youth except that he was brought up in Dronfield, Derbyshire, by the vicar, the Revd John Russell. On 18 September 1794 he became an ensign in the 80th regiment of foot, and from 1794 to 1802 he served in the Netherlands, at the Cape of Good Hope, in Ceylon, and in Egypt. From 1803 to 1807 he was in India, where he joined the staff of the commander-in-chief, Lord Lake, whose daughter, Elizabeth (died 1851), he married on 16 June 1806. They had five sons and one daughter. On 15 July 1798 Harvey became a lieutenant, on 9 September 1803 a captain, and on 28 January 1808 a major. After being employed in England during the first half of 1808 as an assistant quartermaster-general, he was stationed in Ireland from July 1808 to 1812. 
On 25 June 1812 Harvey became a lieutenant-colonel and deputy adjutant-general in Upper Canada. By travelling overland from New Brunswick on snowshoes, he arrived in Upper Canada early in 1813 and played a conspicuous part in the Anglo-American War of 1812-14. On 6 June 1813, at the battle of Stoney Creek, he attacked and drove back an American force five times larger than his own. In November 1813 he earned a medal at the battle of Crysler's Farm, and he was wounded during the siege of Fort Erie on 6 August 1814. Although he went on half pay in 1817, he became knight commander of the Royal Guelphic Order in 1824 and in May 1825 was made a colonel. Through seniority he rose to the rank of major-general in January 1837 and lieutenant-general in November 1846. 
Without private means Harvey desperately needed a civil appointment. In 1825-6 he served on the commission to determine the price of crown land in Upper Canada and from 1828 to 1836 as one of the four inspectors-general of the newly formed Irish constabulary, with responsibility for Leinster. During the tithe wars of the 1830s Leinster was the centre of agitation: Harvey did everything in his power to promote compromise and avoid bloodshed and won recognition for his moderation. In 1832 he gave evidence to the House of Commons select committee on Ireland and recommended the solution to the tithes question that was eventually adopted. In April 1836 the Irish constabulary was reorganized and his post abolished, but he was compensated with the position of lieutenant-governor of Prince Edward Island. 
In 1767 the whole of Prince Edward Island had been divided into townships, distributed by lottery to landlords in Britain, and on his arrival in August 1836 Harvey was confronted by an assembly controlled by a popular party demanding confiscation of the estates, a policy opposed by the Colonial Office. Harvey sought to take the initiative out of the hands of the escheat party by persuading the landlords resident in Britain to make concessions to their tenants, and he supported a measure to increase the taxes paid by non-resident landlords. These measures temporarily restored a degree of tranquillity to the island and won Harvey considerable popularity and a reputation for being able to handle recalcitrant assemblies. This reputation was later enhanced in New Brunswick, where he was transferred in May 1837 to succeed lieutenant-governor Sir Archibald Campbell, who was at loggerheads with his assembly. By surrendering to the assembly control over the rapidly increasing revenues derived from the sale of crown lands, and reconstructing his executive council to include the leaders of the colony's Reform movement, Harvey established a harmonious working relationship with the majority in the assembly and ensured New Brunswick's loyalty during the Canadian uprising of 1837-8. In 1838 he was created KCB for his services and he was fulsomely praised in the Durham report in 1839 and by Governor-General Lord Sydenham in 1840. 
Harvey was less successful in resolving the Maine-New Brunswick boundary dispute. Although he prevented friction along the border from evolving into a serious conflict, he was not sufficiently aggressive in upholding the British claims, and in 1841 he was abruptly dismissed, although later that year he was reassigned as governor of Newfoundland. In Newfoundland sectarian violence between the predominantly English and protestant urban middle class in St John's and the largely Irish and Roman Catholic majority in the outports had led to the suspension of the constitution. The new constitution imposed by the 'Newfoundland Act' of 1842 was opposed by the largely Catholic Reform Party, but Harvey again showed his remarkable abilities as a conciliator. He put an end, at least temporarily, to the sectarian violence and won the respect of the colony's Roman Catholics, although in 1846 he could not convince the Reformers to agree to a renewal of the 'Newfoundland Act'. None the less, his sojourn in Newfoundland was not a particularly happy one. He went deeply into debt maintaining a lifestyle he could not afford, and he was reprimanded by the Colonial Office for borrowing money from his colonial secretary. 
In August 1846 Harvey was given the more lucrative post of lieutenant-governor of Nova Scotia. His instructions were to engineer a coalition between the colony's Conservatives, who dominated the assembly and the executive council, and the Reformers, who were likely to win the next election and were demanding the introduction of responsible party government. Despite his best efforts, Harvey was unable to construct a coalition, and following the election of August 1847 he had no option but to dismiss the Conservatives and admit the Reformers to office. On 2 February 1848 he therefore reluctantly presided over the introduction of the first formally responsible party ministry in the British empire. The transition did not prove easy. A stream of petitions was sent to London accusing Harvey of identifying himself with the new Reform administration, and he lost the confidence of the secretary of state for the colonies, the third Earl Grey, who was unwilling to accept the full implications of the new system and criticized Harvey for not restraining the partisanship of his new advisers. Harvey suffered a shattering blow when his wife died on 10 April 1851, and his health rapidly deteriorated. He began a six-month leave of absence in May, but on his return was incapable of performing even routine tasks. On 22 March 1852 he died at Government House, Halifax, Nova Scotia, and was buried in the military cemetery in Halifax alongside his wife. 
Harvey was lucky in that the long wars against France opened up unusual opportunities for the promotion of officers like himself who had neither family connections nor large personal fortunes. Repeatedly he won recognition for acts of daring and bravery: but most of his military service was spent in backwaters. During the Anglo-American War of 1812-14 Harvey became one of the best-known military officers in British North America, but after the war he was just one of a vast number of young officers with an uncertain future. After a false start in Ireland, at the age of fifty-eight he began a new career as a colonial administrator and eventually served in more British North American colonies than any other governor. Partly because his origins were humble, he did not find exile among the colonists as tedious as did most of his contemporaries, and everywhere he served he won popular support. Noted for his tolerance and flexibility, he was the ideal colonial administrator during a period when the role of the governor was undergoing a fundamental transformation. 


@@@@@


doc= 53734


Ellis, Sir William Charles (1780-1839), physician and asylum superintendent, was born on 10 March 1780 at Alford, Lincolnshire, the son of William Ellis, rector of All Hallows Staining in the City of London, and his wife, Sarah Francis Ellis. He received a classical education before being apprenticed to a surgeon-apothecary in Hull, going on to become a member of the Royal College of Surgeons. On 14 February 1806 he married Mildred Wood, daughter of John Wood, at Louth in Lincolnshire. Although brought up in the Church of England it was only after his marriage that Ellis acquired strong religious convictions. While living in Hull, and suffering from poor health, he became a Methodist and went on to become a lay preacher. Strong religious convictions exercised a profound influence on his subsequent career. He became widely regarded as a kind man, paternalistic in his approach towards his patients, an image enhanced by his rather stout appearance. 
Ellis's interest in the treatment of mental disorders developed during his practice as an apothecary in Hull. By 1814 he had acquired an interest in Sculcoates Refuge, a private lunatic asylum whose treatment principles were modelled on those of the Quaker inspired York Retreat. Ellis's approach to the treatment and management of mentally disordered people owed much to the methods developed at the retreat. At this time public interest in the plight of Yorkshire's insane had been heightened by exposures in the 1815 report of the select committee on the state of madhouses of scandalous conditions at the York Lunatic Asylum, a charitable institution. In response the West Riding magistrates agreed to adopt legislation passed in 1808 and to erect a county pauper lunatic asylum, thus providing William Ellis with a fortuitous opportunity to consolidate his career. 
Ellis published a lengthy pamphlet in response to the findings of the select committee and the plans for the county asylum. In 'A Letter to Thomas Thompson, Esq. M. P.' (1815), though acknowledging his own limited experience in the field, he summarized his ideas on the nature of madness and put forward detailed proposals for the operation of the new asylum. His plan was based on the principle that the asylum should operate on a curative rather than a custodial philosophy, with the productive employment of patients as a central tenet. The leading county magistrate, Godfrey Higgins, was evidently impressed. Ellis was appointed as director of the West Riding Asylum at Wakefield and took up the post in December 1817, with his wife, Mildred, as its matron. By the time the asylum opened to receive patients in November 1818 Ellis had obtained the degree of MD, the only county asylum superintendent thus qualified. 
According to his daughter Harriet, Ellis regarded the appointment at Wakefield as a call from God. He regarded each of his patients as a man and a brother, entitled to every effort to bring about either recovery or at least alleviation. The Ellises' regime at the asylum was permeated by the practical expression of faith. Religious instruction was provided every morning both to staff and to the more sensible patients. Each Sunday the patients attended divine service, which always included a sermon from Dr Ellis. 
It was, however, in the promotion of work as an essential therapeutic tool that Ellis built his reputation. He and Mrs Ellis developed sophisticated arrangements at Wakefield whereby most physically capable patients worked in some way. The men were employed in agricultural and horticultural work, as well as in trades like baking, brewing, shoemaking, bricklaying, painting, spinning, and weaving. Female patients undertook domestic tasks such as kitchen work, cleaning, and laundry. 
Ellis remained at the West Riding Asylum for thirteen years. His considerable reputation led the Middlesex magistrates to ask him to superintend their prestigious new asylum which opened at Hanwell in 1831. At this, the largest asylum in the country, he and Mrs Ellis sought to further advance the system they had implemented at Wakefield. An elaborate programme of work was set in place with patients employed in a wide range of occupations. Harriet Martineau, visiting the asylum in 1834, described large numbers of apparently contented people engaged in all sorts of outdoor and indoor occupations. William and Mildred Ellis created something akin to a large working religious community at Hanwell, an achievement recognized by the award of a knighthood to Ellis. 
Ellis's book, 'A Treatise on the Nature, Symptoms, Causes, and Treatment of Insanity', was published in 1838, having been in preparation since before he left Wakefield. In this substantial volume Ellis demonstrated his continued adherence to established ideas on the origins and practical management of mental disorders. His analysis of causation comprised all the accepted genetic, physical, social, and psychological factors. The treatment methods he outlined included a range of medicines, as well as other physical treatments like bleeding and warm and cold baths, though he recognized their therapeutic limitations. He continued to advocate strongly the more progressive moral treatment techniques, with work retaining its central place in his treatment system. 
Ellis retired from the Hanwell post in summer 1838, having taken exception to some decisions which followed political changes among the Middlesex magistracy. His pursuit of a policy of strict economy in the asylum's management was increasingly viewed as penny-pinching at the expense of vulnerable people. After leaving Hanwell, Ellis established a private lunatic asylum at nearby Southall Park. However, he did not long enjoy the benefits of a less pressured existence. The poor health that had dogged his career culminated in his untimely death from dropsy at Southall Park on 24 October 1839. 
Ellis earned a prominent place among the great pioneers of psychological medicine, primarily for promoting work as a key instrument of therapeutic change. By successfully implementing moral treatment methods and adapting them to the circumstances of a large pauper institution he paved the way for further liberalization in treating the insane which accompanied the dissemination of the non-restraint system in the 1840s. 


@@@@@


doc= 53735


Wittie, Robert (bap. 1613, d. 1684), physician, was baptized at the church of St Mary, Beverley, Yorkshire, on 14 November 1613. He was the eldest and only surviving son of George Wittie (died 1649), a baker of Beverley, and his wife, Anne (died 1675), daughter of William Howard of Thearne, 3 miles away. Both parents were of families long settled in the East Riding. Wittie was a pupil at Beverley grammar school before entering King's College, Cambridge, as pensioner at Easter 1629. He graduated BA in 1633, MA in 1636, while teaching in Hull, and MD in 1647, when in medical practice there. His marriage to Mary Hall (died 1691), second daughter of Henry Hall esquire of East Lilling, North Riding of Yorkshire, which had taken place by 1649, appears to have been childless. Wittie was incorporated at Oxford on 13 July 1680, and in September the Royal College of Physicians of London elected him an honorary fellow. 
Wittie's interest lies in the resourcefulness with which he used his opportunities, at a time of serious disruption to everyday life, particularly in Yorkshire. He established Scarborough's reputation as a spa, and his many patients testified to the success of his treatment. His achievements were the more remarkable in that his father, an alderman, and mayor of Beverley in 1638, only 'made his mark'. 
A year after graduating Robert Wittie was appointed usher at the grammar school of Kingston upon Hull with responsibility for teaching the lower forms. An outbreak of plague closed the school in 1637, most inhabitants having fled, and it did not reopen for over a year, though Wittie's services were evidently retained. The school library possessed several medical texts, to which the master, Anthony Stephenson (described by Calamy as 'well-skilled in physic') perhaps introduced him. Wittie also met James Primrose, a French born physician practising in Hull near the school. Later colleagues and close friends, their acquaintance began with Wittie translating Primrose's 'De vulgi in medicina erroribus' (1638) as 'Popular Errours... in Physick', a work which warned against credulity in medical matters. A short section, on the medicinal use of antimony, then enjoying something of a vogue, was published in 1640 as 'The Antimoniall Cup Twice Cast'. As the preface to the translation explains, printing of the complete text was delayed 'by the distraction of the times'. Wittie's concern to limit the practice of unlicensed quacks continued into later life, as shown by evidence in Sloane MS 1393, fols. 12-17. 
Granted a licence to practise medicine in 1641 Wittie resigned his post at the grammar school the following year. In that April dissatisfaction in the north over the king's demands for payment of ship money led to an overt act of defiance by his subjects. When Charles appeared on the 23rd at Hull's Beverley gate demanding access to the large ammunition store then kept in the town, the governor refused to admit the king and his troops, so making one of the opening moves in the civil war. Hull was besieged by royalist forces soon after Sir John Hotham's rebuff, and again in September 1643, when Lord Fairfax was governor. The town was not easy to blockade and, in spite of heavy bombardment, neither siege lasted long. Nevertheless, Wittie's first year or two of practice was conducted under difficult conditions. Following the end of the siege of Scarborough, in the summer of 1645, Wittie treated the survivors of the royalist garrison and found them to be suffering from severe privation and disease, mainly scurvy, not then necessarily meaning vitamin C deficiency, but covering many skin complaints (that is, 'scurfy') variously caused. Three years later Wittie was again called to Scarborough Castle to treat Colonel Matthew Boynton's garrison. On the way home from this visit (27 July 1648) he wrote from Beverley to the mayor and corporation of Hull warning that the governor, after negotiating with Prince Rupert, had declared for the king. The letter suggests that Wittie's sympathies lay with the parliamentarians. 
After long delay 'Popular Errours... in Physick' came out in 1651 with a dedication to Frances Strickland, wife of an extreme puritan MP. Two poems written by Wittie's friend, the more moderate Andrew Marvell, probably while tutor to Lord Fairfax's daughter Mary, at Nun Appleton, praised the translator for his fidelity to Primrose's original, instead of producing effectively a new book. Primrose's doubts about the wisdom of clergymen and women practising medicine were neatly solved by a text that aimed to instruct them in plain English. The book included one or two additions by Primrose, and his verdict on 'The Antimoniall Cup'. 
Wittie's preface to 'Popular Errours' was written 'from my house in Hull'; by the time it reached print he and his wife were in York, where he practised for thirty years. His mother joined them following the death of her husband and the settlement of his estate (his will was proved in April 1649). The son prospered: he bought an estate of about 260 acres in Holderness, and acquired notable patrons. The earl of Suffolk, Lord Ros (son and heir to the earl of Rutland), and James, Lord Annesley (heir to the earl of Anglesey), all figure in the dedications of his books; others were the subject of case histories. Wittie's mother was buried in the choir of the church of St Martin's-le-Grand in Coney Street, York, in December 1675. 
The publication of 'Scarbrough Spaw', for which Wittie is principally remembered, coincided with the Restoration of 1660. Mindful of his earlier allegiance he did not ask for royal patronage, but among the miscellanea -- anagrams and chronograms -- that preface the work, twenty-six lines of self-deprecatory verse commend his 'Water Work' to Charles II. Many of its readers enjoyed it, the owner of one copy writing on the flyleaf: 'This account of the Scarbro' Spaw is the best that ever I read.' The beneficial effects of Scarborough's mineral springs had been discovered barely ten years before Wittie settled in Hull and, after taking the waters himself, about 1637-8, he prescribed them for conditions ranging from convulsions to gout. Wittie claimed to have identified small amounts of vitriol, nitre, alum, salt, and iron in Scarborough's mineral water in experiments carried out in his laboratory by himself and a learned friend. However, Wittie's work was criticized by two men: William Simpson of York and George Tunstall of Newcastle, who styled themselves 'Chymists' and disputed his findings and his 'Galenical' therapeutics. An acrimonious dispute developed: from published treatises that broke no bones, it descended to the coffee houses of York. Simpson's language may have been intemperate, but Wittie was guilty of using phrases like 'Sir Simpson', and 'base Bachelor of Arts'. The 'Chymist', he said, who used preparations of mercury, iron, copper, antimony, and arsenic, was 'a viperous brat eating through the bowells of its dam'. Much energy, paper, and ink was expended by both parties, and Wittie complained that it wasted time he needed to turn 'Scarborough Spaw' into Latin ('Fons Scarburgensis' was published in 1678). Meantime Simpson wrote his own book on the subject, lifting material from his opponent's. The controversy seems to have done Wittie's York practice no harm, but the scene at Scarborough was changing. In addition to promoting the waters themselves, Wittie had pointed out the value of relaxation in a bracing climate with congenial company, and these attractions gradually became more important. 
About 1678 Wittie took up residence in Basinghall Street, London, where a niece kept house for him. 'Ouranoskopia, or, A Survey of the Heavens' (1681) was his response to the wonders opened up by the telescope, which illustrated the infinite power and glory of God in creation, and confirmed the work of Copernicus. Discussing the movement of the planets, Wittie puts forward the possibility that some are inhabited by sentient beings, and that the sun may be the abode of the blessed. He concedes that astronomy may have an application to medical practice. A dramatic poem describing war among the stars, written as a distraction from gout, and published four years earlier, as 'Gout Raptures', was printed in Greek, Latin, and English versions, to make it suitable for use in schools. 
Wittie died in October 1684 in London, in the parish of St Michael Bassishaw, where he was buried. His will was dated 5 October 1684 and was proved on the 23rd, in London. His widow was executor, and from his estate at Owstwick was to pay a number of bequests to their relatives. Her will, proved in York in 1691, suggests that the commission had not been easy. 


@@@@@


doc= 53741


Hanbury, John (1700-1758), merchant, was born at Llanfihangel, Monmouthshire, on 15 August 1700, the son of Charles Hanbury (1677-1735) of Pant-teg, and his wife, Grace (died 1710), widow of Jenkinson Beadles. The Hanbury family had been active in the Society of Friends from his grandfather's time. Although John's active career was spent almost entirely in London, there are no surviving records of an apprenticeship there or of his admission to a livery company. He first appears as an independent trader in London about 1724, suggesting that he had spent the immediately preceding years away from London, most likely as a factor in the Chesapeake for an English merchant. He soon became conspicuously active in the London tobacco import trade, ranking second in 1729-31, and first by 1747. His Virginia business was primarily that of a commission merchant, receiving from planters consignments of tobacco for sale, and returning cargoes of manufactures and other goods as ordered. His Maryland business, by contrast, involved substantial dealings with local independent merchants. In both trades he reduced costs and risks by sending out relatively few vessels of his own, depending instead on chartering as needed. To superintend the frequent adjustments needed, he employed a principal agent in each colony with broad powers to charter shipping. 
Hanbury's Virginia and Maryland correspondents included planters from the most prominent local families. To attract such a clientele he was expected to provide political as well as the usual commercial services. By the 1740s he was a key player in the competition to influence appointments to desirable public positions in both colonies. In Maryland he was very close to Lord Baltimore, whom he served as 'banker', and in Virginia to Lieutenant-Governor Gooch, whose executor he became. He was also reportedly on excellent terms with all the major figures in the Pelham and Newcastle ministries. Through his access to Lord Granville, lord president of the council, he was able to deflect British legislation requiring loyalty oaths that would have excluded Pennsylvania Quakers from public office. When the issue became pressing at the start of the Seven Years' War, Hanbury negotiated the compromise under which Quakers withdrew from the Pennsylvania legislature during the war but retained their rights to future membership. 
In 1747 Hanbury took in as partner his cousin Capel Hanbury (died 1769), son of a Bristol soap maker. Both partners had numerous acquaintances in Bristol and were able to cultivate a political interest there. John Hanbury particularly pleased the duke of Newcastle by soliciting votes and guaranteeing funds for the election in 1754 of Robert Nugent as member for Bristol. Hanbury's closeness to the ministry became controversial at the time of Braddock's expedition the next year. In 1747 the local planters and merchants organizing the Ohio Company of Virginia had asked Hanbury to take a share in the company and act as its London agent. As such, he was consulted by both Henry Pelham and the duke of Newcastle on the French military challenge in North America. He also contracted to pay and victual Braddock's troops; in this work his agents and the warehouses of the Ohio Company were utilized. When the expedition ended in disaster, Dr John Shebbeare and other anti-ministerial publicists tried to depict John Hanbury as the hypocritical and self-serving Quaker mastermind behind the ill-fated strategy. In fact, from 1726 Hanbury had been the member of the Quakers' meeting for sufferings, responsible for correspondence with Virginia and Maryland. Even so, he attracted unfavourable comment from more strictly pacifist Friends for arming his ships in wartime and for investing in privateers in the 1740s. 
This John Hanbury, usually termed of Tower Street, must be distinguished from several namesakes, including Major John Hanbury of Pontypool (1664?-1734), ironmaster and MP, and John Hanbury (1671-1732), governor of the Hamburg Company and subgovernor of the South Sea Company. In 1728 John Hanbury of Tower Street married Anna Osgood (died 1754) from a prominent Quaker family originally from Bristol. When he died intestate on 22 June 1758 at Holfield Grange, Coggeshall, Essex, his real estate (primarily in Essex) passed to his only son, 
Osgood Hanbury at first continued his father's North American firm in partnership with Capel Hanbury. After the latter's death in 1769, Osgood began to disengage from the now politically exposed Chesapeake trade and thus reduced his ultimate losses from the American War of Independence. In 1757 he married Mary, daughter of Sampson Lloyd (1699-1779) of Birmingham, Quaker iron dealer and banker. During the American War of Independence he compensated in part for the loss of his Chesapeake trade by expanding his West Indies business through the firm of Hanbury and Gosling. In 1770 he had also joined in founding the London bank of Hanbury, Taylor, Lloyd, and Bowman in partnership with his father-in-law. This firm, continued by his descendants for four generations, served as the London correspondents of Taylors and Lloyds, the family's bank in Birmingham, until absorbed in 1884 into what ultimately became the modern Lloyds Bank. Through the marriage of his daughter Anna to Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, bt, brewer and anti-slavery activist, Osgood Hanbury was also the progenitor of the numerous Buxtons and Hanburys who over many generations managed the Truman, Hanbury, and Buxton brewery. He died in 1784. 


@@@@@


doc= 53742


Osgood Hanbury (1731-1784), and his personal estate was divided equally between Osgood and his sister, Anna, wife of Thomas Barnard of Kingston, Surrey. She had no children so that, at her death, her share of her father's fortune also went to Osgood's children, including the brewer Sampson Hanbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 53747


Nongqawuse (b. c.1840, d. in or after 1905), prophet, was orphaned at an early age, possibly during the 1850-53 Cape Frontier War between the Xhosa and the British, and went to live with her uncle, Mhlakaza, at the Gxarha River in independent Xhosa. Reliable documentation on her life and character is very thin, and although her prophecies and their consequences have been extensively recorded, the details of her motivations and her personal life must remain forever obscure. 
In April 1856 Nongqawuse and a younger cousin, Nombanda, went out into the fields to scare the birds away from the standing corn. When they returned home Nongqawuse reported that they had met two strangers who introduced themselves as persons long dead, and, according to the reliable account of W. W. Gqoba, continued as follows: 'You are to tell the people that the whole community is about to rise again from the dead... all the cattle living now must be slaughtered, for they are reared with defiled hands as the people handle witchcraft. Say to them that there must be no ploughing of lands, rather must the people dig deep pits (granaries), erect new huts, set up wide, strongly built cattlefolds. (Peires, 79)' These prophecies were accepted by Nongqawuse's uncle Mhlakaza, a Christian convert who had been dismissed by his former employer, an Anglican clergyman, on account of his increasingly visionary religious experiences. Such prophecies were not entirely new. They had multiplied in the climate of despair which had been generated by continual Xhosa military defeats, and they had lately been boosted by exaggerated reports of Russian successes against the British in the Crimea. The notion that existing cattle had somehow become contaminated was a reaction to the recent outbreak of lung sickness, a hitherto unknown and deadly cattle disease newly arrived from Europe. Enquirers who visited Nongqawuse's place were shown black shapes bobbing up and down in the misty sea and told that these were the dead, waiting to rise as soon as all the cattle had been slaughtered. On other occasions Nongqawuse entered a particular bush, and conversed with spirits audible only to herself. 
A turning point was reached in July 1856 when Sarhili, king of all the Xhosa, visited Nongqawuse and became convinced of the truth of her prophecies. He ordered his subjects to kill all their cattle and destroy their entire stock of corn. Disappointment followed disappointment as the dead failed to rise, but the movement was kept going by the desperation of the committed believers, who had slaughtered all their cattle and could no longer retreat from the path they had chosen. The fact that many Xhosa remained sceptical and refused to kill their cattle only incensed the believers and provided an excuse for the continued non-fulfilment of the prophecies. The situation was further exacerbated by the actions of Governor Sir George Grey, who took advantage of the catastrophe to break the power of the Xhosa chiefs and to free their land for colonial settlement. 
The relationship between the two figures at the centre of the prophecies, Nongqawuse and Mhlakaza, remains unclear, but it would seem that Nongqawuse alone had visions which were subsequently interpreted by Mhlakaza. The only contemporary description of Nongqawuse, provided by a colonial spy, depicts her as 'a girl of about 16 years of age, has a silly look, and appeared to me as if she was not right in her mind' (Peires, 87). As the movement approached its climax, Nongqawuse seems to have become increasingly unable to cope with the consequences of her prophecies; she became sick, and her role as prophetess was taken over by her cousin Nombanda. 
The prophecies peaked with the 'great disappointment' of February 1857 but the flames of despair kept it going until June 1857, when all hope was finally extinguished. By that time, more than 400,000 cattle had been killed and approximately 40,000 Xhosa had starved to death. Among these was Mhlakaza. Nongqawuse herself did not die, but fled across the Mbashe River into Bomvanaland. In March 1858 the chief of the Bomvana handed her over to Major John Gawler, a British magistrate responsible for implementing the policies of Governor Grey. Grey had set up a military tribunal with the purpose of convicting the Xhosa chiefs of levying war against the British crown. Gawler was charged with the task of preparing Nongqawuse as a witness in this dubious case. He brought her to King William's Town, dressed her up, and had her photograph taken, but he was unable to get a coherent statement out of her, and the fragments that survive have clearly been doctored by colonial officials. 
Nongqawuse and another prophet were taken by Major Gawler to Cape Town in October 1858, for purposes unknown. The two women were accommodated with other female Xhosa prisoners in the Paupers' Lodge, but after that Nongqawuse disappears from the official records. A colonial administrator mentioned in a passing reminiscence that she had married, and that she was living with her husband in the Alexandria district as late as 1905. Her reputed grave is located on the farm Glenthorn, and there is a plaque erected by local residents. But her journey to Alexandria and the exact nature of her relationship with the colonial officials remain, like so many other aspects of her life, a complete mystery. 


@@@@@


doc= 53748


Burgers, Thomas Francois (1834-1881), president of the South African Republic, was born on 15 April 1834 in Langfontein, Camdeboo, in the Graaff-Reinet district of Cape Colony, the youngest son of Barend Jacobus Burger or Burgers (1775-1845), a minister, and Elisabeth Magdalena Theron (1792-1867). He received his initial education at Graaff-Reinet, then went to Utrecht in the Netherlands to study for the ministry. It was while he was there, between 1853 and 1858, that he met Mary Bryson (1836-1929), a Scot, whom he married in 1858 and with whom he was to have ten children. 
After being admitted as a minister in the Nederduits Gereformeerde Kerk (Dutch Reformed church) in Cape Town, Burgers became dominee at Hanover in the rural Karoo in 1859. The radical theology he had acquired in Utrecht from Professor Opzoomer and others soon revealed itself. He rejected much of the 'Bible' as improbable, and did not believe in the bodily resurrection of Christ. In 1862 he was accused of rationalism and heterodoxy by his church, found guilty of deviation from its confession, and suspended as a minister. A strong-willed man, Burgers appealed to the Cape supreme court, which set aside the suspension in 1865. He was then able to return to his ministry. Two years later the supreme court's decision was upheld by the British privy council, the Cape's highest court of appeal. 
Three brief sketches which Burgers wrote after a visit to the Transvaal were published first in the Cape Town journal 'Volksblad' (1871) and then as 'Schetsen uit de Transvaal' (1872). He found the Nederduits Hervormde Kerk in the Transvaal more congenial than his own branch of the Dutch Reformed church, and he impressed the white population of the Transvaal as one who would stand up to the British, then apparently seeking to encroach on Transvaal territory from Griqualand West. After President Brand of the Orange Free State had recommended Burgers as a man who would help extricate the Transvalers from their many difficulties, he was persuaded to run for president. Burgers was duly elected by a majority of 2964 votes, and sworn in on 1 July 1872. From the beginning he was opposed by the most conservative white burghers (citizens) of the Transvaal, led by Paul Kruger. 
Burgers proved an idealistic but impractical president who failed to understand the people he ruled. Very seriously ill in 1874, he nevertheless worked hard to try to reduce the republic's isolation, and above all tried to launch a railway scheme to build a line from Pretoria to Delagoa Bay, a line which he believed would be the country's salvation. He sought to resist the interference of the British high commissioner, Sir Henry Barkly, who detested him, and he ignored the Keate award, which failed to grant the Transvalers the land they claimed in the south-west. On a fourteen-month visit to Europe he met Lord Carnarvon, the colonial secretary, but was not persuaded to support the idea of a British-led federation. His goal was to put the Transvaal back on its feet, then lead it into a federation with the Orange Free State which would be the core of a future united South Africa with its own flag. He achieved very little in practice besides founding a newspaper in Pretoria in 1873 and establishing a museum, library, and botanical gardens. This last, in central Pretoria, is still known as Burgers Park. 
Burgers's efforts for the Transvaal did not win him support there; instead the white burghers increasingly opposed him. They misleadingly claimed that his 'Education Act' would remove the 'Bible' from schools. When he sought to change the country's flag and coat of arms, in 1874, his attempt was reversed while he was absent. Tensions continued to grow as the burghers accused him of tactless behaviour. Burgers was often away from Pretoria and became increasingly isolated. His final failure came in 1876 when he led his burghers against the forces of Sekukuni of the Pedi, whose people were encroaching on land which the white Transvalers regarded as their own. For this war he drained the state's coffers, and this forced him to introduce a most unpopular war tax. The men who accompanied him in the field drifted away, and his campaign therefore failed. 
Burgers's various failures as a leader gave Theophilus Shepstone, sent by Carnarvon to annex the Transvaal, the opportunity to claim that a majority of white Transvalers were in favour of British annexation. All Burgers could do was issue a note of protest when Shepstone proclaimed the annexation in April 1877. The following month he left for Cape Town, his political career at an end. He was then given a pension by the British from the Transvaal treasury on condition that he did not enter the territory. The Transvaal burghers accused him of treason for accepting it; he in turn blamed them for failing to reconcile themselves to British rule. He died poor, 'of a broken heart' (Appelgryn, 255), on 9 December 1881 at Richmond, Cape Colony, where he had been living, and was buried there. His remains were reinterred in the old cemetery, Pretoria, after the eventual opening of the Delagoa Bay Railway, his great dream, in 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 53749


Leyds, Willem Johannes (1859-1940), politician in the Transvaal and diplomatist, was born on 1 May 1859 at Magelang, Java, the second son of Willem Johannes Leyds (1828-1865), a Dutch headmaster, and his wife, Tryntje, 'nee' van Beuningen van Helsdingen (1832-1914). Leyds was a musical child and also had a photographic memory. He won a scholarship to the Rijkskweekskool voor Onderwijzers in Haarlem where he trained as a teacher (1874-8); during teaching spells in Breda and Amsterdam he saved money to continue his education and also taught himself Latin and Greek. In 1880 he enrolled as a law student at the University of Amsterdam, where fellow students let him join an elite society without having to pay membership fees. He was awarded an LLD 'cum laude' in 1884. In the same year, on 10 July, he married Louise Wilhelmina Susanna, 'nee' Roeff (1856-1907). They had three children: Willem Johannes, Louis Willem, and Wilhelmina Johanna. After being introduced to a delegation from the Transvaal (South African/Zuid-Afrikaansche Republic) by his university professors, Leyds was offered the post of state attorney of the republic by President Kruger. Leyds and his wife duly travelled to Pretoria where he was sworn in on 13 October 1884. 
Leyds applied himself with great diligence to his new post. His reputation for incorruptibility was enhanced by the sensational trial of the tycoon A. H. Nellmapius in 1886: despite government pressure to drop the case, Leyds refused to do so and succeeded in getting Nellmapius convicted. The scope and complexity of Leyds's work as state prosecutor and supervisor of the police and prison services was increased by the rise in crime after the 1886 gold rush in the Witwatersrand, and he was involved in improving laws and introducing a secret police force. As the judicial adviser of the republic he was also involved in negotiations with the British government concerning Bechuanaland, St Lucia Bay, and the new republic. 
Leyds's efficiency was tacitly recognized by several foreign orders which were conferred upon him, including a British knighthood which he politely declined. At only twenty-nine years of age he was elected state secretary of the South African Republic; on 2 May 1889, a day after he had reached the required minimum age of thirty, he was duly sworn in. As secretary, Leyds became Kruger's 'right hand', and they effectively ran the actual government of the republic together. Despite great differences in age, education, and cultural background, both strove to make the republic a strong, independent Afrikaner state and trusted and respected one another. Although they did clash at times, Kruger once told Leyds that he continued to trust him because 'you tell me everything to my face; you never do anything behind my back' (priv. coll.). 
Leyds's tenure of office coincided with a difficult transitional period when the republic had to transform itself almost overnight into a modern industrial state. He was instrumental in modernizing the Transvaal, creating an efficient administrative system, helping to establish (in 1891) a national bank and a mint, and chairing a monetary conference in 1893 attended by representatives from the Cape, the Orange Free State, and Natal whose outcome was a treaty to create a uniform monetary system. Leyds was also largely responsible for the establishment of the Nederlandsch Zuid-Afrikaansche Spoorweg Maatschappij (NZASM) which obtained the sole right to construct and control the republic's railways and resulted in rail links with the Cape (1892), Mozambique (1894), and Natal (1895). His efforts to promote cultural ties with the Netherlands were strengthened by the appointment of N. Mansvelt as superintendent of education. Mansvelt improved existing education along Dutch lines and established a Staatsgimnasium, or Normal College, to train teachers, in 1893. Leyds promoted related projects, such as a botanic garden, a museum, and a bacteriological institute (later the Onderstepoort) in the Transvaal. 
Leyds was also closely involved in the South African Republic's unsuccessful overt and covert attempts to obtain an outlet to the sea via St Lucia Bay, Kosi Bay, and Delagoa Bay -- schemes which failed mainly owing to British opposition. Negotiations with France and Germany to construct an independent cable connection between Delagoa Bay and Europe also failed. Ever concerned about the security of the South African Republic, Leyds, although generally opposed to the republic's monopolistic concession policy, favoured the maintenance of the dynamite monopoly, since he felt state control of weapons and explosives was necessary. This stance made him unpopular with Rand capitalists but English press reports that the Kruger-Leyds government cared nothing for the mining interests were unfair. Leyds negotiated an agreement with the Mozambique government in 1897, for example, to recruit African workers for the mines. The republic's government saw the influx of foreigners after 1886 as a serious threat to the South African Republic's continuance as an independent Boer republic. Uitlanders were consequently subjected to discriminatory franchise qualifications and Johannesburg was denied a municipality. By not resolving Uitlander grievances the Kruger-Leyds government played into the hands of British imperialists who later used the problem as a 'casus belli'. During the Jameson raid (1895-6) Leyds was on sick leave in Europe. He wanted to use the anti-British feeling aroused by the attempted coup to have the South African Republic's independence and neutrality guaranteed by the major European powers. However, in his absence his opponents in the Transvaal sowed distrust about his aims and about the possible outcome of the plans for the republic; the scheme was therefore aborted. Leyds was the chief target of 'Hollander hate' in the Transvaal, generated partly by the number of Hollanders whom Kruger had appointed to high posts. He was nevertheless re-elected as state secretary in 1892 and 1897 with increased majorities. 
Leyds's able defence of the South African Republic against claims of British suzerainty and his efficient management of its affairs made British imperialists regard him as the chief obstacle to the overthrow of Kruger's government. Leyds was consequently largely demonized in the jingoistic British press. The British colonial secretary, Joseph Chamberlain, and the under-secretary, Lord Selborne, were therefore surprised when they met him in 1897 to find him 'distinctly agreeable', 'clever and good-looking', and possessed of an 'extraordinarily frank and conciliatory attitude'. Selborne warned Chamberlain not to praise Leyds in public, however, because 'all British South Africa, from Rosmead to Rhodes and from Hartley to Schreiner are united in believing him to be 'the' enemy, and whether it is true or false, all that you say will be judged in the light of this prejudice' (Selborne to Milner, 24 May 1897, University of Oxford, MS Milner Dep. 204, fols. 67-8). 
In 1898 Leyds was appointed ambassador-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary to the courts of France, Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, Portugal, and Russia; despite British denial of the South African Republic's right to foreign representation, Leyds, whose fluency in five European languages made him eminently suitable for the post, gained accreditation at all six courts, and chose centrally located Brussels as his headquarters. He warned his government not to expect aid from any European government in the event of a South African war and, on a visit to the Transvaal in 1899, he was behind the 'great deal' -- secret negotiations with Rand capitalists to resolve their grievances. The reconciliation attempt was, however, scuppered through a deliberate leak to the press by an agent of the war-mongering Lord Milner. After the outbreak of the South African War, Leyds tried to persuade one or more of the European powers to mediate and bring about an honourable peace for the Boers. A Russian mediation attempt in March 1900 floundered, however, partly owing to official German opposition. Leyds also launched a pro-Boer campaign, helped by press bureaux in Paris and Dordrecht, raising money for South African War victims, establishing an aid fund, advising pro-Boer groups abroad, and serving as a channel for protests against alleged British contraventions of international conventions, and for petitions for European intervention such as the 'Appeal to the nations for justice and peace'. 
On 26 July 1900 the Transvaal executive adopted a secret resolution empowering Leyds to withdraw all the republic's considerable assets from European banks and place them under his personal control to be used at his discretion to further the Boer cause -- a testimony to their confidence in him. Since Britain controlled the cable links between South Africa and Europe, Leyds made use of secret couriers and neutral shipping lines to maintain communications with the Transvaal. With the aid of secret agents he also purchased arms and ammunition which were smuggled to the Boers by the same means. 
When peace was finally declared, Chamberlain stated that Leyds would not be allowed to return to South Africa. He settled in Holland and resumed his former Dutch citizenship in 1905 but continued to act unofficially as a Boer representative. He declined offers of Dutch academic and diplomatic appointments, drawing on the South African Republic's government archives, which had been sent to him for safe keeping in 1900, to publish twelve books on the republic's struggle against British imperialism, from the British annexation of the Transvaal in 1877 to the end of the South African War. Leyds also composed Kruger's 'Political Testament' of 1904 and, after Kruger's death, arranged for the return of his body to South Africa, personally accompanying the coffin to Cape Town. 
Leyds refused to hand over the remainder of the South African Republic's secret funds to Britain after the South African War, as he wanted to use the money to promote the political, economic, and cultural resurrection of the former Boer republics. He purchased stock for the impoverished farms, provided funds for the Christian National Education schools, for the re-emergence of Afrikaans/Dutch newspapers, and for the establishment of the Het Volk and Orangia Union political parties. These projects went against Lord Milner's Anglicization programme and helped to create a spirit of Afrikaner solidarity. Leyds advised Boer leaders such as Botha and Smuts on political tactics to achieve self-government and secretly assisted Smuts in his negotiations with the Liberal government in Britain in 1907 which led to the restoration of self-government in the former Boer republics. In 1907 Leyds's wife died, leaving two children (Willem having died in infancy). He married a second time, on 8 October 1910, taking Anna Castens, 'nee' Grissee (1868-1942), as his wife. 
Leyds visited South Africa in 1908-9 and in 1911 and continued to take a lively interest in South African affairs until his death, corresponding with leading political figures and voicing his opinion on matters such as the rebellion of 1914 and South African participation in the First World War. He was awarded honorary doctorates by the universities of Pretoria and Stellenbosch, in 1936 and 1939 respectively. His home in The Hague was at 237 Frankenslag, and he died in hospital in The Hague on 14 May 1940 during the German invasion of the Netherlands. He was buried alongside his first wife in the Eik en Duinen cemetery, The Hague. 


@@@@@


doc= 53751


Fairbairn, John (1794-1864), newspaper proprietor and politician in Cape Colony, son of James Fairbairn, tenant of Carolside mill, and his wife, Agnes Bruce, was born at Legerwood, near Berwick, Scotland, on 9 April 1794. He attended Edinburgh University in 1812 (studying classics, theology, and medicine), but poverty prevented him graduating. As a schoolmaster in Newcastle upon Tyne, Fairbairn wrote articles in the 'Edinburgh Magazine' and 'The Star', both edited by Thomas Pringle, future secretary of the Anti-Slavery Society. Pringle was the first of Fairbairn's several mentors and, in 1822, persuaded him to emigrate to Cape Town, promising a literary and teaching career in the recently annexed Cape Colony. Fairbairn responded enthusiastically, writing that they could become the 'Franklins of the Kaap' (Pringle, 176-7). 
Fairbairn initially taught at the Classical and Commercial Academy in the Keizergracht (Darling Street), which Pringle and he founded but which closed in 1825. He was editor (1824-59) and eventually proprietor (1835-64) of the 'South African Commercial Advertiser' ('SACA'). Published in Dutch and English, this first South African newspaper was immediately threatened with government censorship, but Fairbairn's resistance led to an ordinance safeguarding freedom of the press. Fairbairn, whose journalism was coloured by his Ricardian political economy, initially believed that British settlers had a divine and heroic role to play in the Cape. His overly theoretical approach led him to seemingly contradictory policies, causing his contemporary and modern detractors to see only opportunism in his editorials. He grew increasingly pessimistic about a British civilizing mission, since his chosen means, a free press and constitutional reform, required a limit on colonial expansion and cultural homogeneity. He played a major role in establishing the Cape's educational system and in modernizing its financial institutions. His activities in banking and insurance brought him considerable profit. In 1845 he founded the Mutual Life Assurance Society of the Cape of Good Hope, which later became, as Old Mutual, South Africa's largest financial company. 
Criticism of the government's arbitrary powers and its use of patronage led to Fairbairn's call for representative institutions. However, the strategic importance of the colony meant that the British government would not leave it to a legislature certain to be dominated by a more numerous, wealthy, but questionably loyal, Cape Dutch-Afrikaner electorate. Nor, in the era of emancipation, could a slave-holding society be relinquished to settler control. 
Initially Fairbairn's relations with this Afrikaner elite were cordial, and he must have hoped for its support over representative government, given his assertion that all who made Africa their home, whether from 'England or Holland' were 'all Africans' ('SACA', 17 March 1824). Moreover, his attitude to emancipation would have won endorsement. While he claimed to favour the abolition of slavery, he distanced himself from those who advocated 'liberty' on 'moral and religious grounds', arguing for a 'statecraft' determined by the 'principles of Political Science'. 'The Ten commandments', Fairbairn wrote, might be employed by others, but he was 'content with the Multiplication Table' ('SACA', 2 March 1831). Slaves could only be freed if compensation was paid. 
Yet Fairbairn's conviction that the newly arrived British colonists had a unique role to play in making the Cape a 'fit abode for free men' was resented. His British patriotism led to relations with Afrikaners cooling, bringing serious consequences for his political and financial ambitions. Moreover, despite his tortuous position on abolition, Fairbairn supported Dr John Philip's campaign -- parallel with that of the anti-slavery movement in Britain -- to extend civil rights to the Cape's Khoi-Khoi (Hottentot) population. Fairbairn distinguished between Khoi-Khoi, held in serf-like bondage, and slaves who, unlike Khoi-Khoi, were property. 
Fairbairn's support for 'Hottentot emancipation' not only angered Afrikaner farmers and their commercial and professional kinsmen, but also brought hostility from eastern Cape British settlers intent on maintaining control over Khoi-Khoi labourers with a 'Vagrancy Act', whose passage the 'SACA' successfully opposed. In the 1830s Fairbairn became critical of British settler and government expansionism on the colony's eastern frontier. Settlers were located on seized Xhosa land, where incursions and retaliations continued. Conquest bred insecurity and chauvinism, and Fairbairn's editorials blamed the new colonists for increased conflict. The establishment of two conservative newspapers followed: 'De Zuid Afrikaan' for Afrikaners in the western Cape, and the 'Grahamstown Journal' for British settlers. Both papers achieved sales at the expense of the 'SACA', and threatened Fairbairn's influence and livelihood. 
Fairbairn now saw representative institutions imperilling the newly created Khoi-Khoi civil liberties and the increasing economic freedoms which the colony had won. He did not abandon the hope of an elected government but urged a political campaign to create a non-racial, if British led, alliance which would defeat Afrikaner power. 
In the 1830s, the 'SACA' led the attack on existing monopolies and government economic intervention. Fairbairn helped transform the banking system and validated joint stock companies. Championing friendly societies and commercial insurance companies, he became a leader in these institutions. He advocated building railways, regulating merchant shipping, bills of exchange, the reform of auctions, limited liability legislation, mechanisms for rehabilitating insolvents, and the modernization of agriculture. He married Elizabeth (1812-1840), second daughter of Dr John Philip, the South African director of the London Missionary Society, in Cape Town on 24 May 1831. 
By 1841 Fairbairn's efforts had contributed significantly to the growth of common interests among new Afrikaner and British capitalists and his editorials announced a 'reconciliation' which removed the 'very appearance of disunion' ('SACA', 2 Jan 1841). An expanding middle class, resentful of its lack of influence and of privileges given to older commercial rivals, combined in calling for a legislative assembly. When in 1849 the colonial secretary and the governor landed convicts at the Cape, breaking previous promises, a politically astute cabal, including Fairbairn, created an Anti-Convict Association which focused on agitation for self-government. The 'SACA' became one of the association's major propagandists, joining the call for a boycott of state institutions until the convicts were deported. Grandiloquently, Fairbairn reminded his readers of the social contract made by 'Englishmen' in 1688, and of the need to 'resist despotism', that 'dry rot of the constitution' ('SACA', 23 May 1849). 
The association's successful boycott, and its almost colony-wide coalition against the government, convinced the administration to redirect the convicts and hastened the government's decision to create an elected assembly. Fairbairn and three other 'popular members' were elected to conclude the government's legislative council business and to act as advisers in drafting the proposed constitution. Fairbairn (who was assaulted in his home by a mob incited almost certainly by government officials) was elected with the support of Cape Town merchants, mission station Khoi-Khoi, and rural Afrikaners, each group with its own agenda. When the governor chose to deal with non-constitutional matters first, Fairbairn and his associates resigned and pursued their campaign in London. Although receiving no immediate help from the colonial secretary, their proposals were subsequently accepted, allowing a substantial number of Afrikaners and a smaller group of Khoi-Khoi and ex-slaves to be enfranchised. With his standing among rural Afrikaners restored, Fairbairn was elected to the first legislative assembly as member for the rural Swellendam constituency (1854-64) and increasingly reflected the opinions of his conservative electors. 
More and more pessimistic about the efficacy of the British mission, Fairbairn still hoped, in the 1840s, that its influence would overcome 'the evil genius of Africa'. By the 1850s, he gloomily prophesied that the civilizing power of the colony would be weakened if it moved beyond its coastal base, as 'the repelling genius of Africa becomes stronger' ('SACA', 13 Dec 1851). He also foresaw that settler expansion would provoke bloody conquest and a 'terrible spirit of war and revenge'. The English settlers, he concurred, were 'more stern and implacable than the Boers', and a new generation was emerging 'full of enterprize and bent on conquest, whom no government will be able to control' (John Fairbairn to James Fairbairn, 28 Aug 1851, University of the Witwatersrand, MS A663/BA). 
Fairbairn's wife died on 30 May 1840, nine years after their marriage, leaving two sons and a daughter. The eldest son, John Philip, drowned in the Gamtoos River on 1 July 1845, aged eleven. Personal loss and political foreboding blunted the satisfaction Fairbairn might have felt in his achievements. He died on 5 October 1864 at the Wynberg home of his son-in-law, advocate F. S. Watermeyer, and was buried in the Somerset Road cemetery in Cape Town. 


@@@@@


doc= 53752


Juta, Jan Carel (1824-1886), bookseller, was born at Zaltbommel, Netherlands, on 23 March 1824. He studied law before entering the book trade in Holland. He emigrated to the Cape on the suggestion of his brother, a Dutch sea-captain whose ship had been wrecked in Table Bay and who had, after swimming ashore, fallen in love with a Cape Town woman. Before leaving for the Cape, Juta married Louisa Marx (died 1893), the sister of Karl Marx, one result of which is that some of the more obscure writings of Marx are to be found in Cape Town newspapers, where they were placed by his sister. In Cape Town, Juta joined the congregation of the Groote Kerk, the main Dutch Reformed church, where his children were baptized. 
Within a few months of his arrival, Juta had established a bookselling and publishing house in the centre of Cape Town. The first work he published concerned the constitution ordinance which granted the Cape representative government (1853). He later published widely in both English and Dutch, including textbooks and more popular works. He initiated and published the influential 'Cape Monthly Magazine' (1857-81), and the 'Descriptive Handbook of the Cape Colony' (1875) compiled by John Nobel, clerk of the house of assembly. It was in the 1860s that his firm began to specialize in the production of legal works, for which it was to remain famous. He both encouraged local writers, and, through importing books from Britain and Holland, the growth of a reading culture in Cape Town. 
In poor health, Juta returned to England in 1884 and settled in Chiswick, Middlesex, where he died on 8 April 1886. His wife then returned to Cape Town; she died in Rondebosch in 1893. One of their sons, Henricus Hubertus (Henry Hubert), became speaker of the Cape legislative assembly and judge president of the Cape division of the supreme court. 


@@@@@


doc= 53755


Theal, George McCall (1837-1919), historian and civil servant, was born on 11 April 1837 at Saint John, New Brunswick, where his United Empire Loyalist forebears had settled. He was the eldest of the nine children of William Young Theal, a doctor, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Bell. Theal's schooling at the Cockaigne Academy and at St John Grammar School gave him the normal grounding of a classical education. Significantly, a favourite book was Gibbon's 'Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire'. After spending time in the United States and west Africa, he was 'en route' for Australia with friends when he decided to stay in South Africa. Frontier newspapers, schoolteaching, some months at the diamond fields, and five years at the Lovedale mission occupied his early years in South Africa. He published two early works: 'South Africa as it is' and a 'Compendium of the History and Geography of South Africa' which, by 1877, had reached a third edition. He also collected oral records, subsequently published as 'Kaffir Folk Lore'. 
The years from 1877 to 1881 were crucial for South Africa: widespread frontier resistance was quelled, and Carnarvon's imperially propelled federation project failed. They were also decisive years for Theal. He moved from the eastern Cape to Cape Town and lost his close association with the indigenous people among whom he had worked as missionary and as government appointee. His early sympathy for the conquered peoples disappeared in his later work. Excited by the records of the past that he encountered in his official duties, he became a zealous archivist and dedicated historian. 
Theal was appointed colonial historiographer in 1891. This was a decade after his bitter disappointment when the Sprigg government appointed the Revd H. C. V. Leibbrandt to the recently created post of librarian to the house of assembly and keeper of the archives. Theal's consolation was an unwelcome, but better paid and mercifully short, appointment as magistrate at Tamacha. He returned to Cape Town as a clerk in the native affairs department. It was part of his work to prepare summaries of documents and investigate disputes. In addition, he was instructed to search out and prepare for publication documents relating to issues of current concern. His four volumes of 'Basutoland Records' (three published) and his nine volumes on the 'Records of South East Africa' resulted from such work. Successive Cape governments backed him in his wider commitment to search for, transcribe, translate if necessary, and prepare for publication the records of Cape Colony. To this end he was permitted to spend long years working in repositories in Britain and in Europe. The most notable result was the thirty-six volumes of 'Records of the Cape Colony' from 1793 to January 1828. Theal knew foreign languages and drove himself hard; his work was not faultless, but his achievement remains impressive. Long before the age of photocopying, his work equipped scholars in South Africa with some, at least, of the documents necessary for historical research. Writing history flowed from his archival work. Here, too, he achieved and maintained a prodigious productivity. He studied the ethnography of the indigenous people and published the results. More impressively, he achieved an eleven-volume survey of the South African past which brought the story almost up to his own day, as well as a host of smaller histories. He drew on earlier works, but none of his predecessors had attempted quite so broad a canvas. The chronological span of his publications extends from 1871 to the 1960s, when reprints of some of his compilations were issued. 
In 1904 the Cape government decided to retire all civil servants over sixty years of age. After vigorous protests and a parliamentary select committee, Theal received a pension based on his salary as civil service clerk, but he retained the title and emoluments of colonial historiographer until his death. He continued to work assiduously. One of his later tasks was to prepare for publication the manuscript of G. W. Stowe's work 'The Native Races of South Africa'. Theal's ideas were disseminated widely when some of his works were translated into Dutch, and his writing became the basis of school textbooks. He was utterly convinced of his own impartiality and accuracy, and he vaunted his own merits. He omitted annotations from his historical writing and claimed that this was the result of his desire to avoid expense and delay. He has been condemned by late twentieth-century historians for his own self-congratulation -- however wide his interests, his sympathies were extremely narrow, and his accuracy has not escaped unscathed the scrutiny of later scholars. Like other historians of his day, writing in other places, he saw history as a progressive movement. For him the theme of progress lay in the achievements of the white population of South Africa, both Boer and colonial British, who in establishing themselves and subjugating the indigenous peoples, made possible the inevitable triumph of civilization over barbarism. Always concerned to defend the white colonist or trekker, Theal berated unpopular officials and humanitarians. He conspicuously failed to see that there was 'another side' to frontier issues, and simplified complex movements to the point of caricature. For example to him the upheavals in the interior subsequently called the mfecane resulted simply from the savagery of Shaka, whom Theal called the 'Attila of South East Africa'. He similarly dismissed the cattle killing as the 'madness' of the Xhosa, whose leaders perpetrated 'a blunder such as a child would not have made'. 
Theal received honorary doctorates from Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, in 1895 and from the University of the Cape of Good Hope in 1899. The criticisms of his own day were muted and his evident sympathy for the trekkers won him the lasting esteem of many Afrikaner historians. But since 1930, if not earlier, the castigation of Theal has become an academic industry, and his errors and misrepresentations have been frequently subjected to withering attack. Placed alongside the burgeoning studies of black polities and of the experience of indigenous peoples, Theal's work appears now to be at best superficial and smug, at worst callous. Yet historians, like others, are entitled to be judged by the standards of their own context. His presentation of South African history was guided by what he judged to be the crucial needs of his own times -- co-operation among the white inhabitants of South Africa and the development among them of a shared sense of identity. 
Described as tall and massive, with grey eyes that betokened humour, Theal apparently possessed an air of essential simplicity and charm. He spent his last years at Wynberg. An Episcopalian by birth, he became a Presbyterian by choice, but served as an elder in the Dutch Reformed church at Wynberg. He died in Wynberg on 17 April 1919, survived by two children, Martin William and Hannah Catherine Hester. His wife, Mary, 'nee' Stewart, had died on 23 November 1911. He was buried in the Dutch Reformed church cemetery at Wynberg. Friends collected funds and commissioned an oil portrait to serve as his memorial. The painting, by Professor E. Roworth, is now housed in the South African Library at Cape Town. 


@@@@@


doc= 53756


Dingane ka Senzangakhona (c.1798-1840), king of the Zulu, born in the south-eastern corner of emaKhosini, Babanango district, Natal, was the son of Senzangakhona ('c'.1757-1816), Zulu chief, and a junior wife, Mpikase. He spent his early manhood under his half-brother Shaka's reign. He served in the 'amaWombe butho' ('age-mate military unit') and accompanied Shaka on campaigns. In September 1828, he and his brother Mhlangana, in league with the 'induna' Mbopha, assassinated Shaka. Dingane then had Mhlangana killed and dismissed Mbopha. Insecure and suspicious, he also killed some of Shaka's favourites and most of his own surviving brothers, but spared Mpande as ineffectual. Dingane was slothful and cunning but not astute. He lacked Shaka's urge to conquest, and loved pageantry and dancing. He had many concubines but never produced an heir. Under him the quality of the Zulu army declined, and although he apparently realized the importance of firearms he failed both to obtain them in sufficient numbers and to use them effectively. 
Dingane initially halted campaigns and dissolved some 'amabutho'. His kingdom was shaken, however, by the secession of the Qwabe chiefdom. Dingane then restored military discipline and resumed campaigning. His forces raided the Npondo and the Swazi, attacked Mzilikazi's Ndebele (Matabele) in the central Transvaal, and in September 1833 stormed the Portuguese fort at Delagoa Bay, Mozambique, and killed its governor. 
Dingane was uneasy with the white traders at Port Natal (Durban) who harboured refugees from his kingdom. In 1835 they agreed to send refugees back in return for peace. Dingane also admitted missionaries to his kingdom. The agreement soon failed, however, and tense relations resumed. 
From 1837 the Zulu kingdom was threatened by land-hungry Boers, with 'Old Testament' attitudes and nineteenth-century firearms, on their great trek away from British ruled Cape Colony, who wanted to take Natal. On 6 November 1837 the trekker leader Pieter Retief arrived at Dingane's capital, Mgungundhlovu, to ask for Natal south of the Thukela (Tugela) for their republic, which the Port Natal traders had decided to join. Dingane knew that in January a trekker force had defeated Mzilikazi. He himself had then sent a second expedition against the Ndebele. To buy time Dingane promised the concession if Retief would recapture cattle taken by Chief Sekonyela. Retief first reported to the trekkers, who immediately began crossing the Drakensberg and settling in numerous camps, and then tricked Sekonyela into trying on a pair of handcuffs and ransomed him for Dingane's cattle. Before Retief returned to claim his reward Dingane learned that the trekkers had decisively defeated the Ndebele, driving them north towards modern Zimbabwe. Dingane apparently believed that only by destroying the trekkers while they were unprepared could he save his people from expropriation and massed his forces in preparation. On Retief's arrival Dingane reportedly signed a document assigning land in Natal. He tricked the Boers into attending a farewell dance without their arms, during which Retief and his companions were seized and killed. Dingane then sent his forces to destroy the trekkers in their camps. His masterstroke miscarried. The Zulu massacred the occupants of the first camps they encountered but gunfire gave the alarm to others, who drove them off. A large part of the trekkers' stock had been taken, however. They were confined to defensive laagers and short of a decisive victory would be forced to return over the Drakensberg. Dingane's position was further improved when the first trekker counter-attack was halted and routed by his army on 11 April 1838. An invasion by the Natal traders was also defeated and their settlement dispersed. 
With the arrival of Andries Pretorius and his commandos from the Cape, the trekkers invaded the Zulu kingdom in December 1838. Dingane's army attacked their laager by the Ncome River, at the battle of Blood River, on 16 December. The Zulu were routed by Boer firepower and tactics, and sustained massive losses. Dingane then negotiated an agreement granting the Boers land south of the Tongati River. His half-brother Mpande rebelled and in September 1839, with his followers, crossed the Thukela and took refuge with the trekkers. In January 1840 Mpande's army, shadowed by a Boer force, marched into Zululand. The two Zulu armies fought at the Maqonqo hills (near Magudu in the far north of Zululand) on 29 January. Dingane's army, commanded by Ndlela, was defeated. Mpande then claimed the Zulu kingship. Ndlela, wounded, fled back to Dingane, who had him strangled. Dingane and his followers fled across the Pongola, north-east into the territory of Silevana of the Nyawo. Helped by a force of Dingane's enemies -- the Swazi, led by Sonyezane Dlamini -- Silevana attacked Dingane at night and mortally wounded him. Dingane died on 15 March 1840 at Esankoleni (near Golela on the Natal-Swaziland border) and was buried there. 
In Afrikaner mythology Dingane was the treacherous, murderous, savage villain; the anniversary of Blood River was long celebrated as Dingane's day. He was portrayed in three South African films, 'De Voortrekker' (1916), 'They Built a Nation' (1938), and 'Die Voortrekkers' (1973), and sculpted on the frieze in the Voortrekker monument (1949) at Pretoria. Zulu also reviled his memory, both for his failure and for his treatment of the Cele and Qadi. Magema ka Magwaza, the Zulu historian, wrote, 'he had the heart of a dog and the nature of a witch. Dingane was truly like a poisonous snake' (Fuze, 17). Nevertheless, for all his cruelty and duplicity, arguably he had done the best he knew to save his kingdom and people. 


@@@@@


doc= 53757


Dinizulu ka Cetshwayo (1868-1913), Zulu king, was the eldest son of Cetshwayo ka Mpande (c.1826-1884) and his senior wife, Novimbi Msweli, and thus the heir apparent to the Zulu kingship. Aged five, in 1873 he witnessed his father's coronation by Theophilus Shepstone. In 1879 British forces invaded and conquered the Zulu kingdom, defeating Cetshwayo's forces. Cetshwayo was exiled, and the kingdom was divided into thirteen kingdoms. Dinizulu was left in the area assigned to the Mandhlakazi chief, Zibhebu, who had quarrelled with Cetshwayo and was hostile to his Usuthu faction. Dinizulu was briefly reunited with his father when in 1883 Cetshwayo was restored to a truncated kingdom shorn of a large reserve on the Natal border and another area in the north set aside for the renegade Zibhebu. The ensuing civil war (a direct consequence of the British policy of causing dissension among the Zulu), Zibhebu's victory over the Usuthu, and Cetshwayo's flight and death in 1884 left Dinizulu in mortal danger. As Zibhebu's forces ravaged the kingdom's heartland, Dinizulu was hidden by Ndabuko in the fastnesses of the Nkandla Forest. 
The Usuthu petitioned the British to install Dinizulu as king and to restore order, but there was official reluctance to reinstate the Zulu kingdom. As many of the Usuthu were reduced to starvation by Zibhebu's raiding, Usuthu leaders negotiated with a committee of Transvaal Boers, who offered to install Dinizulu as paramount chief in return for land on which to establish a so-called New Republic. On 22 May 1884 the Boers proclaimed Dinizulu king. They then supported the Usuthu forces in attacking and routing Zibhebu; in return, however, they claimed almost the entire Zulu heartland, right down to the coast. In response to Zulu pleas, growing anarchy, and their own hostility to Boer expansionism, the British intervened, acknowledging the New Republic within greatly restricted boundaries; it was shortly afterwards amalgamated with Transvaal. The rest of the Zulu territory was annexed and placed under direct crown rule on 14 May 1887. 
Informed that his kingship was abolished, and enraged by the reinstatement of Zibhebu as a chief by the British, Dinizulu put himself at the head of an uprising. His forces successfully attacked Zibhebu, but were broken up by British troops on 2 July 1888. Dinizulu then fled to Transvaal, but was persuaded by the missionary and Zulu sympathizer Harriette Colenso to travel to Bishopstowe, the Colenso family home in Natal, where he surrendered to the British. He was convicted of treason, and was exiled to the island of St Helena. There, allowed considerable freedom, he learned to read and write, and to play the American organ. In 1898 he was freed and allowed to return to Zululand, no longer as king but as 'government 'Induna'' (local headman), a role which recognized the authority he still held in the eyes of many Zulu. He was also installed as chief of the core of the Usuthu faction, which was now constituted by the British administration as a tribe with a defined territory. Before his return, however, Zululand had been handed over to Natal; the authorities in the territory were thus responsible to a legislature elected exclusively by white men, who had a direct interest in exploiting its resources of land and labour. Dinizulu found his central role deeply frustrating. He had little opportunity to influence legislation or administrative policy in the interests of his people. His function was rather to justify government policy to his tribe, a role which threatened to destroy the widespread loyalty and respect he still enjoyed. He thus spent most of his time in his local chiefdom at Osuthu, using it as a base to maintain and extend his personal authority and links among the Zulu at large. He married wives from the leading lineage groups of the previous kingdom, dispatched messengers to the headquarters of its constituent chiefdoms, and received visits from their leading men. 
By the early years of the twentieth century, changes in the South African economy and policies of the Natal government conspired to raise tensions in Natal and Zululand, which made Dinizulu's position increasingly difficult. The crown, absentee landlords, and land companies could now more profitably sell or lease land to white capitalist farmers than to African tenants. Many African tenants were forced off the land and the rents of those who remained were raised. Their struggle to maintain economic independence became increasingly difficult. In 1902 the Natal government tightened the squeeze by making substantial areas of Zululand available to white farmers, confining the Zulu to defined reserves in the heartland of their old kingdom. Finally, in 1906, taxes on Africans in Natal and Zululand were substantially raised by the introduction of a poll tax. Attempts to collect the tax met with a number of instances of resistance. Bambatha, chief of the Zondi in Natal, was involuntarily involved in one of these attempts, and, accompanied by a wife and two children, sought asylum at Osuthu. Anxious not to offend the government, or to undermine his standing with his own people, Dinizulu sent Bambatha back to Natal but allowed his wife and children to stay. On his return, Bambatha found that he had been deposed in favour of an uncle, and at once attacked him, initiating a rebellion. To strengthen his support, he claimed that Dinizulu had authorized his attack, and given him charms which would turn bullets into water. The rebellion spread, and proved difficult and costly to suppress. To prove his own loyalty to the government, Dinizulu offered to send all his forces to assist against Bambatha; but in the later stages of the rebellion he allowed some of the rebels who fled to Osuthu to remain there, rather than hand them over to the authorities. 
On these grounds, and on suspicion of his involvement in the murder of some pro-government chiefs, Dinizulu's arrest was ordered. Once again on the advice of Harriette Colenso he surrendered himself. Through the efforts of the Colensos and their friends, his defence was undertaken by the former liberal premier of Cape Colony W. P. Schreiner. Although the presiding judge remarked that his actions had not been motivated by any hostile intention against the state, Dinizulu was convicted of treason for harbouring rebels, and sentenced to four years' imprisonment. On the inauguration of the South African Union in 1910, however, its first prime minister, Louis Botha (who had been involved in the Boer expedition to put Dinizulu on the throne in 1884), released him. Dinizulu settled on a farm in Transvaal, but his health had long been poor, and he died there on 18 October 1913. 
Dinizulu's lifelong commitment to maintaining the Zulu kingship had tragic consequences for his people as well as for himself. It facilitated the annexation by Transvaal of a large part of the Zulu kingdom, precipitated direct British rule, and assisted the formal extinction of the kingdom and its incorporation into white settler-ruled Natal. It did, however, keep the idea of the kingdom alive in the minds of the Zulu people and of white administrators and politicians, with profound consequences for the future. 


@@@@@


doc= 53758


Moorosi (c.1795-1879), ruler of the Ngwe (Putili) and warrior, was born, oral evidence suggests, at Mohale's Hoek in the south of what became Lesotho. His father, Mokuoane, Ngwe (Putili) ruler, became a vassal of the Sotho leader Moshoeshoe in the late 1820s. When Moorosi succeeded to the relatively small chiefdom some years later he acknowledged Moshoeshoe as his suzerain, but sought as much independence as possible, and in 1846 moved south of the Orange River. When that area was annexed by the British in 1850 he returned to the south of what later became Lesotho, to a rugged mountainous area close to the Orange River. He aided Moshoeshoe against the forces of Sir George Cathcart in 1851-2, and fought with the Sotho against the Orange Free State in the wars of 1858 and 1865, gaining a reputation as an able military leader, a good shot, and a skilled rider. Towards the end of 1865 he retreated to a natural fortress, a mountain with three almost sheer rocky sides which rises above the junction of the Quthing and Orange rivers. He soon found that his territory was part of the area which had come under British protection as Basutoland. 
After Cape Colony took over Basutoland in 1871 Moorosi was at first little troubled by the magistrate of Cornet Spruit, but in May 1877 a separate magistracy was created at nearby Quthing. Early the following year the tactless new magistrate, Hamilton Hope, issued a writ against some subjects of Moorosi's son Lehana (Doda) who had not paid tax, then insisted on referring the matter to Moshoeshoe's successor, Letsie. That matter blew over, but later in the year Hope's successor, John Austen, arrested Lehana, this time on a trumped-up charge of stock theft. Lehana was gaoled at Quthing prior to being sent away, but was sprung from gaol on his father's orders. Moorosi then refused to surrender him. In February 1879, anticipating that Moorosi would go into full-scale rebellion, Austen abandoned the magistracy, which Moorosi's men then pillaged. 
Moorosi then mobilized his forces on his natural stronghold, to which Cape colonial forces laid siege. Numerous attempts were made to take the mountain, but Moorosi's people put up valiant resistance, which included a number of daring sorties from the mountain. In September Colonel Brabant of the Cape mounted rifles met Moorosi part way up the mountain to persuade him to end his resistance, and another such meeting took place the following month, when Sir Gordon Sprigg (1830-1913), the Cape prime minister, met Moorosi, but on each occasion the chief refused to surrender unconditionally. In late November the commanding officer of the Cape mounted rifles led the final assault, which began with artillery bombardment, took three days, and included the use of scaling ladders. Forty-three members of the colonial force were killed before the mountain was taken on 20 November. Moorosi himself died that day, along with most of the other defenders. His head was cut off and exposed on a pole, then sent to King William's Town. After protest from Whitehall it was returned for burial with his body on the mountain which still bears his name. 


@@@@@


doc= 53759


Khama the Great (c.1835-1923), chief of the Ngwato, was born at Mashu in Ngwato country, in what later became Botswana. Son and heir of Sekogma I ('c'.1795-1883), Khama grew up in years of relative peace. In his early twenties, to his father's annoyance, he fell under the influence of an itinerant evangelist and in May 1860 was baptized a Christian. John Mackenzie of the London Missionary Society, missionary at Shoshong from 1862 to 1876, became his mentor. Khama remained a devout Christian and an extreme teetotaller, regarded by many Europeans as the exemplar of an African Christian. On 22 May 1862 he married Mogatsamocwasele, known as Mma-Bessie (died December 1889). It is possible that he had had an earlier marriage. Fierce internal dissensions were common in the Ngwato chiefdom and in 1872, at a time when the Ngwato were beginning to be exposed to new forces of colonial expansion, Khama briefly seized power before restoring his father as chief. In 1875 he deposed his father and from then until his death ruled the chiefdom. 
Khama first appealed to the British to act against the Boer trekkers entering his country from the east in 1876. Although nothing was done immediately, the British came to see him as an ally in keeping open the 'road to the north' or 'missionaries' road' -- the corridor which ran west of the Transvaal. Khama was delighted when in 1885 a British expeditionary force arrived in the area to expel Boer 'filibusters' and when its leader, Sir Charles Warren, declared a British protectorate over Bechuanaland, including the lands of the Ngwato. Mackenzie, who accompanied Warren, persuaded Khama to offer the British some frontier farmland for the settlement of white Christians, an offer which was not accepted. 
In 1895 Khama heard that the British government proposed to transfer the administration of his country to Rhodes's British South Africa Company. With two other Tswana chiefs, he travelled to England to oppose such a transfer. Queen Victoria presented him with a 'Bible', in which she wrote that that book was the secret of his greatness. Joseph Chamberlain, the colonial secretary, promised the chiefs that they would remain under the queen's protection, though they did agree to cede a narrow strip of territory for the building of a railway to the north. 
Khama returned to Bechuanaland to find his European-educated son and heir, Sekogma, in effective control. Disliking Sekogma and suspecting him of wanting to usurp power, Khama in October 1897 forced his son into exile. Khama then married in 1900 a twenty-one-year-old schoolteacher, Semane Setlhoko (1878/9-1937), who bore him a son, Tshekedi Khama (1905-1959), when he was seventy (he had earlier been married to Elisabetha, his second known wife). In 1907 he recognized Tshekedi as his heir, disowning Sekogma. However, when Khama had a minor accident in 1916, Sekogma returned to Serowe, beginning a process of reconciliation which led in 1920 to his being made heir in place of Tshekedi. Sekogma married, produced an heir, and succeeded Khama, but Khama's prior recognition of Tshekedi helped to fuel tensions in the chiefdom long after his death. He died of pneumonia in his capital of Serowe, in the Bechuanaland protectorate on 21 February 1923, and was buried at Serowe Hill. 
Courteous and athletic, Khama's authoritarianism nevertheless estranged him from many of his senior relatives. A pragmatic ruler of the largest reserve in the British protectorate, he proved himself a shrewd entrepreneur, who launched a trading company which was so successful that rivals persuaded the British to close it down in 1916. He continued to receive strong moral support from Christian nonconformists in Britain, and the regard in which he was held, as a Christian gentleman, helped to ensure that the British did not hand over Bechuanaland to either Southern Rhodesia or South Africa. 


@@@@@


doc= 53760


Bunsen, Christian Karl Josias von, Baron von Bunsen in the Prussian nobility (1791-1860), diplomatist and scholar, was born on 25 August 1791 in Korbach, in the German principality of Waldeck, the only child of Heinrich Christian Bunsen (1743-1820), a regimental officer, and his second wife, Johannette Eleonore, 'nee' Brocken. Bunsen had two half-sisters through his father's first marriage; his family was not of aristocratic origin. After a grammar school education in Korbach (from 1798), Bunsen moved on to read theology and philology first in Marburg (in 1808) and later in Gottingen (from 1809). These studies culminated in a prize essay, the 'Athenian Law of Inheritance', for which the University of Jena granted him an honorary doctorate in 1812. 
The years from 1812 to 1816 were a period of wide-ranging scholarly activities: Bunsen studied Persian, Icelandic, and Arabic in Munich, Leiden, Paris, and Copenhagen. During this time the idea of writing a universal history focusing on 'the Germanic nations, the ancient Greeks and Romans, and (for the earliest period) the Median-Persian-Indian race' (Bunsen, 1.88) also took shape in his mind. On the basis of work in comparative philology Bunsen intended his research to branch out into religion, literature, law, and philosophy. Early in 1816 this life-plan found the approval of the classical scholar Barthold Georg Niebuhr (1776-1831), to whom Bunsen paid a visit in Berlin at that time; Niebuhr's influence on Bunsen's life and work can hardly be overestimated. 
When Niebuhr became Prussian envoy to the papal court in 1816 he succeeded in drawing Bunsen into the diplomatic service, even though Bunsen was more inclined to an academic career. He arrived in Rome in November 1816 and was quickly integrated into the vibrant community of German artists and intellectuals residing in the city. He also became friendly with Benjamin Waddington (died 1828) of Llanofer, a country gentleman and magistrate who was spending the winter in Rome with his wife, Georgina Mary Ann, 'nee' Port (1771-1850), and his daughters. On 1 July 1817 Bunsen married Waddington's eldest daughter and coheir, Frances [
Bunsen's appointment as secretary to the Prussian legation in 1818 marked the beginning of a new phase in his life: henceforth his scholarly ambitions had to compete with the demands of the Prussian civil service. In 1823 he succeeded Niebuhr as Prussian minister to the Vatican and held this position until he left Rome in 1838. Bunsen's twenty-two years in Rome were characterized by a variety of activities. His household in the Palazzo Caffarelli on the Capitol deserves to be mentioned as an international social meeting-point for artists and intellectuals. Visitors included, among others, the painter Johann Friedrich Overbeck, the sculptor Bertel Thorvaldsen, the poet and scholar Giacomo Leopardi, as well as Thomas Arnold, Julius Hare, Connop Thirlwall, Philip Pusey, and Sir Walter Scott from Britain. Bunsen managed to maintain his scholarly interests by co-authoring a work entitled 'Description of Rome' (1830), which surveyed the city's ancient, medieval, and modern cultural treasures. He also developed an interest in Egyptian antiquities, which eventually led to the publication of 'Egypt's Place in Universal History' (1848-67). Bunsen's 1828 proposal to found an archaeological institute can be perceived as an outcome of these endeavours. In addition he was closely associated with the establishment of a protestant infirmary. Both institutions outlived his stay in Rome. 
Bunsen's concern with religious matters during his years in Rome had far-reaching consequences. In order to facilitate daily worship he wished to revive the hymns of German reformers and to provide for his countrymen a work comparable to the English 'Book of Common Prayer'. His compilation of ancient hymns and prayers was first printed in 1833. Selections of this work were translated into English by Catherine Winkworth (1827-1878) in 1855 and became well known under the title 'Lyra Germanica'; its various editions greatly influenced protestant worship in nineteenth-century England. Bunsen's involvement in religious questions also had a more political nature, which ultimately led to his departure from Rome. A diplomatic crisis between Berlin and the Vatican arose over the disagreement about the possibility of marriages between protestants and Catholics: while such 'mixed' marriages were allowed by Prussian law, the Vatican became increasingly determined to abolish them. The failure of Bunsen's mediating efforts in this matter led to his resignation in April 1838. 
During a first sojourn in England from August 1838 to October 1839 Bunsen pursued his scholarly interests, visited many of the Englishmen he had met in Rome, and saw a great deal of Elizabeth Fry, Frederick Denison Maurice, and William Ewart Gladstone. On 12 June 1839 Bunsen received an honorary DCL from the University of Oxford. In October of the same year he returned to the continent in order to become ambassador to Switzerland, where he and his family stayed until the spring of 1841. At that time Bunsen was summoned from Bern to Berlin in order to discuss the possibility of an Anglo-German bishopric in Jerusalem with Friedrich Wilhelm IV. Owing to his successful negotiations in London in this matter, this bishopric was controversially founded as the expression of a joint effort of the two great protestant powers in Europe to improve the situation of Christians in the Holy Land. 
After this diplomatic success Bunsen was appointed Prussian ambassador to the court of St James in 1842. During his time in this office, which he held until 1854, Bunsen maintained close connections with Queen Victoria and Prince Albert. Bunsen's ambassadorial activities were wide-ranging, and included the organization of royal visits as well as the foundation of a German hospital in London in 1844. His fascination with the English parliamentary system was reflected in the advice he gave to Friedrich Wilhelm IV in constitutional matters. He also took a keen interest in educational and cultural issues, initiated translation activity, and increased his connections and his popularity in England by travelling extensively. As in Rome, Frances von Bunsen's active support of her husband's ambassadorial career, evidenced in the warm hospitality received by their many guests, put the couple at the centre of a wide social and cultural network: their London home in Carlton Terrace was a popular meeting-place for celebrities from many European countries. 
On a scholarly level Bunsen promoted Niebuhr's innovative research in Roman history, which greatly influenced nineteenth-century English historiography. His enthusiasm was shared by three of his closest English friends: Thomas Arnold (1795-1842), Julius Hare (1795-1855), and Connop Thirlwall (1797-1875). Bunsen also kept up his interest in philological work and introduced his countryman Friedrich Max Muller to the scholarly resources in oriental studies in England. In the theological debates of his time Bunsen was a decided antagonist of the high-church party. As a result he was frequently associated with historicist German biblical criticism in the tradition of David Friedrich Strauss, and his research in this field was so widely known that a defence of his opinions by the broad-churchman Rowland Williams was included in 'Essays and Reviews' (1860). The seven volumes of Bunsen's 'Christianity and Mankind' (1854), which can be perceived as a development of the ideas about universal history presented to Niebuhr at the outset of his career, were published at the end of Bunsen's stay in England. In 1853 Bunsen received an honorary degree from the University of Edinburgh. 
In a political context Bunsen supported the plans for German unification and did his utmost to foster English support for the union of Germany under the leadership of Prussia, thus aiming for an intimate alliance between the two countries. On two occasions, however, he could not reach an agreement between Prussian and English interests. In 1852 he was forced to sign a protocol about the abrogation of the constitutional independence of the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein from Denmark, which he had defended in a printed memoir presented to Lord Palmerston in 1848. A second political tension between England and Prussia arose at the outbreak of the Crimean War in 1853. Bunsen advised his king to join the western alliance of France and England. Friedrich Wilhelm IV, however, had an aversion to Napoleon III and mistrusted Palmerston's political principles. As a result he preserved neutrality towards Russia and accepted Bunsen's offer to resign his post as minister in London in April 1854. 
After their return to Germany in June of the same year Bunsen and his wife settled in a villa near Heidelberg, where he passed most of his remaining years with literary work. The year 1855 saw the publication of the book translated into English as 'Signs of the Times' (1856), which exercised a great influence in reviving the liberal movement in the German states after the failure of the revolution of 1848. In another important work (1868-70), translated as 'God in History', Bunsen explored how the progress of mankind is reflected in the conception of God formed within each nation. Bunsen's authorship was prolific and his output includes further books, articles, lectures, and political pamphlets within the wide scope of the interests covered in his major publications. Many of them appeared in German and English. During a visit to Berlin in September 1857 Friedrich Wilhelm IV raised Bunsen to the rank of baron and conferred upon him a life peerage. 
In 1858 Bunsen's health began to fail and he suffered increasingly from the symptoms of chronic heart disease. The last two winters of his life were spent in Cannes, and in 1860, after having given up the house in Heidelberg, Bunsen and his wife arrived in their new home in Bonn, where he spent the last months of his life. As far as his health allowed, he still pursued his scholarly interests and was surrounded by his family and friends. Bunsen died on 28 November 1860 in Bonn and was buried there on 1 December 1860. 
In response to one of her husband's last requests Frances von Bunsen wrote 'A Memoir of Baron Bunsen, Drawn Chiefly from Family Papers' (1868), published in German and English and showing her linguistic and literary talent. After her husband's death she moved to Karlsruhe, where she looked after the children of her deceased daughter Theodora, Baroness von Ungern Sternberg. Her family and friends were dispersed in many European countries; she kept in touch with them in visits and letters, which showed her intimate knowledge of the political and cultural events of her time. She died in Waldhorn Strasse, Karlsruhe, surrounded by many of her children and grandchildren, on 23 April 1876, and was buried next to her husband in Bonn. 


@@@@@


doc= 53763


Jabavu, John Tengo (1859-1921), journalist and politician in South Africa, was born on 11 January 1859 at Tyatyora village, near Healdtown in the eastern Cape, the youngest child of humble parents, Ntwanambi Jabavu and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Mpinda. Jabavu's family belonged to the Mfengu, who had fled from Natal during Shaka's wars (1818-28) and settled among the Xhosa of the eastern Cape. Strongly influenced by missionary teaching, the Mfengu had adopted Christian ideals, and were inclined towards European models of education and peasant agriculture. Jabavu was very much a product of this tradition. In 1875 he graduated from the Methodist institution at Healdtown and took up a teaching position at Somerset East in the eastern Cape. 
While teaching at Somerset East, Jabavu became the local correspondent for some of South Africa's leading newspapers as well as apprenticing himself to a printer. He attracted the attention of Dr James Stewart of the Lovedale Mission School, who was looking for someone to edit the institution's Xhosa-language journal, 'Isigidimi sama-Xosa' ('The Xhosa messenger'). As editor, Jabavu took a keen interest in Cape politics and during the Cape elections of 1883 he canvassed actively for one of the candidates. His partisan and controversial attitudes did not find favour with the missionary hierarchy and his editorial contract was not renewed. 
But Jabavu had become convinced of the existence of a literate readership sufficient to support a Xhosa-language newspaper untrammelled by missionary inhibitions and willing to articulate their views and their opinions. In 1884 he launched his own newspaper, 'Imvo Zabantsundu' ('Black opinion'), with financial backing from two white businessmen with political interests. The franchise of Cape Colony, though qualified, was at that time colour-blind and African voters held the balance of power in at least five eastern Cape constituencies. Jabavu's opinions thus carried considerable political weight, and he used his influence to fight various pieces of legislation which were designed to disarm and disenfranchise Cape Africans, to seize their lands, and to restrict their freedom of movement. 
Jabavu was recognized for nearly fifteen years as the leading spokesman for African interests throughout southern Africa. He lost his pre-eminence, however, as the result of a split which occurred in Cape politics after Cecil Rhodes was deposed as premier of the Cape in 1896. Rhodes formed the Progressive Party, which was closely identified with the British imperial interests, whereas his opponents gravitated to the Afrikaner Bond. Several of Jabavu's white political allies tended towards the Bond, and Jabavu himself was impressed with the liberal racial attitude of its leader, Jan Hofmeyr. During the Cape elections of 1898, Jabavu backed the Bond candidates. Rhodes retaliated by sponsoring a rival newspaper with the assistance of Jabavu's long-term political adversary W. B. Rubusana. Because Jabavu was a Mfengu and Rubusana was a Xhosa, this rivalry acquired a nasty ethnic tinge. 
Jabavu's association with the Afrikaner Bond led to the closure of 'Imvo' by martial law during the South African War of 1899-1902. He became increasingly dependent on his white associates and this dependence, together with his jealousy of Rubusana, caused him to take idiosyncratic stands which lost him the confidence of many of his supporters. Jabavu refused, for example, to attend the inaugural meeting in 1912 of the South African Native National Congress (subsequently the African National Congress), and insisted on setting up his own organization instead. He later supported the notorious 1913 'Native Land Act', which was introduced by his ally J. W. Sauer. In 1914 he challenged Rubusana, the sitting member, for the only African-held seat in the Cape provincial legislature. This split the African vote and threw the seat to the white candidate. 
Jabavu married twice: in 1885 to Elda Sakuba (1864-1900), with whom he had four sons (the eldest of whom was Dandson Don Tengo Jabavu), and in 1901 to Gertrude Joninga, with whom he had three daughters. He died quite suddenly on 10 September 1921 while attending a meeting at the University College of Fort Hare. Though his historical reputation has been soured by the obstinacy and jealousy of his later years, his place in the pantheon of black journalism and African nationalism remains secure. 


@@@@@


doc= 53764


Mehmet Ali (c.1769-1849), Ottoman viceroy and founder of the Egyptian royal family, was born in the Macedonian port of Kavalla, though the actual date of his birth has been obscured. Mehmet Ali himself often gave the date as 1769, the year in which both Napoleon and Wellington were born. Son of Ibrahim Agha, commander of a detachment of infantry irregulars and part-time tobacco merchant, and Khadra, a colonel's daughter in Kavalla, there is no record of Mehmet Ali's siblings. His father is said to have been of Albanian extraction, his mother a native of Kavalla. As Ottoman governor of Egypt (1805-48) Mehmet Ali oversaw a radical restructuring of the province's administration and economy which transformed Egypt into a regional power. At its height, Mehmet Ali's empire embraced the Red Sea coast of Arabia, the Sudan, Crete, and all of greater Syria. His expansionism led him into direct conflict with Lord Palmerston in the two Syrian campaigns (1831-3 and 1840), defining moments of British policy towards the Eastern question. Though ultimately divested of his holdings beyond the frontiers of Egypt and the Sudan, Mehmet Ali succeeded in establishing a hereditary governorship which set Egypt on a course of autonomy from the Ottoman empire. 
There is little in his upbringing to recommend Mehmet Ali for such greatness. His early training in the tobacco trade was combined with a military career, much like his father. He entered state service against Aegean corsairs at seventeen, and married his only wife, Amina, soon after. The couple had three sons and two daughters: Ibrahim ('b'. 1789/90), Ahmad Tosun ('b'. 1793), Isma'il Kamil ('b'. 1795), Tevhide ('b'. 1797), and Nazli ('b'. 1799). He never took another wife, but Mehmet Ali had a further seventeen sons and thirteen daughters with a series of concubines -- the last when he was in his sixties -- yet he was survived by only three sons and one daughter. 
In March 1801 Mehmet Ali landed in Egypt as second in command of an Albanian detachment with the Anglo-Ottoman force dispatched to evacuate the survivors of Napoleon's ill-fated French expedition of 1798 to 1801. He took command of the Albanian force and entered the political struggle between the Ottoman governor and the Mamluk households. With the support of the notability of Cairo he ultimately won the governorship of Egypt in May 1805, a post he would retain for the next forty-three years. In his first six years in office he faced opposition from the Mamluk military households that had been displaced by the French, and from the British government who feared the return of the French and considered the Mamluks as the only basis for effective local government. A British force landed in Alexandria to support a sympathetic Mamluk coalition in a bid to overthrow Mehmet Ali in March 1807. A column of 1400 soldiers under the command of General Fraser moved on Rosetta where, abandoned by their Mamluk allies, they met strong local resistance and were forced to retreat. Mehmet Ali dispatched troops to engage the British forces in a second attempt on Rosetta in April in which some 400 British soldiers were killed and a similar number taken prisoner. The survivors retreated to Alexandria, whence they entered into negotiations for a release of prisoners in exchange for the withdrawal of the British force from Alexandria, which was concluded on 14 September 1807. 
This victory strengthened Mehmet Ali's domestic position and by 1811 he was sufficiently confident to attempt campaigns abroad. That year, at the request of Sultan Mahmud II, he sent an army headed by his son Tosun to Arabia to restore the holy cities of Mecca and Medina to Ottoman rule, and in 1820 he sent a campaign force to occupy the Sudan. In 1822 the sultan turned to his governor in Egypt for assistance in suppressing the Greek insurrection. The Egyptian army was first sent to occupy Crete (1822-4), and then to quell the rebellion in Morea. The campaign force of 30,000 men and 200 vessels reached Athens by 5 June 1827, and both Crete and Morea were added to Mehmet Ali's domains. 
Britain and France were divided in their policies towards Mehmet Ali. Extensive French technical assistance to Egypt led Britain to view Mehmet Ali as a French client astride a strategic route between the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean. British policy towards the Egyptians in Greece was also coloured by philhellenism at home, which had been intensified by the poetry (and death) of Lord Byron. These differences would prove an enduring tension in Anglo-French relations, though in 1827 the powers agreed to take joint action in Greece. A fleet was dispatched, led by Admiral Codrington, which destroyed the Egyptian and Ottoman ships anchored at Navarino (20 October 1827) and negotiated the repatriation of the surviving forces of Mehmet Ali's eldest son, Ibrahim Pasha, to Egypt. Mehmet Ali sought compensation for his sacrifices in Greece with new territory in Syria. When this was denied him by Mahmud, the viceroy re-equipped his armed forces and sent an expedition up the Palestine coast in October 1831, again under Ibrahim Pasha's command. The Egyptian army not only conquered all of greater Syria over the next ten months, but also swept across Anatolia to within 100 miles of the Ottoman capital of Constantinople. The first 'Syrian crisis' revealed the vulnerability of Ottoman territorial integrity and was instrumental in shaping British policy towards the Eastern question. Secretary of state Palmerston, faced with French support for Mehmet Ali and Russian interests in gaining access to the Dardanelles, feared that European ambitions in Ottoman territories could provoke conflict between the powers. 
In May 1838 Mehmet Ali informed the British and French consuls of his intention to seek independence from the Ottoman empire, prompting the Ottoman army to move against the Egyptians at Nasib (24 June 1839). The Ottoman army was defeated, the sultan died suddenly before hearing the news, and the Ottoman fleet reacted to the power vacuum by defecting to the Egyptian navy. Palmerston rallied Austria, Russia, and Prussia to back the young Sultan Abdul Mejid, who offered Mehmet Ali hereditary rule over Egypt and southern Syria in exchange for a withdrawal from northern Syria. Mehmet Ali refused the terms, and Palmerston responded by ordering a blockade of Syrian ports and inciting local rebellions against Egyptian rule. The British fleet, under Admiral Napier, then bombarded Egyptian forces in Beirut (11 September 1840), and an Anglo-Ottoman force landed to force an Egyptian retreat. Egypt's relations with the Ottoman empire were regulated in an imperial decree (1 June 1841) conferring hereditary rule over Egypt to Mehmet Ali's line, and stripping him of all other possessions except the Sudan. 
Mehmet Ali, now in his seventies, attempted no further reforms. His physical and mental health deteriorated until, in 1847, his son Ibrahim assumed control over Egypt. Ibrahim, who was terminally ill, died, passing the succession to his nephew, Mehmet Ali's grandson Abbas, in December 1848. Mehmet Ali himself died in Alexandria on 2 August 1849 and was buried in the Cairo Citadel in the mosque which bears his name. 


@@@@@


doc= 53765


Muhammad 'Abdallah Hasan (1856-1920/21), religious leader, was born north of Buuhoodle, Somaliland, the eldest son of an Ogaden father, Sheikh 'Abdallah Hasan, and a Dhulbahanta mother, Timiro Seed Magan. Contemporary Britons called him the 'Mad Mullah', but most Somalis referred to him by the Islamic religious titles of 'sayyid' or 'wadaad'. From 1899 to 1920 Sayyid Muhammad led Somalis in a holy war against Christian foreign rule, and in particular against the British administration of the Somaliland protectorate and its local Somali supporters. 
After memorizing the 'Koran', the young Muhammad had set out on a career of peripatetic Islamic learning which, in the early 1890s, brought him to Mecca. There he joined the Salihiyyah, the reformist Sufi brotherhood founded by the Sudanese Muhammad Salih. On his return to Berbera, by then under British colonial protection (1884-1960), he alienated both the Qadiriyyah brotherhood and the British administration through his reformist theological stances. He puritanically objected to any form of indulgence of the senses during devotional practice and insisted that any Muslim who supported or even tolerated Christian rule in his country deserved to be harassed and killed. 
About 1897 Sayyid Muhammad moved inland and founded his own religious settlement in Qoryaweyn. There he began to attract adherents, known as dervishes, who, in joining, submitted to his authority and renounced their clan identity for a religious (Muslim, Salihi) one. Armed hostilities began in 1900. Between 1900 and 1904 the British launched four major expeditions, led by men such as Lieutenant-Colonel E. J. E. Swayne, Brigadier-General W. H. Manning, and Major-General C. Egerton. However, the elusiveness of the enemy and the harsh, dry terrain made supply problems insuperable and doomed any formal, large-scale war effort. The peace agreement of March 1904 gave Sayyid Muhammad an autonomous area near Illig and a sea port. He immediately set out to use these to realize some of his state-building ambitions and to extend his influence. He had surrounded himself with a council of special advisers ('qusuusi') and a personal bodyguard of low-caste people ('gaarhaye'). He had organized the army into four commands and had created seven administrative divisions, each formally associated with the name of one of his many wives (who included Barni Hirsi, the mother of his eldest son, Mahdi). He sent out and received caravans, and his dhows (flying the dervish flag showing a white turban) plied the seas, exporting hides, skins, and gum in return for firearms, food supplies, and clothing. He conducted an active diplomacy. Apart from writing letters in Arabic, occasionally containing elaborate Islamic theological and jurisprudential arguments about the duty of holy war, he composed a wide range of oral poetry in Somali, from peaceful overture to withering attack. 
In 1909, Sayyid Muhammad's Somali opponents, with Italian and British aid, persuaded the leader of the Salihiyyah in Mecca to excommunicate him by letter. Although some Somalis believed that the letter was falsified, it sowed discord in the ranks of his followers. In the following years he moved his headquarters to Talah and institutionalized his power by building more than forty fortresses (where possible surrounded by cultivated fields) in different parts of the country. As war approached in 1914, he intensified his international diplomacy and participated in the international pan-Islamic movement which supported the Ottoman empire against its Christian enemies. It was not until early 1920 that the British were able to move against the sayyid, with aerial bombardments of Talah and other forts. Thus his movement was broken, though he himself escaped. In December 1920 or January 1921, while settled in Imey, the man who had dominated the history of Somaliland for twenty-one years fell sick, probably with influenza, and died near Imey. 
Somalis remember Sayyid Muhammad in many ways: as the instigator of ruinous inter-clan warfare as well as the untiring defender of their religion, and as a ruthless local potentate as well as the first fighter for their national independence. Perhaps he was all of this and more. One of his poems contains his own reflections on his career: 'Although I failed to have a flag flown from here to Nairobi, did I not gain religious honour and paradise in victory and defeat? Although I failed to obtain the luscious pastures of the 'Iid and the Nugaal as grazing, did I not successfully ride my steed out to war? Although I failed to get people to show me sympathy and acknowledge their kinship with me, did I not gain God's mercy and [the reward of seeing] the Prophet's countenance? (Jaamac Cumar Ciise, 293)' 



@@@@@


doc= 53766


'Urabi, Ahmad Muhammad (1841-1911), army officer and politician in Egypt, was born on 31 March 1841 (7 Safar 1257 according to the Islamic calendar) in the village of Huriyyah Razna, near the delta town of Zaqaziq, the second of four sons and six daughters of al-Sayyid Muhammad 'Urabi (died 1848), religious scholar and graduate of the famous Cairo mosque-university of al-Azhar, and al-Sayyida Fatima Sulayman, one of his three wives. 'Urabi claimed descent from the family of the Prophet Muhammad through a thirteenth-century Iraqi settler in Egypt, though the lineage is disputed. Both parents were native Egyptians of peasant extraction. 
At the age of five 'Urabi entered the Koranic school in the village, where he studied under his father for three years before his father's death of cholera, and then under his elder brother Muhammad's tuition until the age of twelve. He then entered the University of al-Azhar in Cairo, where for two years he was exposed to the rudiments of the Islamic sciences. He abandoned his religious studies in 1854 when the new governor of Egypt, Sa'id Pasha, opened the military to the sons of village headmen. Seizing the new opportunity, 'Urabi enlisted as a common soldier on 6 December 1854. 
In the ten years of Sa'id Pasha's reign ('r'. 1854-63), 'Urabi enjoyed rapid promotion to officer grade. Within six years he was the first native-born Egyptian to reach the rank of 'kaymakam', or lieutenant-colonel, thanks to the patronage of Sa'id Pasha and the French general under whom he served, Suleyman Pasha. Just before Sa'id's death 'Urabi travelled in the governor's retinue to visit the Islamic holy city of Medina in Arabia. In later life he was to look back on this period of royal patronage and rapid promotion as the happiest days of his life. 
With the accession of Isma'il ('r'. 1863-79), native-born officers found promotion obstructed by the Turco-Circassian elites favoured by the new governor. 'Urabi was court-martialled for insubordination following a dispute with a Circassian brigadier, Hushrev Pasha, and sentenced to twenty-one days' imprisonment. While 'Urabi successfully appealed the decision, he earned the enmity of the minister of war. The ambitious 'Urabi received no promotions in the reign of Isma'il, in spite of his service in the Abyssinian campaign (1876). He was seconded to the civil service for three years (1867-70), during which time he married Karima, a lower member of the khedival household. Karima was a milk-sister to the wife of Khedive Tawfiq, Isma'il's son and successor, and served as wet-nurse to Prince Ilhami Pasha. This was not a unique honour: three of the six conspirators later exiled to Ceylon with 'Urabi had also married women of the royal household. 
It was in the reign of Khedive Tawfiq ('r'. 1879-92) that 'Urabi was promoted to his highest rank of full colonel, and during this period he entered the political arena. The economy of Egypt had been largely in British and French hands since 1876, when the Egyptian treasury had been unable to honour its commitments to foreign creditors. In order to satisfy its European creditors, the Egyptian government began to make cuts in expenditure, which led to pay arrears and the threat of reductions in the size of the army that touched native-born Egyptian soldiers and officers. 
In July 1880 the khedive issued a decree limiting military service to four years, which was interpreted by 'Urabi and his fellow officers as a means of preventing native-born Egyptians from ever reaching officer rank. 'Urabi led a group of dissident officers who began to petition the khedive to appoint an Egyptian as minister of war. In January 1881 government plans to arrest 'Urabi and his fellows were leaked to the dissidents, who instructed their soldiers to mutiny. When, on 1 February 1881, 'Urabi and two colleagues were arrested, their troops stormed the ministry of war, seized the military judges, and released their commanders. Tawfiq defused the crisis by appointing the dissidents' candidate as minister of war, though relations between the military and the khedive continued to deteriorate. The dissident officers made common cause with members of the national assembly and landed elites with grievances against European influence or the khedive's rule. These grievances were presented in a military demonstration before the viceregal palace on 9 September 1881 in which Tawfiq was forced to concede to demands for representative government and an enlarged army. 'Urabi then claimed to speak on behalf of Egyptian interests rather than just those of the army. 
'Urabi's anti-European agitation turned against Tawfiq, who was accused of subservience to the powers. This point seemed reinforced by the Anglo-French joint note of 8 January 1882, written by French foreign minister Leon Gambetta, in which the two powers undertook to preserve the khedive on his throne. The initiative had the opposite effect to that intended, raising objections from Egypt's suzerain, the Ottoman sultan, and discrediting Tawfiq and his government. The 'Urabists capitalized on the Gambetta note to force a change of cabinet in February 1882 in which 'Urabi was appointed minister of war. 
Civil order in Egypt began to break down as the military and the khedive became rival poles of authority. Britain and France, fearing for their financial interests in Egypt, dispatched a joint fleet to prop up the khedive. They demanded the resignation of the cabinet on 25 May, calling in particular for 'Urabi to withdraw from Egypt to reduce tensions. 'Urabi responded by denouncing Tawfiq for betraying his country to foreign interests. Tawfiq retreated from Cairo to his palace in Alexandria to be closer to the protection of the European fleet, leaving Egypt under 'Urabi's effective control. Tensions between Egyptians and Europeans erupted in riots in Alexandria (11 June). 'Urabi ordered the building of shore defences to protect Alexandria from attack by sea, which elicited repeated demands from Sir Beauchamp Seymour, the commander of the British fleet in Alexandria, that construction be halted. This led to a series of ultimata and to the bombardment of Alexandria. The French, unwilling to take military action, withdrew their naval squadron and on 11 July the British fleet opened fire, marking the beginning of the British intervention in Egypt which would ultimately lead to a seventy-four-year occupation. 
'Urabi, in control of Cairo and most of Egypt, responded to the British occupation of Alexandria by calling for a general conscription and declaring war on Britain. He obtained a religious ruling ('fatwa') from al-Azhar calling for Tawfiq's deposal as a traitor to his country and religion for bringing about a foreign occupation. Tawfiq, confined to Alexandria and its hinterlands, backed by the British, declared 'Urabi a rebel. This dual authority crisis endured until Sir Garnet Wolseley landed a British force of 20,000 men, who routed 'Urabi's army near the Suez Canal at Tell al-Kebir (13 September 1882). 'Urabi was arrested two days later and subsequently tried for treason, along with a number of his leading supporters. His cause was taken up by a number of sympathetic Britons, particularly Wilfrid Scawen Blunt, who arranged for an English lawyer, A. M. Broadley, to undertake the defence of the group which came to be known as 'Arabi and his friends'. On 3 December 1882 'Urabi pleaded guilty to the charge of rebellion and had his death sentence commuted to perpetual exile, along with six of his colleagues. They and their families were shipped at British expense on a chartered steamer, the 'Mareotis', to Ceylon. 
After nineteen years in exile 'Urabi was pardoned by Khedive 'Abbas II ('r'. 1892-1914) and returned to Egypt on 1 October 1901. In his final years he declined all political activity and applied himself to preserving his rightful place in Egyptian history. He wrote his memoirs and gave autobiographical essays to his friend W. S. Blunt to publish in English and to Jurji Zaydan to publish in his Arabic biographical dictionary of luminaries of the nineteenth century. He died at his home on Jawhar al-Qa'id Street in the Munira district of Cairo, after nine months' illness, on 21 September 1911 and was buried the same day in the Imam al-Shafi'i mosque. 


@@@@@


doc= 53768


Sandile (c.1820-1878), chief of the Ngqika Xhosa, son of Chief Ngqika and his great wife, Sutu, was born in independent Xhosa near the later Fort Beaufort in South Africa. He was installed as chief in 1842 and led the Ngqika Xhosa until his death in battle in 1878. In accordance with Xhosa custom he had several wives and many children. His great wife was Nopasi, the daughter of the Mpondomise chief Myeki and the mother of his great son and heir, Gonya. Although the elder son of the great wife, Sandile was not the eldest son of his father. On Ngqika's premature death in 1828 Sandile was still a minor and the regency was assumed by Maqoma, his elder brother by a junior wife of Ngqika. Relations between the brothers were never good. Maqoma was more forceful both intellectually and physically, but he was also very erratic, and Sandile gradually managed to assert his authority. Shortly before Sandile was born Ngqika was dispossessed of his ancestral lands around the Kat River by Governor Lord Charles Somerset. This grievance gave rise to the 1834-5 Cape Frontier War during Maqoma's regency, and to the 1846-7 Cape Frontier War (known as 'the war of the axe') shortly after Sandile had assumed power. This war ended abruptly when Sandile, who had voluntarily entered the British camp to conduct negotiations, was treacherously imprisoned. His country was annexed to the British crown under the name of British Kaffraria, and the new governor, Sir Harry Smith, embarked on a policy of humiliating the Xhosa chiefs and taking over their powers. 
A crisis erupted in 1850 with the emergence of a Xhosa prophet and witch-finder named Mlanjeni. Sandile refused to attend a meeting called by Smith for fear of being imprisoned a second time, and was immediately deposed by the British. This triggered the 1850-53 Cape Frontier War, the longest and most brutal ever fought on that frontier. Sandile lost more territory, and these losses were compounded as a result of the prophecies of Nongqawuse in 1856-7. Sandile wavered for a long time, but finally committed himself to the prophecies and slaughtered the last of his remaining cattle. The starvation which followed reduced the population of British Kaffraria by two-thirds, from 105,000 to 37,500. Although Sandile escaped imprisonment, his power was broken, and for nearly twenty years he existed as a mere cipher, drinking heavily and clinging ever harder to traditional customs. But in 1877, when King Sarhili of the Gcaleka branch of the Xhosa became embroiled in a war against the British, Sandile rallied to his cause. He entrenched himself in the Isidenge forests near the town of Stutterheim and refused to give up, even after Sarhili himself had surrendered. Sandile was wounded in a skirmish on 29 May 1878, and died of his wounds a few days later. He was buried in the forest on 9 June. Some controversy has arisen concerning the fate of his body, more especially because Lieutenant F. Carrington returned to Britain with a skull reputed to be that of Sandile. It is probable, however, that his body was buried intact. In 1972 a memorial was erected over the grave site. 
Sandile was physically not a strong man, having been born with a club foot. Colonial sources portray him, moreover, as weak-willed and unintelligent. Xhosa oral tradition, however, remembers Sandile with respect and affection. He was one of the few Xhosa chiefs to consistently resist the colonial occupation, and the only one to actually die in battle. As a chief he was generous and unassertive, sensitive to the will of his people and always articulating their aspirations rather than his own. 


@@@@@


doc= 53772


Power, (Frederick) Tyrone Edmond (1869-1931), actor, was born in London on 2 May 1869, the son of Harold Power and his wife, Ethel Levenu, mildly successful entertainers, who in 1877 crossed the Atlantic to seek their fortune with American audiences. He formed the third generation of a theatrical dynasty which originated in the early nineteenth century with his grandfather the first Tyrone Power (1797-1841), and continued into the late twentieth century with his son Tyrone (1914-1958), the popular film star, and his actress granddaughters, Romina and Taryn, and grandson Tyrone jun. ('b'. 1958). 
His parents did not wish Power to endure the hardships of life on the stage, so after a nominal education at Dover College until 1883 he was packed off to an orange ranch in Florida in order to learn the business of fruit-farming. He soon ran away and attached himself to the stock company of a theatre at St Augustine, with which he made his acting debut as Gibson in Charles Hawtrey's 'The Private Secretary' on 29 November 1886. With similar enterprise and aplomb he then proceeded to fashion a rewarding professional career for himself, gaining valuable early experience with two of the leading companies of the day. He had three seasons in 1888-91 with the formidable Czech actress Fanny Janauschek, one of the last great tragediennes in the 'grand style', for whom he opened as Dominie Sampson in 'Guy Mannering' (an adaptation of Sir Walter Scott's novel) at Montreal; he subsequently toured throughout Canada and the United States in tragedies, comedies, and melodramas. He then contrived to obtain a letter of recommendation from Ellen Terry. This he presented to Augustin Daly, the celebrated playwright-director-impresario, whose company he joined in May 1891 to play Sir Oliver Surface in 'The School for Scandal' and with which he remained associated until November 1898, while fulfilling occasional engagements elsewhere. Under Daly he took a full part in the manager's characteristically mixed repertory of contemporary plays and classics, accompanying him on American and European tours and playing a wide range of major and supporting roles. These included Posket in Sir Arthur Wing Pinero's 'The Magistrate' and Brooke Twombley in 'The Cabinet Minister' by the same author, Much the Miller in Tennyson's 'The Foresters', Frederick in 'As You Like It', Holofernes in 'Love's Labour's Lost', Antonio in 'Much Ado about Nothing', Christopher Sly in 'The Taming of the Shrew', Caliban in 'The Tempest', and the Host of the Garter Inn in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor'. In 1894 he gave his first performance with the company in London, where in June he also took the bold step of hiring the Princess's Theatre to mount and assume the lead in his own play, 'The Texan'; the venture was not a success. He then appeared in several productions with Herbert Beerbohm Tree, both on tour and at Her Majesty's, and acted in a command performance before Queen Victoria at Balmoral. 
After returning to America, Power became a member of Minnie Maddern Fiske's company, appearing in Hermann Sudermann's 'Magda', 'Frou-Frou' by Henri Meilhac and Ludovic Halevy, and other plays, before securing a particular triumph at the Fifth Avenue Theatre in September 1899 with his characterization of Lord Steyne in 'Becky Sharp', an adaptation by Langdon Mitchell from Thackeray's 'Vanity Fair'. In 1900-02 he undertook an extensive tour of Australia and New Zealand, co-starring with his first wife, Edith Crane (whom he had married in 1898) in an astutely chosen repertory programme, which included 'inter alia' dramatizations of Thomas Hardy's 'Tess of the D'Urbervilles' and George Du Maurier's 'Trilby', H. J. Byron's comedy 'Our Boys', 'The Taming of the Shrew', and a current sensation, 'The Only Way', F. C. Wills and F. Langbridge's version of 'A Tale of Two Cities'. This was followed by an engagement in June/July 1902 at the Lyceum Theatre in London as Bassanio in 'The Merchant of Venice', opposite Sir Henry Irving as Shylock and Ellen Terry as Portia. Back in New York, Power rejoined Mrs Fiske as Judas Iscariot in her production of William Winter's 'Mary of Magdala' at the Manhattan Theatre in November, and played the title-role in a tour of Stephen Phillips's verse drama 'Ulysses', which opened at the Garden Theatre in September 1903. Power then acted as leading man to a succession of starring actresses: to Julia Marlowe in Maria Lovell's 'Ingomar the Barbarian' and Paul Kester's 'When Knighthood was in Flower' in 1904, to Mrs Leslie Carter in David Belasco's 'Adrea' in 1904-5, and to Henrietta Crosman in 'The Christian Pilgrim', a morality play based on 'The Pilgrim's Progress', in 1907. Other conspicuous successes in the ensuing years included his Robert Smith, the Drainman, in C. R. Kennedy's 'The Servant in the House' in 1908, Brutus in William Faversham's production of 'Julius Caesar' in 1912-13, and Abu Hasan in the American premiere of Oscar Asche's 'Chu-Chin-Chow' (music by Frederick Norton) in 1917. 
After the First World War, with the advent of greater realism in performance, Power's romantic, somewhat rhetorical style of acting seemed increasingly outdated, and his stage work became more intermittent, although he repeated his Brutus in revivals of 'Julius Caesar' in 1918 and 1927, and in 1922 could still command such important roles as Sir Anthony Absolute in 'The Rivals', and Claudius in 'Hamlet'. Turning to the cinema, he moved to Hollywood, where he appeared in numerous silent films, notably D. W. Griffith's 'Dream Street' (1921), Henry King's 'Fury' (1923), Raoul Walsh's 'The Wanderer' (1925), and J. S. Blackton's 'Bride of the Storm' (1926). He was beginning to adapt to sound, as in Walsh's 'The Big Trail' (1930), when he died in Hollywood of a heart attack on 30 December 1931. By then his personal life had become increasingly turbulent, plagued by alcoholism and financial troubles. After the untimely death in January 1912 of Edith Crane, to whom he was happily married for almost fourteen years, he had contracted other, shorter-lived marriages, first to the actress Patia (Helen Emma) Reaume, with whom he had a son but from whom he was divorced in 1920, then, following a long, adulterous affair, to Bertha Knight, whom he married in 1921. Blessed with a tall, imposing physique, handsome features, a strong, resonant voice, and a natural dignity of bearing, Power was without doubt an accomplished actor in his prime. Though ultimately denied the accolade of greatness, he none the less made a distinctive contribution to the character of the American theatre while significantly enriching his own family traditions. 


@@@@@


doc= 53773


Meynell, Viola Mary Gertrude (1885-1956), novelist and short-story writer, was born on 15 October 1885 at 21 Upper Phillimore Place, London, the fifth of the seven children of Wilfrid Meynell (1852-1948), journalist and author, and his wife, Alice Christiana Gertrude Meynell, nee Thompson (1847-1922), poet and essayist. Her parents built a house at 47 Palace Court in Kensington in 1889, and she attended the convent school of the Sisters of Sion as a day student from about 1893 until 1901. She grew up in a strongly Roman Catholic literary atmosphere, helping her parents with their many journalistic tasks from an early age; many of her later novels and short stories reflect her Catholic upbringing, exploring themes of moral transgression and the possibility of redemption and the interaction of divine providence in the individual's life. She was especially close to her mother, adopting a great deal of her philosophy and values. Her first novels, 'Martha Vine' (1910) and 'Cross-in-Hand Farm' (1911), are relatively simple tales of love and morality, although already marked by the acute psychological analyses that are her fiction's great strength; her mother was supportive of her early fiction, but was concerned that it was too self-revelatory. With 'Lot Barrow' (1913), she turned to an ironic rural tragedy, in the manner of Thomas Hardy, and began to find a wider and respectful audience; her reputation was solidified with the much lighter comic romance, 'Modern Lovers' (1914). 
In 1911 Meynell's father bought property in Greatham, Sussex, and she and the family thereafter divided their time between the country home and London. An early engagement to the Irish-born painter Charles Stabb was broken off by 1912. Many literary friends from London came to stay with the Meynells at Greatham: D. H. Lawrence lived there for six months in 1915, and a story he wrote during that time, 'England, My England', was perceived by the Meynells as a cruel attack on their family. Among Meynell's good friends in this period were Maitland Radford (whose marriage proposal she turned down in 1915), the novelists Ivy Low and Gladys Huntington, and the poet and children's author Eleanor Farjeon. 
Although her brother Francis was a vocal pacifist, Meynell produced two books supporting the war effort: 'Julian Grenfell' (1917) a short, impassioned biography of the soldier hero; and a translation of Eugene Lemercier's 'Lettres d'un soldat' (1917). The novels she wrote during the war -- 'Columbine' (1915) and 'Narcissus' (1916) -- dealt directly with questions of sin and moral responsibility, and reflect the sombre mood of the times. She was engaged to her publisher, Martin Secker, but broke off with him just before their planned 1919 wedding. Her short volume of 'Verses' (1919) was respectfully reviewed. 
Meynell's next two novels, 'Second Marriage' (1918) and 'Antonia' (1921), were experiments in wedding psychological realism to mythic and allusive plot structures; 'Antonia' was roundly damned by critics, who found it incoherent. Meynell surprised family and friends when she finally went through with a marriage proposal, marrying a local Sussex farmer and merchant who was neither literary nor Catholic, John William Dallyn (1879-1947), on 28 February 1922; she gave birth to a son, Jacob, in January 1923. Her mother's death in November 1922 was a turning point in her life. On the one hand, it liberated her artistically, as she turned to the short story (with the 1924 collection, 'Young Mrs Cruse' and four later collections) and used it as a vehicle to portray her personal experiences more directly than she had done with her novels; on the other hand, her mother's memory continued to haunt her, and she spent some years researching and writing 'Alice Meynell: a Memoir' (1929) and rededicating her time and efforts to the Meynell family. She and her husband separated finally in 1929 (as a Catholic, she never considered divorce, and continued to use her married name everywhere but on her published work), and she moved back to London while her son attended the Froebel school there. She lived at 14 St Mary Abbot's Terrace until 1930, when she moved back into the family home at Palace Court. By 1935 she had returned to Greatham, and lived there with only brief exceptions until her death. Much of her time at Greatham was occupied with caring for her aged and increasingly infirm father. 
Meynell wrote fewer novels, producing instead reviews and articles for magazines and newspapers, and turning to editing projects such as an edition of the letters of J. M. Barrie (1942), which she took on at the request of her good friend Lady Cynthia Asquith, and two volumes of letters addressed to Sir Sydney Carlyle Cockerell (1940 and 1956), to whom she was very close in the last few decades of her life. But during this period she also produced what may be her masterpiece, the ambitious novel 'Follow thy Fair Sun' (1935), the fullest development of her psychological insights and her Catholic themes. She radically revised it -- shortening it and eliminating its allegorical elements -- and republished it under the title 'Lovers' in 1944. She also produced more short stories, many of which, set on farms or in small villages, give insight into her life and experiences; her later stories are increasingly dark in tone and outlook. 
Meynell's health deteriorated in the late 1940s, and she was eventually diagnosed as having muscular dystrophy. Despite a growing weakness and paralysis, she wrote one more novel ('Ophelia', 1951), a memoir of her father's friendship with the poet Francis Thompson (1952), and more short stories. Four of her stories appeared in the 'New Yorker' in 1955-6; one of these, 'The Veranda', is directly autobiographical in its depiction of her illness. She died at her home, Humphrey's Homestead, Greatham, on 27 October 1956, and was buried the same month in the Catholic cemetery in nearby Houghton. At her death, she was working on a volume of 'Collected Stories', published in 1957. Her body of work includes a dozen novels and some forty short stories in addition to her memoirs and miscellaneous poetry and prose. Her fame was at its height during the decade following the First World War, but her later work also found many readers and much critical acclaim for the beauty of its style and the depth of its probings into human motivation. 


@@@@@


doc= 53776


Kaye, Sir Cecil (1868-1935), intelligence officer in India, was born on 27 May 1868, at Rosevale, Madron, near Penzance, Cornwall, the son of William Kaye, an officer of the Bengal civil service, and his wife, Jane Margaret, 'nee' Beckett. He entered Winchester School in March 1881. In March 1889 he joined the 2nd battalion, the Derbyshire regiment, as an officer. In 1892 he transferred to the Indian army and saw active service in the fierce campaigns of 1897 to 1898 against the tribes of the north-west frontier. He was awarded a medal with clasp for his services. From 1900 to 1901 he was a member of the British contingent of the international expeditionary force sent to suppress the Boxer uprising in northern China. At Tientsin he met Margaret Sarah, the daughter of the Revd T. Bryson, of the London Missionary Society; they married in 1905, and had one son and two daughters. In 1908 Kaye was appointed to the general staff at Indian army headquarters, Simla, where he served as deputy adjutant to the quartermaster-general in the intelligence branch. 
Upon the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 Kaye was appointed deputy chief censor, India. In this capacity he worked closely with the government of India's political intelligence office, the department of criminal intelligence (DCI), which was then under the distinguished leadership of Sir Charles Cleveland. Kaye made a reputation in India for his ability to cipher and decipher secret messages. At the end of the war he visited London, where he studied the home government's facilities for signals intelligence; the experience made him conscious, as he admitted to close friends, that he was only a beginner in the field. Kaye was made CSI in 1917 and CBE in 1919. 
In 1919 Kaye was seeking retirement from the Indian army when, to his surprise, he was offered the directorship of the department of central intelligence (as the DCI was named after March 1918), following Cleveland's resignation. The government of India had initially offered the post to David Petrie of the Indian police, who was too exhausted to take it. On accepting, Kaye was placed on special duty under the home department on 29 September 1919. His appointment was initially temporary, but on 7 May 1920 he was confirmed in this office. Though he never acquired Cleveland's high reputation, Kaye was an efficient head of intelligence and was popular with his colleagues. He played a significant role in shaping the government of India's restrained response to Russian Bolshevism. As early as February 1923 he wrote that there were few Bolshevik agents in India of whom the DCI did not know. All the available evidence indicates that his conclusion was accurate. 
In 1924 Kaye retired as director of central intelligence and was knighted for his work. He was succeeded by David Petrie. At the beginning of 1925 he began work on 'Communism in India', which appeared the following year as a secret publication of the government of India. In this volume he summarized the conclusions of his department about its work against the Bolsheviks and their Indian agents for the period 1919 to 1924. He retired from the army in 1925 and, after a short period in England, took service as a minister of the small Indian princely state of Tonk. On retiring from service there, he settled at Srinagar in the foothills of the Himalayas. He wrote weekly letters to the journal 'Near East and India'. Kaye and his wife continued to be popular figures in the social life of the British government at its twin centres of New Delhi and Simla. On 5 March 1935, a few days after his daughter's wedding, he died of a heart attack at New Delhi. At his request the funeral took place at Sanawar in the Simla hills. An obituarist noted his 'peculiar faculty of putting his ear to the ground and ascertaining the trend of opinion and movements, whether open or subterranean', going on to observe that his 'small neat handwriting was an index of his precision' ('The Times', 6 March 1935). His daughter Mary Margaret (Mollie) Kaye (1908-2004) gained repute as a popular novelist and wrote an autobiography, 'The Sun in the Morning' (1990), which covers the period of her father's active career. 


@@@@@


doc= 53778


Bates, Daisy May (1859-1951), anthropologist and social worker among Aboriginal Australians, was born around 16 October 1859, at Roscrea, co. Tipperary, Ireland, the third of four children of Edward Dwyer, shopkeeper and small farmer, and his wife Bridget, 'nee' Hunt. Both parents died within five years and relatives cared for the children. Daisy received a secondary education which added linguistic facility to her characteristic lifetime oral fluency, selective memory, and aristocratic values. Born a Roman Catholic she claimed Anglicanism and the O'Dwyer surname. 
Bates alleged that her migration to Australia was necessitated by tuberculosis, but her longevity under harsh conditions suggests that this was part of her increasingly fictitious persona. She sailed on the 'Almora' for Queensland, disembarking at Townsville in January 1883. While a governess on Fanning Downs station near Charters Towers, on 13 March 1884 she married according to Anglican rites Edwin Henry Murrant (1864-1902), a stockman who became notorious in the South African War as Breaker Morant ['see 'Morant, Harry Harbord]. They soon separated, and their union remained unknown until 1978. 
On 17 February 1885 Daisy bigamously married John Bates (1856-1935), drover, in the Anglican church, Nowra, New South Wales. Their son, Arnold Hamilton Bates, was born at Bathurst on 26 August 1886. Sporadic family relationships virtually ceased from 1902. 
In 1894 Daisy Bates returned to England, gaining journalistic experience that would later sustain her when she contributed 270 newspaper articles on Aborigines. She arrived in Perth in 1899 to investigate claims in 'The Times' of atrocities against Kimberley Aborigines. After visiting the north-west with her husband, she accepted an invitation from Perth's Catholic bishop M. Gibney to spend three months at the Trappist Beagle Bay mission, which enabled her to gain first-hand knowledge of the position of Aborigines. 
Yet, when 'The Times' published further allegations during May 1904, Bates surprisingly wrote defending pastoralist and government Aboriginal relations. Possibly these opinions recommended her for official employment, because she was appointed by the government of Western Australia to collect ethnographic and linguistic data. Across five years she visited Aboriginal communities, amassing data for a government-sponsored book, for which she sought advice from Andrew Lang. 
Bates's project became diverted in 1910, when she was assigned to A. R. (Radcliffe-)Brown's Western Australian anthropological expedition. Their friction is legendary; the distressing conditions among exiled diseased Aborigines on Dorre and Bernier islands influenced her towards welfare activities. Insight into antipathy between Bates and Brown was provided by a fellow expeditioner, Grant Watson, and by later anthropological evaluations of White and Needham. 
The interlude in Bates's official work proved disastrous, because the incoming government terminated her appointment in 1912, reneging on publishing her book. So commenced her self-imposed years of tented isolation and penury at Eucla and Ooldea, a bizarre attraction for train passengers, including whistle-stop visits by royalty. 
From 1932 Bates was befriended by a journalist, Ernestine Hill, who popularized her seclusion and affectionate grandmotherly Aboriginal title, Kabbarli. Bates was appointed CBE in 1934, and from 1936 she received a meagre government weekly allowance of $2, later $5 5's'., to prepare her papers for the National Library of Australia (fifty-two boxes eventuated). 
Bates is judged harshly from her later newspaper notes and 'The Passing of the Aborigines' (1938), but her Ooldea years belong to her old age when both she and her writings approached mythology. Her ill-fated memoir, 'The Native Tribes of Western Australia' (1985), based upon participant observation, only needed careful editing to establish its significance. Her work remains controversial, although championed by feminist writers. Bates shared the contemporary opinion that the Aboriginal peoples were doomed; she was contemptuous of people of mixed heritage and preferred male informants; she camped distant from 'her' people. She later publicized Aboriginal cannibalism, which provided fuel for racists, but which was a travesty of reality. 
Blue-eyed and slightly built, Bates was 5 feet 3 inches tall, a grand eccentric, aptly described in her bush setting, equipped with umbrella, 'gloved, veiled, tailored, sailor-hatted, cravatted, shirt-waisted, voluminously skirted' (Hill, 3). She passed her final years in mock gentility in Adelaide, where she died at the Hydro Sanatorium, Prospect, on 18 April 1951 from myocardial degeneration and senility, leaving $66. She was buried on 20 April 1951 at North Road cemetery, Nailsworth, Adelaide. 


@@@@@


doc= 53779


Sprimont, Nicholas (bap. 1715, d. 1771), goldsmith and porcelain manufacturer, was baptized in Liege on 23 January 1715, the son of Pierre Sprimont and Gertrude Goffin, and may have been apprenticed there to his uncle Nicholas Joseph Sprimont ('c'.1678-1744). Given his knowledge of French silver and porcelain it is likely that he also trained in Paris. His presence in London is recorded in 1742, when he took on his first apprentice, James Lamistre, and in November married Ann Protin at Knightsbridge Chapel. Sprimont entered his mark at Goldsmiths' Hall on 25 January 1743, when he was working in Compton Street, Soho. In September 1744 he stood godfather to Sophie, daughter of the French sculptor Louis Francois Roubiliac, at the Huguenot church in Spring Gardens; this suggests that he himself was a Huguenot. It is known that one model used by him while he was proprietor of the Chelsea Porcelain Manufactory was based on a Roubiliac original -- that of the painter William Hogarth's pug dog Trump, which dates from 1747-50 (V&A). In 1745 it was stipulated that a large panel of Chelsea porcelain should be incorporated into the base relief of Roubiliac's monument to Bishop Hough in Worcester Cathedral. 
Sprimont's documented silver is rare and bears date marks for 1743 to 1747. Of the four salts in the Royal Collection at Windsor Castle (1742-3) one, supported on a crayfish, is similar to salts made in the early years of the Chelsea Porcelain Manufactory. The crayfish are so lifelike that they may well have been cast from nature. The sauceboats and stands in the Royal Collection at Buckingham Palace (1743-5), in the form of shells on dolphins, support figures of Venus and Adonis. These salts and sauceboats form part of a larger service made for Frederick, prince of Wales, on which Sprimont worked in collaboration with the goldsmith Paul Crespin (1693/4-1770). The centrepiece of 1741-2 bears Crespin's mark but the shell support under the bowl has Turin marks and may be the work of Lorenzo Lavi, who later worked in Paris. Dominated by a central figure of Poseidon the bowl is supported by four dolphins and the raised arms of two mermaids. Four dishes that complete the service are unmarked but have been attributed to Sprimont. This royal service was evidently a complex combined effort incorporating the work of several foreign craftsmen. A payment of $149 to Sprimont, recorded in the receipt book of Charles, fifth Lord Baltimore, in January 1745, was probably for this royal service (particularly as Baltimore made an earlier payment to Paul Crespin in April 1743 for $89 3's'.). Lord Baltimore served as gentleman of the bedchamber to the prince of Wales and may have served as his agent for this commission. Other important commissions include a tea kettle (1745), formerly in the Russian royal collection (Hermitage Museum, St Petersburg); a set of six shell-shaped sauceboats (1746-7) made for Thomas Watson, earl of Winchilsea and Nottingham (Boston Museum of Fine Arts); and the 1747 centrepiece made for the second earl of Ashburnham (V&A). The latter is in the form of a tureen supported by young goats and may have been intended for use as a fruit basket. The Ashburnham centrepiece is close in design to a soup tureen made for the duke of Somerset, dated 1740 and marked by Paul Crespin (Toledo Museum of Art, Ohio). An epergne made by the royal goldsmiths John Parker and Edward Wakelin for the duke of Bolton in 1760 has a similarly complex design. The similarities of these elaborate centrepieces suggest that Sprimont may have designed all three but close examination reveals no connection in their casting, finishing, and facture. 
Sprimont's involvement with the foundation of the Chelsea Porcelain Manufactory probably dates from September 1744, when his presence in Chelsea is first recorded; he leased a house in Church Lane East, for which he took out an insurance policy. He was encouraged to venture into porcelain making by a 'casual acquaintance with a chemist' who has been named as d'Ostermann, a German (Mallet, 'Dictionary', 432). The Huguenot Charles Gouyn (died 1785), a jeweller from Dieppe, was senior partner in the enterprise until about 1748, when he left to set up the 'girl in a swing' factory in the West End. In 1751 Gouyn described himself in a newspaper advertisement as 'late Proprietor and Chief Manager of the Chelsea-House'. 
The earliest products of the Chelsea Porcelain Manufactory are marked by an incised triangle and include salt cellars in the form of crayfish based on a silver prototype. By 1747 Sprimont was also occupying Monmouth House, Lawrence Street, Chelsea -- at that time the factory showroom -- which backed onto the Church Lane property. Although production was in Chelsea sales were later conducted from a warehouse in Pall Mall, and the Lawrence Street site became a manufactory from 1749. The business was closed for a year in 1749-50 for reorganization and expansion. 
Contemporary newspapers advertised the range of new stock, which was marked with a raised anchor. The earliest advertisement, of 1749, lists luxury products including tea, coffee, and chocolate services, plates, dishes, and all table utensils. Many of these pieces were based on Meissen prototypes. In 1754 porcelain toys, snuffboxes, smelling bottles, etwees, trinkets, enamel-painted watches, and porcelain hafts for table and dessert knives and forks were also listed. These pieces were marked with an anchor in underglaze red. A scent bottle and candle nozzle found on the site of the property in Church Lane East suggests that the 'red anchor' toys were made there. Such toys had been made in silver for export by Sprimont's former business associate Paul Crespin. Traditionally supplied by jewellers, such stock may have been inspired also by Sprimont's brother Jean Piers, who was a working jeweller in Liege. The Chelsea toys were intended for wholesale to jewellers, goldsmiths, toyshops, and cutlers. 
The Chelsea porcelain was designed to appeal to rich, fashionable, and aristocratic clients and to replace expensive foreign imports. Clients included Queen Charlotte, who in 1763 ordered a service for her brother Duke Adolphus Frederick IV of Mecklenburg-Strelitz. About 1752-3 Sprimont addressed an anonymous plea to the government to curb the import of porcelain from the Meissen factory entitled 'The case of the undertaker of the Chelsea manufacture of porcelain ware'. Meissen was brought into the country by patrons for their own use but inevitably sold on at auction and by the London chinamen. Sprimont wrote: 'considerable parcels are now allowed to pass at the Custom House, as for private use, by which means the shops abound with new stock, and public sales are advertised at the very beginning of the winter, and in large quantities. (Jewitt, 171-2)' About the same time Sprimont deliberately arranged to copy examples of Meissen porcelain. Sir Everard Fawkener wrote to Dresden on behalf of the Chelsea Porcelain Manufactory, asking the British envoy, Sir Charles Hanbury-Williams, to send 'over fifty or threescore pounds' worth of models for copying' (Clarke, 111). Sprimont also arranged to borrow pieces in private ownership, from Henry Fox at Holland House, Kensington. From 1756, during the Seven Years' War, supplies of Meissen porcelain ceased and even French competition was virtually eliminated. Sprimont responded by developing a line in vases in the French manner. He continued to attract financial support for his venture; Sir Everard Fawkener, a rich Turkey merchant and secretary to the duke of Cumberland, paid Sprimont sums totalling $1495 between 1746 and 1748. Fawkener held a large stock in the manufactory until 1757, when it closed for a year due to Sprimont's illness. When it reopened a gold anchor was used as the mark. 
Sprimont was an accomplished draughtsman. A signed design for a tureen that bears the arms of Thomas Coke, earl of Leicester (Sprimont's landlord in Chelsea; V&A), must date from 1744-59 and could have been intended for silver or for porcelain. Another signed drawing shows two glasses on a silver dish decorated with vine leaves and grapes (Society of Antiquaries, London). Sprimont was also a skilled modeller but, except in the earliest years, it is unlikely that he had time to design and model for the Chelsea manufactory himself as well as manage the enterprise. He directed the design and modelling by recruiting the best foreign craftsmen, including the Brussels-born figure modeller Joseph Willems, who eventually left for Tournai in 1766 after working for Chelsea for over fifteen years. The decorating studio was managed by a member of the Flemish Duvivier family. In the 1760s the modeller responsible for the French-style vases may have been Flanchet, described by a contemporary as a pupil of the French court goldsmith Jean Claude Duplessis. There was a workforce of about a hundred at Chelsea during the early 1750s. 
Sprimont used his own skills to promote those of the next generation. He provided training in designing and painting -- 'arts very much wanted here' -- for thirty boys from parish and charity schools (Tait, 26-7). One of these, William Browne, described his experiences in a letter of 1772 to the earl of Charlemont: 'I served an apprenticeship to Mr Sprimont of Chelsea who... was the first person who brought English china to the perfection it now has arrived at. Under him, I was made master of the various branches of this art, and though painting was my particular department in his manufactory, yet with attention I have obtained a thorough practical knowledge of the whole process. (ibid.)' 

A painting of a man seated with two ladies, flanked by Chelsea porcelain vases, has recently been identified as showing Nicholas Sprimont with his wife and his sister-in-law Susanna Protin. It dates from about 1759 and features elaborate porcelain vases associated with the Chelsea gold anchor period (1758-69), when the addition of bone ash made the paste better able to retain its shape during the firing process. One of these vases is closely based on a French model produced at the Vincennes factory by Duplessis. The lady carrying the pot-pourri vase -- identified as Sprimont's sister-in-law Susanna -- played an active part in the management of the Chelsea Porcelain Manufactory. In 1751 her signature is found on the apprenticeship indenture of Richard Dyer; in August 1769 she was signatory of the transferral of the lease on the Chelsea factory to the new owner, the jeweller James Cox. Susanna lived with the Sprimonts for the last few years of Nicholas's life, and he recognized her support by leaving her $1500 in his will. The identification of the sitter as Sprimont is reinforced by his evident ill health. Sprimont is thought to have suffered from chronic gout; his lameness is mentioned in a press notice in January 1763, as it impeded development of the manufactory. 
Besides his own portrait Sprimont had a considerable collection of Italian, French, Flemish, and Dutch paintings, including works by Poussin and Watteau. These furnished his house in Chelsea and, from 1762, his property in Richmond, Surrey, on the terrace overlooking the bridge. In December 1758 he announced his intention to sell 'all his Pictures... in order to enable him to carry on his great Undertaking in the Chelsea Porcelain Manufactory till March next' (Tait, 27). This sale was cancelled and the paintings were eventually sold at Christies in March 1771, when they raised $1239. The spate of newspaper advertisements for the Chelsea manufactory that mention Sprimont's name demonstrate his ability to promote his venture. 
In April 1769 a notice of sale of the Chelsea porcelain factory, including the models, mills, kilns, and presses, appeared in the London press. The finished porcelain was sold to a Piccadilly dealer, Thomas Morgan, who made a considerable profit, and James Cox, jeweller, bought all the workshops and equipment later that year. The death of Sprimont's manager, Francis Thomas, in January 1770 led Cox to sell the factory to William Duesbury and John Heath, of Derby, in the following month. The manufactory continued in their ownership until 1784, when the Lawrence Street buildings were demolished. 
After Sprimont's death, on 22 June 1771, Susanna Protin married his friend the upholsterer Francis Deschamps; Sprimont was buried in the Deschamps family vault at Petersham church, near Richmond. Sprimont's wife, Ann, remarried in 1773. She described her first husband as 'a man of the most unsuspecting and benevolent disposition' (Gardner, 140). The couple had had no children. Collections of Sprimont's silver are held in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, and the Hermitage Museum, St Petersburg. 


@@@@@


doc= 53780


Savery, Servington (c.1670-c.1744), natural philosopher, was almost certainly born on the family estates at Shilston, near Modbury, Devon, the only child of Christopher Servington Savery, sheriff of Devon, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Colonel Cloberry, whom he married in 1669. Related through his grandfather to Thomas Savery, he belonged to a distinguished Devon family that traced its origins back to immigrants from Brittany in the early sixteenth century; his father, a fervent anti-papist, played an active role in William III's accession to the throne. In 1691 Savery married Elizabeth, the daughter of John Hale of Bowringsley and a close relative of Lord Chief Justice Hale; they had three sons and three daughters. He appears not to have been educated at university, unlike close relatives. Although he corresponded with London instrument makers and fellows of the Royal Society, he seems to have spent his entire life in Shilston, studying, experimenting, and inventing scientific instruments. Best known for his work on magnetism, Savery exemplifies the significant numbers of wealthy, reclusive, provincial natural philosophers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 
Savery started to experiment with magnets while still at school, and after several years of private research was encouraged by John Huxham to communicate his results to the Royal Society. His long paper in the 'Philosophical Transactions' (1730) summarized previous knowledge about magnetism, discussed practical techniques for magnetic experiments, and described an elaborate machine based on a rotating terrella (small spherical lodestone) to test theories about the magnetic structure of the earth. The most influential section of the paper concerned the production of artificial magnets from steel bars, introducing new techniques and giving detailed instructions. Savery's artificial steel magnets were important because they provided the first reliable, cheap substitutes for natural lodestone, essential for remagnetizing compass needles on long voyages and for carrying out experiments. Although lacking influence because he was operating from a distance, Savery was respected in metropolitan circles for his work. However, unlike his successor Gowin Knight, he gained little personal advantage from his magnets, which were marketed in Exeter and London by the Lovelace family. 
In addition, Savery devised a telescope that had two adjustable object glasses and incorporated a micrometer, and engaged in lengthy correspondence with George Graham about it. Graham used Savery's instrument to measure the diameter of the sun, and recommended it to Lord Macclesfield and James Bradley, the astronomer royal. But it was not until 1753 that James Short arranged for Savery's paper to be published in the 'Philosophical Transactions', and not until about 1755 that John Dollond built a Savery heliometer. Savery's other inventions included a barometer with a sensitive measuring device based on alcohol floating above the mercury. 
A descendant of Savery recorded that this 'man of a very studious turn of mind, and of very retir'd habits: amusing himself in philosophical pursuits' died when he was about seventy-four, presumably at Shilston (J. Savery, fols. 83, 92). 


@@@@@


doc= 53781


Mainauduc, John Boniot de (c.1750-1797), surgeon and animal magnetizer, was born in Cork, the son of Elias Mainauduc ('c'.1710-1790), 'one of the greatest mathematicians in Europe', according to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (60, 1790, 575), but, more probably, a linen draper, of French protestant descent. After a classical education, probably in Cork, de Mainauduc studied anatomy under William Hunter. In 1769 he became a pupil and dresser at St George's Hospital, and in 1770 he studied midwifery at Westminster Lying-in Hospital. After a further period of medical training, he opened an apothecary's shop in 1775. In 1777 he became a member of the Company of Surgeons, and resigned his share of his apothecary business to practise surgery and midwifery. On 17 March 1778 on the recommendation of John Leake and George Fordyce, who had taught him, he was awarded the degree of MD from King's College at Aberdeen. He started teaching anatomy and midwifery, but although he continued studying medicine, he was denied entry to the College of Physicians as a surgeon. 
In 1782 de Mainauduc went to Paris to seek employment as a royal physician, and in 1784 gained a necessary French qualification at Rheims. But after a dispute over his intended position, he approached Franz Mesmer, who reportedly refused to teach him, notwithstanding the offer of a fee of 200 guineas. Instead he studied animal magnetism under Mesmer's former colleague turned rival, Charles Deslon. By 1785 de Mainauduc was installed in prestigious Bloomsbury Square, London, where he soon became Britain's leading animal magnetizer. He briefly promoted the Hygiaean Society, which stressed the benefits of helping the poor, and published a proposal for its establishment in 1785. But he achieved far greater success by advertising his lectures and therapeutic treatments for wealthy patients. He reputedly earned a fortune, charging between 10 and 50 guineas for his courses on animal magnetism, whose details he obliged his students to swear not to reveal. He taught in Bristol in 1788 and 1789, and probably supplemented his income by tours to other provincial centres. 
De Mainauduc attracted several hundred patients and pupils to Bloomsbury Square, including members of the aristocracy (such as the duchess of Devonshire, the prince of Wales, and the duke of Gloucester), the newly wealthy wives of Quaker industrialists, rival medical men, and occult enthusiasts (including the artists Philip de Loutherbourg and Richard Cosway, and the governor of Gibraltar, Charles Rainsford). De Mainauduc's basic technique resembled hypnotism. Placing himself opposite his patient -- usually a woman -- he stared intently into her eyes, and moved his hands round her body without touching her. Many women experienced a 'crisis' -- manifested as convulsions, hysteria, or sleep -- followed by a calm warmth; some of them also claimed that chronic physical ailments were alleviated. 
De Mainauduc died suddenly on 22 March 1797 in Bloomsbury Square. The following year his lectures were published, probably by his assistant, Ann Prescott (who may have been his wife). This book describes a comprehensive scheme of health based, like those of many medical contemporaries, on maintaining the body's equilibrium and the free circulation of atomic particles. With a vitalist insistence that life depends on an immaterial principle, de Mainauduc explained how, with God's acquiescence, the mind could control the body. A magnetic therapist supposedly used his own 'volition' to divert diseased atoms emanating from a sick person's body and restore natural harmony. 
Marginalized at the time as a quack, de Mainauduc has most often been portrayed as a Mesmeric charlatan. However, he was medically well qualified: his career and his teaching resembled those of some eminent medical contemporaries, who were similarly competing for a wealthy clientele. In contrast with Mesmer, he never used magnetic equipment for treating his patients, and there is no evidence linking him with radical activism. Particularly after the French Revolution, hostile pamphlets ridiculed de Mainauduc and other animal magnetizers. 'Animal Magnetism', the title of a popular pirated farce by Elizabeth Inchbald, became a versatile term of abuse for mocking physicians and natural philosophers, as well as religious and political factions. Robert Southey and other defenders of the British establishment converted de Mainauduc into a symbol of subversive French practices. 


@@@@@


doc= 53783


Pelly, Sir Henry Bertram (1867-1942), naval officer, was born on 9 September 1867 in Upminster, Essex, the sixth of seven sons of Richard Wilson Pelly (1814-1890), captain, Royal Navy, and his wife, Katherine Jane (died 1901), youngest daughter of John Gurney Fry of Hale End, Essex. 
Pelly entered the navy as a cadet in the training ship HMS 'Britannia' in January 1881 and during his early career spent long periods abroad on the China station and in the south Pacific, interspersed with service in the Channel Fleet. He departed from the usual career in 1897, when he declined the offer of command of a torpedo-boat destroyer and requested appointment to a larger ship because 'promotion would never come to me unless I could serve under a rising man rather than as my own head' (Pelly, 57). He was eventually able to put this into practice. After service in the royal yacht 'Victoria and Albert' (1899-1901) and promotion to commander he was flag commander (1902-4) to the successive commanders of the Channel Fleet, admirals Sir A. K. Wilson and Lord Charles Beresford. On 14 December 1904 he married Lilian Katherine Hawkshaw (1883-1966), elder daughter of Sir William Vincent, twelfth baronet (1834-1914), of Stoke D'Abernon, Leatherhead, Surrey. The couple had two sons and two daughters. 
Promoted captain on 1 January 1906, Pelly subsequently became flag captain to Rear-Admiral Sir Francis Bridgeman in the Mediterranean Fleet (1906-7) and flag captain to Admiral Beresford in the Channel Fleet (1907-9). He was inspector of contract-built ships (1909-12) and, just after the outbreak of the war in 1914, was given command of the battle cruiser 'Tiger', completing at Greenock. To date Pelly had enjoyed what was in appearance a charmed career, with a succession of posts as flag commander or flag captain to 'rising men', followed by command of the magnificent 'Tiger', whose arrival was eagerly awaited by Rear-Admiral Beatty, commander of the battle-cruiser force. However, this supposedly choice appointment had a host of problems. The ship was still unfinished and did not commission until 3 October, and even then did not land all civilian workers for another three months. There were numerous teething troubles, particularly with electrical systems and dynamos, and precious little time -- only nine days according to Pelly -- for her new and inexperienced crew to train before joining the fleet. 
On 24 January 1915, acting on intelligence provided by wireless interception, Beatty engaged a German raiding force in the vicinity of Dogger Bank. A running battle followed in which Beatty, in the leading ship 'Lion', signalled: 'Engage the corresponding ship in the enemy's line'. 'Tiger' was the second British ship and Beatty intended her to engage the second German ship, the 'Moltke'. Pelly, however, considering that there were five British battle cruisers against three German battle cruisers and an armoured cruiser, interpreted this to mean that he should concentrate on the lead German ship, the 'Seydlitz', leaving the two rearmost British ships to concentrate on the last German ship, the armoured cruiser 'Blucher'. This resulted in 'Moltke''s being left free to fire on the leading British ships; the errors were compounded after the 'Lion' was damaged and fell behind. Beatty's signal 'Attack the rear of the enemy' was misinterpreted by the second-in-command, Rear-Admiral Sir Archibald Moore, to mean the now doomed 'Blucher' instead of the escaping German battle cruisers. 'Tiger', though initially ahead of the other British ships, manoeuvred erratically, probably because of a shell that destroyed the intelligence office below the conning tower and damaged internal communications. Pelly chose not to continue the pursuit unsupported -- had he done so other British ships might have followed -- and the Germans escaped with the loss of 'Blucher'. Pelly's post-battle explanation, that his conduct was based on the Grand Fleet battle orders pertaining to concentrating fire on the lead enemy ship as the best means of reducing the enemy's speed, was not accepted by Beatty, and Pelly was informed that Beatty's signals were for guidance not rigid adherence, and that the main objective had been the destruction of the enemy. Beatty made allowances for a newly commissioned ship and for the fact that Pelly's crew included a large number of recovered deserters, but he now regarded Pelly as 'a little bit of the nervous excited type' (Patterson, 145). Admiral J. A. Fisher, the first sea lord, was furious and referred to the captain of the 'Tiger' as a 'poltroon' who 'ought to have gone on had he the slightest Nelsonic temperament in him, regardless of signals' (Marder, 'Fear God', 150-1). Fisher added: ''Any fool can obey orders!'' (ibid.). Pelly might very well have been relieved but for the intervention of the first lord, Winston Churchill, who possibly did not want to tarnish the British victory. 
Pelly survived for the moment but there was a cloud over his future, and when 'Tiger''s gunnery did not improve his inclusion among the elite of the battle-cruiser squadron ended. In May 1916 Beatty reported the 'Tiger''s shooting 'as usual unsatisfactory' and, as there was a convenient opening ashore, Pelly was named commodore, Royal Navy barracks, Portsmouth. However, before the formal change of command the battle of Jutland took place, and Pelly received the CB for his conduct of 'Tiger'. Promoted rear-admiral in 1917, he remained at Portsmouth for the rest of the war. He was subsequently rear-admiral, Egypt and Red Sea station (1919-20) and admiral superintendent of dockyard and senior naval officer of Gibraltar, 1920-3. He was promoted vice-admiral in 1922, and in 1925 was placed on the retired list, with promotion to admiral in 1926. In 1938 he published his memoirs, '300,000 Sea Miles: an Autobiography'. He died at Churchill, near Axminster, Devon, on 27 December 1942. 
It was not only Pelly's mistake that permitted the bulk of the German force to escape at Dogger Bank -- there were mistakes by others that contributed to this -- and one cannot definitely say that, had it not happened, he would have risen to higher office in a reduced navy after the war. Nevertheless his questionable judgement at a crucial moment undoubtedly blighted a promising career and forever diminished his reputation in naval history. 


@@@@@


doc= 53787


Seymour, Frances, duchess of Somerset (1699-1754), poet and letter writer, was born on 10 May 1699, probably at Longleat House, Wiltshire, the eldest child and coheir of Henry Thynne (1675-1708) and Grace ('c'.1676-1725), daughter and heir of Sir George Strode. Her early upbringing was at Longleat, home of her grandfather Thomas Thynne, first Viscount Weymouth (bap. 1640, d. 1714), where she became friendly with Elizabeth Singer, later Rowe (1674-1737). Another early poet friend was her great-aunt Anne Finch, countess of Winchilsea (1661-1720). After her father died in 1708 Frances and her mother moved to Leweston, near Sherborne, home of the Strodes. 
On 5 July 1715 Frances, aged sixteen, married the soldier and courtier Algernon Seymour, earl of Hertford (1684-1750) ['see under 'Seymour, Charles, sixth duke of Somerset]. Her husband's parents, the 'proud duke' of Somerset and his duchess, unaccountably hated her. There were two children of the marriage: Elizabeth (1716-1776) ['see 'Percy, Elizabeth, duchess of Northumberland] and George, Viscount Beauchamp (1725-1744). An estate at Marlborough, Wiltshire, was settled on Hertford at his marriage; he completed the grand house begun by his father while Lady Hertford improved the landscape. From about 1730 they also had a modest country retreat at St Leonard's Hill, near Windsor; their town house was in Dover Street until 1721, thereafter in Grosvenor Street. In 1723 Lady Hertford was appointed lady of the bedchamber to Caroline, princess of Wales (later Queen Caroline), with a salary of $500 p.a. 
Two short poems by Lady Hertford, based on the sentimental story of Inkle and Yarico retold by Steele in 'The Spectator', no. 11, were printed anonymously in 'A New Miscellany... Written Chiefly by Persons of Quality' (1725). Isaac Watts published four short poems by her under the pen-name Eusebia ('Piety'), in his 'Reliquiae juveniles' (1734); but her unconquerable diffidence ensured that most of her verse remained unpublished in her lifetime. She wrote many lively letters to family members, and to Watts, Elizabeth Rowe, and other friends, including notably Henrietta Knight, Lady Luxborough, and Henrietta Louisa Fermor, countess of Pomfret. Their subjects are, variously, literature, religion, court gossip, family, and the pleasures of a rural life. A few appeared in Rowe's 'Miscellaneous Works' (1739) but most remained unpublished in Lady Hertford's lifetime. 
Lady Hertford was patron to two generations of poets, including Watts, Rowe, Laurence Eusden (1688-1730), James Thomson (1700-1748), John Dyer (1700-1757), Stephen Duck (1705-1756), her son's tutor John Dalton (1709-1763), William Thompson (1712-1766), and William Shenstone (1714-1763), all of whom complimented her in published verse. Johnson asserted that Thomson, on his first visit to Marlborough, 'took more delight in carousing with lord Hertford and his friends than assisting her ladyship's poetical operations, and therefore never received another summons' (Johnson, 3.287), but the countess did in fact issue further invitations as well as smoothing Thomson's path to royal patronage. Of even more value was her intercession with Queen Caroline in January 1728, which secured a pardon for Thomson's friend Richard Savage (died 1743), poet and convicted murderer. 
The queen's death in 1737 ended Lady Hertford's service as lady of the bedchamber, leaving her with a pension of $400 p.a. and time to devote to rural pursuits. The estate at St Leonard's Hill was given up in 1739 when the Seymours acquired nearby Richings, near Colnbrook, Buckinghamshire. They renamed it Percy Lodge and adorned it with a hexagon, a hermitage, and a 'bungola' (bungalow) in the Indian style. 
Lady Hertford was a lifelong evangelical Christian. Rowe's posthumous 'Devout Exercises of the Heart' (1737), with a preface by Watts, was dedicated to her, and her religious friends and correspondents included, in addition to Rowe and Watts, Selina, countess of Huntington (1707-1791), and Catherine Talbot (1721-1770). Her piety was intensified when her beloved son contracted smallpox on his grand tour and died at Bologna on 11 September 1744, his nineteenth birthday. According to Horace Walpole she then interested herself in spiritualism, influenced by Rowe's famous 'Friendship in Death' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 35.179). 
On 2 December 1748 Lady Hertford became duchess of Somerset following her father-in-law's death; her husband died on 7 February 1750. She passed her remaining years as dowager duchess of Somerset at Percy Lodge; she died there on 7 July 1754 and was buried on 20 July beside her son and husband in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 53788


Kay, William Kilbourne (1856-1929), mail-order retailer, was born on 11 September 1856 at Market Harborough, Leicestershire, the son of Richard Kay, a doctor. Nothing else is known about his education or early life. However, on 15 February 1883, when he married Jessie Farenden ('b'. 1857/8), daughter of Charles Farenden, telegraph engineer, in Southampton, he was described on the marriage certificate as a jeweller's assistant. By 1886 Kay was selling goods via mail-order catalogue from premises in Foregate Street, Worcester. He was not the founder of British mail-order retailing; Pryce Jones has a greater claim, and the Bradford-based Fattorini family was ahead of him in selling to customers organized into clubs. Yet he was the first mail-order retailer to devote himself exclusively to the mail-order club business. By 1894 he had embraced the club system in a big way, supplying watches and jewellery to members of 'Kay's Universal Clubs'. Each club member paid a weekly instalment, in total sufficient to purchase an item from the catalogue, and then drew lots to decide whose turn it was to take it home. This boosted the purchasing power of individual customers who might otherwise not have bought at all. 
Kay's business flourished and in 1896 he bought Skarratt & Co., long established as watchmakers in Worcester. This allowed him to claim that his firm dated from 1794. It also enabled him to manufacture a range of English Lever watches; these sold in thousands to railwaymen requiring a reliable timepiece. By 1900 Kay was employing fifty packers and clerks at his extensive Shrub Hill premises and he was able to claim that his 6000 spare-time agents were servicing 250,000 customers annually. Kay's catalogue was by then offering a vast range of goods, including clothing, boots and shoes, and household furniture. By 1919, when the company cheekily published a brochure to celebrate 125 years in business, its customers numbered about 500,000. 
Kay was a ruthless competitor, not averse to denigrating rival firms, some of which, he claimed, 'were under the thumb of unscrupulous Jews' (Kay & Co. 'Catalogue'). As an employer he was a stern disciplinarian, though proud that his modern offices made 'every reasonable provision for the health and comfort of those engaged' (Kay & Co., '125 Years', 13). He did not neglect civic duties, and served the city of Worcester as high sheriff in 1898-9, councillor from 1896 to 1902, and magistrate from 1900. Kay died at his Worcester home, The Elms, Battenhall, on 2 May 1929, having been ill for three years, and was buried in the churchyard at Hallow, just outside the city. Little is known about his personal life, but he was survived by his wife and by three sons and three daughters. The family retained control of the firm until 1937, when it was absorbed into Isaac Wolfson's Great Universal Stores group. 


@@@@@


doc= 53789


Dickin, Maria Elisabeth (1870-1951), founder of the People's Dispensary for Sick Animals (PDSA), known by her friends as Mia, was born at 1 Farrington Terrace, South Hackney, Middlesex, on 22 September 1870, daughter of William George Dickin (died in or before 1899), Wesleyan minister, and his wife, Ellen Maria, 'nee' Exell. Maria was the eldest of their eight children, and to supplement the family's slender income she established a voice production studio in Wimpole Street. On 1 September 1899 she married -- at the parish church of St John the Evangelist, Westminster -- her first cousin Arnold Francis Dickin ('b'. 1874/5), son of Henry Dickin. Her husband was an accountant living at 4 Orlando Road, Clapham. The 1901 census found the couple living at 12 Mount Nod Road, Streatham, with one servant, and described Arnold Dickin as 'accountants' articled clerk' and Mia as 'professor of singing'. She later gave up her studio to keep house in Hampstead Heath; they had no children. 
Maria Dickin collected short 'thoughts and sayings' on religious subjects of Reginald John Campbell (1867-1956) -- then Congregational minister of City Temple, London -- and published them without commentary as 'Suggestive Thoughts from the Temple' (1905). She was a practising spiritualist and became active in the revived movement for religious healing. For many years she collaborated with James Moore Hickson, editor and publisher of 'The Healer', in promoting 'Sunday evenings with the sick', in the course of which she too was healed. Her preoccupation with pain shifted from human beings to animals when she began visiting the poor in the East End. In 1917 the sight of the injured animals there was, she later recalled, 'a revelation to me' and 'made me indescribably miserable' (Dickin, 1). At about this time she went through the 'heartrending' experience of nursing her sick dog, which eventually had to be put down, and in describing what followed she momentarily set aside her customary reticence about herself. A 'deep and sacred experience' (ibid., 2) united her own suffering with a semi-obsessive concern about the sufferings of others in the powerful combination often found in reforming pioneers at their moment of creative vision. The mystery of human pain had long troubled her and now became haunting, engulfing her in 'an agony of spirit' (ibid.) and temporarily threatening her religious faith. Sitting alone on holiday in a hotel garden, with her golfing friends elsewhere, she felt the eyes of millions of animals focused imploringly upon her. It was 'a command I dare not refuse' (ibid.). 
Dickin's hunt for East End premises led her to a sympathetic clergyman who lent her a cellar in Whitechapel, and there she opened the first People's Dispensary for Sick Animals of the Poor on 17 November 1917. In the PDSA's early documents Baroness de Teissier was listed as co-founder but this shadowy figure soon faded from the scene. By 1922 Dickin had become 'honorary director', chairing the PDSA's committee of management -- roles that she retained until shortly before she died. No large donations from her were publicized and at no stage did she use the PDSA's literature for self-advertisement; not until 1949 did an annual report publish her photograph. The PDSA aimed to provide free treatment in dispensaries for animals whose owners could not afford a vet. Non-political and non-sectarian, it focused entirely on remedial work and on the educational effort flowing from that, leaving others to prosecute cruelty. Understandably, prominent registered vets were at first discouraging, although Dickin persuaded an experienced and well-known unregistered one, named Hartshorn, to work with her. For the rest of her life vets' hostility threatened her movement, with the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and the PDSA on one occasion aligned on opposite sides in a lawsuit. 
The new movement prospered by drawing together two humanitarian strands: the individualist preoccupation with pain, often emphasized in the analogy that the PDSA drew between human and animal suffering; and the collectivist environmentalism involved in recognizing that working-class cruelty flowed ineluctably from economic necessity and required a co-ordinated remedy. In its first decade the PDSA grew very fast, at first within London but after Dickin's caravan tour of 1923 -- its mare provided by her husband -- within many parts of England. As with other pioneering causes the evil under attack seemed far more prevalent than had been at first supposed, and in the same year the first of several overseas branches was founded, in Tangier. Also in 1923 the PDSA was incorporated, and within seven years its annual income had grown five-fold, more than doubling again during the 1930s. In her will, however, Dickin referred to 'the strain... endured' by herself and by the PDSA's staff during its early years and especially in the national crisis of 1930-32. She published 'The Cry of the Animal' and other humanitarian works, edited PDSA periodicals, and -- combining energy with firmness -- ran the organization almost as a family gathering, with its annual staff dinner and its annual church parade and service. She also instituted the Dickin medal (the 'animals' VC'), awarded to any animal displaying conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty associated with the armed forces or civil defence in the Second World War; the first was awarded in 1943, and the 53 beneficiaries included 31 pigeons, 18 dogs, 3 horses, and one cat. Her OBE of 1929 was raised in 1948 to a CBE. 
All too little is known about Maria Dickin's private life, although she listed 'music, literary work and philanthropic' as her recreations in 'Who's Who'. She died of influenzal broncho-pneumonia at her home, 4 Lansdowne House, Lansdowne Road, Kensington, London, on 1 March 1951, her husband having predeceased her. In her last will, made in 1947, there were two executors: Maurice Cole of Radlett, an accountant; and Albert Webb of Knightsbridge, deputy chairman of the PDSA. In this will Dickin left many bequests to her sisters and to PDSA officers, but she drew special attention to Albert Webb, noting her gratitude to him 'for the many acts of kindness readily given to me' and 'for his untiring efforts' in helping her to establish the PDSA, and expressing the hope that he would take her place as its chairman. She asked the trustees to employ her residuary estate to set up a foundation in her name. 
By 1950 the PDSA was providing in Britain a regular service in 207 communities, not to mention its animal ambulances and hospitals and its five homes for stray dogs. By the 1960s, according to the PDSA's annual reports, many of its early dispensaries were disappearing in slum-clearance schemes: mass affluence and suburbanization were carrying away the Whitechapel world where Dickin's movement had begun, and were opening up new opportunities and structures. The PetAid hospital and PetAid practice gradually replaced the dispensary, and a network of retail shops reinforced more traditional ways of raising funds. Yet the PDSA retained its name and its objective remained the same: the protection of sick animals whose owners could not pay for the necessary treatment. 


@@@@@


doc= 53791


Ellison, Sir Gerald Francis (1861-1947), army officer, was born on 18 August 1861, the second son of Canon Henry John Ellison (1813-1899) and his wife, Mary Dorothy ('nee' Jebb). He was educated at Marlborough College and entered the army in 1882. He passed out from the Staff College, Camberley, in 1889, thereafter holding a series of staff appointments at the War Office and at Aldershot. On 3 January 1894 he married Lilian Amy (1861/2-1949?), only child of Colonel Robert Bruce. They had a son and a daughter. For his services in South Africa during the South African War, Ellison was mentioned in dispatches and awarded the queen's medal with four clasps. He had earlier advertised his status as an outstanding 'thinking' soldier by the publication of a book, 'Home Defence' (1896), which in the previous year had won the gold medal of the Royal United Services Institution. 
The defeats and disappointments of the British army at the hands of the Boers prompted a long-overdue radical examination of the army and a series of recommendations for its reform. Ellison played an important part in this exercise, demonstrating outstanding gifts as an administrator. A three-man committee comprising Lord Esher, Admiral Fisher, and Sir George Clarke (later Lord Sydenham) was constituted in November 1903 and given the task of reorganizing the War Office. Ellison was appointed the committee's secretary. In four months the committee produced a whole series of far-reaching recommendations. Clarke, who was later to criticize Ellison, acknowledged the secretary's outstanding contribution to the committee's report. Even more interestingly, R. B. Haldane was to write that 'he recognized [Ellison's] hand in much of the Report' (Haldane, 184). When Haldane was appointed secretary of state for war in the Liberal government in December 1905, Esher counted it 'a great stroke' ('Journals and Letters', 2.126) that they had 'nobbled' the minister by persuading him to appoint Ellison as his principal private secretary. Ellison held the post until 1908. 
Historians have speculated and disagreed about the precise degree of influence that Ellison exercised over Haldane, and how much he was responsible for the form and content of Haldane's army reforms of 1906-7. Haldane stated in 'An Autobiography' (1929) that when first he became minister for war, he was 'instructed' by Ellison. Also, that Ellison was 'one of those who co-operated in advising me' in fashioning the reforms (Haldane, 184, 189). But neither Ellison in his memoirs nor Haldane suggested that the reforms were based upon ideas supplied by Ellison. This claim was made by Clarke in a letter to Esher: 'the whole scheme is from Ellison's book' (21 March 1906, Esher MSS). Haldane, in a letter to his mother, had described his exact working method. Ellison, he stated, was 'an enthusiastic convert to my scheme of reform' and was 'working out the details' from notes supplied by Haldane (29 Jan 1906, Haldane MS 5875, fol. 37). On the available evidence, the fairest conclusion would seem to be that Haldane emphasized the political primacy of economy in his reform measures, which Ellison acknowledges, but 'undoubtedly, in a two-way flow of opinions, both men were influenced by each other' (Spiers, 77). 
After leaving Haldane, for the next three years (1908-11) Ellison served as director of army organization at the War Office. Then he was appointed to the staff of General Sir Ian Hamilton, the inspector-general of overseas forces, a position Ellison held until the outbreak of the First World War. Hamilton commented with obvious satisfaction on how the two men 'worked hand in glove... our qualities usefully complement one another' (Hamilton, 1.7). It was natural that, when Hamilton was given the command of the Dardanelles expedition, he should have asked for the services of Ellison. He needed 'an organizer of outstanding calibre' and 'a real business man at the head of our mission' (ibid., 1.280, 2.6). Typically, Kitchener insisted that Ellison could not be spared from staff work at home, but later relented. 
The failure of the Dardanelles campaign did not hinder Ellison's career as an outstanding staff officer. With the substantive rank of major-general he served first at Aldershot from 1916 to 1917 and later at the War Office as deputy quartermaster-general and inspector of general communications. In 1923 he was promoted lieutenant-general. His service was recognized by a series of decorations: CB (1904), CMG (1916), KCMG (1919), and KCB (1922). He retired from the army in 1925, shortly thereafter publishing a second book, 'The Perils of Amateur Strategy' (1926). His costive and discreet 'Reminiscences' appeared in thirty parts over an eight-year period in the 'Lancashire Lad' (1931-9), the journal of the Loyal regiment (North Lancashire), of which he was appointed colonel in 1926. 
Ellison, who had been a Royal United Services Institution trustee since 1920, made his home at Canons House, Canon Street, Taunton, where on 28 October 1947 he died of cerebral thrombosis, at the age of eighty-six. Ellison was no flamboyant character. It was his professional competence that inspired the respect and affection of his peers. The importance of the contribution he made to the improvement of the British army in the decade before the First World War deserves to be acknowledged. 


@@@@@


doc= 53798


Kinnear, Georgina (1826/1828-1914), headmistress, was born in Edinburgh, the second of the seven children of John Gardiner Kinnear and his wife, Mary, the daughter of banker Alexander Smith. About 1832 the family moved to Glasgow, where John Kinnear became the partner in a firm of commission merchants and power-loom manufacturers. The only one of their children to marry was the eldest sister, Marion, who married Robert Lockhart, a brother of Sir Walter Scott's son-in-law. The younger brother, Alexander Smith Kinnear, became Baron Kinnear of Spurness and senator of the college of justice. Aptly, he chaired the Scottish universities commission of 1889 that passed the ordinance admitting women to degrees and university classes. 
Georgina Kinnear never went to school, receiving the usual superficial education of girls of her time. But she was a natural student. While quite a young child she developed the habit of getting up about 5 a.m. to sit wrapped in a shawl reading, and it was a habit she retained to within a few years of her death. She learned languages from her brothers' tutors, but owed most to her own efforts and industry and instinctive knowledge of how to learn. As was the convention of the time, when older she travelled widely in Europe and became fluent in French and German and later Russian. 
In 1860 Miss Kinnear, by then in her thirties, was 'permitted' by her parents to travel with family friends, Lord and Lady Napier, to The Hague to assist with the education of their sons. The following year Napier was appointed ambassador at St Petersburg. Miss Kinnear accompanied his family there and immediately began to study the Russian language and culture. When the Napier's sons went to school she transferred herself to the family of Nikolay Milyutin, a reforming minister under Tsar Alexander II. According to Miss Kinnear's cousin, Marion Murray, Milyutin frequently consulted Miss Kinnear, particularly about British political methods. She later returned to Russia after his death, spending several summers with Mme Milyutin and her daughters in the interior of Russia or in the Crimea. She saw and learned much about the life of the peasants, for whom she had a high esteem: 'They are a fine people and only need education' (Murray, 529). 
It was, however, the secondary and higher education of women and girls that was of particular interest to Miss Kinnear. Alice Younger believed that during a visit to London in the 1860s Miss Kinnear assisted in some of the inquiries on which the women's evidence to the schools inquiry commission was based ('The Park School, Glasgow, 1880-1930', 23). Wishing to become acquainted with the practical organization of a large school, she joined the staff of Cheltenham Ladies' College under Dorothea Beale in 1874. There she made such an impact that, when Louisa Lumsden (also a teacher there) was appointed headmistress of the new St Andrews School for Girls (later St Leonards School) in 1877, at her strong recommendation Miss Kinnear was made the fourth founder member of the staff. 
In 1880 Miss Kinnear was selected from fifty candidates to be the first headmistress of the Park School, Glasgow, founded by the newly established Glasgow Girls' School Company. Appointed at a salary of $400, she remained in the post for twenty years. She was left without interference by the directors to manage the school as she wished, and pupils, staff, and inspectors alike agreed that her inexhaustible questing spirit permeated the whole atmosphere of the school. Having taken up schoolteaching late in a life much involved in thinking about educational matters, and after experiencing other cultures and conventions, she had her own decided views on educational methods and aims, in many of which she differed from the conventional wisdom of even the reformers of the day. 
Miss Kinnear herself taught English and history in a style more appropriate for a university and often above the understanding of most of her pupils. Nevertheless they found her lessons immensely stimulating. Her battle cry was 'think for yourself', and her 'Whys?', thrown into lessons on the most taken for granted of subjects, encouraged pupils to do just that. She disapproved of examinations on intellectual grounds, but reluctantly accepted them as practical means of forwarding girls' educational standards, and Park pupils who entered public examinations did well. Pupils went on to enter the Oxbridge women's colleges or Queen Margaret College, Glasgow, before the opening of the Scottish universities to women in 1892. Miss Kinnear believed in keeping school and play hours separate and disliked homework as she felt this encouraged desultory habits of work. Like many Scots she preferred day schools to boarding-schools. She also held strong views on adequate pay and refused part of her salary so that no member of staff should be underpaid. 
Miss Kinnear was an ardent Liberal and reformer. She only once attended the headmistresses' conference, and then said nothing because she disagreed with so much, particularly the complacency of the participants as to the progress of women's education. 'Compare the number of men and women students in the Universities; when there are more women than men, as there ought to be, we may begin to speak of progress' (Murray, 529). She was described by an early Park pupil as 'a charming but formidable woman, full of new ideas of a woman's place in the world' (Lightwood, 29). 
Miss Kinnear was small, with a dignified but rather old-fashioned appearance. She had dark, piercing eyes and a wonderful smile which occasionally lit her face. She always dressed in black, with a fine lace collar held in place by a flashing diamond and a lace cap over thick braids of dark hair. She would rustle into the classroom in full silk skirt with a swinging step and hoist herself onto the high chair at the desk, giving a little kick to get into position. She had great tolerance and a high sense of justice. She was concerned with overall schemes, not petty matters: 'It is of no significance, my dear' was an often-used phrase. She treated the girls as equals, though they in turn regarded her with a mixture of awe and fear. She aimed at instilling religious and moral principles, a love of study, and habits of diligence, concentration, and self-control in her pupils. She was kind, always willing to help, insightful about character, and unselfconscious about herself. 
A natural, self-taught intellectual, Miss Kinnear loved history, especially the Elizabethan period, Russian politics, the 'Old Testament' (which she interpreted as a dramatic picture of human life), and the growth and structure of a language (she published privately in 1904 a grammar book quite incomprehensible to most of her pupils, 'The Use of Words'). She was a fine needlewoman and loved walking, which was her only exercise. Above all she was a brilliant talker, combining graphic description with keen analysis and illustrating her remarks with shrewd and humorous comments, the words flowing so rapidly listeners had difficulty keeping up with her. 
When Miss Kinnear retired she drew up an elaborate scheme of study for herself, but could not pursue it, for her health broke down shortly after she moved back to Edinburgh to live with her remaining family. For the next fourteen years she lived a restricted and latterly invalid life, reverting in her final illness to speaking much of the time in Russian. She died on 26 April 1914 at her home, 11 Darnaway Street, Edinburgh, and was buried three days later at the city's St George's Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 53799


Young, Margaret Paulin (1864-1953), headmistress, was born on 4 December 1864 in Lilliesleaf, Roxburghshire, where her father, the Revd William Langlands Young (died 1907), had been United Presbyterian minister since 1857. Her mother was Margaret Brown Paulin. Her vivacious family circle included two sisters; J. M. Barrie was a cousin. In 1874 William Young was inducted as minister at Parkhead United Presbyterian Church and the family moved to Glasgow. In 1880 Margaret Young went to the Park School, Glasgow, enrolling on the second day of the new school. Remembered as a gay, lively schoolgirl, she was also one of the oldest pupils and soon became head girl. On finishing her schooling she went to London to attend the Training College for Teachers in Middle and Higher Schools for Girls (from 1885 the Maria Grey College), then the only institution in Britain providing such training. 
In 1884 Margaret Young obtained her first teaching post, at the Oxford High School for Girls, where she taught classics for two years. In 1886 she returned to the Park School as an assistant mistress, teaching English, mathematics, and Latin. She was especially good at making dry subjects interesting, enlivening her lessons with amusing stories and racy comments. If she taught a double lesson she let the girls run round at half-time and even joined in playing 'prisoners' base'. 
Miss Young was also obvious headmistress material and was groomed for such a post by the Park headmistress Miss Georgina Kinnear. In 1897 the Glasgow Girls' School Trust opened a third school at Kilmacolm (later St Columba's School) and Margaret Young was appointed the first headmistress at a salary of $200. 
Three years later, having firmly established the new school at Kilmacolm, Miss Young was appointed headmistress at the Park School following the retirement of Miss Kinnear, a post she held until 1929. Her first task was to advise the school directors on modernizing the school facilities. During her headship pupil numbers continued to grow, specialized courses in science and art were established, and a domestic science department was added. Miss Young also actively supported the introduction of hockey at the Park School about 1901, attending all subsequent school matches, regardless of the weather. She approved the establishment of a school council, which resulted in the introduction of a school uniform, and she introduced the house system to the school. She encouraged the former pupils' club, the Park School Students' Association (PSSA), to undertake social projects and was herself active in the Glasgow section of the Girls' Guildry (a non-denominational organization linked to local churches), of which she was president for five years. During her last year as headmistress Miss Young initiated a London branch of the PSSA; after her retirement she remained an active member of the association and was for two years its president. 
As one of the original pupils, assistant mistress for eleven years, and head for twenty-nine, Miss Young became so involved in the Park School that on her retirement she admitted finding it difficult to think of herself and the school as separate entities. The pupils presented her with a portrait by James Gunn as a leaving present and the board of directors established a fund of $500 to be used for an annual prize for the school dux. 
Miss Young's lively, outgoing personality was always combined with a sense of responsibility. As a young teacher she was tall and slim, with an encouraging smile, brown hair drawn rather severely back, and a 'delicious laugh', which bubbled up irrepressibly in the midst of the serious business of the hour. In later years she had a more motherly appeal and was remembered for her pungent wit, gracious courtesy, gaiety, and dignity. She was always beautifully dressed, with a habit of passing the long strings of beads she wore between her hands as she talked. Her leisure interests included needlework, motoring, and photography. Margaret Young died on 15 January 1953 at her home, 64 Hillhead Street, Hillhead, Glasgow, and was buried on 19 January at the Maryhill crematorium following a burial service at Claremont North, Church of Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 53800


Spens, Janet (1876-1963), literary scholar, was born on 23 January 1876 at Bellevue, Hamilton, Lanarkshire, the second daughter of Walter Cook Spens (1842-1900), a Glasgow advocate and sheriff-substitute of Lanarkshire, and his wife, Helen (died 1927), daughter of Sir John Gillespie of Edinburgh. Janet was one of eleven children, only seven of whom survived to adulthood. She and a sister were sent to live with an aunt, Mrs Lizzie Robertson, in Edinburgh. Until she was fourteen she was educated by governesses and thereafter she attended private classes in Edinburgh. She then returned to Glasgow and enrolled at Glasgow University, graduating MA in 1899. 
In 1901 Miss Spens went to Versailles as a 'repetitrice'. The following year she returned to Glasgow, where she held a class for adults and gave a series of lectures on nineteenth-century poets. In 1903 she and Margaret Hannan Watson founded Laurel Bank School for Girls in Glasgow. During her five years teaching at Laurel Bank, she continued her adult literature classes. She was happiest teaching adults: to her, the quintessence of things was revealed only in art, especially literature, and above all in poetry. Great literature was written by adults, for adults, and chiefly about adult experiences. In 1908 she was appointed assistant lecturer in the English department at Glasgow University and in 1909 she was appointed tutor to the women students in arts. Her first work, 'Two Periods of Disillusion', was published the same year and the following year she gained the degree of DLitt. 
In 1911 Miss Spens was appointed tutor in English literature at Lady Margaret Hall, where she remained for twenty-five years, latterly as a fellow. She was unusual in holding such a post without having been a student at one of the Oxford or Cambridge women's colleges; her appointment was a reflection of the high opinion of her work held by her teachers and colleagues, including Gilbert Murray and A. C. Bradley. She enjoyed Greek and French literature and was interested by metaphysics and theology. Her subtle mind expressed itself either in ingenious suppositions or imaginative penetration. She published three more books, 'An Essay on Shakespeare's Relation to Tradition' (1916), 'Elizabethan Drama' (1922), and 'Spenser's Faerie Queene: an Interpretation' (1934), the last of which was the most original and provocative. She also wrote a number of articles, reviews, and essays. She did not publish as much as she may have wished, partly because she never found writing easy. Her lecturing, too, was rather strained. She was best in small groups, or tutoring, though her sharp mind and forthright criticism could make it rather an ordeal for her students. She regarded the contemporary emphasis on self-expression and self-development in educational theories as mistaken. She was keenly interested in all aspects of education and with Eleanor Lodge, the history tutor at Lady Margaret Hall, she started the Oxford National Education Association to provide contacts between teachers in elementary and secondary schools and university academics. 
Janet Spens and Eleanor Lodge formed a lifelong friendship. They shared holiday cottages and bought a house in Oxford to which they intended to retire. Miss Spens was devotedly nursed by Eleanor Lodge through a protracted period of severe illness, which began shortly after her arrival at Lady Margaret Hall and lasted through the First World War. Eleanor Lodge died in 1936, but Janet Spens remained for the rest of her life at their house at 5 Fyfield Road, Oxford. During the Second World War she was an indefatigable air-raid warden and had a houseful of evacuee children. 
Miss Spens was described by friends as unshockable, for her scrupulous sincerity led her to question moral and literary values. Her sincerity also resulted in a 'ruthlessness in criticism which made her formidable as a tutor and extremely candid in friendship' (K. M. L., 'The Brown Book', 33). But she was enormously kind and would go far out of her way to help others, while her originality was heightened by her idiosyncrasies. Her unintentional remarks provided sheer comedy, and she was notoriously absent-minded. But she was always the first to laugh at herself. 
The Oxford National Education Association ended in the 1930s and Janet Spens retired as tutor at Lady Margaret Hall in 1936, but she continued teaching part-time and discussing education into her seventies. Each term she invited the university English women tutors for a literary evening with papers and discussions. She was created an Oxford MA by decree when women were admitted to full membership of the university. In 1944 Glasgow University awarded her an honorary LLD and in 1954 she was elected an emeritus fellow of Lady Margaret Hall. She died at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 14 January 1963, having suffered near-blindness in her last few years. 


@@@@@


doc= 53804


Downing, Joseph (1676-1734), printer and bookseller, was born into a family of London printers, the second of four sons of William and Ann Downing. He learned his trade in the family printing shop in Bartholomew Close, near West Smithfield, and took over responsibility for the business on his father's death. Shortly afterwards Downing became free of the Stationers' Company by patrimony, and by 1705 he was binding apprentices in his own right. He took the company's livery in 1706 and held minor office in 1713-14, but never became a member of the court. From 1703 Downing was closely associated with the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK), later also with the Society for Propagating the Gospel. The former, founded in 1698, had as one of its major aims the dissemination of devotional literature among sections of the population that were losing a formal connection with the church. The association with the SPCK enabled Downing to build up a substantial business, specializing in printing and distributing large quantities of cheap, improving tracts intended to be read by a wide and increasingly literate public. 
Downing was not the society's servant. His imprint (unlike those of his successors) does not refer to the SPCK directly, nor do his catalogues make explicit reference to the connection between the titles listed and the society. Although the society distributed only those it selected, publication was probably regarded by Downing almost as having its imprimatur. This explains incidents such as that in December 1703, when Downing was reprimanded by the society's committee for printing a translation from the French that contained 'many dangerous points' (Jefcoate, 321). After this the minutes of the twice-monthly SPCK committee meetings record relatively few signs of dissatisfaction with their printer, though they occasionally sought to advise him on matters such as appropriate binders or advertising. He rarely appeared before the committee in person, often sending a representative if requested to do so. As membership changed with time, the committee sought to establish the society's precise relationship with Downing. On occasion, he was obliged to renounce his right in the society's titles printed by him. Nevertheless, the connection continued, apparently to mutual benefit, for the remainder of his life. 
Downing's achievement was to develop a profitable business in a specialist area of the book trade at a time when the spread of literacy was creating a market for such material. This was based on the printing of large quantities of a relatively small number of tracts on social topics of particular concern to SPCK members -- for example swearing, drunkenness, uncleanness, lying, and breaches of the Lord's day. Some were intended for specific groups, such as prisoners, soldiers, or even London boatmen. Downing's interest in spreading literacy took practical expression with his own published 'Proposal for Teaching Poor Children to Read', in which he calculates that a child could be taught to read for an investment of only 10's'. He was a trustee of London charity schools, and left $50 to the charity school of his own parish. 
A catalogue issued in 1707 (wholly revised in 1708) was addressed to 'all pious and charitable persons (especially as live in the country) who are religiously disposed to give any number of [books] to their friends, dependents, or others' (Jefcoate, 322). Prices are supplied for books singly or 'by the hundred &c.' Items could be selected to make up parcels of improving tracts on a range of subjects. Nevertheless, Downing's publishing activities were not restricted entirely to mass markets for cheap print, as his long connection with the German pastor Anton Wilhelm Bohm (1673-1722) demonstrates. This enabled the distribution in the English-speaking world of translations and adaptations of many of the key texts of Lutheran pietism. In addition Downing printed Bohm's sermons and other works for London's own Lutheran parishes, some of the first examples of printing in London in the German vernacular. Downing died in 1734, after which the business (and SPCK connection) was continued by his widow, Martha, of whom further details are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 53805


Jacobi, Johann Christian (1670?-1750), bookseller and translator, was born in Germany. He studied at the University of Halle, probably in the 1690s, where he became closely associated with August Hermann Francke, the leading figure of the pietist reform movement within contemporary German Lutheranism, and his circle. Although his motivation in coming to England is uncertain, he is said to have made the acquaintance of English students at Halle. He was resident in London from 1709 at the latest, setting up as a German bookseller early that year 'next door but one to Sommerset-House in the Strand' ('Der christliche Wandermann', 1710, title page). In this capacity he worked closely with Anthony William Boehm, Francke's closest colleague in England, and with Joseph Downing, printer and bookseller to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK), with which Boehm enjoyed the closest links. Jacobi had married Mary Magdalen (whose surname before marriage is unknown) by 1712. Their son John Owen was baptized at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 7 June 1712. In that year Jacobi's business premises moved to Southampton Court on the north side of the Strand. From 1714 he was 'chapel-keeper' at the German court chapel in St James's. 
Jacobi's business can best be understood as a specialist retail outlet aimed at the growing market for German-language materials in an area known for German settlement and in close proximity to the Lutheran chapel at St Mary, Savoy. It was largely based on titles printed by Downing for the SPCK and on items imported from Heinrich Elers's pietist bookshop at Halle. Jacobi was referred to some fourteen times in imprints between 1710 and 1718, sometimes simply as 'the German bookseller in the Strand'. 'Estrid: an Account of a Swedish Maid, who hath Lived Six Years without Food' ('London: printed for J. Jacobi, near Somerset-House, in the Strand, 1711') may represent a typically pietist title; to this publication was appended a list of 'Books to be sold at the German bookseller's shop', including seven Latin and fifteen English titles almost all of which were written or edited by Boehm and published by or in association with Downing. The list was headed by Boehm's Latin translation of Johann Arndt's 'Vom wahren Christenthum', one of the founding texts of pietism. 
If the sale of German bibles, psalters, and prayer books represented Jacobi's core business, then the 'Guide de Londres dedie aux voyageurs etrangers', issued by Jacobi in 1710 with the curious imprint 'le German Bookseller-shop', attempted to appeal to a different market, in this case the many French-speaking immigrants and visitors likely to be found in the Strand area. Despite this diversification, the economic basis for Jacobi's bookshop is not entirely clear; it may not have been sustainable as an independent enterprise without support from Halle or the SPCK. Within a couple of years of his final move about 1717 to the Exeter Exchange, which provided cheap retail space on the Strand for a number of foreign booksellers in this period, Jacobi appears to have given up bookselling altogether. 
After his withdrawal from the book trade Jacobi remained active as a translator, publishing 'Psalmodia Germanica' in 1722; the second edition of 1725 probably represents his last collaboration with Downing. These contributions to the English hymnody were apparently much admired in their day. In 1735 Richard Ford published Jacobi's translation of Johann Jacob Rambach's biography of Boehm. In the same year Jacobi appears to have visited Germany with his three daughters, as a passport was issued for 'Johann Christian Jacobi, his daughters and their effects to cross into Holland and thence to Saxony and to return without hindrance'. He died in London on or about 14 December 1750, his will suggesting that his wife had predeceased him. 
Jacobi's bookselling represents an important aspect of the dissemination of Halle pietism in the English-speaking world. As the first book trade outlet to be opened in England with specifically German characteristics, it also represents a (minor) milestone in the development of cultural relations between the two countries. After the apparent failure of his business about 1718, no further German bookshop was to open in London for over thirty years. 


@@@@@


doc= 53806


Haberkorn, Johann Christoph (c.1720-1776), printer, was probably born in northern Germany. About his family origins and upbringing nothing is known, but by the summer of 1746 he was certainly in London, marrying Sarah Burscoe in St George's, Mayfair, on 7 September of that year. By early 1749 Haberkorn had set up as an independent printer with his partner Johann Nicodemus Gussen and had begun paying rates on a property of the north side of Gerrard Street, Soho. 
One of the earliest productions of the Gerrard Street press was a duodecimo edition of Luther's 'New Testament' published early in 1751, but certainly in the press during 1750. This was announced in an advertisement printed in the 'Daily Advertiser' shortly before Christmas 1750. It would be printed 'mit neuen Buchstaben und auf fein Papier' ('with new type and on fine paper'; 'Daily Advertiser', 22 Dec 1750, 4). In the preface to the 'New Testament', Haberkorn and Gussen describe their motive in setting up a German press in London as 'entirely in order to print good, improving works that would promote true Christianity' (p. 4). Certainly most of their early productions are octavo sermons or devotional works by Friedrich Michael Ziegenhagen, preacher at the German court chapel in St James's. In their preface Haberkorn and Gussen also mention various target groups for the sale of this material, including German-speaking schoolchildren, German professionals and tradesmen who had moved to London, charitable persons who would be disposed to buy a number of copies to distribute among the indigent German poor, and German-speaking protestants in the North American colonies. 
In the same month as they were announcing the completion of the 'New Testament' Haberkorn and Gussen were arrested: 'on a charge of having printed at Gerrard Street, St. Ann's Parish, Soho, for James Marmaduke, bookseller in St. Martin's Lane, five hundred copies of a book entitled 'Morning and night prayers with the litanies and prayers recommended to be said in Catholic families'.' They appear, however, to have recovered quickly from this setback (Mosher, June 1978). Haberkorn's partner is no longer mentioned after 1753, by which time Haberkorn had himself become a widower. On 17 November 1753 he married 'Ann Weston, spinster, a minor', at St George's, Hanover Square, London. Haberkorn now acquired a family: John George Haberkorn was baptized on 1 September 1754 at St Anne's, Soho, and a daughter, Mary Haberkorn, followed him on 5 January 1756 (Chapman, 50). 
Having established himself as a specialist for printing with Fraktur types in German with the capability of printing in English books, Haberkorn now quickly expanded into other areas of the market. He appears to have made something of a speciality of programme books, for example, in both French and Italian. In the mid-1750s Haberkorn began to diversify his business further, taking him in quite unexpected directions. In 1754 he was responsible for the letterpress in Thomas Chippendale's 'The Gentleman and Cabinet-Maker's Director', one of the most celebrated productions of its kind in this period. The publication, which includes 160 plates, may have influenced other authors in the field to seek Haberkorn's services. Prominent among them was William Chambers, whose 'Designs of Chinese Buildings, Furniture, Dresses and Utensils' of 1757 (sold by the author 'next door to Tom's Coffee House, Russel-street, Covent-Garden') was the first of a number of his works printed by Haberkorn. As with the Chippendale, Haberkorn's name is omitted from this first edition, but the printer's ornaments are undoubtedly his, and he is named as the printer on the French version that appeared in the same year. 
It is known that Haberkorn had lost his second wife by 1758 because, as her executor, he had entered into what was clearly a bitter legal dispute with his mother-in-law by November of that year. He had left Gerrard Street by December 1759, moving to nearby Grafton Street, about half-way down on the south side. When the 'new' John Haberkorn of Grafton Street re-emerges in 1761, the list of the publications printed by him reads very differently from that of ten years earlier: of the titles so far identified, not a single one is in German. In 1762 Haberkorn embarked on probably his most ambitious project to date: the first volume of James 'Athenian' Stuart's and Nicholas Revett's 'Antiquities of Athens', one of the most significant English architectural publications of the period. The engravings are found not only as separate plates but also well integrated with the letterpress. It is remarkable that standard bibliographies of British architectural writers omit any mention of Haberkorn's contribution to the project, although it surely establishes him among the most innovative and sophisticated printers of the period. Haberkorn was clearly pleased with the solution for the title-page for 'The Antiquities of Athens' because a similar 'archaic' or 'architectural' quality can be found on the title-page of another large work he printed in 1762: an edition of Boccaccio's 'Decamerone' printed for John Nourse. 
Mortimer's 'Universal Director' of 1763 lists 'Habberkorne, John. Grafton-street, Soho' firmly among the leading tradesmen of London (Maxted, 15). In the same year he took his first recorded apprentice, John Jones, indentured for $10. After 1763, however, no further grand illustrated works are associated with Haberkorn's name; most of the titles known to have been printed by him during the next two years are again devotional works in German. It must be assumed his business was failing by this time; he had certainly stopped paying the rates on the Grafton Street property by May 1766. Not unusually, the chancery case against his in-laws was still in progress in the following year and a document dated 19 June 1767 shows that Haberkorn was by then living in the parish of St George, Southwark, although his name continues to appear in imprints with the Grafton Street address during that year. If the details are unclear, it seems certain that the business was effectively handed over to the German printer and bookseller Carl Heydinger during 1767. Apparently abandoning the chancery case and leaving his children in London, Haberkorn returned to Germany, probably in late 1767 or 1768. 
Haberkorn went to Altona, now a part of Hamburg but at that time a separate entity and a dependency of the Danish crown. In 1771 he was married for the third time; his new wife was Gesine Metta Spieringk or Spiering. On 15 May 1772 he was arrested again, for reprinting a pamphlet regarded as favourable to Caroline, queen of Denmark, George III's sister, now disgraced after the fall and execution of her lover Count Struensee. After three years' imprisonment Haberkorn received a pardon on 16 March 1775, but survived only a further eighteen months, dying, probably in Altona, on 8 August 1776. 
Haberkorn was an innovative entrepreneur prepared to take risks in response to a rapidly developing market. Unexpectedly, he turns out to have been associated with some of the most ambitious titles printed in London during the century. His printing shop could handle a range of languages, undertaking major projects and producing presswork of the highest quality. His role in Anglo-German cultural exchange during the mid-eighteenth century was clearly significant. 


@@@@@


doc= 53807


Linde, Andreas (d. 1759), bookseller and bookbinder, may have come originally from Saxony in north-eastern Germany. He was present in London from no later than January 1743, as he married Ursula Smith at St Giles, Cripplegate, on the 22nd of that month. He appears to have set up shop as a bookseller, bookbinder and stationer 'at the Bible in Katherine-Street in the Strand' (advertisement, 'Daily Advertiser', 26 Dec 1750) during 1749. An early engraved trade card describes him as 'Andrew Linde, book-binder, to His Royal Highness Prince George' (Bodl. Oxf., John Johnson collection, trade cards) and a number of bindings by him for George III as prince of Wales are found on books in the King's Library at the British Library, including a copy of Johann Haberkorn's German psalter printed in London in 1751, which Linde also sold (BL, 218.d.3). Linde's recorded bookbindings are not highly regarded -- they have been described as 'undeniably hideous' (Nixon, 160) -- and his description of himself as a bookbinder was dropped from imprints after 1753 in favour of 'bookseller and stationer', a formula he also used in his will. Although he frequently implied royal patronage in his imprints, for example styling himself 'stationer to His Majesty and to His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, and bookseller to Her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales' in the 'Bibliotheca curiosa, being a catalogue of the libraries of Messrs. Jager and Brande, apothecaries to his majesty, both deceased' (1753), there seems to be no evidence of any formal association with the court. 
Most of Linde's earliest appearances in imprints were associated with German-language books printed in London by Johann Christoph Haberkorn and Johann Nicodemus Gussen. During 1753 and 1754, however, his imprint also became associated with English titles written in opposition to Count Nicholas Ludwig von Zinzendorf and the Moravians at a time when the sect was finding increasing acceptance in England. In particular, Linde issued a number of attacks on Zinzendorf and his followers, written or edited by Heinrich Rimius, typically deriding them as 'enthusiasts and fanaticks' (as for example in the full title to 'A Pastoral Letter against Fanaticism', 1753). A legacy in his will to Johann Reinhard Pittius, 'Minister of the Lutheran Church in the Savoy [...] as a token of my respect for him' (will, fol. 268) appears to confirm his attachment to the pietist orthodoxy then prevailing among the German Lutheran clergy in London. 
A further collaboration saw Linde's imprint on works and translations by Christlob Mylius, a young German writer who died in London in 1754. One of these was possibly Linde's most celebrated publication, Mylius's highly influential German translation of William Hogarth's 'Analysis of Beauty', published in 1754 as 'Zergliederung der Schonheit' with a dedication by Linde to Augusta, dowager princess of Wales. This is one of two examples of Linde's connection with the bookseller Johann Wilhelm Schmidt in Hanover, one of the earliest direct links between members of the London and German book trades. This link with Hanover was noted at the time by Wilhelm Philipp Best, London agent for the University of Gottingen's library, who saw in Linde's bookshop an opportunity to distribute the university's publications in England. The library had purchased a number of items from 'Bibliotheca curiosa', which Linde had issued in 1753. 
An advertisement attached to 'A Supplement to the Candid Narrative of the Rise and Progress of the Herrenhuters' (1755) listed some fifteen titles 'lately published by A. Linde'. Apart from a number of original works or translations by Mylius, these included five further anti-Moravian titles, a German grammar for English readers, an English grammar for Germans, and German translations by Christoph Mattheus Seidel of 'The Pilgrim's Progress' and 'The Holy War' by John Bunyan. Linde had also issued 'A Catalogue of Curious and Usefull Books in all Languages and Sciences, the Most of them Lately Imported', to be sold 'very cheap', on 4 December 1754, which showed that the sale of works published under other imprints than his own remained a significant part of Linde's business. A note on the title page ('Catalogues of the German books may be had separate') demonstrates the prominence of German titles among the imports. Further evidence for Linde's connection with the German trade can be found in his inclusion by Gleditsch among the international purveyors of the Leipzig 'Commentarii de rebus in scientia naturali et medicina gestis' from 1756 to 1758. 
Linde retired from bookselling and sold his stock by auction in November 1758. Although the announcement of the auction (by Longman) stated that he was 'going into another way of business' ('A Catalogue of the Quire-stock and Copies of a Bookseller', 1758), he may well have suffered ill health or been concerned about competition from Christlieb Gottreich Seyffert, a German bookseller who had set up shop in Soho in 1757. Linde died in London, perhaps at his home in Brydges Street, Covent Garden, between 4 November 1759, when he made his will (under the name of John Andrew Linde), and the 19th, the date it was proved. He requested that he be buried in the German Lutheran churchyard at the Savoy. Linde imprints continued to appear into the next decade, at least one being attributable to Linde's widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 53808


Seyffert, Christlieb Gottreich (fl. 1757-1764), bookseller, may have come originally from Leipzig, and was first mentioned in London imprints in 1757. During that year he issued two catalogues, one in German and one in English, in which he described himself alternatively as a purveyor of 'neue teutsche Bucher, aus allen Wissenschaften' ('new German books in every branch of knowledge') or of 'new books lately imported in [the] French, Latin, and German languages, and in almost all faculties' (catalogues, formerly Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin, Preussischer Kulturbesitz, now lost). Seyffert sent copies of these catalogues directly to potential customers with a signed printed letter soliciting orders, suggesting a determination to establish himself as a serious player in the foreign book market. Implicitly, he was announcing himself as a rival to Andreas Linde, already established in London as a bookseller and stationer, who was to give up his own business in the following year. 
Early in 1757 Seyffert had acquired a substantial house 'at the corner of Kings Street in Dean Street opposite St Anns Church Soho' (letter, 13 May 1757, BL, Add. MS 4475, fol. 207). Within months of setting up his business, on 5 August 1757 he married Johanna-Maria Lieberich at St Anne, Soho. A daughter, Johanna Christina Elisabeth Seyffert, was born on 29 June 1758. In the same year Seyffert issued an English translation of Jan Swammerdam's 'Bijbel der natuure', an important contribution to early modern entomology, first published at Leiden in 1737 and 1738. The two substantial folio volumes of 'The Book of Nature, or, The History of Insects', which was edited by John Hill, were offered on a subscription basis with plates by the Hamburg engraver Johann Christian Gottfried Fritsch and clearly represented an ambitious and expensive initial project. Another publication of 1758, Madame de Fauques's political allegory 'La derniere guerre des betes', was to prove more characteristic of Seyffert's publishing activities in the longer term. Its apparent success ensured several further editions and sequels, an English translation, and finally the accolade of foreign pirated editions masquerading as Seyffert's own. 
It was this topical and satirical vein that Seyffert decided to mine rather than the kind of expensive scientific publication represented by 'The Book of Nature'. About 1760 Seyffert moved from Soho to premises 'at Homer's Head near St. Alban's Street in Pall Mall' (advertisement, 'Daily Advertiser', 20 May 1762). His publications in Pall Mall (chiefly in French and presumably aimed at the cosmopolitan and sophisticated market found in the area) included a French translation of George Lyttelton's 'Dialogues of the Dead' (1760) and a bilingual edition of Nicolas-Joseph Selis's 'L'inoculation du bons sens' ('or: an estimate of the present manners of the French nation', 1761). Other titles, for example 'The Life and Opinions of Bertram Montfichet, Esq;', were clearly intended to exploit the success of Laurence Sterne's 'Tristram Shandy', published by Robert Dodsley, a near neighbour of Seyffert in Pall Mall, in 1760. 
A number of imported editions with cancel title-pages bearing Seyffert's imprint probably testify to links with the continental trade (for example with J. F. Bassompierre et fils at Louvain or Desaint et Saillant in Paris). More significant was Seyffert's presence from 1759, in succession to Linde, in the imprints of 'Commentarii de rebus in scientia naturali et medicina gestis', published annually by Johann Gottlieb Gleditsch at Leipzig. It was apparently this connection with the German trade that attracted the attention of Johann David Michaelis, a professor at the University of Gottingen, who believed that Seyffert might fulfil a similar role as the London distributor of the university's own 'Commentarii'. In a letter to Michaelis of 1761, however, the Hanoverian diplomat Wilhelm Philipp Best, who acted as Gottingen's agent in London and was well acquainted with the London book trade, doubted whether Seyffert's business was financially secure enough to pay for the 100 copies Gottingen hoped to sell in this way (W. P. Best to J. D. Michaelis, 'c'.1761, Gottingen University library, cod. MS Mich. 320). 
Best's concerns were justified; by 1762 Seyffert had clearly overreached himself and was obliged to sell his business and his entire stock (the sale was announced by Samuel Paterson in the 'Daily Advertiser' to take place over four successive days from 17 to 20 May 1762). In 1764 he was acting as attorney for Germans with claims on the British military resulting from the Seven Years' War. Although there is no further evidence for Seyffert's activities after 1764, his brief career as a foreign bookseller in the London book trade marks him out as an ambitious and innovative figure in a notoriously difficult market. 


@@@@@


doc= 53814


Clark, Thomas (bap. 1775, d. 1859), composer, was baptized on 5 February 1775 at St Peter's, Canterbury, the son of William Clark ('b'. 1745/6?) and his wife, Mary Quested (1738?-1794). They lived at 35 St Georges Street, Canterbury, where William, a cordwainer, made and sold boots. Thomas was apprenticed to his father, and in 1796 he was made a freeman of Canterbury. His schooling is unrecorded but anecdotal stories suggest that his musical education began early, as his father directed the Wesleyan Methodist choir, and the chapel orchestra, which included a serpent played by his uncle, practised in the room below his bedroom. According to Harvey, Clark was also interested in bellringing, and he was encouraged to compose by the Francis family, and in particular by John Francis, headmaster at Shepherds House boarding-school, Cranbrook, where a choir of forty boys performed Clark's music. 
Although Clark had probably been composing for many years beforehand, his first collection, 'A Sett of Psalm and Hymn Tunes with some Select Pieces and an Anthem', was not published until 1805. From then onwards his output was prolific: a further eleven sets had appeared by 1821, although no copy of the tenth now apparently survives. Other important publications included compilations of music for Sunday schools, and nine sets of psalm tunes, which also contained anthems and Anglican service music and which were specifically 'adapted for the use of country choirs' with 'symphonies' (in the words used on the title-pages of the second, fourth, fifth, and sixth collections) -- short instrumental interludes for the string and/or wind instruments that often accompanied the singing in rural churches without organs. 
Clark married Ann Ledger on 1 November 1806 at St George's, Canterbury. He never became a full-time professional musician but continued to combine shoemaking with composing and choir training. It is presumed that he directed the Wesleyan Methodist choir at the St Peter's Street Chapel for nearly thirty years, although there is no record of his appointment. A new leader of the singers was engaged in 1841, and Lightwood states that Clark had to resign the post as he was suspected of holding Unitarian beliefs. He may then have trained the choir of the General Baptists, who worshipped at the dilapidated Blackfriars monastery and who tended towards Unitarianism, but it is unclear whether he actually joined this society. 
Like many other provincial church music composers of his day, Clark was influenced by Handel, and he always remembered the powerful effect of hearing 'Messiah' on a visit to London with his father. His compositions are well written with good tunes and rhythmic vitality, and he deserves to be more widely remembered; but provincial composers, however capable, rarely became famous. As John Fawcett of Bolton, a contemporary of Clark's, who also combined shoemaking with composing, wrote: 'Never reject a good composition, on the ground of its not having a great author's name attached to it. A few years ago a musical gentleman in London informed me that a certain piece of music, composed by Mr Clark, was laid before, perhaps, the best organist in London. The organist, on examining the composition, and seeing the name Clark attached to it, began to play it, observing it was an excellent composition, and spoke highly of the abilities of Dr Clark, as a composer; but when he was informed that it was the composition of Clark, the shoemaker, of Canterbury, the bigoted organist immediately laid it down, as unworthy of being played through. If the composition be really good receive it; but if it be false, or dry and tasteless, reject it, whoever be the composer. (Fawcett, 43)' Today Clark's reputation rests on only one tune, 'Cranbrook', originally set to 'Grace 'tis a charming sound' in his first 'Sett' and now sung to the Yorkshire words 'On Ilkla Moor baht 'at'. During the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries nonconformist composers adapted secular music to sacred texts, but 'Cranbrook' is a rare example of a sacred-to-secular parody. This adaptation is usually credited to the conductor of the Heptonstall glee club and was apparently first sung at a concert in 1877, but it has also been suggested that it was extemporized during an outing of the same club to Ilkley Moor in 1886. In the north of England 'Cranbrook' remained popular as an alternative tune to 'While shepherds watched their flocks by night'. 
Thomas Clark died on 30 May 1859 in Canterbury, probably at his home in Stour Street, and, presumably because of his Unitarian beliefs, was buried in the unconsecrated part of Wincheap burial-ground, Canterbury, on 3 June 1859. 'His dedicated skill produced worthy boots and shoes for the people of East Kent, while his intellect was continually used to make not only his neighbours, but people in many countries, including America, sing as they had never done before. (Harvey, 39)' 



@@@@@


doc= 53816


Brett, Edwin John (1828-1895), journal editor and publisher, was born in White Horse Lane, Canterbury, the son of Thomas Brett ('c'.1777-1867), British army officer, and his wife, Mary. At fourteen he was apprenticed to a watchmaker, but soon moved to London, where he worked as an artist-engraver. By the age of sixteen he was engraving for Henry Vizetelly's 'Pictorial Times'. 
Brett joined a radical Chartist circle that included Feargus O'Connor and George Augustus Sala, the latter friendship continuing until his death. He was present at the Kennington Common Chartist demonstration on 10 April 1848, and later claimed that its failure was decisive in his later shift towards mainstream politics. On 4 January 1849 he married Eliza (1832-1893), daughter of Henry Archer, a Clerkenwell butcher. Brett found a valuable professional mentor in Herbert Ingram, publisher and Liberal MP, but his proposed take-over of the editorship of the 'Illustrated Inventor' was thwarted on 8 September 1860 when Ingram drowned in Lake Michigan. 
Brett gained his first editorship in 1864, presiding over Edward Harrison's 'English Girl's Journal and Ladies' Magazine' with William Emmett. When it folded the following year they parted acrimoniously, and went into competition with each other in the expanding market for boys' periodicals. Brett then joined the Newsagents' Publishing Company (NPC) at 147 Fleet Street, and inaugurated an era of astonishing success with a series of best-selling periodicals. With aggressive marketing and shrewd identification of his target readership, he garnered profits that only his lack of interest in bookkeeping prevent historians from estimating. Under his management the NPC developed a new sub-genre in 'penny-dreadful' fiction that placed juvenile heroes in tales of sensational brutality. These publications came under attack for their glamorization of highwaymen and housebreakers. 
By 1866 this success had allowed Brett to found 'Boys of England' at 173 Fleet Street, a weekly whose blend of thrilling fiction and factual articles enjoyed popularity until its closure in 1899. It adopted a somewhat spurious moral tone, repackaging lurid narratives within the dignifying context of imperial heroism. Articles exhorted boys to participate in outdoor games and surrender their pocket money to the journal's lifeboat subscription fund (Brett named the vessel after himself). By January 1868 the periodical had proved popular enough for him to target a slightly older readership with 'Young Men of Great Britain' (1868-72), a 'healthy, moral, instructive and amusing companion for every age'. Brett became agony uncle to thousands of boys who sought his advice on broken voices, bad breath, and the propriety of using tinted writing paper. He eventually gave the paper its own etiquette column. 
As 173 Fleet Street became 'The Boys of England Office', Brett nurtured a new respectability. He found homes for several street orphans, helping them to honest careers. The prestige of his papers was further enhanced when he took advantage of the bankruptcy of the adventure novelist Captain Mayne Reid, signing him as a regular contributor and saving the author from ruin. 
During the 1870s Brett expanded into other markets, overseeing the production of popular romantic fictions under such titles as 'Wedding Bells' (1870-79) and 'Something to Read' (1881-99). His 'English Ladies' Novelettes' (1891-2) became the 'Princesses' Novelettes', which survived until 1904. By this time Brett was dividing his time between two residences, Burleigh House, at 342 Camden Road, and Oaklands, on the Isle of Thanet. Financial success allowed him to indulge his passion for arms and armour, and over thirty years he acquired nearly a thousand items of militaria. After the death of Eliza Brett on 30 May 1893, he occupied himself with the collection, for which he published a lavishly illustrated catalogue in 1894. This formed the basis of the Christies catalogue when he began to sell the collection at auction on 18 March 1895. After a long illness Brett died at Burleigh House on 15 December 1895, leaving an estate worth $76,538 to his nine children. The majority of his publishing empire was left to his eldest sons, Edwin Charles and Edgar Percy, who continued to manage its titles until the business collapsed in 1909. Brett was buried in the family vault in Highgate cemetery on 19 December 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 53817


Rymer, James Malcolm (1814-1884), novelist and journal editor, was born in Holborn, London, on 1 February 1814 (gravestone, Kensal Green; private information, D. Collins), the second son in the family of five sons and one daughter of Malcolm Rymer ('b'. 1775), engraver and printseller, and his wife, Louisa, 'nee' Dixon (1783/4-1868), a milliner. His parents were of Scottish descent. He married, on 27 April 1839, Caroline (1821-1853?), daughter of John Huttly, boot and shoemaker, with whom he had a son. His first interests were in mechanics; in 1840 he was granted a patent for an improved furniture castor, and in 1841 was listed as a civil engineer living at 42 Burton Street, St Pancras. He soon became, however, one of the most prolific writers of popular fiction in mid-nineteenth-century Britain, although he never published under his own name, choosing instead to employ a number of pseudonyms, the most common of which were M. J. Errym and Malcolm J. Merry, but which also included Marianne Blimber, Nelson Percival, J. D. Conroy, Septimus R. Urban, Bertha Thorne Bishop, and Captain Merry USN. Rymer also appears to have had skills as an engraver, as in 1854, with his son Francis Chadwick, he ran Rymer & Co., lithographers, at 16 Red Lion Square. Some of his own fiction was illustrated by woodcuts with distinctive quality and panache, probably indicating the hand of the author. 
In the late 1830s the publisher Edward Lloyd was pioneering fiction for the expanding working-class urban readership, a public which by his profession Rymer knew well. In 1841 Lloyd published Rymer's 'Adeline, or, The Grave of the Forsaken', a vivid 'domestic' tale, and two years later 'Ada the Betrayed, or, The Murder at the Old Smithy' became the lead serial in 'Lloyd's Penny Weekly Miscellany' for 1843. The success of the novel helped establish the popularity of the penny issue form and Lloyd's fortune. Rymer combined powerful melodrama with narrative skills learned from mainstream writers, and Ada, in particular, has a touch of Dickens's Oliver Twist about her as, with parentage unknown, she preserved her innocence through the perils of a criminalized city. Rymer's successive works showed range as well as suspenseful plotting. 'The Black Monk, or, The Secret of the Grey Turret' (1844) updated both Ann Radcliffe and Walter Scott for his semi-literate readers, while he supplied a contemporary interest in social issues with 'The White Slave: a Romance for the Nineteenth Century' (1845). Writing anonymously, and adapting some earlier sources, Rymer created two of the most enduring icons of Victorian popular culture. 'Varney the Vampyre, or, The Feast of Blood', distantly related to John Polidori's 'The Vampire' (1819), created a sensation when serialized by Lloyd in penny numbers, and established the aristocratic vampire in the public imagination. Contemporaneously, Rymer may have written 'A String of Pearls, or, The Barber of Fleet Street', a work also attributed to Thomas Peckett Prest, for Lloyd's 'People's Periodical and Family Magazine'. This innocuously titled tale introduced the cannibalistic Sweeney Todd and Mrs Lovett into popular fiction and drama. Rymer was now one of Lloyd's most prolific writers, probably urged on by the need to recover from bankruptcy in February 1847. 
In the 1850s Lloyd's publications were becoming superseded for the adult reader by the more sophisticated popular fiction offered by the publisher John Dicks, in particular the novels of G. W. M. Reynolds. In 1858 'The Life Raft: a Tale of the Sea' by 'M. J. Errym' appeared in 'Reynolds's Miscellany'. Rymer became one of Dicks's major authors. His most popular titles exploited the current taste for criminal historical romances, but he remained versatile. It is claimed, on the strength of his accurate delineation of American scenes, that he visited the United States, and from the early 1860s his stories appear in the expanding genre of American dime novels. These were published under a bewildering variation of pseudonyms and titles. 'The Raft and the Spray' was reissued four times, with different titles and attributions. His later writings included the lost novel 'A Mystery in Scarlet' (which appeared in serial form in the 'London Miscellany', 1866), a work that delighted the young Robert Louis Stephenson. 
Rymer was said by Thomas Catling to have written up to ten stories simultaneously, and has been credited with over 120 titles, mostly published anonymously or under pseudonyms. Rymer also edited a number of periodicals, including the short-lived 'Queen's Magazine' (1842) and 'Lloyd's Weekly Miscellany' (1845). On his death he left two scrapbooks inscribed 'Tales and Sketches Contributed by James M. Rymer to Various Periodicals'. These indicate a very different style from that of 'Varney the Vampyre' -- essays in the style of Leigh Hunt, and some accomplished short stories, suggesting that through his pseudonyms he carefully concealed his alternative career as a sensational author. Following the death of his first wife, he married on 6 July 1859 Sarah Rebecca (1824-1909), formerly a governess, daughter of William Carpenter, gentleman. They had a son, who died in 1865. He died on 11 August 1884 at Lawn Cottage, Shepherd's Bush Green, London, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 53818


Gravelet, Jean-Francois Emile (1824-1897), tightrope walker, was born on 28 February 1824 at Hesdin, near St Omer in France, the son of Andre Gravelet ('c'.1789-1832/3), himself a tightrope walker and a soldier in Napoleon's grande armee, the holder of the cross of the Legion d'honneur. His mother was Eulalie Merlet ('c'.1794-1833/4). In 1829 a troupe of travelling entertainers came to the neighbourhood and Jean-Francois was fascinated by them. He tried out tightrope walking between two chairs with disastrous but salutary results. He was then and there convinced of the necessity of being almost obsessively well prepared for any dangerous acts he proposed to carry out. A local former sailor skilled in climbing rigging took an interest in the boy's ambitions and helped him to practise in a wood nearby. When the parents were convinced of their son's prowess and single-mindedness they enrolled him at the age of five as a residential pupil in the famous Ecole de Gymnase in Lyon, the foremost training ground for acrobats of all kinds. He appeared professionally as the Little Wonder some six months later, and within two years was in Turin at the royal command of the king of Sardinia. 
After leaving the school Gravelet, who was orphaned by the age of ten, joined circus troupes and appeared all over the continent for about eighteen years. In 1851 he became a member of the famous Ravel Family of French acrobats, which included one with the name Blondin, from whom some authorities say the pseudonym may have derived; others assert that he adopted a nickname first applied to his father. With the troupe he went to America under a contract from Phineas T. Barnum. In the course of the journey across the Atlantic, Blondin rescued a young nobleman who was swept overboard in a storm, and who was later to show his gratitude in a material way. With the Ravels he appeared at Niblo's Gardens in New York, and in Boston and Philadelphia. In the spring of 1858 Blondin visited Niagara Falls and conceived his plan of making a crossing on a rope. With his usual attention to detail, it took him nearly a year to work out a possible line of approach. About 1858 he married Charlotte Sophia Lawrence (1838-1888), who was said in the dedication of a pamphlet by G. L. Banks in 1862 to be 'the high-minded and exemplary wife of a brave and devoted husband'. They had three daughters and two sons. Blondin was described at this time as of medium height (5 feet 5 inches), stocky, weighing 10 stone, with a broad chest and muscular arms, light grey close-set eyes, fair (though not blond) hair to his shoulders, and a small imperial beard. He was a teetotaller. 
Blondin had no capital to fund his venture and approached the editors of the 'Niagara Falls Daily Gazette', obtaining their support when he convinced them that he was in earnest. His agent, Harry Colcord, also took some persuading that the apparently mad plan was feasible. All sorts of problems were presented: General Porter, the owner of Goat Island, near the falls, where Blondin had calculated he should make the crossing, would not give permission and he had to go further downstream; the 3-inch-wide rope would cost $1300; and while the owners of local hotels and tourist venues were not slow to see the attraction of the 'show', they would not provide much finance. But Blondin doggedly went ahead, and crowds variously estimated at between 10,000 and 25,000 were brought in by extra trains and steamers. 
Blondin stepped out onto the wide rope (by his standards) at five o'clock on a sunny day, 30 June 1859, with his 30 foot balancing-pole weighing 40 lb. He completed the crossing from the American to the Canadian side in seventeen and a half minutes, having stopped on the way to lie down to rest and to pull up a bottle of refreshing drink from the deck of the steamer 'Maid of the mist', moored in midstream. Bands played on both sides and were packing up when Blondin announced that he would make the return journey, and did so in seven minutes. Accounts of the feats he performed differ fairly widely, but it is certain that various other 'stunt' crossings were organized in the next few weeks. On 14 September 1860 the prince of Wales, then on a tour of Canada and America, witnessed a performance. Blondin offered to take the prince across on his back but this was vetoed by the duke of Newcastle, who was in charge of the party. The prince none the less much enjoyed the spectacle, which included a crossing on stilts, and sent a cheque in appreciation. This must have been welcome, as no great financial success attended the venture. Jones' Wood in New York was his next venue, and there he met again the young nobleman, 'Comte A', whom he had rescued at sea; he urged Blondin to give up his dangerous profession and, when unsuccessful in his plea, presented him with a diamond ring. 
Henry Coleman, Blondin's new manager, sailed for England and arranged an appearance at the Crystal Palace in London in June 1861, which was accompanied by the band of the Coldstream Guards. The crowds applauded, but Dickens and 'Punch' were scathing, the latter publishing a skit interview between Boswell and Johnson on Blondin. The Crystal Palace Company made $10,000 profit from seats at half a crown and 5's'. (pre-booked), from which Blondin received only $1200, out of which he had to pay all his expenses. A provincial tour followed, during which a lion was pushed across the rope strapped into a wheelbarrow. Further years at the Crystal Palace earned more money, and Blondin bought a house in London's Finchley Road, which he named Niagara Villa, with a carriage and pair and servants to ease Madame Blondin's domestic life. After a farewell performance in February 1863, the Blondin family set off on a tour of France, Spain, Russia, Portugal, and Italy, and in 1864 he went to South America for two years. India, Australia, and New Zealand followed, with another tour of South America. He became a naturalized British subject on 4 June 1868. In 1879 some unrecorded financial disaster struck, the house and trappings were sold, and another, more modest one, in Ealing, was purchased. So the performances had to continue: Europe and even Ceylon, then London again, and off to New York. Madame Blondin died on 19 December 1888. Another residence, Niagara House, was built in Northfield Lane, Ealing, where Blondin, though never fully retired, kept domestic animals and made small handicraft objects. Blondin's residence was demolished in the 1930s but a mansion block -- close to Niagara and Blondin avenues -- retains the name. 
At the age of seventy Blondin again performed at the Crystal Palace, refusing a net, and in 1895 at Blackpool he injured his back. He married the nurse who looked after him, Katherine, 'nee' James (1864/5-1901), at Brentford register office on 29 November 1895, and lived another two years with her. His final performance was at Belfast in 1896. He died at Niagara House of diabetes on 22 February 1897 and was buried beside his first wife in Kensal Green cemetery. Phrenological examination, which was popular at the time, showed him to be careful, prudent, jealous of his own self-respect, and conscious of his obligations to his family and society. 


@@@@@


doc= 53819


Violante, Pauline (b. 1840/41), tightrope walker, was the second of the two daughters of Elizabeth Wild, actress, and a bandsman named Young. Her parents acted with Old Wild's, a company of travelling players from Yorkshire, but had left to marry by 1830. Trained as an acrobat, Selina Young performed at Bury with Samuel Wild's company in 1853 as 'Pauline Violante, the first tight-rope dancer in the world'. In 1858 she became the first artist to cross a high wire at the Crystal Palace. 
G. Van Hare ('b'. 1815), manager of the Alhambra, renamed Young the Female Blondin in 1861. She amazed audiences by ascending a telegraph wire stretched from the stage to the roof. Edward Tyrrel Smith (1804-1877) contracted her to walk a tightrope across the Thames from Battersea Bridge to the Cremorne Gardens. Dressed in Albanian national costume, she made her attempt on 12 August 1861, watched by 20,000 spectators. Although a poorly weighted wire forced her to abandon her crossing, she succeeded in a second effort the following Monday. 
During her career Young crossed the high rope in several dangerous ways: in a suit of armour, in a sack, and pushing a wheelbarrow. She had imitators using the same pseudonym, notably Madame Genieve (Selina Powell, with whom she is sometimes confused), who, eight months pregnant, was killed falling from a rope at Aston Park in July 1863. 
Young's career came to a violent conclusion on 14 August 1862 at Highbury Barn. As she crossed the wire amid a spectacular firework display, she stumbled and fell 50 feet to the gravel below, fracturing her left leg and shoulder. Attended by several doctors who happened to be dining nearby, she was taken to St Bartholomew's Hospital the following morning, emerging from Queen's ward on 24 October. Newspapers reported that she had urged surgeons to amputate the useless leg, which was 3 inches shorter than the other. 
On 1 November 1862 an appeal was launched on Young's behalf by Felix Joseph (1840-1892) and Sarah Ann Hughes, Young's aunt, the widow of Edwin Hughes (1813-1867), circus proprietor. Joseph stressed that Young's career had provided support for her aged father and invalid sister (her mother had died some years previously). A total of $300 was collected, allowing them to set up as shopkeepers. In 1864 she married Charles Greaves jun., and kept an inn in Surrey. Selina Young died in obscurity, her passing unrecorded by the press. 


@@@@@


doc= 53820


Stern family (per. c.1830-1964), merchant bankers, came to prominence in Britain with 


@@@@@


doc= 53822


Silcox, Lucy Mary (1862-1947), headmistress and feminist, was born on 11 July 1862 at Warminster, Wiltshire, the eldest of four daughters of the Revd John Wesley Silcox, Methodist minister, and his wife, Betsy, 'nee' Parkinson. She was educated at Chelsea High School for Girls and at Newnham College, Cambridge, 1881-5. She was awarded a college scholarship in 1883 and passed part two of the classical tripos with first-class honours, later becoming a distinguished associate of Newnham College for thirty years from 1894. 
Between 1885 and 1889 Lucy Silcox worked as a teacher of classics at the recently founded Liverpool High School for Girls, where, as her pupil Mary Sheepshanks testified: 'Her flashing eyes and gypsy look gave a hint of a warm and tempestuous nature, and her recherche and at times exotic dress expressed a love of beauty which in her was a dominating passion.... Lucy Silcox gave and inspired love' (Sheepshanks). In 1890 Lucy Silcox was appointed the (very young) first headmistress of the new Girls' Public Day School Company East Liverpool High School for Girls. Soon after taking up that post she made time after school hours to coach, successfully, an ill-prepared Eleanor Rathbone in Latin and Greek for Oxford. She was succeeded as head of East Liverpool by her younger sister Alice. From 1900 to 1908 Lucy Silcox was headmistress of West Dulwich High School for Girls, and finally, between 1909 and 1926, she was head of the girls' public boarding-school St Felix, Southwold (founded in 1897). 
Lucy Silcox, in the judgement of those who encountered her, including Sir Ernest Gowers, was 'one of the greatest headmistresses of all time' ('The Felician', Sept 1946-7, 8). She was an idealist in her educational philosophy, dedicated to inspiring her pupils with a love of beauty, goodness, and truth; to that end she tried to allow the girls the maximum freedom, both in their choice of studies and in their organization of the school. She believed in treating the girls as reasonable people, capable of self-government and self-imposed discipline -- there was extraordinarily little 'policing' by the staff. In her first address at St Felix, Lucy Silcox described the school as a ship in which each member felt her partial responsibility for the well-being of the whole, and where there was 'a real spontaneity and elasticity and freedom [in] the give and take with each other... -- the giving and asking for nothing in return,... which alone is free from the spirit of barter' ('The Felician', July 1909, 5-6). In her time at St Felix, Lucy Silcox could not shower enough beauty and intellectual inspiration on 'her' school. There were music recitals by Viennese chamber quartets and Myra Hess -- who had to have her Steinway steered delicately up the fire escape into the Hall -- and by Adele Focini who played Brahms on her great-uncle Joachim's violin; talks by the poets De La Mare, Masefield, and Rabindranath Tagore; visits by the painters Cammaerts and Walter Sickert, who, alone, was a disaster. Lucy Silcox collected good paintings and fine pieces of old furniture for the school and she herself directed the girls in Greek plays, sometimes partly in her own translation: 'Iphigenia in Tauris', 'Antigone', 'The Trojan Women'. As her way of commemorating the suffering and needed rebirth after the First World War, she managed to acquire a Mestrovic bust of a young girl for the school and she planted a large, sunken water garden in the grounds. 
Lucy Silcox's socio-political commitment was feminist and humane. Her life's work as a teacher testified to her belief in the education of girls and, before the First World War, she campaigned actively for the vote. Not only was she president of her local branch of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies but she also toured the surrounding Suffolk villages, speaking up for 'the cause' from her pony trap. Sometimes an apple would be shied at her, but much more often she would hold her audience. She also worked, successfully, for the election of women candidates in local government. During the First World War -- a very difficult period for the school since it was evacuated three times and one part split off to what the girls called the Funkhole in deepest Wales -- Lucy Silcox would testify to unpopular moral restraint in warfare. One pupil never forgot how 'We had been receiving news of some new atrocity perpetrated by the Germans, which had caused much controversy about the rightness or advisability of retaliating in kind. Miss Silcox revealed her thinking on the situation by quoting from a classical author who had said 'If we perish we perish but we will not do this thing'' (private letter from Rose Tebbutt, 7 May 1990, St Felix School Archive). 
Possessing a passionate temperament, which could occasionally descend into immediately repented temper, Lucy Silcox was an eager, loving friend, the brilliance and colour of her appearance expressing an inner fire. Her friends included Jane Harrison, John Masefield, Gilbert Murray (who wrote a tribute to her in 'The Times', January 1947), Bertrand Russell, Paul Nash, Ray Strachey, and Eleanor Rathbone, but her lifelong companion was the fellow headmistress Olive Dymond, whom she had first met at Newnham. Her limp, the legacy from infantile paralysis, never prevented her from strenuous travels, exploring with gusto Corsica, Spain, Egypt, Palestine, Syria, and of course, Greece. Her remarkable face with its large liquid eyes, wide forehead, strong mouth, and map of lines has been finely drawn by many artists, including Stanley Spencer. Lucy Silcox died on 11 January 1947 at her home, Foxcombe End, Boars Hill, Oxford, listening to a favourite symphony with friends, and was buried in Oxford. She left 2000 books and her collection of paintings by Corot, Derain, Gertler, Christopher Wood, Matthew Smith, Chirico, Epstein, Ivon Hitchens, Frances Hodgkins, and Vanessa Bell to be shared between St Felix and Newnham. The paintings were sold to Leicester Art Gallery. A uniquely vivid, magnetic personality, no one who knew Lucy Silcox ever forgot her. 


@@@@@


doc= 53824


Henderson, John (1822-1867), circus performer and proprietor, was born in London, the son of John Henderson, an actor. He was advertised as a rider with Price and Powell's circus at Bristol in 1842. After a spell with Pablo Fanque in Lancashire, he was with Powell's circus at Hammersmith in 1843, performing as a trampolinist, clown, vaulter, and somersault thrower. He married Agnes Selina ('c'.1825-1879), the fifth daughter of Henry Michael Hengler, the circus rope-dancer, on 2 October 1843, at Canterbury. Their only child, a daughter, died at the age of twenty-one. In 1844 Charles Hengler (Mrs Henderson's brother) took over Powell's company; Henderson and William Powell were joint ringmasters in 1845. Henderson appeared as a leaper at Astley's Amphitheatre, London, in 1847, in William Batty's time, and returned in 1850 to perform on the iron wire. He continued with Hengler's company for many years, a brilliant all-round artiste, although he occasionally appeared in other arenas. 
In October 1858 Henderson left Hengler to fulfil engagements in Moscow and St Petersburg, first selling his black mare Bess. By 1859 he had become involved in circus management, probably for Hengler, ostensibly of Frowde's Cirque Modele, at Sheffield, while at the same time appearing on the slack wire. The company was then transformed into Henderson's Grand Cirque, at Chester. Although he was always associated with Hengler, Henderson always strove towards success in his own right. During 1860 his circus toured England. For the next seven years he alternated between Hengler's, other circuses, and his own temporary companies. He was manager of the Christmas circus at the Agricultural Hall, Islington, London, for three seasons from 1863 to 1864, and ran the winter 1866-7 circus at the London Music Hall, Manchester. Henderson died of pleurisy on 10 May 1867 while his circus was at Ipswich, and was buried on 13 May in Ipswich cemetery. He was a fine tall man with curly hair and a bushy moustache. 


@@@@@


doc= 53825


Hengler, John Michael (1831-1919), tightrope walker and circus manager, was born on 10 July 1831 at Lambeth, London, the fourth son of Henry Michael Hengler (1784-1861) and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Pilsworth ('c'.1790-1869), of Dublin. (Frederick) Charles Hengler was his brother. The son of a famous circus rope-dancer, Hengler first appeared on the rope, without the aid of a balance pole, at the age of six. He also became an accomplished rider, and took part in hippodramatic sketches and spectacles. He was noted with Price and Powell's circus at Camden Town in 1843 performing backward and forward somersaults on the tightrope. In 1850 'Young Hengler' was turning somersaults on the rope while playing Louis Jullien's 'Drum Polka' on a side drum or an overture on the violin. By 1851 he was billed as the 'Prince of Tight Rope Artistes', his sobriquet for the next twenty years. In 1852 he first performed the dramatic role of Hamlet: acting and dramatic recitations became part of his stock-in-trade. During a visit to Denmark in 1855 he performed before Frederick VII at Copenhagen. Hengler spent twelve months in the United States in 1856-7, when he was based in New York. On his return he joined the new circus in Liverpool run by his brother Charles Hengler. He visited Copenhagen again in 1858, and later went on to Paris. 
Hengler married Hannah Frances (1843-1920), the daughter of Thomas Lloyd, a horse dealer, at St Silas's Church, Liverpool, on 6 August 1865. They had a son and five daughters, none of whom were to be associated with the circus. On the death of his eldest brother Edward Henry Hengler in January 1865, Hengler became sole proprietor of the Liverpool Riding School in Elizabeth Street, although he continued to perform in the arena. His last performance on the tightrope was in 1872 at Sheffield, when he also recited 'The Charge of the Light Brigade', accompanied by orchestral effects. 
During the 1880s Hengler became a Liverpool shipowner and went into local politics: he was a member of the West Derby (Liverpool) local board from 1881 to 1890, serving as chairman for the year from April 1886. He was the last manager (1889-95) of Hengler's circus in Argyll Street, London. He died at his residence, Airlie House, Meols Drive, Hoylake, Chester, on 17 November 1919, and was buried at Flaybrick Hill cemetery, Hoylake, on 19 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 53826


Frowde, James Henry (1831-1899), clown and evangelical preacher, was born on 17 April 1831 at Portsea, Hampshire, the first son of James Frowde (1800-1850) and his first wife, Georgiana Margaretta Hengler (1808-1837), an equestrian performer, the daughter of the circus rope-dancer Henry Michael Hengler. His mother's early death, leaving four young children, made a vivid and lasting impression on Frowde; his father remarried within the year. He received a liberal education, while his home life was strictly religious and puritanical, under the influence of his stepmother. 
Frowde's life was changed by the visit of Hengler's circus to Portsmouth in 1846. For the first time he met his mother's family, and in the summer of 1847 he joined Charles Hengler's circus at Stamford. He learned to ride, and earned his keep by cleaning out the stables and animals' quarters. He first appeared in the circus at Leicester in that year, as a supernumerary in a fete scene. One of the clowns taught Frowde all he knew, and by 1850 'Jem Frowde' appeared on the bills as 'a Man of Many Forms' -- referring to his skills as a contortionist. He became one of the main attractions at Hengler's, and enjoyed immense popularity. He travelled with the company for the next ten years, and briefly ran his own company in 1859. He was principal clown at Charles Hengler's new circus which opened in Liverpool in 1857, where it was later recalled that, 'Being a good-looking young fellow, Jem had a host of female admirers and used to be daily inundated with love letters and souvenirs d'amour' ('Liverpool Citizen', 12 Sept 1888, 12c). His dress imitated the original court jester style as closely as possible, with cap and bells, and no make-up apart from a little rouge. 
The impact of his religious upbringing remained with Frowde, and in December 1856 at Chester he was presented with a valuable 'Bible' by three clergymen, as a testimonial to his conduct in private life and his constant attendance at church services. On 4 June 1857 he married Elizabeth, the youngest daughter of the Revd Christopher Hayden, at St John's Church, Liverpool. She died in childbirth the following March. The child, a daughter, also died. Frowde continued to perform as a clown until 1861, mainly with Hengler's but occasionally appearing with other companies. On 9 October 1861 he married Susan Mary, the daughter of the Revd William Harrison, at Leamington Spa, and retired from the circus. 
Frowde exchanged the circus for the life of a country gentleman, purchased three estates near Newent, Gloucestershire, and became a freemason. From 1878 until 1892 he was a captain in the Gloucestershire artillery volunteers. With his second wife he had two sons and two daughters. He continued to live a religious life. His 'talking clown' experience and colloquial skills, in addition to his intimate knowledge of the scriptures, equipped him for the role of lay preacher, and he had a mission room erected at one of his properties, Walden Court, and obtained a bishop's licence to preach there. The contrast between his natural jollity and grave religious beliefs led many people to regard him as eccentric, if not actually shocking, but his character overcame the reservations of the local people. 
About 1892 the Frowdes relinquished their estates and went to live in Gloucester. Following the death of his wife in 1895, James Frowde took rooms at 53 Westgate Street, where he died on 28 August 1899. He was buried in Gloucester cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 53827


Fanque, Pablo (1796-1871), equestrian performer and circus proprietor, was born in Norwich on 28 February 1796, the third son of John Darby, a butler of African descent, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Stamps. He was baptized on the same day because he was not expected to live. Orphaned at an early age, he was apprenticed to William Batty, the owner of a travelling circus, and grew proficient in tumbling, posturing, leaping, rope-dancing, and riding. He became a member of Andrew Ducrow's troupe at Astley's Amphitheatre in London, but later rejoined Batty and in 1828 was billed as 'Young Darby'. It is not known when and why he adopted the name Pablo Fanque, but he was noted using it with Batty's company in Liverpool during the 1835-6 season, when he performed on the 'corde volante', and in 1836, when he was described as the loftiest jumper in England, leaping the length of a post-chaise, with a pair of horses in the shafts, and through a military drum. In 1841 Fanque left Batty to set up on his own account with two horses; he was initially partnered by W. F. Wallett. Over the next six years he built up one of the finest studs of horses and ponies in the country, and his circus, which used wooden buildings rather than tents, travelled throughout the country, especially in Lancashire and the north. He employed many of the most famous artistes of his day. His fortunes fluctuated, and from about 1865 his circus was in decline. 
Fanque married Susannah Marlaw ('c'.1801-1848), the daughter of a Birmingham button maker; their son Lionel (1835-1919) was a celebrated equestrian clown. Fanque's wife was killed on 18 March 1848 in Leeds, when the balcony at her husband's circus collapsed. Three months later (11 June 1848) he married Elizabeth Corker ('c'.1829-1896) of Sheffield, an equestrian performer thirty years his junior. With her he had two more sons, George (1854-1881) and Ted (1855-1937), who also went into the circus as equestrian clowns; all three of Fanque's sons took the surname Pablo. 
Fanque continued to travel with his circus until his death at The Britannia inn, Stockport, on 4 May 1871. He was buried in the Woodhouse cemetery, Leeds, and his circus was taken over by Toby Knight, a roundabout proprietor. The Beatles' song 'Being for the Benefit of Mr Kite' (1967) was prompted by a poster advertising an act at Fanque's Circus Royal, Rochdale, in 1843; John Lennon's lyrics referred to Fanque by name. 


@@@@@


doc= 53828


Barnes, Arthur (1828-1908), acrobat, was born at Birchall Street, Birmingham, the son of Henry Barns, an iron-founder, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Williams. He was first noted performing with Edwin Hughes's circus for the 1845-6 season, then with William Cooke's circus in 1846, and with Pablo Fanque's circus from 1846 to 1849. In Copenhagen on 4 July 1848 he married Alexine Pettoletti, an equestrian performer and member of a famous Danish circus family, with whom he had two daughters, Annie ('b'. 1863) and Jessie (1872-1876). 
Barnes became famous for his consecutive somersaults, thrown from a spring-board. He recounted that for a long time he could do only twenty or thirty, but that by constant practice he eventually managed fifty. In 1850 he achieved eighty-seven consecutive somersaults in a trial with William Cooke's circus at Gainsborough. In 1854 he visited America, where he eclipsed all his competitors, then returned the following year to perform with Hengler's circus at Liverpool. In 1857 he visited Denmark, and the next year performed in Denmark, Portugal, Spain, and France. He travelled throughout Britain with all the big circus companies of the day, including those of Wallett, Hernandez and Stone, Newsome, Frowde, and Sanger. In January 1864 at the Royal Agricultural Hall, Islington, London, it was claimed that Barnes had 'accomplished the unprecedented feat of throwing nearly 100 consecutive somersaults' (Morley, 55). 
Barnes retired about 1867 to Sparkhill, near Solihull, where he purchased considerable property in Baker Street and lived comfortably on the rental income. His first wife having died, he married Catherine Edgington on 10 November 1875, and had two further children, Alexine Mary ('b'. 1877) and Arthur Henry ('b'. 1880). He died on 1 July 1908 at 36 Baker Street, Sparkhill, after forty years in retirement. 


@@@@@


doc= 53829


Ryan, James (c.1799-1875), tightrope walker and circus proprietor, was said to be the cousin of Charles Adams, an equestrian actor, and grandson of the circus proprietor Henry Adams. Billed as the 'Young Hibernian', he was seen at Birmingham in May 1815 performing on the tightrope. At Astley's Amphitheatre in London in 1822 he turned a previously unequalled number of somersaults, and in 1823 he was billed to turn forward and backward somersaults on the tightrope without the aid of a balance pole. 
Early in 1828 Ryan's Arena was operating in Chelsea; this business on his own account succeeded, and later in that year he erected a substantial amphitheatre in Bradford Street, Birmingham, with an arena and a stage. He later had premises in Sheffield, Halifax, Bristol, and other large cities, but kept Birmingham as his headquarters. During the 1830s considerable animosity existed between Ryan and Andrew Ducrow, and Ryan opened many of his circuses in opposition to Ducrow. In 1841 he opened a brick-built circus, which led to his financial ruin, and in 1842 he was forced to sell his buildings. He continued to perform in other proprietors' arenas, and appeared as late as 1859 with Madame Macarte's circus at Stourbridge. He retired shortly after this, and for some years lived in Bromsgrove Street, Birmingham. In later years he was said to be eccentric, and was described as a short, thick-set man, of fine build and appearance. He remained healthy and vigorous, though he partly lost the sight in one eye. In 1873 he joined his daughter Susannah, a popular equestrian performer, at her home in Paris. He died there in poverty on 13 November 1875. 
Ryan was remembered as a kind-hearted, energetic performer, with a fund of stories of circus life. At the height of his career he was a real benefactor to his equestrian performers, and was known for rewarding talent with proper remuneration. 


@@@@@


doc= 53830


Croueste, Edwin (1841-1914), clown and circus proprietor, was the son of Alexander Crowhurst, a shoemaker, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Finch, and was born at Bromley, Kent, on 23 May 1841. His first visit to the circus was in 1851, when he saw Batty's circus performing during the Great Exhibition. On leaving school he worked for two years at a shop in the Minories, London, but, always keen on tumbling and clowning, in 1857 he joined a circus at Stratford as a clown. His brother, Harry (died 1891), had been a clown for some time, and Edwin had seen many travelling companies; he had also visited Astley's where 'The Battle of Waterloo', with Edward Gomersal as Napoleon and the ringmaster John Widdicombe as Wellington, made a particular impression on him. He appeared with John Clark's circus at Lambeth Baths for the winter season of 1857-8, and in 1858 joined Harry Croueste's circus in Vauxhall Gardens for what proved to be its last year. 
One of the best-known circus clowns of his day, Edwin Croueste visited many continental cities, America, and the colonies. In 1863 he took part in a race along the Thames between three clowns drawn in tubs by geese, a variant of Dickie Usher's stunt. In 1879 he was advertised as 'England's Greatest Shakespearian Jester, Acknowledged the Biggest Draw in the Profession', and gave a permanent address in Leicester. He then went into business for himself, and by the late 1880s Edwin Croueste's Grand circus seems to have become well established: in the 1890s it was based in Scarborough and made regular visits to Dewsbury, Halifax, Leicester, and Bradford. In 1891 Croueste opened an iron circus in Dewsbury, which in 1894 he converted to the Empire Variety Theatre. 
Croueste had a son, George John Coney Croueste, an equestrian performer, but he died in 1881 at the age of eighteen. Croueste's nephew George, known as the 'English Hernandez', was famous in the late 1870s as a clever pirouette and somersault rider, and later became equestrian director in his uncle's circus. Prosperous for many years, Edwin Croueste lost his money later in life, and died in the workhouse hospital at Horton, Bradford, on 25 April 1914. 


@@@@@


doc= 53831


Ginnett, (John) Frederick (1825-1892), equestrian performer and circus proprietor, was born in Lambeth, the eldest son of Jean Pierre Ginnett (died 1861), the founder of Ginnett's circus, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Partridge (died 1877). (A John Frederick Jannett was baptized in Lambeth on 2 October 1825.) He made his first recorded public appearance at Astley's Amphitheatre, London, in December 1830, described as 'an entirely new prodigy... the infant non pareil'. In 1832 he appeared in a command performance before the king and queen at Brighton with Andrew Ducrow's equestrian company. By 1851 he had become director of Franconi's Cirque National from Paris, and in 1861, following the death of his father, he took over control of the family circus, and was responsible for its enormous success. He built a number of permanent circus buildings, including those at Portsmouth, Plymouth, Dublin, and Cork (the Portsmouth building was used only as a music-hall). 
With his first wife, Sarah (died 1866), the daughter of William Savage, a Warwick corn dealer, whom he married on 20 February 1855, Ginnett had three sons, Frederick, Claude, and Bertie, all of whom went into the profession, Frederick with considerable success. On 17 September 1874 Ginnett married Anne Maria (1853-1915), the daughter of John Snape, a Leamington Spa decorator; they had four daughters (including the equestrian performer Ida Iona) and two sons. Ginnett died from bronchitis and asthma on 12 January 1892 at his residence, 27 Wellington Road, Brighton, and was buried in the Brighton parochial cemetery three days later. 
At the time of his death, Ginnett owned three circus buildings, the Eden Theatre (later the Grand) in North Road, Brighton, the Hippodrome, Belfast, and the Hippodrome, Torquay. His estate, valued in March 1892 at some $36,000, included 274 horses and a large tenting circus with associated paraphernalia. 


@@@@@


doc= 53832


Cooper, John (1833/4-1920), animal trainer, was born in Bread Street, Birmingham, the son of a well-known carrier. Orphaned at the age of ten, he ran away with Hilton's menagerie. After a spell with Manders's menagerie, he became apprenticed to the animal trainer Thomas Batty. In 1852, with Batty in Leeds, Cooper distinguished himself by coolly securing the collar of a lion which had broken free. Batty's men had stood by, paralysed with fear, and Mrs Batty fainted. He was billed the next day as 'the youngest lion Tamer in the world'. Eventually his fame as a lion tamer reached the continent, and he joined the German menagerist Renz. Altogether he spent seventeen years abroad, visiting every town of note in Europe. In 1871 he was presented with a carved pipe by Victor Emmanuel II of Italy. In addition to his group of lions, Cooper became the proprietor of trained elephants. After returning to Britain, in the mid-1870s he joined James W. Myers's American circus, and remained with them until Myers sold up in 1882. Cooper then decided to retire, and sold his animals in 1883, but his love of the profession was so strong that he joined Edmonds's (previously Wombwell's) menagerie, as a trainer and exhibitor. With Edmonds he travelled England, Wales, Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Denmark. His performances with the lions and leopards, in each cage, lasted twenty minutes and people stood spellbound. 
Cooper was a gentle, quiet, and unassuming man whose wonderful control over his animals was legendary. He was the surest tamer of his day, dispensing with all kinds of glitter, and performed in plain evening dress, often without even a switch in his hand. He had a large, dark beard, and beautiful blue eyes. Eventually he retired to Penzance, but then he returned to the midlands, first to Cotteridge, Birmingham, and finally to a commodiously furnished house in Wolverhampton, surrounded by an extensive library, oil paintings, and presentations from crowned heads. He was said to have owned property in Birmingham. He died, unmarried, on 15 April 1920, at his home, 2 Cleveland Road, Wolverhampton; according to his death certificate he was eighty-six. He was buried at Penn Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 53833


Newsome, James (1824-1912), equestrian performer and circus proprietor, the son of Christopher and Mary Newsome, was baptized in Newcastle upon Tyne on 1 June 1824. His elder brother, Timothy (1813-1890), was a celebrated lion tamer. James was indentured to William Batty, the lessee of Astley's Amphitheatre, London, in 1836, and became famous as a horse tamer, trainer, and trick rider. He was a great favourite with circus audiences both in London and the provinces. 
On 17 May 1846 Newsome married Pauline Hinne [
In 1853 Pauline Newsome toured for the season as 'Madame Pauline Newsome's French Troupe', and repeated the experience in 1856. By 1859 Newsome's circus was established. The company travelled the country, staying several weeks or months at each venue, and using specially erected buildings rather than tents. The family prospered; Madame Newsome directed the business arrangements of the circus, while her husband was horse trainer and equestrian director. All six of the Newsome daughters were equestrian performers, and were noted in the hunting field as well as in the ring. 
A fire at their circus in Edinburgh in 1887 causing damage estimated at $7000 brought about a change in the family's fortunes, and they were forced to sell up in 1889 after a poor season in Sunderland. The family dispersed to other circuses, and eventually Pauline and James Newsome retired to Cleethorpes, where they lived near their daughter Virginie, who was now married. Pauline Newsome died there on 25 September 1904; James Newsome survived her until 1 January 1912. They were both buried in the Beacon Avenue cemetery, Cleethorpes. 


@@@@@


doc= 53834


Bannister, James (1758/9-1836), circus proprietor, is of unknown parentage and upbringing. He was one of the earliest circus owners to take his show, Bannister's Equestrian Troupe, on tour. In 1804 they were at Stamford in Lincolnshire for the mid-Lent fair and soon afterwards performed at Grantham with Bannister's daughter, Miss S. Bannister ['see below'], on the tightrope and slack wire. Individually and also in partnership with his fellow equestrian performer, James West, Bannister toured the north of England and Scotland from about 1810; later displays of Bannister's Equestrian Company and Bannister's Olympic circus, an offshoot of Astley's Amphitheatre, appeared at Norwich (1813) and Newcastle and Hull (1815-16). During this period the company employed several prominent performers, among them the equestrians Mr Kemp, Henry Bryson, and James West, and the rider and rope dancer Henry Michael Hengler. In 1816 Bannister employed the artist and later Royal Academician David Roberts (1796-1864) as a scene-painter at his Nicholson Street circus in Edinburgh. Roberts toured with the circus from April 1816, stopping at Carlisle, Newcastle, Hull, and York; in January 1817 Bannister established a new circus and theatre company, the Pantheon, with the musician Montague Corri. Soon afterwards Roberts left the company when his employer was declared bankrupt. Bannister died, aged seventy-seven, on 6 November 1836 and was survived by his two daughters, both of whom worked with their father's companies. 
Miss 


@@@@@


doc= 53835


Barry, Thomas (c.1810-1857), clown, was born in Ireland about 1810. He was noted with Samwell's circus in Swansea in 1842, and as a white-faced ring clown at Astley's circus for long periods between 1843 and 1856. In 1844 he sailed the Thames from Vauxhall to Westminster in a tub drawn by four geese, an illusion originated by Dicky Usher in 1809. Celebrated as a clown and at the zenith of his fame in 1847, he was found by Sam Wild to be as jovial and good-natured as he had been when performing with Wild's travelling circus ten years earlier. In 1850 he was charged before the Lambeth police court with having assaulted William Henry Harvey, the ballet master at Astley's. 
In 1849 Barry was with Hengler's circus at Windsor, and his benefit at the end of the nine-week season was very profitable. At Astley's during the 1850s he was paid $10 per week. Perhaps his most famous turn was his comic imitation of a parliamentary candidate, with a speech from the hustings. A portrait shows that his make-up consisted of a white face, with small, delicately outlined red mouth, red triangles on his cheeks, greatly exaggerated black eyebrows, and a bald wig. He made guest appearances with other companies, being noted in 1853 at both Madame Macarte's circus in Wolverhampton and at E. T. Smith's Drury Lane circus in London. On one occasion, following a quarrel with the Shakespearian jester W. F. Wallett, he left Astley's in a huff to keep a public house: he was landlord of The Crown tavern, Lambeth, in 1848-50 and again in 1856-7. He finally left Astley's in 1856, when his right to choose his parts was withdrawn, but he died the following year, on 26 March, at Clapham, London. He was buried in Norwood cemetery. His widow, Elizabeth, an actress (formerly Mrs Hugh Campbell), lived until 1873, and his son, Tom Barry junior, followed his father's profession. 


@@@@@


doc= 53836


Batty, Thomas (c.1832-1903), animal trainer and circus proprietor, was a nephew of William Batty, the lessee of Astley's Amphitheatre, London. Celebrated as a lion tamer, he is also said to have been the first to train an elephant to stand on its head. He had many life-threatening struggles with the lions he 'tamed': he had so many scars on one side of his body that, it was said, a half-crown could not be placed between them. He would enter the ring, clad in Lincoln green and long leather boots, with a short whip in his hand. The lions would spring at the bars of their cage with fierce snarls, and he would strike at their paws with his whip, provoking their fury. Someone in the audience would always entreat him not to enter the cage, but he would slip in and have a lively ten minutes or so. From about 1859 he performed on the continent. On one occasion, in Hamburg, he entered the cage wearing a glittering spangled costume, whereupon one of the lions mauled him badly, tearing off the costume and scoring his back. He escaped by using the butt of the gun which he carried at that time; another tamer, Lucas, was killed by the same lions in Paris in 1869. Batty returned to Britain in 1874 and began a provincial tour with his own circus, which enjoyed a reputation for grandeur and excellence. He claimed to pay more in wages to his performers than any two other travelling circuses. 
Batty and his first wife (whose name is unknown) had ten children who were brought up in the circus. Their son George became a famous jockey act rider and proprietor. Mrs Batty died in 1875 and Batty later married Sarah Footit, 'nee' Crockett ('c'.1836-1923). His fortunes declined in his later years, and he entered the workhouse at Newcastle upon Tyne. He died in the Newcastle City Lunatic Asylum, Gosforth, on 22 September 1903. 


@@@@@


doc= 53837


Aguzzi, Elizabeth Clarice (1856-1938), equestrian performer, was born at 3 Felix Street, Lambeth, London, on 4 February 1856, the daughter of Antoni Aguzzi, an equestrian performer, and his wife Helen, 'nee' Smith. Her circus performances, as a bareback and trick act rider, were first noted in the 1870s. Playbills for her performances at Hengler's circus in London for the 1873-4 season advertised her engagements in Paris, Madrid, and Lisbon, as well as at Carl Hagenbeck's circus in Germany. She later rode with Barnum and Bailey's and with Sanger's circus. 
Lizzie Aguzzi married William Francois (Billy) Harvey (1833-1889), an equestrian clown, with whom she had two sons, Erno and Will, who achieved some popularity in the 1890s, under the name the Aguzzi Brothers, as equestrian performers and wire-walkers. Lizzie Aguzzi appeared with William Holland's Grand International Cirque at the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden, during the 1884-5 season in a graceful double act with her husband. She was with Hengler's at Birmingham in 1886, and again at the Covent Garden circus in 1889, in which year her husband died. The last record of her performing is with Alfred Whitmee's short-lived circus at Oxford in 1893. She died on 10 May 1938 in Tooting Bec Hospital, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 53838


Boswell, Nellie (1858/9-1938), equestrian performer, was born in Paris, one of the three daughters of James Clements Boswell (1826-1859), an acrobatic circus clown, and his wife, Rebecca (1814-1898), the daughter of the circus proprietor Thomas Taplin Cooke. She was first noted with Hengler's circus at Hull in 1874, and continued to appear with Hengler's circuses for almost twenty years. She was famous for her character delineation, on horseback, of a Newhaven fishwife, then a jolly young waterman, and thirdly a highland laddie, or Rob Roy McGregor, when she changed her costumes with great rapidity and danced a hornpipe and a Scottish reel with as much ease as if she were on terra firma. She also performed a scene entitled 'The Daughter of the Regiment' on horseback. In 1876 she was described as 'a good-looking and unpretentious young lady, appropriately clad in a tunic and trousers of crimson silk... Without further delay she was on the broad, flat saddle... soon she was standing, now on one foot, now on the other, in a series of attitudes which, besides exhibiting her complete mastery of the equestrian difficulties of the situation, were eminently graceful in themselves. ('Liverpool Weekly Albion', 25 Nov 1876)' On 30 October 1878 Boswell married the widowed circus clown Frederick Isaac Cattle, but she continued to perform until 1892. They had three sons and one daughter. She died at her home, 11 Cyprus Grove, Blackpool, on 21 May 1938 at the age of seventy-nine, her husband having predeceased her. 


@@@@@


doc= 53839


Chapman, Ellen (1830/31-1899), lion tamer, was the daughter of Harry Chapman, a peep-show proprietor. As a child she was brought up by the Manders family, at that time associated with George Wombwell's menagerie. She had no formal education: at her marriage, neither she nor her husband could sign their names. She performed at Wombwell's as the 'Lion Queen', billed as Mlle Pauline de Vere. She frequently worked with a mixed group of lions, tigers, and leopards, was extremely courageous, lovely to look at, and always thrilled the public. In 1847 Queen Victoria patronized Wombwell's and paid tribute to the 'British Lion Queen'. Observers noted her daring feats, her nerve, her self-possession, and her cool bravery as she inserted her head into the extended jaws of a noble lion. When asked what her feelings were during her performances, she replied that she had none, she was so accustomed to performing that her feats never struck her as dangerous. At Stepney fair in 1848, having already made a reputation for herself, she remet 'Lord' George Sanger (1825?-1911), who had just started a circus on his own account. Two years later, on 1 December 1850, they were married in Sheffield. They had two daughters. Later Ellen often took the part of Britannia, with gilded trident and painted shield, in Sanger's circus processions. Madame Pauline de Vere appeared at Lord George Sanger's circus, in her serpentine dance in the lions' den, as late as 1895, when she was noted at Merthyr Tudful in July. She died on 30 April 1899 at 9 Bruce Grove, Tottenham, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 53840


Pauline Newsome (c.1825-1904)], an equestrian performer with whom he sometimes rode in double acts. Hinne was a member of a famous French circus family, the fourth daughter of Johann Hinne and his wife, Franzisca, 'nee' Zinsberger, and was born in Berlin. She travelled to Britain with her family about 1845 and became principal dancer on horseback at Astley's. Following their marriage, the couple sought their fortunes abroad and spent six years with Franconi's Cirque Olympique at Paris, where Newsome was engaged as principal horseman. Afterwards the Newsomes visited Belgium and Germany, and returned to England late in 1852 with their three daughters, Adelaide, Emma, and Marie. Three more daughters, Ella, Pauline, and Virginie, were born in Britain. The Newsomes initially joined Hernandez and Stone's circus, with whom James Newsome went into partnership in 1854-5. He became a partner with Pablo Fanque for the 1855-6 season. 


@@@@@


doc= 53841


Blight, Ellen Eliza (1833/4-1850), lion tamer, was the daughter of John Blight (or Bright), a bugle player and bandleader with George Wombwell's menagerie, and his wife, Elizabeth, the daughter of Samuel Wombwell and so George Wombwell's sister. As a young child Ellen travelled with the menagerie and showed no fear of the animals, and frequently rode on the back of the Bengal tiger. In 1849 she succeeded Ellen Chapman as the 'Lion Queen' in the menagerie, and performed that year before Queen Victoria. On Friday 11 January 1850, while the menagerie was at Chatham, on the Military Road, some naval officers strolled in at about nine o'clock after the conclusion of the public performance, and asked to see the act. Ellen Blight complied, entered a cage containing a lion and a tiger, and rashly clipped the dozing tiger on the nose with her small whip. The animal jumped up, catching the Lion Queen by her dress. She fell; the tiger's claws stripped the flesh from her right leg, and then the animal caught her by the throat, mortally wounding her. The tiger was driven off with an iron bar, and Blight was removed, unconscious, to a living-van, and attended by a doctor who was present, but she died within minutes. Both her parents and a brother witnessed her death. 
Ellen Blight, sometimes referred to as Ellen or Helen Bright, was buried at Coventry on 15 January, in the grave of her cousin William Wombwell. The incident turned the public against the performances of Lion Queens. It was said that George Wombwell had always had a lurking fear of such an accident's happening to his niece, and banned any replacement. The tiger was retained, kept in a separate cage, and was later advertised as the animal which killed the Lion Queen. 


@@@@@


doc= 53842


Moody, Dwight Lyman (1837-1899), evangelist, was born in Northfield, Massachusetts, on 5 February 1837, the sixth of nine children of Edwin Moody (1800-1841), a bricklayer, who died early, and his forceful wife, Betsey, 'nee' Holton (1805-1895). He was educated at the local grammar school and at Northfield Academy for Boys. Becoming a shoe salesman, he was converted in 1855, joined a Congregational church in the following year, and moved to the rising city of Chicago, where he prospered. There he soon launched an undenominational Sunday school that developed into the unattached Illinois Street Church. In 1860 he abandoned his business to become a full-time employee of the Chicago Young Men's Christian Association, acting chiefly as a zealous city missionary but also visiting troops during the civil war. On 28 August 1862 he married the nineteen-year-old Emma Charlotte Revell (died 1903), a calm and self-controlled Baptist who was to accompany him on his main trips to Britain. They had one daughter and two sons. 
Between 1866 and 1870, while president of the Chicago YMCA, Moody became an experienced convention speaker. In 1867 he crossed the Atlantic, basing himself for four months at the London YMCA. He established contact with the circle of evangelicals associated with the annual Mildmay conference and particularly R. C. Morgan, the Brethren publisher and editor of 'The Christian'. In 1871 his home, church, and YMCA were destroyed in the great Chicago fire, but a decisive spiritual experience nerved him for fresh ventures. During a brief visit to London in 1872, when he spoke at Mildmay, he discussed with Morgan a plan for an evangelistic tour of Britain. On 17 June 1873 Moody arrived at Liverpool, unannounced, to mount the enterprise. After missions in York, Sunderland, and Newcastle, he opened a campaign in Edinburgh on 23 November that lasted until late January. Boosted by publicity in 'The Christian', Moody took Edinburgh by storm. Crowds flocked nightly to the Corn Exchange, which held nearly 6000, attracted in part by the singing of his partner, Ira D. Sankey ['see below']. From 8 February Moody enjoyed even greater celebrity in Glasgow, where until April he regularly spoke four times a day. Missions followed in other Scottish towns, in Belfast, Dublin, and Manchester during the autumn, and in Sheffield, Birmingham, and Liverpool in the new year. The climax took place in London between 9 March and 21 July 1875, when he addressed altogether over 21/2 million people at four venues: the Agricultural Hall, Islington; the Royal Opera House, Haymarket; Camberwell Green; and Bow Common. In June an attempted evangelistic visit to Eton College was transferred to an adjacent garden after protests in the House of Lords. Criticized by the secular press for vulgarity, by hyper-Calvinists for distorting the gospel, and by Anglo-Catholics for both, he nevertheless enjoyed enormous popularity and (contrary to some accounts) did make an appreciable impact on non-churchgoers and the working classes. 
Moody sustained similar campaigns in America for the rest of his life. He founded a girls' school (1879), a boys' school (1881), an annual 'Bible' conference (1880) on the Mildmay model (all three at Northfield), and a 'Bible' institute for lay workers in Chicago (1889). During 1881-3 he was again in the United Kingdom, holding missions in Newcastle, Edinburgh, Glasgow, and elsewhere, perhaps the most notable being a visit to the University of Cambridge in November 1882. Between November 1883 and June 1884 he preached in temporary iron tabernacles on eleven successive sites in London, receiving less acclaim than in 1875 but quietly meeting many metropolitan notables. On a final visit to Britain in 1891-2 Moody gave addresses briefly in London and more extensively in Scotland. He collapsed in 1899 while conducting a campaign in Kansas City, and died of heart failure on 22 December 1899 in Northfield, where he was buried on 26 December. 


Moody and Sankey successfully adapted the American revivalist tradition to a respectable urban world, dropping the inherited 'anxious seat' for potential converts in favour of less threatening enquiry rooms and organizing increasingly careful preparations such as domestic visitation. Moody insisted on interdenominational co-operation, helping to draw together the Free Church and United Presbyterians in Scotland. His preaching was deliberately compatible with both Calvinism and Arminianism, but he did adopt the increasingly widespread belief in a premillennial second advent. Although he normally consorted with businessmen, he encouraged measures of civic responsibility such as temperance efforts, free breakfasts for the poor, and refuges for destitute children. In Britain his message seemed radical because of its democratic populism. Strong, square-shouldered, and sporting a long brown beard, Moody used simple language, homely illustrations, and a dash of Yankee humour to bring 'Bible' stories alive. His published sermons circulated widely. Moody and Sankey probably represent the chief cultural influence of the United States on Britain during the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 53843


Ira David Sankey (1840-1908), Moody's singing colleague, was born on 28 August 1840 at Edinburgh, Pennsylvania. He was educated at the high school in Newcastle, Pennsylvania, and entered his father's bank there in 1857. In 1863 he married Fanny, 'nee' Edwards. A lifelong Methodist, he encountered Moody at a YMCA conference in 1870 and, though without vocal training, joined his missions to 'sing the gospel'. After congregational singing, led whenever possible by a mass choir, Sankey accompanied his own baritone solos on a harmonium. Rousing or plaintive melodies possessing memorable choruses reminiscent of the music hall were interspersed with anecdotal sermonettes. His immensely popular 'Sacred Songs and Solos' (1873 and many subsequent editions) came to include a few of his own compositions, especially 'There were Ninety and Nine'. Sankey visited Britain without Moody in 1898-9 and 1901, eventually dying at Brooklyn, New York, on 14 August 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 53844


John Caerleon (d. c.1482), also apparently known as John Kent, who is said by Leland to have had a distinguished academic career at Cambridge in the fifteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 53850


Streete, Thomas (1621-1689), astronomer and astrologer, was born on 5 March 1621 in Cork. As an ensign in Colonel Kingsmill's regiment under Inchiquin, he fought for the king at Tredagh and Dublin, and was twice captured. After the Restoration, Streete lived in London, initially at the New Buildings on Tower Hill, and later in Popping Court, near Fleet Street. There are no records of his having had any formal schooling. He was employed by Elias Ashmole, first as a clerk and then, in 1667, as deputy comptroller in the Excise Office for London, Middlesex, and Surrey. The post was renewed in 1671. For this Streete earned $150 per annum. 
Despite his humble background and somewhat marginal status, Streete's abilities were acknowledged by the most eminent natural philosophers of the day. He was an early and committed heliocentrist, whose principal work was 'Astronomia Carolina: a New Theorie of Coelestial Motions' (1661); a work of computational astronomy, with extensive tables of planetary positions and motions, this became a standard textbook used well into the eighteenth century. It was consulted, as were Streete's ephemerides, by Newton, Flamsteed, and Halley, while Ashmole -- and undoubtedly others -- also used it to cast horoscopes. 'Astronomia Carolina' was the first printed text in English to discuss Kepler's first and third laws of planetary motion (alongside Streete's own version of Kepler's second law). Streete followed this up with 'An Appendix to Astronomia Carolina' (1664), dedicated to Ashmole, and 'The Description and Use of the Planetary Systeme' (1674), as well as a running defence of his work in pamphlets countering the attacks of another self-taught astronomer, the astrologer and mathematician Vincent Wing. 
Although he was never invited to join the charmed circle of the Royal Society, Streete's abilities were recognized by its leading members. His attempt to solve the notoriously difficult problem of ascertaining longitude at sea won the commendation of Lord Brouncker, John Wilkins, John Pell, and Sir Jonas Moore in a testimonial attesting that Streete 'hath attained a greater Exactitude in the Discovery of true Longitude by the motion of the Moon then hath yet been Extant' (Josten, 3.1080). He viewed a lunar eclipse with Edmond Halley in 1675, and was invited by Robert Hooke to observe Mercury's transit of the sun at Gresham College in October 1677; it is probable that there were other such occasions for which no record survives. After Streete's death Halley edited a second edition of 'Astronomia Carolina', with an appendix, in 1710. 
Streete was both an autodidact and a respected natural philosopher at a time when the two still commonly went together. As with other such men, including Vincent Wing and Jeremy Shakerley, astronomy and astrology shared his attention. Thus, for example, in the dedication of 'Astronomia Carolina', he related the coronation of Charles II to the 'rare and most remarkable Appearance of Mercury in the sun' (its transit of the sun). This was no mere rhetorical conceit; the belief in a correspondence between the natural and the social was still widely held even among the readership of a specialized work such as 'Astronomia Carolina'. 
More specifically, the hopes raised by exciting new discoveries and theories in astronomy seemed to Streete to apply equally to astrology, as the application of such new knowledge to human affairs. As early as 1652 Streete produced 'A Double Ephemeris for the year... 1653: Geocentricall and Heliocentricall'; this set of tables along with those of his friend and fellow researcher Joshua Childrey were the first of their kind. Both of Streete's tables were explicitly intended for use by astrologers for the improvement of their art, as well as to convince doubting astronomers. He defended both geocentric and heliocentric aspects (that is, angular relationships between the planets), arguing that 'long continued and infallible experiments do also confirm the same, both in the Change of Weather, and things of near concernment unto us'. However, as befitted a careful natural philosopher who was also a royalist writing in 1652, he added, 'Let honest Astrologers be cautious... and modest in their Predictions. So will I' (Streete, 'Double Ephemeris', dedication). 
Streete wrote other ephemerides, 'with Astrological Observations thereon', for 1663 and finally 1683. He died in Westminster on 17 August 1689 and was buried in Westminster New Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 53851


Steiger, Isabelle de (1836-1927), artist and theosophist, was born at 2 Canning Street, Liverpool, on 28 February 1836, the daughter of Joshua Lace, a local solicitor. She attended Miss Hackney's day school at Liverpool and Avonbank School, Stratford upon Avon. Her early, uneventful life at Liverpool was followed by equally uneventful years spent shuttling between England and Switzerland after her marriage, in 1861, to a Swiss cotton merchant, Rudolf Adolf von Steiger von Riggesberg. For reasons of both business and health the de Steigers (as they were more usually known) moved to Egypt, where Rudolf died from tuberculosis in 1870. After returning to England in 1874 Isabelle completed her formal art-training at the Slade School and launched her career as a professional artist. In this she met with a fair degree of success: between 1879 and 1926 she exhibited at many London and provincial galleries -- only once at the Royal Academy, but on twenty-nine occasions at the Walker Art Gallery in her native Liverpool. 
Madame de Steiger did not confine herself to historical and mythological oils, of which her 'Cleopatra after the Battle of Actium' was the best known, but obtained commissions for floral subjects and portraits in pastels. In addition she was occasionally employed as an illustrator, although her most notable venture in this field was not a success: her frontispieces for A. E. Waite's occult journal the 'Unknown World' (1894-5) are remarkable only for their uninspiring subjects and insipid style. Pictorial art was not, however, the only outlet for her creativity; on her return to England she had deeply involved herself in spiritualism, and when the Theosophical Society became firmly established in the early 1880s she embraced this as well. In the course of that decade Madame de Steiger's frequent contributions to the journals of both movements brought her into contact with the proponents of less public magical and mystical traditions. She thus became one of a loosely associated group of remarkable women: H. P. Blavatsky, Mabel Collins, Anna Kingsford, and -- most significantly -- Mary Anne Atwood. Unlike the other women Mrs Atwood, who joined none of the esoteric societies of the time, represented not the modern movement but theosophy as understood by the mystic Jakob Boehme and by the early alchemists; it was to this that Isabelle de Steiger now committed herself. 
In essence Mrs Atwood looked upon alchemy as a 'science of the soul' which, when properly understood, would enable the adept to attain divine union by way of illumination gained in an exalted form of mesmeric trance. Her theory had been set out in 1850 in 'A Suggestive Inquiry into the Hermetic Mystery', but this book, published anonymously, had been recalled and most copies destroyed because Mrs Atwood and her father, Thomas South, felt that the world was unready for such a revelation. Isabelle de Steiger was busily studying alchemy within the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, which she had entered in 1888, taking the motto 'Altiora peto' (I seek the heights). She now proved to be one of Mrs Atwood's few sympathetic hearers, and the only promoter of her views. 
However, promoting Mrs Atwood's idea of alchemy proved to be a far from simple task and the two books Madame de Steiger devoted to it, 'On a Gold Basis' (1907) and 'Superhumanity' (1916), were both utter failures. She met with a similar lack of support for her ideas within the Alchemical Society, which she helped to found in 1912, and succeeded only in irritating A. E. Waite (1857-1942) by accusing him of failing to retain his youthful enthusiasm for the Atwood creed. His irritation stayed with him, and when he was called on to write 'that silly Preface to 'Memorabilia'' (her posthumous memoirs, 1927), his diary records that he 'found it almost impossible to do these few pages because of their subject' (Gilbert, 'Waite', 152). Madame de Steiger succeeded in prodding others to better effect. When Mrs Atwood died in 1910 she persuaded William Tait, the Belfast publisher, that a new edition of the 'Suggestive Inquiry' was justified. She then carried out a meticulous editing of the text but declined to write an introduction to the book, so that when it finally appeared in 1918 the praise that greeted it went to W. L. Wilmshurst, who had leaped at the task. 
The praise Madame de Steiger did receive for her writing was accorded to her edition of an obscure but important text of the German Romantic mystic Karl von Eckartshausen. 'The Cloud upon the Sanctuary' (1896) was translated and annotated by her with an introduction by her mentor in occultism, J. W. Brodie-Innes, who was also her neighbour when she lived at Edinburgh during the 1890s. In later editions (1903, 1909) he was replaced by A. E. Waite, who was much happier with Madame de Steiger's enthusiasm for the notion of a 'secret church' (which mirrored his own ideas) than with her views on alchemy. 
Madame de Steiger's relations with Waite were usually cordial: she had worked with him on the 'Unknown World', and when the Order of the Golden Dawn split in two, in 1903, she supported Waite's 'mystical' faction as opposed to the 'magical' tradition represented by Brodie-Innes. She also praised Waite in her memoirs, but she could not forgive his rejection of Mrs Atwood and in her final years she looked instead to Rudolf Steiner and his Anthroposophical Society for spiritual comfort. This was all she had, as material comfort was largely denied her following the destruction of most of her paintings in a fire at an Edinburgh furniture repository in 1900. By this time she had retired to Rockferry in Cheshire -- within sight of Liverpool but more genteel. There she continued both to paint and to write, but demand for her pictures matched the demand for her books and it is perhaps fitting that her last painting, which she completed shortly before her death at Rockferry on 1 January 1927, was entitled 'Castles in the Air'. 
As a painter of classical historical subjects in the style of Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema, whom she consciously imitated, Isabelle de Steiger's work has long been consigned to a well-merited obscurity that is shared by her literary efforts -- occult works possessed of an almost uniquely impenetrable obscurity of their own. But for all the failings of her esoteric creativity, Madame de Steiger was instrumental in preserving Mrs Atwood's 'A Suggestive Inquiry into the Hermetic Mystery'. In its turn, this book, unquestionably the most remarkable alchemical text of modern times, inspired a minor masterpiece of modern fiction, Lindsay Clarke's 'The Chymical Wedding' (1989). 


@@@@@


doc= 53852


Smith, Robert Cross (1795-1832), astrologer and journalist, was born on 19 March 1795 to respectable parents in Abbots Leigh near Bristol. By 1820 he had found work as a clerk in London. In the summer of that year he married Sarah Lucas, with whom he had six children. Known to his readers as Raphael, or Merlinus Anglicus Jun., he was a key figure in the revival of astrology in the nineteenth century. He edited the first weekly astrological journal in 1824 and from 1826 produced a successful almanac, the 'Prophetic Messenger', whose copyright was keenly sought after his death. His style was popular and dramatic: he wrote of astrology as an exclusive and learned practice, but his work linked it to popular tales of the supernatural. Of delicate health, Smith died of consumption at his home in Castle Street East, London, on 26 February 1832. 


@@@@@


doc= 53853


Watkins, Geoffrey Maurice (1896-1981), bookseller and publisher, was born on 7 June 1896 at 26 Trefoil Road, Wandsworth, London, the only child of John Maurice Watkins, founder of Watkins' Bookshop, and his wife, Bertha Maude, formerly Bullock. Watkins attended Emanuel School, Wandsworth, and completed his education at Heidelberg from 1909 to 1913. The emphasis of his schooling was so European that when he was invited to tea at Max Gate, while he was stationed at Dorchester during the First World War, he had no idea who Thomas Hardy was. 
Watkins' Bookshop had been founded in 1893 as an adjunct of the publishing house of the Theosophical Society, but by 1896 it had become independent and was settled in Cecil Court, off Charing Cross Road. In 1919 Geoffrey Watkins left the army and officially joined the firm, which was now engaged in publishing as well as bookselling, in order to provide essential support for his father, who by 1922 was totally blind. Between the wars father and son catered for readers, with books, and for the writers of the books, with tea, at the almost daily sessions of 'tea, talk and theosophy' in the office at the back of the shop. Those who might be expected to appear included Yeats and AE (George Russell) to discuss fairies and Neoplatonism with G. R. S. Mead, A. E. Waite, and Stephen McKenna (the translator of Plotinus), and also the storytellers Algernon Blackwood, James Stephens, and Standish O'Grady, the oddities Edith Sitwell and Lady Ottoline Morrell, and the infamous Aleister Crowley; all were regular visitors. 
Watkins was of necessity in charge of the day-to-day running of the business and oversaw both the shop and the publishing house, whose list ranged from Mead's remarkable journal 'The Quest', to Evelyn Underhill's editions of the English mystics and the first printing of C. G. Jung's 'Septem sermones ad mortuos'. The shop survived the blitz and after the Second World War the breadth of vision in the firm's output was expanded to take in new works of the Gurdjieff-Ouspensky school, alchemy, and the tarot, and to issue reprints of classics within its specialist field. In 1947 John Watkins died and the business came completely into Watkins's hands. Under his sole direction it continued to be a haven for seekers after 'rejected knowledge', although the visitors were changing; now they included Aldous Huxley, Alan Watts, and Kathleen Raine. There were also innovations. In 1953 Geoffrey issued 'The Hermetic Museum', the first of a series of important reprints of alchemical texts and studies by A. E. Waite and others which have proved to be as valuable to historians of science as to would-be alchemists. 
But for all his publishing genius Watkins wrote very little. He contributed anonymously to Christmas Humphreys's 'Concentration and Meditation' (1935) and wrote a few other slight pieces. Beyond these and his enlightened publishing programme, his real contribution to scholarship came through the guidance, encouragement, and kindness he showed to all those who struggled to bring academic acceptance to 'rejected knowledge'. He always ensured that important books went to the right home -- thus Yeats's copy of Mead's 'Orpheus' came to rest in the National Library of Ireland via Kathleen Raine -- and that students should avoid any book unsuited to their needs. 
Watkins achieved all this without loss to his private life. Neither his wife, Flora Kate Phelps (1900-1975), whom he had married in 1933, nor their son Christopher, born in 1938, was sacrificed to the business. Nor did Watkins compromise his friendships. To avoid accusations of partisanship he never allied himself to any of the movements or personalities that came and went during his lifetime; the meetings of such societies as he did join (the Buddhist Society, and the Guild of Pastoral Psychology, for example), he attended discreetly, and he continued to observe the Anglican form of his Christian faith. He could not, however, continue the business indefinitely; his son did not wish to take it up and in 1974, shortly before his wife's death, he sold both shop and publishing house. 
In his own words Geoffrey Watkins had 'put forward books to do with mysticism, meditation and self-training in its very best sense' (private information). However, to others the shop was something more than a stock, at once comprehensive and carefully selected, of books on 'Theosophy, Christian and Oriental mystical philosophy, astrology, alchemy, and other esoteric subjects' (Watkins, 'Yeats', 308). It was, in the eyes of the poet Kathleen Raine, a 'University of Lost Knowledge' (private information), a centre in which not only the books but also the people who read and wrote them were gathered, jointly aiding the gradual academic acceptance that the study of these subjects constitutes a legitimate facet of the history of ideas. During his retirement Watkins continued to offer his advice and support to all who sought it. When he died at Kings Ride Nursing Home, Richmond, Surrey, on 15 August 1981, Watkins' Bookshop died with him: it might exist in name, but without his presence it could not live. 


@@@@@


doc= 53855


Ayton, William Alexander (1816-1909), Church of England clergyman and alchemist, was born on 28 April 1816 in the Bloomsbury district of London, the son of William Capon Ayton. He was educated at the Charterhouse School, London, and Trinity Hall, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1841. In the same year he took holy orders and he was ordained priest the following year. From 1850 to 1873 he held a series of rural livings in the midlands, and was then appointed vicar of Chacombe, Northamptonshire, where he remained until his retirement in 1894. 
Ayton took up occult pursuits while at Cambridge but did not develop them extensively until the 1880s, when an unhappy involvement with the spurious Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor in 1884 was followed by a significant role in the affairs of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, which he and his wife, Anne (died 1898), joined in July 1888; he took as his motto within the order 'Virtute orta occidunt rarius' ('those that rise by virtue rarely fall'), and his wife's was 'Quam potera adjutato' ('I will help as much as I can'). In 1890 he conducted the marriage of Samuel Liddell Mathers (1854-1918), a founder of the order, and Mina Bergson at Chacombe, and following the collapse of the order in 1901 he acted as co-chief of its rump with A. E. Waite until his death. 
Alchemy, however, was Ayton's great passion, his experiments being conducted largely in an alchemical laboratory that he had built in his cellar at Chacombe, 'where the Bishop cannot see it' (Yeats, 184). His letters reveal a profound knowledge of alchemical texts but he was very much a practising alchemist and claimed to have perfected the elixir of life, albeit fruitlessly: he told W. B. Yeats that he had 'put it away on a shelf... but when I got it down the other day it had all dried up' (ibid.). Ayton's final years, until his death at home at the age of ninety-two, on 1 January 1909, were spent at Grove Lodge, Saffron Walden, where he continued to warn of the dangers inherent in occultism while still encouraging others, such as Julius Kohn, the translator of many classical alchemical texts, in their own occult researches. 


@@@@@


doc= 53856


Barrett, Francis (fl. 1780-1814), writer on magic and demonologist, described himself as a 'Professor of Chemistry, Natural and Occult Philosophy, the Cabala, etc.' (Barrett, 'Magus'). His dates of birth and death, and his antecedents, are unknown. A dated manuscript translation of part of Georg von Welling's 'Opus mago-cabalisticum' (1719) shows that Barrett was active in 1780, while a 'Times' report of his inept attempts at ballooning in Greenwich and Swansea in 1802 refers to him as an apothecary who had once owned a shop in Walworth. He was married with one son. 
In 1801 Barrett published 'The Magus, or, Celestial Intelligencer', in which he advertised private instruction on occult philosophy at 99 Norton Street, Marylebone. A frontispiece captioned FRC ('Frater rosae crucis', Brother of the rosy cross), portrays a dark-haired, romantic-looking individual. Composed in the Christian tradition, 'The Magus' was a farrago of Renaissance alchemy and natural and talismatic magic that fitted contemporary Gothic taste, and which was typical of the interests of late eighteenth-century Rosicrucian brotherhoods in Germany. The book's most startling feature was a set of gargoyle-like portraits of demons conjured up in ritual magic ceremonies. Barrett was almost certainly also the author of the anonymous 'Lives of the Adepts in Alchymical Philosophy' (1814) which John Ferguson dismissed as 'superficial and superstitious' (Ferguson, 41). 
Rumours that Barrett founded a sodality in Cambridge appear unfounded and his one known pupil, John Parkins of Little Gonerby, Grantham, was the subject of criticism for dissolute behaviour. Interest in Barrett's ritual magic in the 1860s was due to the tea merchant and occultist Frederick Hockley (1808-1885), who reprinted 'The Magus' in 1870. However, this did not succeed in rehabilitating Barrett's reputation in the eyes of late nineteenth-century writers on occultism who regarded him as a 'credulous amateur' (Barrett, 'Lives', 1888, 5). 


@@@@@


doc= 53857


Ferguson, John (1838-1916), chemist and bibliographer, was born on 24 January 1838 at Alloa in Clackmannanshire, Scotland, the second of three children of William Ferguson and his wife, Margaret Kidd. His father moved from Alloa at an early date, settling in Glasgow as a merchant. Ferguson was educated at the old high school of Glasgow, at that time situated between John Street and Montrose Street, and subsequently matriculated at the University of Glasgow for the session 1855-6. In total he spent nine years as a matriculated student, most of these in the faculty of arts, graduating BA in 1861 and MA with honours in 1862. As an undergraduate he distinguished himself, winning several prize essay competitions, with titles as diverse as 'Historical account of the papacy as a temporal power in Europe' and 'On cohesion'. However, rather than proceeding to Oxford or Cambridge, the typical course for brilliant arts faculty students to follow, he remained in Glasgow to develop his increasing interest in science, which had begun in the late 1850s. 
At that time Professor William Thomson (later Lord Kelvin) was engaged on his research into electric telegraph cables and Ferguson was employed by him, both in the laboratory and on field trips, to carry out numerous electrometric experiments. In addition to experimental work Ferguson was also required to prepare an abstract of some of Thomson's lectures for the use of students. This resulted in the publication of 'Elements of Dynamics', part 1 (1863), and the first occurrence of his name in print. In 1863 he matriculated in the faculty of medicine in order to pursue studies in chemistry. After a time working as a student in the chemistry laboratory he became assistant to the professor, Thomas Anderson, and in 1868 was appointed university assistant with responsibility for tutorial classes and the supervision of students in the laboratory. By 1869 ill health forced Anderson to hand over general responsibility for running the chemistry department to Ferguson, who became intimately involved in planning its transfer to the new university site at Gilmorehill to the west of the city centre. Following Anderson's death in 1874 Ferguson was appointed to the regius professorship. By all accounts Ferguson was an excellent teacher, to which the number of his students subsequently occupying chairs of chemistry, both in Britain and throughout the empire, bears eloquent testimony. However, by 1867, with the publication of a paper on Geber in 'The Laboratory', discussing the identity of this writer with the Arabic author Jabir, Ferguson had already established the historical and bibliographical character of almost all his subsequent output. It was this bias towards the more developmental and philosophical aspects of his subject that was to cause some contemporaries to criticize the absence of experimentation from his work. But as John Millar Thomson, his assistant and subsequently professor of chemistry at King's College, London, remarked, 'from the record of the work done by those who came immediately under his influence, it is clear that he encouraged experimental research in others' (Thomson, 8). 
Ferguson lamented the lack of interest shown in the history of science in Britain and determined to use his position to redress this imbalance to some small degree. After he settled into his new position as professor, a steady stream of papers and articles flowed from his pen. Many of these were published in the proceedings of the several learned societies of which he was a member, for example: 'On the study of the history of chemistry' ('Proceedings of the Philosophical Society of Glasgow', 1875, 27-39), an attempt to periodize the history of chemistry; 'Recent enquiries into the early history of chemistry' ('Proceedings of the Philosophical Society of Glasgow', 1876, 368-89), dealing largely with Greek manuscript sources from the second to the fifth centuries AD; an article on Sir Humphrey Davy for 'Good Words' (1879); and five entries for the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1879-88) on Geber, Christopher Glaser, Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac, Paracelsus, and Karl Wilhelm Scheele. Between 1882 and 1915 he published a series, 'Bibliographical Notes on Histories of Inventions and Books of Secrets', based on talks delivered to the Archaeological Society of Glasgow. In these he focused on the early writers of compendia (Albertus Magnus, Vincent de Beauvais, Polydore Vergil, Roger Bacon, and Conrad Gesner) and books of technical recipes. 
Also, from the mid-1870s until its eventual publication in 1906, Ferguson was working on what has become his most enduring monument, the 'Bibliotheca chemica'. According to the subtitle this purports to be 'A catalogue of the alchemical, chemical and pharmaceutical books in the collection of the late James Young of Kelly and Durris', but in fact was transformed by Ferguson into a detailed biobibliography of alchemical and early chemical writers which has yet to be superseded. By establishing and defining the corpus, the 'Bibliotheca chemica' has become the primary reference work for anyone commencing research in the area. Carl Gustav Jung, for example, referred to it frequently in his books on psychology and alchemy. Although only describing 1300 books (a fraction of what Ferguson was to possess himself) it runs to over a thousand pages in two quarto volumes due to the wealth of bibliographical and biographical information provided for each entry. 
Another subject which was to engage Ferguson over several years was the elusive figure of Paracelsus. His first essay in Paracelsian research was a paper delivered to the Glasgow University Dialectic Society in 1873 simply entitled 'Paracelsus'. This was followed by a series of six 'Bibliographia Paracelsica', issued privately between 1877 and 1896, and in 1894 he acquired the extensive collection of Paracelsica belonging to Dr Eduard Schubert. In 1897 Ferguson published 'Bibliographical Notes on the Witchcraft Literature of Scotland', revealing yet another interest, one which, by his own testimony, 'But for the chance acquisition of one or two rare books, I should never have entered on' ('Some Aspects of Bibliography', 1900, 38). 
Ferguson's personal library was extensive, containing in the region of 18,000 volumes. While it had been his intention to bequeath his collection intact to a public institution, his will could not be found after his death. Consequently the contents of his estate, books, jewellery, silver, and wines were sold at auctions in Glasgow and London in order to satisfy the claims of inheritors. Fortunately the principal part of his library (some 11,000 volumes) dealing with alchemy, early chemistry, metallurgy, mineralogy, the Rosicrucians, Paracelsus, witchcraft, and the Romani language, was preserved from dispersal when the University of Glasgow purchased it in 1921. 
In addition to his scientific pursuits, Ferguson enjoyed music. He was a competent instrumentalist and attended concerts frequently. Thomson in his memoir reports that whenever the violinist Joseph Joachim was playing in Glasgow he would come to visit Ferguson. Ferguson also liked to travel and was often abroad representing the university in an official capacity. He was well liked and possessed a keen if somewhat caustic sense of humour, a fact which may account for his nickname 'Soda'. He was energetic to the end of his life and loved hillwalking in the western highlands. Ferguson was president of the Royal Philosophical Society of Glasgow (1892-5) and of the Glasgow Archaeological Society (1891-4), and a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, the Society of Antiquaries, the Chemical Society, and the Institute of Chemistry in London. He was also an honorary member of the Imperial Military Academy of Petrograd. He died of heart disease on 3 November 1916, at 6 Claremont Terrace, Glasgow, and was buried five days later at the family burying-ground at Alloa. 


@@@@@


doc= 53858


Mathers, Samuel Liddell (1854-1918), occultist, was born on 8 January 1854 at 11 De Beauvoir Place, Hackney, Middlesex, the son of William Mathers, a merchant's clerk, and his wife, Mary Ann, formerly Collins (died 1885). From 1866 to 1870 he received a classical education at Bedford School, before going to live with his widowed mother at Bournemouth, where he worked as a clerk and developed his twin passions of 'magic and the theory of war' (Yeats, 183). His occult studies were first guided by his neighbour and fellow freemason, Frederick Holland, and they were admitted together, in 1882, into the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia, where Mathers was befriended by William Wynn Westcott, with whom he later created the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. 
Mathers's military zeal was expressed by joining a local volunteer regiment and by translating and adapting a French military manual, published in 1884 as 'Practical Instruction in Infantry Campaigning Exercise'. He also took up both fencing and boxing and delighted in aiding the authorities -- as a civilian -- in quelling public disturbances. It was in the context of his militarism that his less desirable personality traits first appeared. Fantasies about his social status are apparent in an early photograph in which he is wearing the uniform of a volunteer lieutenant (he was never commissioned), and his inability to accept defeat with a good grace was recorded by A. E. Waite, who noted that Mathers debarred a potential candidate for the Golden Dawn who had beaten him in a fencing match. Nor could Mathers accept that others matched his knowledge of occultism: he rejected Holland in the early 1880s because he was the better scholar, and Westcott ten years later for the same reason. In this respect Mathers was transparent; Waite described his learning as 'undigested' ('Occult Review', 199) and to W. B. Yeats he 'had much learning but little scholarship, much imagination and imperfect taste' (Yeats, 87). His imagination was nowhere more apparent than in his Celtic pretensions -- already in 1878 he was adding MacGregor to his name and styling himself comte de Glenstrae -- which were to become an increasingly important part of his self-perception. 
After the death of his mother in January 1885 Mathers moved to London and became active in occult circles. By 1887 he had published his first esoteric work, 'The Kabbalah Unveiled', and was helping Westcott to develop the rituals that formed the basis of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. In March 1888 they brought the order into being and, in company with William Woodman, became its first chiefs. One of the first initiates was the artist Mina Bergson (1865-1928), the sister of the philosopher Henri Bergson, who became Mathers's wife in June 1890 and lent her artistic talents to the creation of a second order, the Rosae Rubeae et Aureae Crucis. The rituals of this wholly magical inner order were entirely the work of Mathers who was, without question, a ritualist of genius. 
However, magicians must eat, and Mathers was desperately poor despite his writing; he had published a small book on tarot cards in 1888 and a masterly edition of 'The Key of Solomon the King' in 1889. Escape from poverty came by way of Annie Horniman, who was both a friend of Mina Mathers and a prominent member of the Golden Dawn. She obtained a post for him at her father's private museum and made the couple a regular allowance even when they settled in Paris in May 1892. Mathers fitted well in 'fin de siecle' Paris, moving in its occult circles and establishing, in 1894, the Ahathoor Temple of the Golden Dawn. He was also becoming arrogant and quarrelsome towards London members of the order, engineering Westcott's removal from office, demanding ever more money from Annie Horniman, and expelling her in 1896 when she cut off his allowance. 
By this time Mathers was showing signs of paranoia, but he continued to work on magical texts -- his most significant work, 'The Book of the Sacred Magic of Abra-Melin the Mage', appeared in 1898 -- and he set up a new occult activity in Paris, the Rites of Isis. He also continued to direct the activities of the Golden Dawn, albeit in an increasingly erratic manner. Matters came to a head in 1900 when Mathers wrote to Florence Farr telling her that Westcott had forged the documents on which the order's authority was founded. In the furore that followed Mathers refused to justify his allegation, expelled the 'rebels' and sent Aleister Crowley to take possession of the London headquarters. On their part the members expelled Mathers and had Crowley bodily ejected. Mathers fired off a barrage of manic, abusive letters but for all practical purposes he had lost his influence. Only the rump of the Golden Dawn remained loyal to him and he was taken in by two adventurers, a couple named Horos, whose criminal activities opened the order to public ridicule at their trial in 1901. 
Nor was this the end of Mathers's woes. Two of his unpublished works, an edition of a magical text, the 'Lesser Key of Solomon', and a 'Book of Correspondences', were 'borrowed' by Crowley and published under his name in 1904 and 1909. Even worse, in 1910 Crowley went on to publish the rituals of the Golden Dawn in his journal, 'The Equinox', Mathers having failed to stop the publication by legal means. Mathers lapsed into complete obscurity. When he died at his home, rue Ribera, Paris, on 20 November 1918 of influenza, no one outside occult circles noticed his death. This was in keeping with his own expectations. In 1898 he had declared: 'for the opinion of the ordinary literary critic who neither understands nor believes in Occultism, I care nothing' (Mathers, 'Abra-Melin', xxxviii). 


@@@@@


doc= 53860


Waite, Arthur Edward (1857-1942), mystic and historian of occultism, was born on 2 October 1857 at Brooklyn, New York, the son of Charles Frederick Waite, an American merchant marine captain of Lyme in Connecticut, and his common-law wife, Emma Lovell, whose family were involved in the East India trade. In 1858 Captain Waite died at sea, shortly before the birth of a second child, Frederica. Unhappy in New England, Emma Lovell took her children back to England where, rejected by her family, she raised them in the northern suburbs of London in a genteel poverty alleviated by fervent devotion to the Roman Catholic church to which she had turned for solace. Sacramental Christianity was to remain a profound influence on Waite's mature thought, but such orthodoxy as he professed was lost in the trauma of his sister's death in 1874 which led him away from the church and towards spiritualism. This he rejected as a creed but it served to introduce him, by turns, to theosophy, to alchemy, and to the work of the French occultist Eliphas Levi 
(Alphonse Louis Constant; 1810-1875)
. However, it was not these aspects of the 'occult revival' (the term now applied to the mid-nineteenth century reawakening of educated interest in alchemy, magic, and other aspects of occultism that had previously been treated with ridicule) which were the principal influences on Waite. His thought and writing were largely moulded by the conflicts and tensions of his private life, beginning with his unacknowledged illegitimacy. 
As he completed his two terms at St Charles's College, Bayswater -- the only formal education he ever received -- and passed out of adolescence, Waite turned briefly to ideas of the priesthood. Such vocation as he may have had, however, did not include a call to celibacy and he took up instead his always precarious literary career. As a poet he met with little success but his early studies of the various occult sciences and 'The Mysteries of Magic' (1886), which he translated from Levi's original, all show the critical acumen that would become the hallmark of his mature writing. They also illustrate his ambivalent attitude to occultism in general. Further conflict entered his life in 1888 through an unhappy marriage, on 7 January, to Ada Alice Lakeman (1867-1924), the sister of Dora, Waite's first and only love; Dora married, also unhappily, the Revd Granville Stuart-Menteath. If not materially, Waite undoubtedly psychologically neglected his wife and daughter, Sybil ('b'. 1888), as he turned inward towards his esoteric studies. These bore immediate fruit and the 1890s were Waite's most prolific decade with ten books, fifteen works edited or translated, and the first independent journal in this field, the 'Unknown World', to his credit. 
Waite also entered, in January 1891, the hermetic order of the Golden Dawn which enabled him to indulge in ceremonial without the constraints of Catholic orthodoxy. However, he was never truly an occultist: in all his work he presented himself as a non-denominational mystic, seeking to propagate what he termed the 'secret tradition' -- a knowledge, preserved down the ages, of the way by which man can be spiritually regenerated and attain divine Union, or 'realization in God'. It is ironic that the works in which he clearly expresses this are not those by which he is known. If his most important works of the 1890s were his editions of alchemical texts, issued between 1892 and 1896, the most popular was 'Transcendental Magic' (1896), his translation of Levi's 'Dogme et rituel de l'haute magie'. Similarly the collections of poems he published in the Edwardian era, 'A Book of Mystery and Vision' (1902) and 'Strange Houses of Sleep' (1906), are now forgotten, while 'The Pictorial Key to the Tarot' (1910) and the pack of cards designed under his supervision by Pamela Colman Smith became, as they remain, the most popular pack ever published. They were followed by another commercially successful work, the contents of which were anathema to Waite: 'The Book of Ceremonial Magic' (1911). 
Other strings remained to be added to Waite's bow. In 1901 he became a freemason and rapidly entered every masonic order open to him as a part of his quest for yet further aspects of the secret tradition. He wrote now on the French mystic Louis Claude de Saint-Martin; on the Hebrew cabbala; on the 'Holy Grail'; on the Rosicrucians; on freemasonry; and yet more on alchemy. As part of his active life in esoteric circles he played a prominent part in the tribulations of the Golden Dawn and helped to found the Alchemical Society, while in the everyday world he weaned Arthur Machen away from despair and back to a productive career. 
Waite's own career was now crystallizing. For nine years, from 1899 to 1907, he was a manager for Horlicks, the malted milk company, but from 1908 onwards he depended solely on income from his writing. London proved to be an increasingly uncongenial setting for the journalism that had become an essential supplement to books that were never financially rewarding; 'The Way of Divine Union' (1915), his finest work, sold badly (and is now virtually unknown), and he decided to move. Eventually, in 1919, he moved to Ramsgate from where he returned only to arrange contracts and to oversee the offshoot of the Golden Dawn that he had created in 1915. The long-suffering Ada Waite died in 1924 but her death had little effect on his work, and on 15 August 1933 he married Mary Broadbent Schofield ('b'. 1885), who had been his unpaid secretary for ten years. 
Waite's final years were taken up with completing his studies of the secret tradition: 'The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross' (1924), 'The Secret Tradition in Alchemy' (1926), 'The Holy Kabbalah' (1929), and 'The Holy Grail' (1933), are the new or revised works on which his reputation largely rests. His last book was his autobiography, 'Shadows of Life and Thought' (1938), and although it reveals little enough of his outer life it contains within it the clearest statement of his own beliefs. Waite died at Gordon House, Bridge, near Canterbury, on 19 May 1942, unnoticed in death as in life, and was buried at Bishopsbourne, Kent. 
It is ironic that works of lesser importance in Waite's own eyes -- his translations of Levi's work and the brilliantly innovative tarot cards designed under his guidance -- have ensured that his influence is still felt in the 'New Age' movement, a movement that embodies all that Waite rejected in occultism. This effect of his work is balanced, however, by its influence in varying degrees on writers as diverse as W. B. Yeats, Charles Williams, Arthur Machen, Evelyn Underhill, and T. S. Eliot, and in the wider field of the history of ideas. Through his critical and historical studies of occultism in all its forms, and even more by his carefully edited alchemical texts, Waite brought order out of the chaos of the occult revival and enabled the study of both the history and content of 'rejected knowledge' to become academically acceptable. It is the growing awareness of his importance in this field that has finally brought him the wider acclaim he always deserved. 


@@@@@


doc= 53861


White, Thomas (d. 1813), astrologer, was the author of 'The Beauties of Occult Science Investigated, or, The Celestial Intelligencer' (1810), published in London and Bath, where he may have lived. Little else is known of his life. One of the relatively rare textbooks of astrology published in this period, 'The Beauties' was reprinted in 1811. 'A Set of Astronomical Tables' for 1780-83 also appeared, in 1811. The title of White's main work assumes that judicial astrology is the essence of occult science. Although strongly criticized by one of the few other astrologers then in print, John Worsdale, it was a reasonably comprehensive introduction to that subject which, together with an ephemeris, would have enabled its practice. It shows signs of the continuing ascendancy of natural philosophy, defining astrology as 'the effects derived from the amazing powers of mutual attraction of the different parts and masses (great or small) of matter' (White, 9). 
White is chiefly remembered, however, for his end. In 1813 he was living and working as an astrologer in the Isle of Wight. He was approached by a police informer posing as a client, who asked for and received a reading of his nativity, and paid with marked money. White was then arrested and charged under the 'Vagrancy Act' for 'pretending and professing to tell Fortunes'. He was convicted, and his books and papers seized. He died in 1813 after three months in Winchester gaol. This use of the act against non-vagrant astrologers alarmed many of them. It seems to have set a precedent, and such prosecutions continued sporadically until 1917; the clause was quietly repealed after examination by parliamentary committee in 1989. 


@@@@@


doc= 53862


Dent family (per. c.1820-1927), Far East merchants, came to prominence with the brothers Thomas, Lancelot, and Wilkinson Dent, respectively the third, fifth, and sixth sons of William Dent (1762-1801), merchant, and Jane Wilkinson ('bap'. 1763, died 1840), of Trainlands, Crosby Ravensworth, Westmorland, who had married in 1791; there were in all six sons and one daughter. There is a suggestion that William and his brother Robert were in Canton (Guangzhou) at some point between 1787 and 1796. The Dent family had a financially solid background and provided substantial benefactions locally, including funds for the rebuilding and endowment of Crosby Ravensworth village school in 1784. Links with the Wilkinson family were particularly strong and when William died, leaving an extremely young and large family, Thomas Wilkinson, possibly a London insurance broker and agent, took at least some of the boys under his wing. 
The third son, 


@@@@@


doc= 53863


Wilson, James (fl. 1819-1820), astrologer, described himself as a 'Philomath' (Wilson, title-page) but is now known only as the author of 'A Complete Dictionary of Astrology' (1819). This was a relatively thorough compilation of information on the practice and theory of judicial astrology. As such, it was a rare kind of book to be published before the relative boom of the 1830s. He also produced 'A New and Complete Set of Astrological Tables' (1820). 
Wilson's intention was to render astrology 'open to examination and experiment' (Wilson, iv), in order that people might prove or disprove its worth for themselves. His work commended Ptolemy and Placidus but occasionally criticized the former, which earned him the opprobrium of his contemporary, John Worsdale. Nothing is known of his life and personal circumstances. 


@@@@@


doc= 53864


Bateman, Hester (bap. 1708, d. 1794), silversmith, was baptized on 7 October 1708 at St Michael-le-Querne, Paternoster Row, in the City of London, the daughter of John Neden or Needham. Little is known of her early life, but as she was unable to sign her name it must be assumed that any education she received was rudimentary. She was living in the parish of St Botolph, Aldersgate, at the time of her marriage on 20 May 1732 to John Bateman (1704-1760), wiredrawer and gold chain maker, of St Bartholomew-the-Less. They had five children, Letitia ('b'. 1733), Ann ('b'. 1736), Peter ('b'. 1740), John, and Jonathan (1747-1791). 
It is reasonable to assume that Hester Bateman may have been involved with the business for some time before her husband died of consumption in 1760. In his will Bateman left his tools to his wife, which suggests that he expected her to continue the business. As a wiredrawer and gold chain maker he had not needed to register a mark at Goldsmiths' Hall. It is significant that Hester Bateman should have done so after her husband's death: by registering her first mark in April 1761 she signalled to the silversmithing trade that she intended to continue her husband's work. 
Although by then in her early fifties Hester Bateman began building on the established business with the help of her workmen and apprentices, and her sons Jonathan and Peter, who were both apprenticed to their sister Letitia's husband, Richard Clarke. Given the understanding that we now possess of the complex organization of the gold and silver trades it cannot be assumed that she made the silver that bears her mark. Any manufacturing silversmith of the time relied upon a system of in-house specialists and outworkers to complete the product successfully. What is more certain is that Hester Bateman was the driving force behind the enterprise. She gradually expanded the range of goods and the quantity to supply a largely middle-class market using the latest, most cost-efficient manufacturing processes. The firm's deliberate use of new ideas and technology allowed it to compete with the cheap silver and Sheffield plate from Birmingham and Sheffield. Hester Bateman must be credited with the energy and foresight to pursue this strategy which enabled her to turn a small family business into one of the most successful medium-sized manufactories of its day. Her son Jonathan was a liveryman of the Goldsmiths' Company in 1784 when his own son Jonathan was apprenticed to him. Peter Bateman worked with his sister Ann after his elder brother's death. 
The type of products produced in the earliest years of Hester Bateman's business were small silver articles such as spoons, wine labels, buttons, and seals. On registering her third (1774), fifth (1776), sixth (1778), and seventh (1781) marks she called herself a spoon maker although as early as 1774 she had used the more general title of plateworker. Surviving examples of her workshops' production before the late 1770s are comparatively rare and it has been suggested that she was supplying other goldsmiths who marked the silver as their own before sale. Pieces stamped for Hester Bateman from the last two decades of the century are much more common, which suggests increasing output and range of product. 
Largely in the neo-classical style, the silver is almost exclusively for domestic use and includes coffee pots, tea urns, cruets, teapots, and salvers among the larger items, along with the smaller objects such as snuffer trays, goblets, salts, mustards, and sugar tongs. At its best the workmanship combined simple manufacturing and decorating techniques to form an elegant if repetitious effect. It used easily worked sheet silver and a repertoire of bright-cut, pierced, or beaded ornament that could be repeated or recombined in unlimited variations. The Bateman style was not high fashion but it was fashionable. In particular, the middle class appreciated the cost-effectiveness of using thin-gauge metal and less time-consuming manufacturing methods. 
Hester Bateman retired when John and Peter entered their mark in 1790. At the time of her death on 16 September 1794, she was living in the parish of St Andrew, Holborn. She was buried at St Luke's, Old Street, on 26 September. The firm continued to invest in new technology to increase the competitive pricing of its own production. A flatting mill for the working of sheet metal was introduced in 1791, enabling the Batemans to dispense with the need to buy in sheet and perhaps recoup their investment by supplying other workshops. A steam engine to power the manufacturing processes had been added by 1802, ten years ahead of the most prestigious business of the time, Rundell, Bridge, and Rundell, the royal goldsmiths. The willingness to exploit the latest technology to produce good quality silver of a standardized design, which had been the foundation of Hester Bateman's success, ensured the survival of the firm into the mid-nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 53865


Worsdale, John (b. 1766, d. in or after 1828), astrologer, was born on 2 December 1766 in Fulbeck, near Grantham, Lincolnshire. After working as a parish clerk there, he studied mathematics (and probably astrology) under Nathaniel Tingle of Helpringham, near Sleaford, in 1778. He was writing and practising astrology in Spanby, near Falkingham, by 1796; then in Donington Northope, near Boston; and finally, by 1819, in Lincoln 'near the Cathedral' (J. Worsdale, 'Celestial Philosophy', 1828, title page), where he remained until his death. 
Worsdale was one of a flourishing community of astrologers and astronomers, throughout the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, in Lincolnshire, Leicestershire, and Rutland. He wrote several books defending and explicating his subject: 'Genethliacal Astrology' (1796, 1798); 'A Collection of Remarkable Nativities' (1799); 'The Nativity of Napoleon Bonaparte' (1805); 'Astronomy and Elementary Philosophy' (1819); and 'Celestial Philosophy' (1828). These were not, however, general or indiscriminate defences. His particular astrology was rigorously purist and highly technical, in the tradition of earlier astrologers such as John Partridge, who still took their mandate from Ptolemy and adhered to a combination of Aristotelian astronomical principles and precise mathematical procedures. As such, he was unforgiving of the 'wretched compilations of borrowed and stolen trash' ('Genethliacal Astronomy', vii) of magical-populist astrologers such as his contemporaries Thomas White and Ebenezer Sibly. At the same time he was equally hostile to the attempts of some of his predecessors, such as John Gadbury, to reform astrology along contemporary scientific lines, which he regarded as ignorant meddling with tradition. 
By the time of his death, Worsdale had won some recognition for his efforts from the tiny but disputatious metropolitan astrological community. There can be no doubt, however, that he was obliged to make his living as a judicial astrologer whose services were in demand for astral advice regarding urgent or intractable personal problems. This must have been grating for him, as most of his clients, although probably not all, came from the common people of Lincolnshire whom he despised as 'the Vulgar and Illiterate', hopelessly unfit to understand 'the Sydereal Mysteries' (Worsdale, dedication). He constantly plundered his casebooks for his favourite proof of astrology as such, and of the particular techniques he used. This involved the 'apheta' or 'hyleg' -- namely a precise prediction of someone's death, followed by its remorseless and usually violent fulfilment. Since the occurrence and timing of death is factually indisputable, this was a customary astrological course of action though Worsdale seems to have taken it to unusual lengths. 
The plebeians on whom Worsdale looked down took an appropriate (if unintended) posthumous revenge. As 'the Lincolnshire wiseman or astronomer' (Penny, 8-9), his name lived on into the early twentieth century in popular folklore. Accompanied by a familiar spirit such as a blackbird or black cat, his uncanny prescience was plainly intimated to be magical, if not diabolical. 
In politics, Worsdale was a whig; he predicted, from the map of its founding, that America would 'establish FREEDOM and LIBERTY in every part of the habitable Globe' ('Astronomy and Elementary Philosophy', 47). In religion, although he lashed 'Infidels, Deists, and Atheists' as well as 'deceitful Popish priests' (ibid., 39), God seems to have been reserved for First Cause, while occasionally authorizing comets as 'awful warnings' of 'DIVINE VENGEANCE' (ibid., 50, 53). However, his main interest is as the last representative of any national prominence of a particular astrological tradition in Britain, embodying a defiantly elitist and pre-modern Aristotelian rationalism and naturalism. His last recorded work, the foreword to his 'Celestial Philosophy', is dated 11 October 1828; it is not known when he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 53866


Atwood, Mary Anne (1817-1910), interpreter of alchemy, was born at Dieppe in 1817, the daughter of Thomas South ('c'.1785-1855), gentleman, of Bury House, Gosport, Hampshire, and his wife, Elise, 'nee' Maurice. She received no formal education but became proficient in Latin and Greek and developed a 'rare and extraordinary knowledge of the classics' (Steiger, 190). Under the influence of her father she joined the circle of theosophists (in the sense of students of the German mystic Jakob Boehme) around James Pierrepont Greaves (1777-1842), developed an enthusiasm for mesmerism, and began her profound study of alchemy. 
Thomas South and his daughter conducted their researches together and first set out their ideas in 1846 in a joint work entitled 'Early Magnetism in its Higher Relations to Humanity as Veiled in the Poets and the Prophets', under the pseudonym Thuos Mathos. Later in life she dismissed the book as 'a mere enthusiastic production' (Atwood, 4), but it was well received and encouraged the authors to work on a project of much greater significance -- a detailed explanation of the true nature and purpose of the alchemical process. Their original intention was to publish two works, a long, epic poem, 'The Enigma of Alchemy', by the father and a study in prose by the daughter. The poem never appeared (save for a fragment printed in volume 10 of 'The Quest' in 1919), but Mary Anne's 'A Suggestive Inquiry into the Hermetic Mystery' was published in 1850 -- to be almost immediately withdrawn, and all but a few copies destroyed. 
The sole reason for this expensive act of suppression was the Souths' joint conviction that they had made a serious error of judgement in revealing to the world a great secret that should rightly remain veiled within allegorical texts. In 1855 Thomas South died, his daughter's book forgotten, save in esoteric circles, and in 1859 Mary Anne South married the Revd Alban Thomas Atwood (1813-1883), moving with him to the house he had built in lieu of a vicarage at Knayton in Leake, near Thirsk in Yorkshire. Here she remained as a virtual recluse until her death on 13 April 1910. She did, however, maintain her esoteric associations, and through Anna Kingsford, Isabelle de Steiger, and A. P. Sinnett, to whom she gave most of her impressive alchemical library, she came to know -- and ultimately to reject as anti-Christian -- H. P. Blavatsky's Theosophical Society. She also continued her alchemical researches and, encouraged by Mme. de Steiger, altered her views on re-issuing her 'Suggestive Inquiry' and extensively revised the text. It was eventually published, edited by W. L. Wilmshurst, in 1918, but its influence had been felt much earlier, notably on A. E. Waite who described it as an 'epoch-making book' (Waite, 'Azoth', 76). However Waite rejected as too extreme her thesis that true alchemy is exclusively spiritual, a science of the soul through which the adept seeks divine union by way of a personal illumination gained in an exalted form of mesmeric trance. Waite's view has attracted much support but without the stimulus of the 'Suggestive Inquiry', scholarly research into alchemical texts would have been delayed for decades. Mary Anne Atwood was buried in Knayton in Leake churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 53868


John Wing (bap. 1662, d. 1726), surveyor and almanac maker, baptized on 5 April 1662, was the son of Moses Wing ('bap'. 1629, died 1697?), Vincent Wing's brother. He was a surveyor at North Luffenham, before moving in 1683 to Pickworth, in Rutland, near Stamford, where he practised and taught surveying and all branches of mathematics, including dialling, laying out enclosures, building plans, and music. (His own music teacher, Gilbert Clerk of Stamford, was also a diallist and became a lasting friend.) In 1710, when Wing made a survey of Pickworth, he was also farming 152 acres there. In 1693 he published an advanced textbook on pure and applied mathematics, 'Heptarchia mathematica', stressing its value for masons, carpenters, and glaziers as well as gentlemen, surveyors, astronomers, and diallists. A few years later he issued his 'Geodates practicus redivivus' (1700), a revised and expanded edition of his uncle's treatise on surveying, which now included a detailed account of the 'Empereal Table', an instrument of his own invention. He referred in the book to his twenty-six years' experience in surveying. 


@@@@@


doc= 53871


Huniades, Johannes (1576-1646), chemist and alchemist, was born at Nagybanya (Baia Mare) in Transylvania, the son of Benedict Banfi-Hunyadi Mogyoro, from 1590 Calvinist bishop of the Trans-Tisza diocese. He served an apprenticeship as a goldsmith to a Nagybanya coiner and worked as a journeyman at Kassa (Kosice, Slovakia) before deciding to leave in May 1606, when he asked his brother-in-law to look after his Nagybanya vineyard and pressing-house. He settled in London during 1608 and rented a workshop for his goldsmith's trade. In April 1613 he wrote again to his brother-in-law, requesting him to take care of his books, instruments, and gold and silverware until he returned to Nagybanya a year later. He was still in England, however, when on 15 July 1617 he presented the Bodleian Library at Oxford with a handsomely bound 'Bible' published at Hanau, near Frankfurt am Main, in 1608 and completed at Kassel under the patronage of Prince Maurice of Hesse. A Latin poem written in it by Huniades is dedicated to Oxford University and to Prince Maurice, while a Hungarian inscription indicates his imminent departure for Hungary. 
Huniades knew the mathematician Thomas Allen of Gloucester Hall, Oxford, and later obtained a copy of Allen's exposition of a work on astronomy by Ptolemy; the John Rylands University Library at Manchester also has a beautifully bound manuscript of Heinrich Khunrath's 'Amphitheatrum sapientiae aeternae' (1609) which belonged to Huniades. Dedicated to John Dee and incorporating his occult 'Monas' symbol, it was printed at Hanau in 1609 and anticipated the Rosicrucian manifestos of 1614-15 published at Kassel, one of Europe's greatest centres of alchemy, which Huniades may well have visited on his way to England in 1608. Both these works, and two pages of alchemical quotes which he inscribed in a family album during 1620, suggest Huniades's strong interest in hermetic philosophy, as does his long relationship with Arthur, John Dee's son, the writer of Rosicrucian alchemical treatises, and physician to Queen Anne, James I's wife, at the time of Huniades's 1617 gift to the Bodleian Library. The 'friend' to whom Arthur Dee paid $100 in travel expenses to collect some 'prime matter' (probably antimony) from Hungary in 1617 was clearly Johannes Huniades (Sloane MS 1876). In 1619 Huniades married Dorothy, a daughter of Sir Francis Colton of Kent. They had a daughter, Elizabeth, born in 1620, and a son, John, born in the same year or in 1621 ['see below'], followed by two more children. Dorothy probably predeceased her husband. 
A legal document of 1625 describes Huniades as a Whitechapel goldsmith but by 1635 he was registered as 'John Hunniades borne at Hunger an Alcamist' (SP 16/294). Jon Jonston, a distinguished Polish physician, writing in 1632 about the transmutation of metals in his book, translated in 1657 as 'A History of the Constancy of Nature', described his friend Huniades as 'the chief of all the Chymists in England'. From Jonston's correspondence with Samuel Hartlib in 1633-5 it is evident that he and Huniades shared a marked interest in Paracelsian iatrochemical medicines. During 1633 Prince Gyorgy Rakoczi invited Huniades to become a professor at a Hungarian academy planned in Kolozsvar (Cluj), Transylvania, but by then Huniades was giving regular courses of chemistry in London attended, for instance, about 1634, by John Webster. Hartlib's 'Ephemerides' for May 1634 mentions a manuscript copy of Huniades's 'Systemata chymi', and an undated note (fol. 47/9/22A) envisages a London 'Publick or City University Laboratory', directed by Huniades, possibly connected with Hartlib's further note that Huniades, backed by Sir Kenelm Digby and others, was constructing a laboratory at Gresham College, Bishopsgate Street, in July 1640. It was in this large laboratory belonging to the medical professorship that Digby, assisted by Huniades, conducted some pioneering experiments on the chemical composition of plants between 1640 and 1641. A notebook of Jonathan Goddard, Gresham professor of physic in 1655, contains several references to Huniades's chemical operations by one of his former students, as well as considerable Latin and old German text, probably in Huniades's hand. One recipe involving a sealed alcohol thermometer (dating from 1641) suggests the earliest recorded use, by Huniades, of temperature measurement in distillation. 
In April or May 1642 Huniades, who befriended Hungarian scholars in England, mentioned in a letter to Pal Medgyesi, Prince Rakoczi's chaplain, that he intended leaving Gresham College, where he taught chemistry, to move back into his house in St Mary's parish, Whitechapel, but he retained his post until at least the end of 1644. William Lilly, who had known Huniades since 1633, dedicating his 'Anglicus, Peace or No Peace' (1645) to him on the eve of his departure for Hungary, praised his skill and learning as an alchemist which had won him fame in England and abroad. J. P. Gowy's untraced portrait of Huniades was engraved by Hollar in 1644 and a silver medallion struck. The inscriptions and symbols in William Marshall's 1646 engraving of another lost portrait cast much light on Huniades as an alchemist. A tax assessment places him still in London during February 1646. Huniades travelled with his family to Amsterdam that summer (intending to stay there for ten weeks before being joined by Arthur Dee for the journey back to Hungary) but died suddenly of the plague on 28 August 1646. The administration of his property was granted in London by decree to his son on 11 September 1647. The high esteem in which Huniades was held by his contemporaries may be gauged from the Dutch scientist Henry Appelius's correspondence with Hartlib in 1643, and in 1647 when enquiries were made about replacing Huniades with Johann Rudolph Glauber, the celebrated German chemist working in the Netherlands. 




@@@@@


doc= 53872


Faber, Albert Otto (1612-1684), chemical physician, was born in Lubeck, north Germany, the son of Gallus (or Walter) Faber, a government official. He was educated at the University of Marburg, where he studied jurisprudence and gained a doctorate. Thereafter he practised medicine, at first in Lubeck; he moved to Hamburg in 1641, and later became the personal physician and army physician to the prince of Sultzbach. He then served the king of Denmark in the same capacities and afterwards the king of Sweden; as late as 1663 he continued to refer to himself as 'Royal physician to the Swedish Army' (Faber, 'A Relation of some Notable Cures', 4). 
Faber moved to England in early 1661, supposedly at the invitation of Charles II, who gave him $50 on 13 August 1661 'in respect of services and necessities' ('Calendar of Treasury Books, 1660-67', 276). He was befriended by Samuel Hartlib, who called him an 'excellent Helmontian physician' ('Diary and Correspondence of Dr John Worthington', 363). By 1662 he was settled in Thames Street, at the bottom of Addle Hill, London, with his wife, Claude, with whom he had two children, Gertrude and Albert Otto. 
Faber's first book, 'Paradoxon de morbo gallico' (1662), was a curious treatise on syphilis, which traced the origin of the disease to the fall of man, condemned the widespread use of mercury as a cure, and presented his own cure in the disguise of an extravagant metaphorical parable written in a form similar to contemporaneous alchemical allegories. The book was first printed in German (Altona, 1660) and later in English (1662). In 1663 Faber published a four-page 'Relation of some Notable Cures', which, like all his subsequent medical publications, was a privately printed pamphlet advertising remedies he was offering for sale. In April 1666 he acted as a witness to the cures of Valentine Greatrakes, the Stroker, who claimed to cure by his touch. 
Shortly after his arrival in England, Faber began an association with the Quakers, possibly at the instigation of his wife and possibly as a 'commercial expediency' to obtain a network through which to vend medicines (Sampson, 484-6). He translated two pamphlets from German, published as 'The Twelve Visions of Stephen Melish' (1663) and 'England's Warning' (1664), containing prophecies popular in Quaker circles. At a Quaker meeting on 14 August 1664 he was arrested pursuant to the 'Conventicle Act', fined $5, and imprisoned at Newgate for three months. From prison he wrote 'A Remonstrance' (1664), in which he argued that the 'Conventicle Act' did not extend to foreigners such as himself. Faber, described by the lord mayor and lord chancellor as 'a very suspected person, reather of crafty principalls & soe a maker of Quakers' (Penney, 215), was ordered to leave the country. He did not do so and later claimed that he could not obtain a passport. In November 1666 he, his servant, and two Quakers were arrested in Banbury on suspicion of arson. While his co-defendants were quickly acquitted, Faber was sent to Oxford gaol. In a letter to the king dated 30 April 1667, he repudiated Quakerism, stating that he was merely curious about it and claiming regular attendance at the French protestant church of London. He was freed in August and deported (without his wife) to Flanders on 22 August. 
In requesting a pass to return to England in 1672, Faber admitted entering England illegally at least once in order to tend to his wife, who was ill. This visit probably occurred in the spring of 1668, during which time his pamphlet 'Some Kindling Sparks in Matters of Physick' was published privately in London. He was granted leave to enter the country on 22 April 1672, and took up residence in London near the Old Palace Yard, Westminster. In 1673-4, he corresponded on medical matters with the Galenist physician John Twisden. Copies of their correspondence seem to have been privately circulated: a copy is extant among Isaac Newton's papers. 
In 1677 Faber published 'De auro potabili medicinali', on the title page of which he referred to himself as the king's physician-in-ordinary. This brief work described the use and effects of his version of 'potable gold', an esteemed preparation of chemical medicine purportedly made from gold and popularized in the early seventeenth century by one Francis Anthony. Faber's tract compared the successes of his own 'cordial' with those of Anthony, and detailed Faber's administration of the cordial to Sheldon, then archbishop of Canterbury. Faber died on 15 August 1684, in London, and was buried there in St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, where in 1685 his daughter, Gertrude, had a marble monument raised to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 53875


Bond, Frederick Bligh (1864-1945), architect, author, and psychical researcher, was born on 30 June 1864 at Marlborough, Wiltshire, the third son of the Revd Frederick Hookey Bond, headmaster of Marlborough Royal Free Grammar School, and of his wife, Mary Isabella Dela Fosse. He was educated at Bath College, where his father had taken up a post, and in 1882 was articled to the Bristol architect Charles F. Hansom. In 1887 he went into partnership with Hansom, working with him and, after Hansom's death in 1891, with his son Edward, on Clifton College and on the buildings of the University College, Bristol. 
From 1900 Bond practised alone, built a solid reputation as both an ecclesiastical and domestic architect (his most important building is the public hall in the Bristol suburb of Shirehampton), and gained his FRIBA. In 1909 he cemented his reputation with the publication of his first book, 'Roodscreens and Roodlofts', written jointly with Bede Camm, and with his appointment as consulting architect to Malvern Priory church. Shortly before this Bond had become director of excavations at Glastonbury Abbey, which in 1908 had been purchased by the Church of England and was administered by the Bath and Wells Diocesan Trust. Bond's fascination with Glastonbury, which rapidly became an obsession, had begun in 1907 and provided him not only with a mission, but also with solace for an unhappy marriage. 
In late 1893 he had married Mary Louise Mills, at Newport, Monmouthshire, and their only child -- Mary Theodora St Vincent Bligh Bond -- was born the following year. The marriage rapidly failed, and by 1898 Bond and his wife were legally separated; bitter legal battles over custody of his daughter continued for many years. It was, perhaps, symptomatic of Bond's growing enthusiasm for esoteric subjects, and especially with what was later termed 'sacred geometry', that he should name his daughter after the masonic lodge, St Vincent, no. 1404, at Bristol, of which he was then the master. His enthusiasm also carried over into his work at Glastonbury. 
From the outset Bond saw himself as a pioneer, describing himself as the 'first in applying psychical research methods to archaeological work' ('WWW', 4.119). He was not the active agent in these controversial methods, that role being taken by Captain John Allen Bartlett ('John Alleyne'), a west country poet and folklorist. At Bond's direction Bartlett produced, by automatic writing, a long series of scripts about the history of Glastonbury Abbey, together with sketch plans of the site. On the basis of these Bond excavated and uncovered the foundations of two previously unknown structures, the Edgar and Loretto chapels. The story of their discovery was publicized in Bond's book 'The Gate of Remembrance' (1918), and alleged messages from medieval monks were published in two further books, 'The Hill of Vision' (1919) and 'The Company of Avalon' (1924), and in a long series of pamphlets, 'The Glastonbury Scripts' (1921-5). 
Bond's research was highly controversial and the diocesan trust, uneasy over his methods -- despite his successes -- and unhappy with the publicity, dismissed him from his post as director of excavations in 1922. He was no longer practising as an architect, and relied increasingly on his writing and research for an income. From 1921 to 1926 he edited the journal 'Psychic Science', and, with the Revd T. S. Lea, published works on the Greek cabbala. This was an application of symbolic word numbers to the symbolic interpretation of the Greek text of the 'New Testament' and to the true interpretation of geometrical forms. But such works as 'The Apostolic Gnosis' (1919-21) had a limited appeal and did little to provide an income. Far more successful were books purporting to reveal hitherto unknown gospels, but they were not destined to bring success to Bond. While acting as editor of 'Psychic Science', Bond had been associated with the automatic writing of Geraldine Cummins, but when in 1926 he attempted to publish and to claim copyright in her 'Chronicle of Cleophas', on the grounds that his presence and influence had been essential to its production, she brought a successful legal action against him. When the book appeared in 1928, it was in her name and to her sole financial advantage. 
Bond then took up a series of lecture tours in the USA, encouraged by his friend and fellow architect Ralph Adams Cram. During one of these he met Archbishop W. H. F. Brothers of an American branch of the Old Catholic church and felt a calling to the priesthood. In 1932 Bond was ordained by Archbishop Brothers and in the following year consecrated as a bishop. He had, however, neither parish nor diocese, and after he returned to England in 1937 ceased to use the title the Right Revd Monsignor Bond OSB. This clerical phase was the last in his curious career; his attempts to excavate at Glastonbury once again came to nothing and he settled for retirement. From 1938 to 1942 Bond lived with his married daughter at Wimbledon, and then moved to Dolgellau in north Wales, where he died, at the Cottage Hospital, on 8 March 1945. He was buried in Llanelltyd churchyard, Dolgellau. 
Bond had left a respectable legacy as an architect, but his real achievement was to set Glastonbury firmly in the English psyche and to link it inseparably to the sacred geometry which he had helped to formulate. 


@@@@@


doc= 53879


Mead, George Robert Stow (1863-1933), theosophist and writer on gnosticism and Christian origins, was born on 22 March 1863 at 2 Montague Cottages, Albert Grove, Peckham, London, the son of Robert Mead, then a lieutenant with the Military Staff College, and his wife, Mary Stowe. He was educated at King's School, Rochester, and St John's College, Cambridge, where he first read mathematics but changed to classics, in which he obtained a BA in 1884. After graduation he studied oriental philosophy at Oxford and then taught classics at various minor public schools until 1889. 
Mead had joined the Theosophical Society in 1884 and determined to devote his life to the cause of theosophy. In 1889 he became Madame H. P. Blavatsky's private secretary, and after her death in 1891 he edited many of her works -- notably the revised edition of 'The Secret Doctrine' (1897). He had been appointed general secretary of the European section of the Theosophical Society in 1890, and for almost twenty years his ability to balance objective scholarship with a sympathetic approach to spiritual reality ensured that the society maintained at least the semblance of academic respectability. Even more important, in terms of the society's survival, was Mead's genuine tolerance of dissenting beliefs that enabled him to steer the society through its first internal crisis. This arose in 1894 when a prominent theosophist, William Quan Judge, was accused of self-promotion by sending fraudulent 'Mahatma' letters (letters containing doctrinal teachings and practical instructions from allegedly supernatural beings) to selected influential members of the society. Compromise between the pro- and anti-Judge factions proved impossible and although Mead came down against Judge, his skill in handling the situation prevented the inevitable split from being a fatal wound. 
Mead was now seen as one of the Theosophical Society's foremost members, a view that became entrenched as he poured out a stream of books and articles, some of which had a lasting influence beyond the narrow confines of the society itself. Thus in 1896 Mead's 'Orpheus', his study of 'the theosophy of the Greeks', greatly impressed W. B. Yeats and led him to revise his earlier opinion that Mead's intellect resembled that 'of a good-sized whelk' (Yeats, 'Memoirs', 282). In the same year Mead published his version of 'Pistis Sophia', the first translation into English of any significant or complete gnostic text. This was followed in 1900 by 'Fragments of a Faith Forgotten', a general survey of gnosticism, and in 1906 by 'Thrice-Greatest Hermes', an outstanding translation and critical commentary on the hermetic texts of the Hellenistic era. With these works Mead established himself as an authority in the field of Christian origins, although his reputation was severely dented by his admission in 1903 that in his book 'Did Jesus Live 100 B.C.?' he had considered (but had not accepted) evidence on the question obtained by clairvoyant means. 
Mead's critical approach can be clearly seen in the contents of the 'Theosophical Review', which he edited from 1898 to 1909, and in the eyes of the Theosophical Society Mead was now proving to be too honest a scholar. But it was not to be academic differences that drove him to resign from the society -- it was a matter of sexual morality. Mead had been happily married since 12 July 1899 to Laura Mary Cooper (1855/6-1924), an author and fellow theosophist, the daughter of the late Frederick Henry Cooper, an Indian civil servant. He unquestioningly accepted the sexual mores of his day and was profoundly shocked when in 1906 the paedophile activities of C. W. Leadbeater came to light. Leadbeater was one of the most respected theosophists of his day and the uproar was great, but public scandal was avoided when Mead secured his resignation from the society. The real problem arose two years later when Annie Besant, by now president of the Theosophical Society, performed a volte-face and early in 1909 brought an unrepentant Leadbeater back into the fold. Mead had fought vigorously and publicly against Leadbeater's reinstatement, and having failed to keep him out, promptly resigned, taking 700 fellow theosophists with him. 
Mead was determined to provide a forum for all those who wished, as he did, 'to promote investigation and comparative study of religion, philosophy and science, on the basis of experience' (Mead and Waite, 3) and in March 1909, with the aid of A. E. Waite, he established the Quest Society and a journal of the same name. Both 'The Quest' and its parent society survived for twenty years, fulfilling their purpose with the aid of writers and speakers as diverse as Martin Buber, Ezra Pound, Ananda Coomaraswamy, Arthur Machen, Tagore, and Yeats. The success of 'The Quest' also ensured Mead's return to academic respectability: in 1917 he supplied the entry on occultism for James Hastings's 'Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics'. 
Mead's last important work, 'The Gnostic John the Baptizer', appeared in 1924 but after the death of his wife in the same year Mead wrote little of any significance, and when 'The Quest' came to an end in 1930 his career as a scholar effectively ended with it. By this time he had become increasingly preoccupied with psychical research and he continued to wrestle with the question of survival until his death on 28 September 1933 at his home, 21 Ovington Street, Chelsea, London. He was cremated at Golders Green two days later. His works on Christian origins have since been superseded, but while he was not the only pioneer in the study of gnosticism, he was the first scholar to present a sympathetic view of gnostic and hermetic texts and the first to bring them before a wider public. 


@@@@@


doc= 53881


Ridley, George (1835-1864), singer and songwriter, was born on 10 February 1835, in Gateshead, the eldest child of Matthew Ridley, ropemaker and sometime coalminer, born at Wrekenton near Gateshead about 1808, and his wife, Frances Stephenson (or Stevenson), born at Gateshead about 1812. George was baptized at St Mary's parish church, Gateshead, on 1 March 1835. He had five brothers and three sisters. A younger brother, John Stephenson Ridley, born about 1846, became the one-mile running champion of England in 1871. 
George Ridley began work at Oakwellgate colliery, Gateshead, at the age of eight, and his publisher and biographer, Thomas Allan, later noted that his education 'must have been of the simplest'. He worked underground at Oakwellgate, then at the Goose pit, Gateshead, for ten years. About 1853 he moved to surface work as a wagon driver at Shipcote colliery, Gateshead. After three years he suffered an accident that was to change his life: a runaway wagon rolled over and left Ridley with severely crushed legs. Incapable of continuing pit work, he turned his hobby of entertaining as a vocalist into a full-time profession. His period of recuperation was lengthy, and it was not until the early 1860s that he began touring towns and villages north and south of the Tyne singing local and Irish songs. 
By 1862, at the very latest, Geordie Ridley had begun to write his own songs, setting them, in both the early music-hall and ballad tradition of the period, to well-known tunes. His first song, 'Joey Jones', concerned the horse which won the Northumberland Plate or 'Pitman's Derby' of 1861. By the end of 1862 his songs had gained enough local popularity to persuade Thomas Allan to purchase ten of them and to produce 'George Ridley's New Local Songbook'. 
Although not included in this collection, Ridley's most celebrated work, 'The Blaydon Races', had already been written. It was first performed at Balmbra's Music Hall in the centre of Newcastle on 5 June 1862 at a benefit concert for the professional boat racer Harry Clasper. The following day the 'Newcastle Daily Chronicle' recorded this first performance: 'Mr Ridley adapted to a popular air a ballad descriptive of a journey (in prospect) by road to the ensuing Blaydon Races'. The song was performed again, set to a tune called 'Brighton', on the actual day of the races, 9 June, and, after that event, a final verse was added. 
There is no evidence that the song enjoyed any particular popularity in Ridley's lifetime or in the forty years after it was written, its fame being almost entirely a twentieth-century phenomenon. James Cosgrave, a Gateshead comedian, whose stage name was J. C. Scatter, featured it in his act during the early years of the reign of Edward VII, probably picking it up from one of Allan's later publications, in which it began to appear. Its recording on early 78 r.p.m. discs and its adoption by the followers of Newcastle United Football Club turned it into an anthem renowned worldwide in both tune and chorus. 
Ridley himself had little over two years left to live after he composed 'The Blaydon Races'. During that time he wrote 'Cushie Butterfield', another song which gained popularity in the twentieth century, but at a much more local level. By the summer of 1864 his health was beginning to decline. Fellow entertainers and sportsmen, who featured in many of his songs, ran benefit concerts to help him, but he faded rapidly. 
Ridley died, unmarried, at the family home, 1 Grahamsley Street, Gateshead, on 9 September 1864. The cause of death was recorded as 'cardiac dropsy', a heart condition probably accelerated by his accident. Local legend has the author of the most famous of Tyneside songs departing this world in abject poverty, although there is little evidence for this beyond the absence of any grant of probate and the balance of probabilities. He was buried at St Edmund's cemetery, Gateshead, on 11 September 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 53882


Boulton, Samuel (fl. 1656), medical writer, about whom virtually nothing is known, published a work entitled 'Medicina magica tamen physica: magical, but natural physick, or, A methodical tractate of diastastical physick', at London, in 1656. The work was re-issued in 1665. Since he is designated on the title page as 'Samuel Boulton, Salop', it seems reasonable to assume that he was born or at least lived in Shropshire, but it is impossible to say more. In his preface 'To the Reader', dated May 1656 and signed as from London, Boulton says that he was induced to publish the work as a result of a 'short, yet violent fit of sicknesse' (Boulton, sig. A4'r'). Claiming that the work had hitherto been scattered in several places in a small octavo notebook, and on loose sheets, and that some of it was written in 'Characterical figures, only for occultnesse sake', he realized that, had he died, the work would have been either lost or 'never digested into any methodical order' because of the 'confused and occult writing'. He also tells his readers that the work had been written some ten years before, but given what he says about its not being ready for publication until after this life-threatening illness, the date of May 1646 after the dedicatory epistle to the marquess of Dorchester is presumably nothing more than a misprint. This dedication tells readers that Boulton had not acquired Dorchester's 'consent or license', that he knew of Dorchester's interest in 'Aesculapian Mysteries' only from various acquaintances, and that he did not otherwise know him. 
In spite of Boulton's detailed description of the state of the work before he finally prepared it for the press, there are good grounds for doubting that he wrote anything but the introductory matter. Chapters 1 to 32 are copied almost entirely verbatim from an anonymous manuscript now in the Sloane collection of the British Library (Sloane MS 1321). This manuscript is as well ordered as Boulton's published version, and none of it is written in secret writing. It seems unsafe to hold it to be the fair and ordered copy of Boulton's confused papers when he first decided to publish, however, since there is no sign of the dedicatory epistle, preface, or introductory chapter, nor of Boulton's extra chapters, 33 and 34. 
Boulton 'ingenuously' confesses in his preface that he did not write all of the book, being indebted for what he calls 'some part thereof' (Boulton, sig. A4'v') to some loose papers of 'an unknown Mr.' which were communicated to him by his close friend, Mr M. B., a 'worthy Gentleman of Kent'. Boulton says that he and his friend believed these loose papers to have been written by 'that late worthy and Reverend chymist Dr. Everard' -- presumably John Everard ('c'.1575- 'c'.1650), the first English translator of the Hermetic 'Poemander' -- but he does not say what grounds he has for this belief. 
The first twelve chapters of Boulton's book provide a clearly expounded theoretical account of so-called magnetic or diastatic medicine -- an occult system of medicine in which medicaments are applied to shed blood, expelled bodily fluids or excrements, or even hair or nail parings, instead of to the sick or injured body itself. It was believed that effluvia or subtle spirits exuding from such bodily excretions were attracted back towards their bodily source and could carry fine particles of the medicaments deep into the body, where they could more efficaciously effect a cure than if the same medicaments were applied directly to the body. Chapters 13 to 32 describe the more practical aspects of this kind of healing. Chapters 33 and 34, which do not appear in the anonymous manuscript, provide lists of herbs and plants which are supposed, by their signatures, to affect certain parts of the body or certain diseases. One or two internal features of these chapters seem to suggest that they too have been copied from another source; certainly there is nothing original in their content. This leaves only the introductory chapter as original to Boulton. Here Boulton defends this kind of medicine as being based upon 'true (yet sublime) natural causes' (Boulton, 2), locating it in the tradition of natural rather than diabolical magic, and insisting that it points the way to useful empirical investigations (ibid., 3). He also insists, with some justification, that this book provides 'the plainest and most methodicallest discourse of this Art, that hitherto is extant' (ibid., 4), having disparaged the earlier discussions of Paracelsus (1493-1541), Tenzelius 
(Andreas Tentzel; 'fl'. 1625)
, and Dr Floyd, who was almost certainly Robert Fludd (1574-1637), as wrapped up in enigmas and clouds of obscurity. Even though so little is known of Boulton, the reader can conclude from the original part of his book that, like Nathaniel Highmore (1613-1685), for example, Boulton was one of those early modern thinkers who sought to separate what might be pragmatically useful in the natural magic tradition from the more fanciful, semeiological, and superstitious. 


@@@@@


doc= 53885


Godson, Robert (fl. 1696-1697), writer on astrology, is known only by his one surviving work, which gives no details of his date or place of birth, family, or career. 'Astrologia reformata: a Reformation of the Prognostical Part of Astronomy' (1696-7), dedicated to the Royal Philosophical Society of London, claims to provide 'An Experimental Detection, and clear Demonstration' of astrology (Godson, title-page). As such, it was part of a movement at that time to reform the subject, which Godson and many others perceived as now 'utterly depraved and corrupted' (ibid., 8). Astrology was indeed profoundly out of fashion, and Godson deplored the way students were taught 'a parcel of silly miscalled Arts and foreign tongues' instead of subjects of solid value such as divinity, medicine, and astronomy, which in his version included its application to human affairs (ibid., 4-5). 
That unfashionability had deeper roots. From the mid-seventeenth century onwards, British astrology had become inextricably embroiled in partisan politics and religious sectarianism. Such politicization had seriously undermined its claims to provide objective truths, and the 'Experimentary Proof' (Godson, 40) which Godson claimed to provide was intended to remedy this ignominy. As such, his book was part of a general movement among the more educated astrologers of the time, which also resulted in John Goad's 'Astro-meteorologica' (1686), John Partridge's 'Opus reformatum' (1693) and 'Defectio geniturarum' (1697), and William Hunt's 'Demonstration of Astrology' (1696). In addition to this demanding task, however, Godson also noted that good astrology requires 'a particularly adapted Temper and Capacity' including a 'propension to it purely for its own sake, and a spirit unbyassed by lucre and partiality' (ibid., 3). 
Unfortunately, Godson's attempt to prove the validity of astrology involved an unconvincing combination of standard astronomy and traditional astrology, as if the latter somehow followed from the former. The first essay is on the subject of rectification (how to discover or correct a subject's birth-time through the astrology of life-events) -- an arcane pursuit even among astrologers -- and he criticized Kepler's suggested new planetary aspects as unduly innovative. The book culminated in 'a Prediction of the Death, of the Present French King' -- just the sort of enterprise which had brought astrology into elite disfavour. It is hardly surprising that Godson's scientific and literary contemporaries, so far as is known, failed to find in this exposition anything new or promising. 


@@@@@


doc= 53886


Hunt, William (fl. 1696), author, published 'Demonstration of astrology, or, A brief discourse, proving the influence of the sun, moon, and stars, over this terraqueous globe' (1696), in which he describes himself as 'a Lover of the Mathematicks and Natural Philosophy' (Hunt, title-page). As the preface was written in Alconbury, Essex, he may have lived there at the time. The work was dedicated to Charles, Viscount Mandevill and earl of Manchester, with thanks for his support. Otherwise, biographical details of Hunt are conjectural. Since it seems probable that he had a university education, he may have been the William Hunt, born the son of William Hunt at Sutton, Cambridgeshire, who attended a private school there and matriculated from Magdalene College, Cambridge, on 7 August 1674, aged nineteen, and who probably graduated LLB from Trinity Hall in 1679. This man's father may be identified as the Oxford-educated clergyman William Hunt who was ejected from his living at Sutton in 1662, but who remained there as a schoolmaster and was licensed as a presbyterian minister in 1672; his two sons, William and John, entered the ministry. A William Hunt of Little Beddow, Essex, 'minister of the gospell', drew up his will on 2 March 1698, mentioning his two brothers, Edward and John, also 'minister of the gospell', two daughters from his first marriage to 'E. T.', and a son, John. The executor was his (second) wife, Abigail, and the overseers included Francis Barrington, esquire. The will was proved on 19 April the same year. 
Hunt's treatise was part of a general movement at the time among the better-educated astrologers to rescue the subject from its parlous state, which he described as 'now so sullied over with Innovations and Superstitions, that it's hard to find the Truth from the Falsehood' (Hunt, v-vi). As a result, there were left 'but few students or lovers of this art' (ibid., A3). Other tracts from this period with the same aim (if not always the same means) include John Goad's 'Astro-Meteorologica' (1686), John Partridge's 'Opus reformatum' (1693) and 'Defectio geniturarum' (1697), and Robert Godson's 'Astrologia reformata' (1697). Hunt claimed that 'I through my diligent Study and Observation have gained more select Arcana's than ever were known to the late (tho Learned) Dr. Goad' (ibid., iv) and, like Goad, he sought to rectify the disrepute into which partisan and sectarian astrologers had brought their subject by concentrating upon 'chiefly this most useful and innocent Part, the Knowledg of the Weather' (ibid., A2). 
Hunt's particular contribution was his claim to ground astrology 'on the Fundamental Rules of the Copernican System and Philosophy.... Whereby the Art is rendered almost Mathematically Demonstrable' (Hunt, title). It was not original, however; Joshua Childrey's 'Indago astrologica' (1652) and Vincent Wing's 'Harmonicon coeleste' (1651) had both attempted to give astrology a new footing in the heliocentric cosmos. The 'almost' of his title gives away the enormous gap between Hunt's ambition -- which is what it might have taken actually to re-establish astrology as a reputable subject -- and his accomplishment. So too does his appendix, 'treating of this Summer's Effects.... Wherein we have great cause to fear, that the Sword, Pestilence, and Famine, will annoy our European Territories this ensuing Summer': just the kind of prognostication that had brought astrology into lasting disfavour among the intellectual, religious, and political elites of the day. 


@@@@@


doc= 53887


Warren, Hardick (fl. 1650), hermetic philosopher, is known only from what may be gleaned from a single printed pamphlet. Inspired by reading the work of William Lilly (p. 16), Warren wrote this work when a young man -- 'my tender years, which indeed are not many' (sig. A3) -- in his 'private chamber' in London, on 9 November 1650. Entitled 'Magick and Astrology Vindicated', and carrying two recommendatory verses by 'W. A.' and 'J. R.', it was published in 1651 by Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Cornhill, and was Warren's first, and seemingly his only, published work. His text was part of the pamphlet debates characteristic of the literature produced during the civil war period in England. Written in direct response and reply to an earlier pamphlet entitled 'A Brief Declaration Against Judicial Astrology' (1650) by John Raunce, to whom Warren refers as the 'Priests Champion' (p. 1), it is part of the upsurge in interest in the occult arts and sciences, alternative religions and Paracelsian medicine in England and Europe in the 1650s and 1660s. Warren claimed he was trying to unite being a natural philosopher, a Platonist, an astrologer, a stoic, a 'Hermet', and a Christian (pp. 30-31). He offered a passionate, Neoplatonic defence of natural magic and natural astrology, explicitly distinguishing them from various 'diabolical practises' (sig. A2'v') with which they had become associated, such as 'Necromancy, Witchcraft and the rest' (p. 3). 
Warren's Neoplatonic conceptual prism refracts his specific religious, scientific, and political understanding. He cites Plato as his authority for saying that magic 'is an Art of Worshipping God'. Warren's magical religion is a form of antisemitic (p. 6), mystical, Christianity; an ancient theology (prisca theologia) in which Christianity was articulated through its Egyptian, Hebrew, Persian, Babylonian, and Greek Platonic influences. He sees this magical religion as scientific, the 'practical part of natural philosophy' involving: 'the investigation of those admirable Vertues, and occult Properties, which that infinite Wisdom hath bestowed and given to his Creatures; and how fitly to apply those things that are to work, to those things that are to suffer' (p. 5). Its investigative light is diffused from the 'first and true Light' from the divine mind, God, through the angels, the intelligences, the celestials, finally into man's mind where 'it is made a bright discourse of Reason, and the knowledge of divine things, and wholly rational' (pp. 11-12). Although the actual causal mechanism between the zodiac and its effect/signification is not discernible by reason, this does not lead Warren to question its scientific status. In his thinking it is comparable to the 'hidden Qualities' in the magnet or digestion, which we experience, but of which we do not know the 'secret Cause'. 
This rational religion of natural magic is also a Paracelsian-influenced, physical medicine. 'Magick is the Connexion of Natural Agents and Patients', and: 'doth contain the whole Philosophy of Nature, which is that which bringeth to light the hidden Vertues, and drawing them out of Natures Bosom, and converting them to humane uses, by applying those things that work to those that suffer... it is nothing else but a mutual application of Natural Vertues, Agent and Suffering reciprocally. (p. 4)' It is linked implicitly with the doctrine of signatures through the ability it gives its practitioner to perceive the 'shewing forth of virtue' that God in his wisdom has infused into all inferior matter, the knowledge of which in turn, citing Ficino, 'may in some measure bring us to the true knowledge of the Divinity of Christ' (p. 5). 
With regard to politics, Warren's pamphlet bears traces of the language of republicanism when he writes of the established churches and how their 'Sisypus Robberies of us the Commonalty (under specious pretence of a divine Right) with endless toyl'. There are also Hartlibian overtones when he writes of the 'Public Good' of making true natural magic available 'in thy own Dialect, not tyed in a Gardian knot of impossibilities'. 
Yet at the same time there is an elitism in Warren's thinking. For true understanding of the divine knowledge is 'found out and attained but by a very few', what he calls 'the true Sons of Minerva' (p. 4). As a consequence, his preferred system of government appears to be one born of a mystical union of church and state, in which a divinely appointed monarch rules through his Magi: 'the Giver of Forms distributeth them by the Ministry of Intelligences, which he hath appointed over his works, Governors and Keepers, unto whom this ability is entrusted in things committed to them, That every vertue of Stones, herbs, Minerals, and all the rest, might be from the Intelligences governing. (p. 7)' There is however no sense of contract in this notion of sovereignty, or election of representatives. Instead Warren claims that the divine light that shines in man: 'is manifest by the 'disposition' of the 'body', as the Peripateticks will have it, or which I conceive is more true, according to the pleasure of the Cause giving, which distributes to every one according to his Will, from thence it passeth the 'fancy', and as yet it is above the 'senses', and being only imagineable, at length it attains to the 'senses', and especially to that of the 'eyes', in that it is made a 'visible clearness', and is stretched forth in each of these prospicious bodies, in which it becomes a 'colour', and a 'shining fireness'. (p. 12)' It is by this distinctly physiognomical means that Warren's magi become known, especially by the look in their eyes. 


@@@@@


doc= 53891


White, Samuel (c.1650-1689), official in the Siamese service and pirate, was probably born in the west of England and was probably a member of a Bristol merchant family. He was the younger brother of 
Samuel White sailed for India in 1675 to join his brother. On board ship he met Mary Povey (died 1682), who was travelling to Fort St George, Madras, to join her fiance, Mr Jearsey; following their arrival in Fort St George in early 1676 Mary Povey married White instead. They had two daughters, Susan ('b'. 1676) and Mary (1678-1692?). In Madras, White joined the establishment of the East India Company as a pilot on a salary of $10 a year, with the opportunity for private trade. This employment was safe but limited, and in late 1677 White accepted an appointment in the service of King Narai of Siam, arranged by George White and Phaulkon. Narai seems to have wanted the English East India Company to establish itself in Siam to help counter the Dutch dominance of Siamese trade. The king was also happy to encourage the company's members to enter the Siamese service and strengthen the trading networks under direct royal control. 
White's first command was of a royal ship plying between Mergui (a Siamese port on the Indian Ocean, in the province of Tenasserim, later part of Burma) and Masulipatam in India; he was engaged in the exotic traffic of importing elephants for Narai, but was also trading on his own account. White moved his family to Mergui, where his wife died in 1682. George White left Siam in 1681, but Phaulkon remained as an adviser on trade to the king. White benefited from Phaulkon's trade policy, adopted by Narai, by which Siam would seek an alliance with France in order to reduce the influence of the Dutch and also that of the Muslim families of Indian descent who dominated administration on Siam's Indian Ocean seaboard. In autumn 1683, following the departure of his daughters for England, White visited the Siamese capital, Ayutthaya, where he was created a mandarin of the third rank and 'shabandar' (harbourmaster) of Mergui. His responsibilities included collecting and managing royal revenues in the province of Tenasserim and the supervision of Siamese maritime interests in the Bay of Bengal. He was also expected to fortify Mergui and assemble a fleet of armed merchant ships, which, with French help, could dominate trade in the Bay of Bengal. Not only did this set Samuel White at odds with his former employers, the East India Company, but it also placed him in a potentially treasonable relationship to England. White did not care which European power was dominant in the area, if his private fortune was assured. 
In this aim White achieved a spectacular beginning. Having assembled his fleet and installed English captains on each, he began an undeclared war against the trade of Burma and the Indian kingdom of Golconda (Hyderabad). Narai had at first encouraged an aggressive policy but was persuaded to moderate his stance by advisers sympathetic to Golconda; White ignored orders to avoid confrontation, and encouraged his captains to seize independent, Golcondan, or Burmese vessels alike. He seems to have wished to avoid challenging the East India Company directly, but some of his captains did seize ships belonging to company officials. All vessels belonging to the two selected states plying the Bay of Bengal were at risk, and over a period of two years many were captured. The prize ships were sent to neutral ports under White's influence, and their cargoes were sold as White's private property, realizing about $30,000, of which he sent half back to England, retaining the balance as working capital. Not contenting himself with using his post at Mergui to underpin his operations as a pirate, White also embezzled the funds provided by King Narai for the fortifications of Mergui and drew the wages for an entirely fictitious garrison of soldiers. He was investigated by the Siamese authorities in 1686, but had Phaulkon's support at Ayutthaya and was cleared of wrongdoing. 
By this time the Siamese alliance with France and White's piratical activities were causing serious concern to the East India Company, which accordingly asked James II to issue a proclamation against Englishmen sailing under foreign flags. James's proclamation recalled all Englishmen in the king of Siam's service; armed with this authority Elihu Yale, the company's president of Madras, dispatched a small force to Mergui, commanded by Captain Anthony Weltden on the 'Curtana', to seize White's ships by way of reparations and to demand the surrender of all the English inhabitants. Weltden arrived off Mergui in June 1687. 
White was aware that foreigners had become unpopular in Siam, and was already planning his escape. He took the precaution of providing himself with a forged pass from the Siamese court, as a protection against prosecution for piracy, and put up only a token resistance to Weltden, sacrificing a Siamese ship before surrendering. Within a month he and Weltden were on excellent terms, spending many evenings drinking together and amusing themselves with thunderous gun salutes while awaiting favourable winds for the voyage to Madras. The sleepless nights helped exhaust the patience of Mergui's inhabitants with White's self-interest; on the night of 14 July 1687 they opened fire with the shore batteries, sinking one of Weltden's ships, then combed Mergui for foreigners and slaughtered every European they could find. The charmed White escaped injury, while Weltden survived a blow to the head only thanks to the thick hat he was wearing. Taking two ships White and Weltden withdrew to Burma; following Weltden's display of incompetence, neither was anxious for an early encounter with the company's officials in India. The ships arrived off Madras in December 1687, but Weltden allowed White to land 30 miles north of Madras to avoid being arrested by the company. White hurried back to England, arriving there before news of the massacre at Mergui, for which he expected to be blamed. He was alleged to have told the Siamese that Weltden had come to seize the town on the company's behalf. In escaping he avoided the fate of Phaulkon, who was executed in April 1688. 
White managed to bring the bulk of his wealth home with him, and in the changed political climate following the flight of James II initiated a lawsuit against the East India Company, claiming $40,000 in damages. He argued that he had ruled from Mergui in the company's interest but had been ordered by Narai to attack Golconda. He also claimed that he had been about to leave for England as Narai's ambassador when Weltden arrived. This was obviously a pre-emptive ploy to counter any charges which the company might prefer against him, but before what would surely have been a fascinating case could be brought to court, Samuel White died suddenly in April 1689. He was buried at Bath Abbey on 27 April 1689. His brother George took up his case, but the company, using the evidence of White's colleague Francis Davenport, showed that White's account did not bear scrutiny. 
George White's name has been linked with the Dowgate Adventurers (or Dowgate Association, named for their meeting place in the City), a group who sought to challenge the East India Company's monopoly by legitimate means. In this they had some success, leading to the establishment of a new East India Company, and eventually its merger with the old to provide a broad-based company with more shareholders. George White was still active in 1702, when he corresponded with Thomas Pitt. However, ultimately the White brothers' activities in Siam proved disastrous for British and indeed European interests. The East India Company directors noted in 1691 that 'Syam never did nor will bring the Company two pence advantage, but many thousands of pounds of loss' (Keay, 204). The policies followed by Narai and Phaulkon had led to conflict with the East India Company and the Dutch, but left Siam open to exploitation by France as well as by adventurers such as the Whites. Narai's death in 1688 was followed by a period of Siamese isolation from interaction with European powers, which would last for over a century. 


@@@@@


doc= 53892


Marshall, Andrew (1779-1854), United Secession minister and religious controversialist, was born at Westerhill in the parish of Cadder, Lanarkshire, on 22 November 1779. He was educated locally before attending classes at Glasgow University. He also went to the Secession Divinity Hall at Selkirk, making the lengthy journey on foot over two days. In November 1802 he was ordained to the church in Kirkintilloch, Dunbartonshire, where he was to remain for the rest of his life. He married Agnes (1785-1847), the daughter of John Dick, a merchant, and his wife, Henrietta Easton, and they had two daughters and four sons. He served as moderator of the synod of the United Secession church in 1836, and was honoured with the degrees of DD from Jefferson College (1841) and LLD from Washington College (1842) in the United States. 
Marshall's disputatious nature involved him in two major controversies. In the first, the 'voluntary' controversy, he articulated the growing conviction among Scottish dissenters that church establishments were unjust and that churches should look to their members alone for support. This view was expressed in a sermon preached by him in Greyfriars Church, Glasgow, in April 1829, later published as 'Ecclesiastical Establishments Considered'. A fierce and widespread debate, in which Marshall was prominent, continued throughout the following decade. The second controversy, the atonement controversy, was to prove Marshall's undoing. It began in 1841 with the suspension of James Morison from his duties as a United Secession minister. The principal charge against him related to his view of the universal nature of the atonement, a view which challenged the traditional Calvinist orthodoxy of his church. Marshall thought that Morison's views were, in effect, those of the church's own professors Robert Balmer and John Brown. Marshall restated the conservative view of the atonement in 'The Death of Christ the Redemption of his People' (1842), and in 'The Catholic Doctrine of Redemption Vindicated' (1844) he attached an appendix which made a specific attack on the professors. However, his extended campaign against them ended in defeat and earned him a humiliating public rebuke from the synod. Marshall broke away from the United Secession church in October 1846, the breach further embittered by attempts to evict him from his church buildings. In spite of contacts with the Free and Original Secession churches, he formed no new attachment before his death on 26 November 1854 at Kirkintilloch. He was buried at Cadder. 
Marshall was a major influence on the presbyterian churches in Scotland, if never quite in the way that he intended. Arguably, he did as much as any other individual to bring the Free Church of Scotland into existence by the debate on church-state relations which he initiated. The thorough rehearsal of arguments in the course of the atonement controversy made it clear that the theology of his colleagues was increasingly liberal, and Marshall's departure helped to clear the way for union with the Relief church, not least because he had been on the union committee. Even by the standards of Secession ministers Marshall was a difficult man, with an obstinate loyalty to principle untempered by any tendency towards conciliation. His isolation at the end of his life would have been complete had it not been for the loyalty of the majority of his congregation and of his son William (died 1860), a United Secession minister in Leith, who seceded at the same time as his father and eventually succeeded him in his Kirkintilloch charge, by then a Free Church congregation. 


@@@@@


doc= 53896


Fremantle, William Henry (1831-1916), dean of Ripon, was born in Swanbourne, Buckinghamshire, on 12 December 1831. He was the second son of the politician Thomas Francis Fremantle, first Baron Cottesloe (1798-1890), and his wife, Louisa Elizabeth (died 1875), daughter of Field Marshal Sir George Nugent, first baronet. Sir Edmund Robert Fremantle (1836-1929), the admiral, was his younger brother. His uncle, the Revd William Robert Fremantle (1807-1895), then rector of Claydon, near Swanbourne, and William Henry's predecessor as dean of Ripon, was an important early influence, instilling him with an early evangelicalism and a lifelong love of children and games. 
Fremantle's education was conventionally classical yet unusually progressive. At Cheam School he came under the influence of Charles Reiner, later tutor to Prince Albert Edward, a German liberal exile whom he described as 'without exception the best teacher I have ever known' ('Recollections', 10). The way in which Reiner was obeyed without recourse to punishment persuaded Fremantle that a 'nation [so] ruled would have few rebellious subjects' (ibid., 11). This was a lesson he subsequently sought to apply far beyond the confines of the nation state. In Dr Hawtrey's Eton College his gregariousness won him the chairmanship of Pop, while his studiousness secured the Newcastle medal in 1849. That same year he went up to Balliol College, Oxford, where he first encountered his lifelong mentor, intermittent colleague, and inconstant patron, Benjamin Jowett. Chastened by a second in classical honours moderations, Fremantle's undergraduate career nevertheless ended in triumph with a first in 'literae humaniores' and the university prize for an English essay on the subject 'The influence of commerce on Christianity', both in 1853. The following autumn he was elected to a prize fellowship at All Souls College. 
Oxford also grounded Fremantle in the liberal theology that marked him for the rest of his life. In this Jowett was a direct, if oblique, influence; Arthur (later Dean) Stanley, professor of ecclesiastical history from 1856, a more profound inspiration. However Fremantle's own reading in German biblical criticism, his extensive foreign travels -- Italy provoked a profound anti-papism -- and his broad-ranging sympathies, especially with the French Huguenots, led if not to original conclusions then certainly to contentiously idiosyncratic emphases in his doctrine. He identified church and nation, arguing that the church was organized in the state for civic purposes and through ecclesiastical institutions for religious worship; indeed, it was commonly observed that the only part of his teaching which was obscure was 'the doubt whether the Prime Minister ought to be 'ex officio' Archbishop of Canterbury, or the Archbishop of Canterbury 'ex officio' Prime Minister' (Anson, 11). Yet in so doing, he effectively subordinated clerical to lay authority; hence Tractarians suspected him of Erastianism. This also opened his establishment to all theists, including nonconformists, and that was distasteful to many other Anglicans. On the other hand his belief in the fact, but not the miracle, of the virgin birth -- similarly, his insistence that the resurrection of Christ represented no violation of natural law -- convinced evangelicals that he was dogmatically unsound. Finally, his profession of 'The Gospel of the Secular Life' (1882), which understood Christianity to be no more (nor less) than the faithful fulfilment of common duties best expressed in terms of service to society generally and its victims particularly, may have nurtured a great Balliol tradition of Christian social thought, traceable from Arnold Toynbee to R. H. Tawney, but it simultaneously outraged the sensibilities of most contemporary protestant Englishmen. 
Fremantle was a strikingly good-looking man: tall, well-built, long-faced, with a high forehead and distinguished by luxuriant sideburns. He was mild of manner and temperamentally guileless. Despite or perhaps because of this, he pursued a continually controversial career. Ordained in 1855, then placed in a college living in Lewknor, he soon began proceedings against All Souls for its failure to implement the competitive principle in fellowship elections set down by the university ordinance of 3 April 1857. Appealing first unsuccessfully to the visitor and then through queen's bench, Fremantle and his co-plaintiffs, Godfrey Lushington and Arthur Watson, won their case in 1864, effectively forging the prize fellowship which endures to this day. Whatever the college thought of this act of principled defiance, Bishop Tait of London was impressed. Accordingly, in 1861 he invited Fremantle to become resident chaplain at Fulham Palace. He also encouraged the young cleric to furnish historical justification for his own, similarly principled, support of the vindicated defendants in the famous 'Essays and Reviews' case brought before the privy council. The result (jointly edited with George Brodrick) was 'A collection of the judgments of the judicial committee of the privy council in ecclesiastical cases relating to doctrine and discipline' (1865), an enduring contribution to scholarship. 
On 6 August 1863 Fremantle married Isabella Maria (died 1901), daughter of Sir Culling Eardley, third baronet, the founder of the Evangelical Alliance. They had three sons and two daughters. Two years later he was appointed rector of St Mary's, Bryanston Square, London, a crown living. His seventeen years there, dedicated to achieving practical form for the ideal of a Christian community, either by doing good works among the poor with Octavia Hill or in the establishment of a parish council, both encouraging the widest local participation in general religious life, were probably the happiest of his career. At any rate, if he was honoured by his appointment as canon of Canterbury in 1882, he was compromised by his contemporaneous election as chaplain, fellow, and tutor of Balliol. In persuading Fremantle to assume these offices Jowett intended to blunt Tractarian domination of the new theology school. At least in Balliol, he succeeded. Fremantle, in turn, hoped to build up liberal theology in the university. Active opposition from the 'Pusey House' wing of the faculty, coupled with Jowett's sly indifference, ensured that he failed. His Bampton lectures for 1883, published as 'The World as the Subject of Redemption' (1885), fell on deaf ears. His article 'Theology in its changed conditions' ('Fortnightly Review', March 1887, 442-59) was denounced from the university pulpit. He was debarred from lecturing on the English Reformation as one of the official theology faculty lecturers, and even forbidden by the rural dean of Oxford from holding an informal conference of theological tutors to promote religion among the undergraduates. 
It was accordingly with relief that Fremantle accepted the deanery of Ripon in 1895. Here, to a degree at least, he prospered. With the active support of his bishop, Boyd Carpenter, he was able to turn the cathedral city into a liberal protestant stronghold. More still, he became something of a link between the broad-church theology of mid-nineteenth-century Oxford and the emerging modernist movement of early twentieth-century Anglicanism. He was a founder member of the Churchman's Union (For the Advancement of Liberal Religious Thought) in 1898, and contributed suitably modernist articles to house journals such as the 'Church Gazette' (launched that year), the 'Liberal Churchman' (from 1904), and the 'Modern Churchman' (after 1911). He also organized the first Conference of Modern Churchmen, held appropriately enough at Ripon, in July 1914. All the while his writings continued alternately to stimulate and outrage: most notably a lecture 'Natural Christianity', delivered in 1902 and published in a longer version nine years later, which led to his being denounced in the 'Daily Express'. 
As if this was not enough, Fremantle now increasingly pursued an informal third career as chief Anglican spokesman for international peace, a quest first begun with 'Pleading Against War' (1885) and subsequently continued through numerous exhortations, pamphlets, and campaigns. He became an advocate for the international arbitration of disputes and a champion for mutual reductions in arms. His all too obvious failure in 1914 caused him great pain. Following the death of his first wife, he married, on 16 April 1903, Sophia Frances, daughter of Major T. G. Stuart. Fremantle died at his London home, 25 Barkston Gardens, South Kensington, on 24 December 1916, and was buried in Essendon, Hertfordshire, three days later. He was survived by his second wife and four of his children, who included Sir Francis Edward Fremantle (1872-1943), a medical officer of health and Conservative MP, and Henry Eardley Stephen Fremantle, a journalist and politician in South Africa. 


@@@@@


doc= 53897


Carroll, Walter (1869-1955), music educationist and composer, was born on 4 July 1869 at 156 Bury New Road, Manchester, the only son and last of the five children of Robert Carroll ('bap'. 1829), a commercial traveller, and his wife, Fanny Wormald, 'nee' Flinn ('b'. 'c'.1832). The Carroll family had no privileges of birth, money, or schooling nor any special musical interest. After leaving Longsight high school at fourteen Carroll started work as a textile warehouse clerk. At the same time he attended evening classes in piano, organ, and music theory, and joined the choir of St Chrysostom's Anglican church, Victoria Park, Manchester. The development of pericarditis at seventeen left him with a permanently damaged heart but also with a determination to succeed in his musical training. 
In 1891 Carroll was among the first to graduate with the external MusB degree from the University of Durham and was appointed singing master to the Manchester Day Training College. On 3 October 1893 he gave the inaugural lecture at a new conservatory, the Royal Manchester College of Music. He took up a lectureship there in harmony and composition at the invitation of Charles Halle, the first principal. In 1894 he was awarded the degree of MusB by the University of Manchester, and in 1900 he was the first to gain its degree of MusD by examination. He was appointed lecturer in music at the same university in 1904, and served as dean of the faculty of music in 1909-11 and 1917-19. 
On 12 August 1896 Carroll married Gertrude Southam ('b'. 1868). They had two daughters, Elsa and Ida (1906-1995). The latter, like her father, pursued a musical career; she became principal of the Northern School of Music, Manchester, in 1956, and was elected president of the Incorporated Society of Musicians in 1976. 
In 1906 Carroll established lectures in the teaching of music at the Royal Manchester College of Music. A year later he founded a training class for music teachers in Manchester, which ran until 1919. Hundreds of teachers benefited from lectures and demonstrations. He lectured throughout England, Scotland, and Wales at the invitation of education authorities and professional associations. Prominent among these was the Incorporated Society of Musicians, of which he was a member from 1896 to 1911, holding the highest regional and national offices. 
In 1909 Carroll was appointed as the first professor in a new department -- the art and practice of teaching -- at the Royal Manchester College of Music. His overriding aim was stated in 1910: 'Gradually to substitute the trained teacher for the untrained is a work full of glorious possibilities for the art of music' ('Manchester City News', 2 April 1910, 8). In 1918 he renounced his academic posts serving the musically talented to devote himself to under-privileged elementary schoolchildren, on his appointment as the first music adviser to Manchester education committee. When his post was made permanent in 1920 he was the first full-time music adviser in Britain. 
Carroll's pioneering work in schools, which included lectures and practical sessions with children and teachers, was inspirational. In 1919 an innovatory scheme of teaching music appreciation was established. He organized concerts for children and founded both a children's orchestra and the Manchester Elementary Schools' Choir. The culmination of his efforts came on 4 June 1929 when 250 schoolchildren made a gramophone recording with the Halle Orchestra conducted by Hamilton Harty in the Free Trade Hall, Manchester. This Columbia recording -- a unique event in British music education -- of Purcell's 'Nymphs and Shepherds' and the dance duet from Humperdinck's 'Hansel and Gretel' has no parallel and remains a permanent legacy. 
By the time of his retirement in 1934 Carroll had given some 1200 specimen lessons in Manchester schools, and 11,187 schoolteachers had attended his courses of lectures. In 1934 alone 12,000 children were taught music appreciation. When his career began the concept of education was limited. Little time was allotted to the teaching of music or to the training of teachers. Forty years later his pioneering work had brought about a change of emphasis. The importance of music within the curriculum had been recognized. Education authorities and advisory staff, at home and abroad, as well as thousands of teachers and several generations of schoolchildren, came under his influence. 
Carroll was director of music at St James's Church, Rusholme, Manchester, from 1916 until 1938. His choral music is rarely performed. He lives on in his piano music for children. From 1912 to 1953 he composed a series of descriptive and imaginative piano works, integrating music, poetry, and design, commencing with 'Scenes at a Farm'. For later volumes such as 'Forest Fantasies' (1916) and 'River and Rainbow' (1933) Carroll employed the foremost illustrators of the day, including Arthur Rackham and William Heath Robinson. Leading a new era in the education of child pianists Carroll ranks among the finest twentieth-century composers for children. 
In his retirement Carroll continued composing for children, producing essays and booklets on music education and lecturing throughout the country. He died at his home, Glenluce, Lapwing Lane, Didsbury, Manchester, on 9 October 1955. 


