@@@@@


doc= 53899


Walcott, John (1754-1831), naturalist, was born on 8 August 1754, probably in Cork, where he was baptized, the eldest son of John Walcott and Mary Yeamans. He lived in England with his father between 1756 and 1766. The family owned estates at Croagh, near Limerick, and lived off the rents of these estates, in some style. The elder John Walcott died in 1776 in Bath, leaving evidence of a wide range of bookish interests in both natural history and geology. He had been elected a fellow of the Society of Arts in 1766. His son inherited his scholarly interests and remained in Bath between 1776 and 1783. He was an early disciple of Carolus Linnaeus (1707-1778), and inspired by Linnaeus's death, he published a never completed 'Flora Britannica... Taken from Linnaeus's Systema naturae', in fourteen monthly parts in Bath between 1778 and 1779. His book 'Description and Figures of Petrifactions Found in Quarries, Gravel Pits etc Near Bath' followed in 1779. This contained the first illustrations of the commonest fossils to be found around Bath, later known as the cradle of English geology from the work there of William Smith (1769-1839), who was to acknowledge his debt to Walcott. One of the fossils so well illustrated in Walcott's 'Description', showing its internal spiralia, was named 'Spiriferina walcotti' by James Sowerby in 1822. 
Walcott was twice married. On 21 November 1777 he married Anne Lloyd, who died in 1782. On 15 November 1783 he married Dorothy Mary Lyons (1759-1832). There were children from both marriages. 
Bath, during the period that Walcott lived there, was a hive of intellectual activity. In 1779 Walcott, already a member of the Bath Agricultural Society, became a founder member of the first Bath Philosophical Society. He moved to nearby Bathford in 1783, and adopted a highly peripatetic lifestyle, moving round the country renting (often large and impressive) houses to live in. By 1784 he was at West Teignmouth in Devon. Here he planned, and certainly commenced, a work on British fishes, for which he made over one hundred drawings during his stay in Devon in 1784 and 1785. This was never published probably because of the too limited sales of his earlier books. He lived in Chelsea, London, from 1787 to 1788. Here he published his third book, 'The figures, description and history of exotic animals, comprised under the classes Amphibia and Pisces of Linnaeus', in two parts in 1788. His final book, in two volumes, 'Synopsis of British Birds', appeared between 1789 and 1792 when he was based at Greenwich. Here he remained until 1802, although he seems to have taken little further interest in natural history, apart from subscribing to new books. He lived in Bristol between 1803 and 1819, in Southampton in 1819 and 1820, and at Highnam Court, Gloucestershire, from 1821 to 1827. By 1829 he had returned to Bathwick and he died in Great Pulteney Street, Bath, on 5 February 1831. 
Walcott had led a very private life. He changed his name to Sympson in 1819 on the death of a cousin, but seems soon to have reverted to using his original name. He was a devoted member of the Countess of Huntingdon's Connexion in Bath and later joined the Wesleyan Methodists. His other devotion, to natural history, is best proved by the forenames given to some of his many children, such as Scopoli, Linnaeus, and Ray. 


@@@@@


doc= 53900


Healey, Donald Mitchell (1898-1988), car designer and rally driver, was born on 3 July 1898 in Woodbine Cottage, Perranporth, on the north coast of Cornwall, the elder of the two sons of John Frederick Healey, who ran the village shop, and his wife, Emmie, daughter of Sampson Mitchell, shopkeeper, of Perranporth. His parents were Wesleyan Methodists. After studying engineering at Newquay College, he took up an apprenticeship in 1914 with the Sopwith Aviation Company in Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, while continuing his engineering studies at Kingston Technical College. In 1916 he enlisted in the Royal Flying Corps as an air mechanic, and after qualifying as a pilot he went on night bombing raids, but after a series of crashes he was invalided out of the Royal Flying Corps in November 1917 and was transferred to the aeronautical inspection department of the Air Ministry, and spent the rest of the war checking aircraft components. He returned to Perranporth in 1919, and on 21 October 1921 married Ivy Maud (died 1980), daughter of Faithful James, a hard rock miner, of Perranporth: they had three sons. 
With financial help from his father, Healey opened a garage and car hire business in Perranporth in 1920, but he became more interested in rally driving and motor racing, using the garage to prepare cars for his races. He first entered the Monte Carlo rally in 1929, in a Triumph 7, and after he won at Monte Carlo in 1931 in an Invicta he was in demand as a competition driver. In 1933 he sold the garage business, and moved to the midlands to work for Riley, but later that year joined the Triumph Motor Company as experimental manager. Promoted to the post of technical director in 1934, he was responsible for the design of all Triumph cars, and created the Triumph Dolomite 8 sports car in 1935. At the same time he had many competition successes driving Triumphs, winning the light class at the 1934 Monte Carlo rally in a Triumph Gloria, which he had designed. When the company went into liquidation in 1939, Healey stayed on at the factory as works manager, producing carburettors for aircraft engines for the Ministry of Supply. He later moved to the Humber Car Company, to work on armoured cars. 
In 1945 Healey founded the Donald Healey Motor Company Ltd, based in a factory near Warwick, and in 1946 his first car, the Healey Elliot, a saloon car with a Riley engine, went into production. This car scored wins in the 1947 and 1948 alpine rallies, and won the touring class in the Mille Miglia in 1948, the first win by a British car in the history of the race. The Healey Silverstone, a high-performance sports car, appeared in 1949, and its success in the United States led to a contract with Nash Motors, an American company, for Healey to build a car with Nash components. Healey opened a new factory, the Cape Works, to assemble the Nash-Healey, and in 1950 he entered the Le Mans 24 hour race for the first time, driving a Nash-Healey, and he drove Nash-Healeys in the Mille Miglia from 1950 to 1952. But his ambition was to design an inexpensive sports car, capable of speeds over 100 m.p.h., and he launched the Healey 100, with an Austin engine and gearbox, at the 1952 motor show at Earls Court. As the Warwick factory could not cope with the expected large export orders, he entered into a royalty agreement with the British Motor Corporation -- formed by the merger of the Austin Motor Company and Morris Motors in 1952 -- by which the British Motor Corporation would build the car while Healey would retain control over the design, and the Austin-Healey 100 went into production at the British Motor Corporation's Longbridge factory in 1953. An immediate success, with its aerodynamic shape and excellent performance, the Austin-Healey 100 won many prizes, including the grand prize at the international motor sports show in New York in 1953. By the middle of 1953 they were producing 120 cars a week, all for export, and by the time production ceased in 1967, 74,000 Austin-Healey 100s had been built, 80 per cent of them for export, proving very popular with American servicemen stationed in Britain. In the 100-S, which he developed purely for racing, Healey achieved his greatest ambition when he recorded 203 m.p.h. at Bonneville Salt Flats, Utah, in August 1956. 
In 1955 Healey formed Healey Automotive Consultants, and worked on new designs for the British Motor Corporation, including the Austin-Healey Sprite, a small sports car based on the Austin A35 saloon, which was an instant success when it went into production in 1958. In the 1958 alpine trial, Sprites took the first three places in their class. Another venture was Healey Marine Ltd, set up in 1958 to build the Healey sports boat, advertised as being 'as thrilling on the water as the famous Healey sports car is on land'. When he bought a house at Trebah, in Cornwall, in 1963, he converted the outbuildings into workshops where he worked on his designs. He sold the Cape Works in 1963, and opened a car showroom in a disused cinema in Warwick selling all makes of sports car, but this was not a success. When the Leyland Motor Corporation took over the British Motor Corporation in 1967, the new chairman, Sir Donald (later Lord) Stokes, cancelled the agreement with Healey, and stopped the production of Austin-Healey cars at the end of 1967. Healey launched a new sports car, the Jensen-Healey, in 1972, using Vauxhall components, and was chairman of Jensen for a brief period in 1973, but this car fell short of American emission standards. In 1974 he sold his company to the Hamblin Group, keeping Healey Automotive Consultants and the right to the Healey name, but he resisted all offers from companies such as Saab and Ford to produce a new Healey sports car. 
Healey loved the competitive side of the motor industry, and was at his happiest driving in a race or a rally: his favourite race was the Mille Miglia, in which he competed eight times between 1948 and 1957. Although he was not interested in serving on committees, and took no part in the activities of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, he loved to travel, and visited the United States several times a year, promoting the sales of Austin-Healey cars. He was made CBE in 1973 for his services to the British motor industry. 
Healey died on 15 January 1988 in the Duchy Hospital, Truro, Cornwall, and his funeral was held in the Perranporth Methodist Chapel. The Austin-Healey Club of America raised the money for a memorial window in St Michael's Church, Perranporth. 


@@@@@


doc= 53907


Armitt, Mary Louisa (1851-1911), author and founder of the Armitt Library, Ambleside, was born at 19 Melbourne Terrace, Salford, Lancashire, on 24 September 1851. She was the youngest of three daughters of William Armitt (1815-1867), an impecunious assistant overseer who valued learning, and his wife, Mary Ann Whalley (1813-1879), from Rivington, Lancashire. Although suffering poor health, the daughters -- Sophia (1847-1908), Annie Maria (1850-1933), who later became Mrs Stanford Harris, and Mary Louisa -- achieved much, all three becoming versatile writers. Initially they attended the local Islington House Academy, Sophia eventually wishing to specialize in art and botany, Annie in literature, and Mary in music. While Sophia later attended the Manchester School of Art, Mary, who left school at fourteen, began studying music, her great love, at Manchester Mechanics' Institute School. In 1866 the two eldest sisters spent three months in Paris, and it became customary for all the sisters to spend vacations abroad, pursuing their various studies. 
Their father died when Mary Armitt was only fifteen, and the sisters had to support themselves. They moved to Eccles, Lancashire, where they set up a successful school, Mary being a year younger than their eldest pupil. They worked very hard, but enjoyed Manchester's cultural facilities, attending the original Halle concerts, lectures, exhibitions, and field naturalist meetings. Largely self-educated, their creative lives were spent writing, teaching, painting (Ruskin later gave encouragement to Sophia), and studying. Aged eighteen, Mary sought advice from Ruskin, and she was urged by him 'not to wish to write' but to 'exercise yourself in all proper girls' and women's work' (John Ruskin to Mary Armitt, Feb 1870, Armitt Library, MS 377). One day, however, greatly moved by a piano recital by Anton Rubinstein, she was inspired to write a long musical appreciation for the 'Manchester City News'. It was immediately published (21 April 1877), and became the first of many. 
In 1886 Mary and Sophia Armitt retired to Hawkshead in the Lake District, and from 1896 they lived at Rydal, near their invalid sister. There they found themselves in an intellectual ambience suited to their temperaments and talents. Through close friendships with neighbours such as Frances Arnold of Fox How and Charlotte Mason, the educational pioneer of what became Charlotte Mason College, Ambleside, they met many distinguished writers, artists, and educationists. 
Mary Armitt suffered heart trouble, and was no longer able to travel abroad, or to visit libraries such as the Bodleian, where she had loved to pore over old books and manuscripts to produce erudite articles (for example, 'Old English viol music', which appeared in the 'Musical Quarterly Review' of 1888). She now joined the London Library, and began to study local history. Using the Le Fleming family archives at Rydal Hall, she prepared two books -- 'Rydal' (1916) and 'The Church of Grasmere' (1912), both published posthumously -- and papers for the Cumberland and Westmorland Antiquarian and Archaeological Society. She wrote prolifically for national magazines, newspapers, and educational publications such as the 'Parents' Review', edited by Charlotte Mason. She was also interested in natural history, especially ornithology, and at W. G. Collingwood's request contributed a full report of the birds of the Lake District in the opening chapter of part 3 of his 'Lake Counties' (1902). 
Shortly before Mary Armitt's death, a legacy enabled her to found and endow in 1909 the Armitt Library, in Ambleside, a reference library and museum for subscribing 'students and book-lovers'. It was opened in November 1912, and became an important depository of rare books, prints, manuscripts, pictures, and artefacts, mainly about the Lake District but also including items of international interest. It embodied two earlier libraries: the 1828 Ambleside Book Club, of which Wordsworth had been a member, and the 1882 Ambleside Ruskin Library, founded with Ruskin's help and approval. 
Subscribers included members of prominent local literary and artistic families, not least Beatrix Potter, who was a member for nearly thirty years and who gave many family books, as well as hundreds of her fungus and natural history watercolour drawings and microscope studies. Important original archives include letters, drawings, manuscripts, and memorabilia of Ruskin, Harriet Martineau, the Lake Poets, the Arnolds, William Green, W. G. Collingwood, and Robin G. Collingwood, among many others. 
Mary Armitt died at her home, Rydal Cottage, on 31 July 1911, and was buried on 2 August beside her sister Sophia in St Mary's churchyard, Ambleside. Annie was later buried with them. 


@@@@@


doc= 53909


MacBride, Ernest William (1866-1940), biologist, was born on 12 December 1866 in Belfast, the first of the five children of Samuel MacBride, linen manufacturer, and his wife, Mary, daughter of a Presbyterian minister. He was educated at the Royal Belfast Academical Insitution and Queen's College in Belfast, and then studied zoology at University College, London, where he obtained a BSc in 1889. He moved to St John's College, Cambridge, where he was elected fellow in 1893 after having obtained a first-class BA in zoology in 1891. 
After a brief period of study at the Stazione Zoologica in Naples, MacBride returned to Cambridge as university demonstrator in animal morphology. Then in 1897 he was appointed professor of zoology at McGill University, Montreal. There he supervised the building of new laboratories and taught a zoology course, primarily to medical students. While in Canada, in 1902 he married Constance Harvey, daughter of H. Chrysler KC, an Ottawa barrister; they had two sons. In 1909 MacBride was appointed assistant to Adam Sedgwick, professor of zoology at Imperial College, London. He remained at Imperial until his retirement in 1934, succeeding Sedgwick in 1914 and developing a successful postgraduate research school. 
MacBride built his scientific reputation on his studies of the embryology of invertebrates, especially the echinoderms (including starfish and sea-urchins). He published a series of papers and also the 'Textbook of Embryology' (1914). When he trained in London and Cambridge, the minute study of embryological development was still seen as a vital source of information on evolutionary relationships. MacBride remained loyal to this belief, even when the vast majority of biologists turned away to other interests. Indeed, he was one of the last British scientists to defend in detail the theory that the development of the embryo recapitulates the evolutionary history of its species. Nevertheless, it was through the application of this theory that he made his most enduring contribution: his recognition that echinoderms (which are now characterized by radial symmetry) have evolved by degeneration from a bilaterally symmetrical form. He showed that the cushion star, 'Asterina', passes through a larval stage in which it is attached to the sea-bed. This he interpreted as the relic of an evolutionary stage in which the ancestors of the echinoderms gave up their free-swimming habits and began to degenerate into radial symmetry. He was one of the first to recognize that the ancestors of the echinoderms must have been closely related to the earliest chordates, from which the vertebrates have descended. 
MacBride continued to defend the recapitulation theory long after most biologists rejected it in favour of new approaches to the study of development and heredity. He condemned the new science of genetics as based on the study of artificially induced characters. MacBride favoured the Lamarckian theory of the inheritance of acquired characteristics: he believed that changes in bodily structure produced by new habits would gradually become incorporated into the species' inheritance. In effect, he maintained, heredity represents a memory of the species' past evolutionary modifications. In the 1920s he played a prominent role in defending the Lamarckian biologist Paul Kammerer against attacks by the geneticists. As a fluent German-speaker, MacBride provided on-the-spot translations for Kammerer when the latter visited London in April 1923. 
MacBride's Lamarckism has deflected historians' attention from his extreme position on social issues. Through the 1920s he played a prominent role in the Eugenics Society, eventually becoming vice-president. He strongly endorsed claims that persons of 'inferior' character should be prevented from reproducing, as a means of purifying the population. He argued for the compulsory sterilization of the least fit members of the British population, whom he identified as those of Irish descent. According to MacBride (who was of Ulster protestant stock), the Irish race had evolved in a less challenging environment than that which had produced the hardy Anglo-Saxons. His views on compulsory sterilization were not endorsed by the membership of the Eugenics Society, and in 1931 he resigned as vice-president. He defended the fascist side in the Spanish Civil War, and in 1937 he expressed support for German military policy. 
Less controversially, MacBride served on the council and also as chairman of the Marine Biological Association. In 1913 he was appointed to a committee of the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries, formed to draw up a programme of investigation into Britain's fisheries. In 1919 he joined the advisory committee on fisheries research set up by the Development Commissioners, and was appointed chairman of the committee in 1933. 
After his retirement MacBride moved to Alton in Hampshire, where he died at his home, Westbank, on 17 November 1940 and was buried on 25 November at St Lawrence's Church there. His wife survived him. He was remembered with affection by many of his students, who preferred to concentrate on his enthusiasm as a teacher rather than on his outdated theoretical opinions and controversial political stance. 


@@@@@


doc= 53910


Fowler, George Herbert (1861-1940), zoologist and historian, was born in Lincoln on 4 September 1861, the only child of the Revd John Fowler (1823/4-1902), headmaster of Lincoln grammar school, and his wife, Martha Bodley, daughter of William Hulme Bodley, a Brighton medical practitioner, and sister of the architect George Frederick Bodley (1827-1907). Fowler was educated at Marlborough College, where his father had taught, and then at Eton College, as a king's scholar. In 1880 he entered Keble College, Oxford. The lectures of H. N. Moseley inspired him to turn to zoology in his final year and he obtained his BA with second-class honours in natural science in 1884. From 1884 to 1887 he held a Berkeley fellowship at the University of Manchester. For part of this time he studied under Rudolf Leuckart at Leipzig, obtaining a PhD for research on coral. On 20 August 1885 Fowler married Ursula Mary Dewes (1867-1912), but the marriage was not a success and the couple separated on 8 September 1892. 
Between 1887 and 1889 Fowler acted as assistant to E. Ray Lankester at University College, London. He also taught zoology at Royal Holloway College in 1888 and 1891. The summers of 1889 and 1890 were spent in research at the recently founded Plymouth laboratory of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, and in 1890 he acted as interim director for six months at a difficult period in the institution's history (following the resignation of G. C. Bourne). He acted as the association's secretary until 1895. 
In January 1891 Fowler returned to University College as an assistant, and later assistant professor of zoology, under W. F. R. Weldon who spoke highly of his energy and capability, but the routine work of the department left Fowler little time for independent research. A problem then attracting much attention in marine zoology was Alexander Agassiz's theory that plankton occurred only in the surface and deepest waters of the ocean, and not in the intermediate layers. Fowler designed a self-closing plankton net and in 1896 and 1897, and again in 1900, made cruises in HM survey ship 'Research' to try it out. The results led him to propose some interesting ideas on plankton distribution but he was unable to obtain the sea time needed to develop them further. 
As a zoologist Fowler was seen as competent rather than brilliant, and when Weldon left for Oxford in 1899 Fowler was passed over in favour of E. A. Minchin. These factors, and the onset of eye strain, contributed to his decision to resign from his University College post in 1909. Fowler's enduring legacy to marine science was the Challenger Society, founded with R. Norris Wolfenden in 1903, which he ran as secretary until 1910, also editing the society's influential publication 'Science of the Sea' (1912). He continued to be a force in the society, not always for the good, as he campaigned against the admission of women as members. 
After his retirement Fowler lived at the Old House at Aspley Guise in Bedfordshire. Its restoration led him to the study of local history which became the dominant passion of the second half of his life. In 1912 he founded the Bedfordshire Historical Record Society to publish sources (mainly medieval) for the county's history. He served as chairman of the county records committee (1913-40) and was instrumental in the setting up of the British Records Association in 1932. This work was interrupted by the outbreak of the First World War, for the duration of which he worked as a voluntary assistant in the hydrographic and naval intelligence departments of the Admiralty. His main task was preparing charts for use by submarines, covering such topics as currents and tidal streams, bathymetry, seasonal variations in density (which affected the operation of sonar), ice movements, North Sea wrecks, and coastal defences. He published 'Charts: their Use and Meaning' in 1916. When the war ended he recommended that the hydrographic department should undertake oceanographic research because of its naval applications. Though his ideas were not fully adopted, some marine research was undertaken by the navy during the inter-war period as a result of this initiative. 
Fowler declined the offer of a knighthood for his wartime services, but was made a CBE in 1918. After recovering from a breakdown due to overwork he returned to historical research. His output was prolific: the 'Bedfordshire Bibliography' by L. R. Conisbee (1962) has no fewer than thirty-three references to editions of medieval sources and historical articles on related themes. These included a magnificent analysis and synthesis, begun during the war, of the 'Domesday Book' for Bedfordshire (1922) and a fourteenth-century 'Sheriff's Roll' (1929). Fowler was also concerned with the wider aspects of the subject and wrote 'The Care of County Muniments' (1923), 'for long the only textbook in the field' (Bell, 160). As chairman of the county records committee he was responsible for setting up the Bedfordshire Record Office which became a model for local record offices elsewhere. He stood for the county council, becoming an alderman, and also helped develop the county library service. 
Fowler was a man of enormous energy and diverse interests. He was a winter sports enthusiast and made regular visits to the Alps. He published a book on the history of skating, 'On the Outside Edge' (1897), and 'Notes on the Early History of Ski' (1909). He enjoyed working with his hands. When advised to rest from intellectual work after the war he took up silversmithing and he listed his recreations in 'Who's Who' as gardening and the repair of manuscripts. In his later years he still regularly spent two days a week at the Bedfordshire Record Office. He died at the Old House, Aspley Guise, on 15 August 1940 and was cremated. He left the residue of his estate to fund studies in Old Icelandic at Oxford University. 


@@@@@


doc= 53911


Robertson, David (1806-1896), businessman and naturalist, was born on 10 December 1806 in Great Hamilton Street, Glasgow, the youngest of the three children of James Robertson (died 1806/7). His father's death left the family poor and, at the age of eight, he was sent out to work as a cowherd. He spent the rest of his childhood labouring on Lanarkshire farms. About 1824 he was apprenticed for a year to his brother who was a weaver, an arrangement which enabled him to attend evening classes. When the classes failed for lack of support he returned to labouring and farm work, and taught himself to write. He subsequently went to evening classes once more, to learn maths and bookkeeping. He said that his determination to study was due to his severe stammer. 
In 1830, encouraged by the anatomist Robert Hunter, Robertson enrolled to study medicine at Anderson's University, Glasgow. He completed the necessary courses in spite of illness but decided against a career in medicine. To keep himself as a student he had set up as a schoolmaster, and later worked for a Glasgow dyer, David Douglas. He became a friend of the family and on 15 May 1836 married Douglas's daughter Hannah, who worked in a china shop owned by her father. The couple soon entered business with his wife's sister, Grace, and her husband, Daniel McDougall, founding the firm of Robertson and McDougall in Jail Square. The business prospered but Hannah Robertson died young (about 1841), as did their two children. On 11 September 1843 Robertson married Hannah Alston ('b'. 'c'.1826) from the Isle of Man. They had two sons, David ('b'. 1847) and Thomas (1850-1947). 
By the 1850s Robertson had developed an interest in geology and natural history. In 1852 he joined the newly founded Glasgow Natural History Society, of which he was later council member, vice-president, and president (1887-90). He was a member of Glasgow's Philosophical and Geological societies, and was elected a fellow of the Geological Society (1869) and of the Linnean Society (1876). 
Robertson often holidayed at Millport on the Isle of Cumbrae, and there one of his friends, Roger Hennedy, introduced him to dredging. Robertson initially began a seaweed collection, but soon became more interested in the shells and marine animals that came up in the dredge. Before long, he was absorbed in the identification both of living species and of the allied forms found in recent geological deposits. Hannah Robertson shared her husband's scientific interests and made the foraminifera her own field of study. 
As Robertson's expertise grew he became involved in a wide scientific correspondence. In the mid-1850s he began a study of the post-Tertiary deposits of Scotland in conjunction with George Stewardson Brady and the Revd Henry William Crosskey. They jointly published 'A Monograph of the Post-Tertiary Entomostraca' as the Palaeontological Society volume for 1874. Robertson also published numerous articles, either on his own or with others, on the identification of marine invertebrates, especially from the Clyde, and of fossils from recent geological deposits. In the late 1850s both Robertson and his wife suffered severe illnesses, as a result of which they retired from business and in 1860 moved to Fernbank at Millport. From then onwards Robertson undertook frequent local dredging trips and almost annual geological tours. He began to attract a coterie of younger scientists, among them the naturalist Thomas Stebbing (1835-1926) and the German zoologist Anton Dohrn (1840-1909). 
In 1885 John Murray (1841-1914), director of the 'Challenger' office in Edinburgh, moved the floating laboratory (the 'Ark') of the Scottish Marine Station at Granton to Millport. It became the nucleus of the Scottish Marine Biological Association's Millport station. In the mid-1890s Robertson was one of the local dignitaries who sought to put the station on a more permanent footing; he laid the foundation stone shortly before his death. His widow donated his scientific collections to the new institution. 
Robertson remained physically and mentally active to the very end of his life. In 1892 he was made a member of a British Association committee to investigate shell-bearing clay deposits in Scotland, a position involving annual excursions on fieldwork. In April 1895 the University of Glasgow conferred on him an honorary LLD. He died at his home, Fernbank, Kames Bay, Millport, on 20 November 1896. His attractive personality and, latterly, considerable age, combined with continued intellectual activity and humble origins, made him something of a wonder to his contemporaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 53912


Allen, Edgar Johnson (1866-1942), marine zoologist and scientific administrator, was born on 6 April 1866 at 6 Havelock Terrace, Preston, Lancashire, the son of the Revd Richard Allen, a Wesleyan Methodist minister, and his wife, Emma Johnson, daughter of a Bideford shipbuilder. They had three daughters and five sons, of whom Allen was the second. He was educated at the Grove School near Leeds and Kingswood School, Bath, before studying chemistry and physics at the Yorkshire College, Leeds, where he graduated with an external London honours BSc degree in 1885. 
Allen briefly taught science at Dunheved College, Launceston, before being appointed first headmaster of Coke College, Antigua. He returned to Europe in 1890 and spent a year studying under F. E. Schultze at the Zoological Institute in Berlin before undertaking postgraduate research in zoology under W. F. R. Weldon at University College, London. During the summers of 1892 and 1893, assisted by grants from the British Association for the Advancement of Science and the Royal Society, he visited the laboratory of the Marine Biological Association (MBA) of the United Kingdom at Plymouth to work on the nervous system of Crustacea. In December 1894 he was appointed the laboratory's director, its fifth in eight years of existence. This instability was partly due to strained relations with the parent body, and this situation improved when Allen also became secretary of the association in 1895 (from 1902 secretary to the council). Chronic underfunding was a more long-term problem and Allen, too, contemplated resignation at one stage but weathered the difficult years, remaining as director until his retirement in 1936. During this time, under his outstanding scientific and administrative leadership, the previously small and struggling laboratory developed into a leading centre for marine research. 
Allen was immediately concerned to expand the scope of the laboratory offshore and to undertake more extensive oceanographic surveys of the region. Through the support of members of the association such as G. P. Bidder, and others, these began in a hired vessel in 1899-1900 and were developed during the following decade into 'regular investigation of the physics, chemistry and biology of the Western Channel and Approaches', carried out in the association's own yacht 'Oithona' (Southward and Roberts, 168). 
During the first decade of the twentieth century the Plymouth laboratory undertook government-sponsored fisheries research as part of the British contribution to the work of the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea. However, in 1910 the fisheries work was taken over by the government, and the laboratory again found itself without adequate funding. During the First World War its work was largely suspended and Allen was employed on other projects, including experiments on the hearing of sea lions under water and whether they could be employed to track submarines. 
It was not until 1919 that renewal of support from the Development Commission enabled the laboratory to expand, and undertake research which had an important bearing on the subsequent development of biological oceanography. Allen believed that 'the problems of marine fisheries were most likely to be solved with physics and chemistry' (Mills, 5). He felt that the broad questions of fisheries could be settled only by comprehensive knowledge not only of the fish themselves but also of the conditions in which they lived. This view grew out of work he had begun in 1905 on the laboratory culture of phytoplankton. He demonstrated that growth was proportional to the amount of nitrate present, and that phosphate was also essential. He further showed that marine productivity had a direct effect on fish populations (using mackerel catches as an example), and that stocks were boosted when conditions were good for phytoplankton growth, the microscopic plants of this 'blue pasture' being 'grazed' by zooplankton, which then in turn became food for many of the commercial fishes. 
After 1910 'both Allen's work and his philosophy of research dominated the way scientists' at Plymouth approached problems (Mills, 203). In the work carried on at the laboratory during the 1920s and 1930s, which developed both from these ideas and from work carried out before the First World War by German fisheries scientists at Kiel, he achieved his aims partly by ensuring that the physical sciences, as well as biology, were strongly represented. However, he did not believe in heading a team, preferring rather, having recruited staff, to allow individuals to work on problems that interested them -- though these may well have been suggested by Allen's leading questions. As one of them, L. H. N. Cooper, later said: 'Allen never directed. He just planted seeds' (Mills, 206). 
During these years Allen himself was principally engaged in projects connected with both the local and national standing of the laboratory. He was continually seeking to extend its influence, by, for example, introducing Easter and summer classes for students. He never married, and much of the space in the director's house, which formed part of the laboratory building, was given over to its work. The habits of economy instilled in the lean early years remained with him and he used his considerable business acumen to support the laboratory and operation of its research vessels. He paid particular attention to developing the library, much of it through exchange of scientific periodicals, and throughout the period of his directorship acted as editor of the association's own journal. For much of his time at Plymouth opportunities for personal scientific work were limited, but Allen's research was well regarded. He worked extensively on Polychaeta but published few of his results, instead making them available to W. C. M'Intosh for his monograph for the Ray Society. At different times he also studied aspects of amphipod genetics (eye colour in 'Gammarus'), and fish biology. 
Allen's contribution to science was recognized both at home and overseas. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1914, and awarded its Darwin medal in 1936. He was a foreign member of the Royal Academy of Denmark and was awarded the Hansen memorial medal and prize in 1923. The Linnean Society awarded him its gold medal in 1926, and in 1938 he received the Agassiz medal for oceanography from the US National Academy of Sciences. He was made a CBE in 1935, and a fellow of University College, London, in 1938. He was awarded a DSc degree by the University of London, and that of LLD by Edinburgh. 
Allen was also active in both local and national societies, serving as president of the Devonshire Association in 1916, of the Plymouth and District Field Club, and of the Plymouth Institution. In 1922 he chaired one of the sections of the British Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in Plymouth. For many years he was a member of the Devon and Cornwall sea fisheries committee. From 1929 to 1937 he served on the Tees and Mersey survey committees of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, and was on the Water Pollution Board from 1932 to 1937. As a member of the British delegation he served on several committees of the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea. 
In 1912 a colleague, feeling that scientists should be more forceful in negotiations with the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries, wrote of him 'Allen is... so frightfully retiring' (A. E. Shipley to G. P. Bidder, MBA archives), but in 1923, when he received the Hansen medal, a Danish newspaper commented (in translation) 'Dr Allen is a sympathetic, tall and slender figure, with a congenial man-of-the-world appearance' (MBA archives). 
On retirement in 1936 he was persuaded to stay in Plymouth, and spent his last few years still involved in scientific interests until failing memory obliged him to give up research. He died suddenly on 7 December 1942 at his home, Reservoir House, Skardon Place, Plymouth. 


@@@@@


doc= 53916


Marshall, Sheina Macalister (1896-1977), marine zoologist, was born at Stewart Hall, Rothesay, Isle of Bute, on 20 April 1896. She was the second of three daughters of John Nairn Marshall ('b'. 1860) and his wife, Jean Colville, 'nee' Binnie ('b'. 1861/2). John Nairn Marshall was a general practitioner in Rothesay and a keen amateur naturalist. He founded the Buteshire Natural History Society and encouraged his daughters' interest in the subject. Sheina Marshall, like her sisters, was educated by governesses up to the age of twelve or thirteen. She then went to Rothesay Academy, and St Margaret's School, Polmont, but her education was interrupted by attacks of rheumatic fever. Confined to bed for long periods, she read the works of Charles Darwin, and her father gave her books on geology and zoology; these determined her to become a zoologist. She entered Glasgow University in 1914, but the First World War led to a year's work (1915-16) for J. S. Macarthur, an uncle by marriage, making luminous clock-faces and instrument dials for the armed forces. Returning to university in 1916 she studied zoology, botany, and physiology and obtained a BSc with distinction in 1919. She held a university Carnegie fellowship from 1920 to 1922, working with John Graham Kerr, professor of zoology. He suggested she should take a job at the marine station at Millport on the Isle of Cumbrae in the Firth of Clyde. The laboratory, belonging to the Scottish Marine Biological Association, had just received a grant from the development fund enabling it to expand. Marshall joined the staff in 1922 and continued to work there for the rest of her life. 
Following a suggestion from Kerr that she should investigate marine food chains Marshall began a seasonal study of plankton, looking in particular at the micro-organisms forming the food of 'Calanus finmarchicus', a copepod important in the diet of herring. The biology of copepods was to become her life's work. In this, and in the study of marine productivity, she was joined in an extremely fruitful collaboration (between 1923 and 1962) by the chemist Andrew Picken Orr. They began by looking at the relationship between physical and chemical changes and plankton distribution throughout the Clyde sea area, but the scale of the undertaking proved too large. Thus in 1926 they monitored seasonal changes in nutrients and phytoplankton in Loch Striven on a weekly basis, obtaining results since considered a 'landmark in the study of marine production' (Russell, 372). 
Between 1928 and 1929 Sheina Marshall and Orr were members of the Great Barrier Reef expedition. Back at Millport, Marshall resumed her early interest in copepods as chief consumers of phytoplankton. She and Orr made an exhaustive study of the biology and physiology of 'Calanus', looking at aspects of its seasonal distribution, reproduction, and growth. Their joint book 'The Biology of a Marine Copepod' appeared in 1957. Following Orr's death in 1962 Sheina Marshall worked closely with E. D. S. Corner, a biochemist from the Plymouth laboratory. 
During the Second World War Marshall took part in the search of British coasts for seaweeds suitable as a source of agar, both on field surveys in the west of Scotland, and in laboratory work with Orr. She worked on methods of harvesting the selected species, 'Gigartina', and supervised collection by volunteers. From 1942 she also took part in a field study on the effect on marine productivity of the addition of artificial fertilizers in Loch Craiglin. 
In the late 1960s the Millport laboratory moved to Dunstaffnage, near Oban, and the buildings were taken over by the University Marine Biological Station. Sheina Marshall decided to stay in Millport, and continued to work at the station in retirement. She spent 1970-71 at Scripps Institution of Oceanography in the USA and was a visiting worker at the Villefranche laboratory in 1974. In her final years when her eyesight deteriorated, making microscope work difficult, she began writing a history of the Scottish Marine Biological Association (published in 1987). She remained in vigorous health until an attack of pneumonia in 1975 undermined her constitution. She died at Lady Margaret Hospital, Millport, from a heart attack two years later, on 7 April 1977. 
Marshall was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1949 and was awarded its Neill prize. She became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1963, and was made an OBE in 1966. The University of Uppsala awarded her an honorary degree in 1977. She was a dedicated and hardworking scientist but also had many outside interests, including walking and foreign travel. She was a gifted needlewoman and enjoyed poetry and listening to music. She had a delightful personality, unassuming but shrewd, and with a keen but kindly sense of humour. She never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 53917


Holme, Wilfrid (d. 1538), author, was the son of Thomas Holme (died 1520), gentleman, of Huntington near York, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Sir Thomas Bolton of Huby. The Holme family had acquired the manor of Huntington in the later fifteenth century and had close connections with the ruling elite in the city of York, where the family held lands and where another branch was active in civic life. The estate at Huntington was settled on Wilfrid in 1511 on the occasion of his marriage to Elizabeth, daughter of Philip Constable of Skirton, a member of a junior branch of the Flamborough Constables. 
Few details are known of Holme's life beyond his authorship in 1537 of a lengthy poem of 269 stanzas entitled 'The Fall and Evill Success of Rebellion', which recalled the events and issues surrounding the recent rising in the north known as the Pilgrimage of Grace. The poem takes the form of a medieval dream allegory, a form much favoured by more famous contemporary court poets such as John Skelton, and reveals Holme as a man familiar with classical and English history, though there is no evidence to suggest where he acquired this learning. Holme's poem takes a strongly reformist line, claiming that while some gentry were compelled to join the rising by the Commons, more were 'seduced with the Papistes devise' (Dickens, 118), and goes on to attack the state of the monasteries and to oppose saints' days, miracles, and the doctrine of purgatory. Holme strongly defends the royal supremacy, likening Henry VIII to the 'Old Testament' kings of Israel, and praises the monarch for abolishing mortuary fees and other clerical privileges. 
Holme's poem provides a provincial reflection of the concerns expressed to parliament in 1529 in Simon Fish's influential pamphlet 'The Supplicacyon for the Beggars'. Holme's protestant views led him to support clerical marriage, while he denounces as a dog who has returned to his vomit Sir Francis Bigod, formerly a fellow reformer who had become involved with the rebels and who was executed on 2 June 1537. The poem finishes with a reference to the Mouldwarp prophecy of Merlin, recorded in Geoffrey of Monmouth's 'History' and, with other such prophecies, current among the rebels, and with a resounding acclamation of King Henry. The text of the poem, with its mixture of archaic forms and sources and its knowledge of humanist and protestant ideas, stands as a corrective to an oversimplified view of the north as a bastion of conservatism at this time, and demonstrates how cultural and religious debates in the capital and at court could reach the modest provincial gentry. Holme died before the end of July 1538, leaving lands at Haxby and Huntington which were held in trust by his kinsmen Sir Marmaduke Constable and Seth Snawsell for his eight-year-old son, Seth. His poem remained unpublished until it was printed in 1572 and again in 1573, when it formed part of the government's propaganda campaign in the wake of another recent rising in the north, which had the express ambition of deposing Elizabeth I and restoring Catholicism. 


@@@@@


doc= 53918


Boulsover, Thomas (1705-1788), cutler, was born in Ecclesfield, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, and baptized in the parish church on 18 October 1705, the fifth of the nine children of Samuel Bolsover (1670-1721), farmer and cutler, and Margaret (1673-1716), daughter of George and Alice Brownell. From 1719 he was apprenticed to Joseph Fletcher (died 1746), cutler, in Sheffield. He became a freeman of the Cutlers' Company of Hallamshire, in the county of York, on 26 November 1726 and was assigned the mark 'cross above crescent above finial' with which to stamp his cutlery. In the same year he established a cutlery workshop on Norfolk Street, Sheffield. Also in that year, on 28 October at Sheffield parish church, he married Hannah (1706-1772), youngest of the three children of John Dodworth, of Owlerton, and Sarah Crook, who married in 1695. Thomas and Hannah Boulsover had ten children, of whom only two daughters survived beyond childhood. Mary (1737-1812), their fifth child, married Joseph Mitchell (1728-1788) on 14 February 1760; on the occasion of their wedding Boulsover entered into partnership with Mitchell. Sarah (1739-1810), their sixth child, married William Hutton, a country squire from Kirby West, in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in Sheffield parish church on 30 October 1764. 
Tradition relates that in 1743 Boulsover was repairing a knife handle composed of silver and copper, and by heating the adjacent metals fused them together. This 'accidental discovery' resulted in the invention of fused plate (Hatfield and Hatfield, 120). Known as Old Sheffield Plate this was the foundation of Sheffield's fine metalwork and silver industry. Fusing silver to copper creates an alloy that can be worked using silversmithing techniques to produce an article with the external appearance of silver yet at a fraction of the cost of a solid silver article. A brick of copper fused with a sheet of silver is rolled and worked in sheet form. 
Boulsover began the manufacture of fused-plate buttons and buckles, costly silver buttons being then in fashion. Fused plate replaced his cutlery manufacture, and by 1747 he had no further cutlery apprentices. However, another cutler, Joseph Hancock (1711-1790), exploited fused plate to make hollow-ware from 'c'.1755. Within a decade the manufacture of fused-plate hollow-ware was widespread in Sheffield. However, Boulsover, who had invented fused plate, took no part in developing it for hollow-ware production and did not patent his process. 
At the end of the 1750s Boulsover was a man of some means, being both a freeholder and a country gentleman; in 1757 he moved his family from Norfolk Street to Whiteley Wood Hall, a seventeenth-century property on the outskirts of Sheffield, and at the same time moved his workshop to larger premises on Norfolk Street. He was involved in local discussions over a turnpike road from Sheffield to Leeds, and his signature appears as one of twenty-five on a petition of 1759 (also confirming the spelling of his name) for the turnpike from Sheffield to Manchester. He remained committed to improving roads throughout his life. 
The 1760s saw a further contribution by Boulsover to the metalwork industry: the development of rolled cast steel for saw making. Rolling cast steel produces a stronger alloy than hammered cast steel. This venture was served by workshops, workers' cottages, an enlarged dam, and an improved water-wheel on the River Porter, below Whitely Wood Hall. Following Boulsover's death Boulsover & Co. continued under the ownership of the Mitchell and Hutton families, and after 1814 was renamed Mitchell & Co. 
Thomas Boulsover died at Whiteley Wood Hall on 9 September 1788. He was buried in St Paul's churchyard, Sheffield, with his wife, on 13 September. He was 'typical of the class of men who, by their observation, imagination, industry and ability, laid the foundation of modern Sheffield' (Hatfield and Hatfield, 10). 


@@@@@


doc= 53919


Butterfield, Michael (1634/5-1724), mathematical instrument maker, was born, according to Martin Lister, in England. Nothing is known of his early life except that he was in France from perhaps 1663. In 1677, when a new form of level made by him was reported in the 'Journal des Scavans', he was established in the faubourg St Germain, Paris. In the following years other notices of his work concerning levels and hodometers appeared, and his inventiveness and skill brought him into close contact with the Academie des Sciences and its members. By November 1678 he knew Huygens, and in 1680 it was he who constructed Cassini's silver celestial planisphere that was presented to the king. In 1683 he supplied Cassini with instruments for the operations that extended the arc of the meridian measurements to Bourges. It was Butterfield also who oversaw the dividing of the meridian arcs for Coronelli's great globes (4.75 metres in diameter) presented to Louis XIV in 1683 by the Cardinal d'Estrees. 
At an unknown date Butterfield became free of the Founders' Corporation of Paris in which he served as 'jure' (1702-4). He supplied instruments to the king's observatory, invented a new form of simple microscope (described in 'PTRS', 12, 1678, and in 'L'usage du nouveau microscope fait avec une seule et tres-petite boulle de verre', 1679), and a form of sundial that is still known by his name (described in 'Description et usage du cadran a boussole portatif universel depuis environ le 54e degre d'elevation du pole jusqu'a environ le 41e degre de l'elevation, c'est a dire le nord d'Angleterre jusqu'au sud d'Italie, & pour tous les pays renfermez entre ces deux terres ou elevations', Paris, 'c'.1701/2). He was particularly noted among contemporaries for his skill in mounting lodestones and for his private collection of the different types thereof. With these he carried out carefully observed experiments, and Nicolas Hartsoeker acknowledged in his 'Principes de physique' (1696) that most of the magnetic experiments he described were derived from Butterfield. In 1698 Butterfield received a grant of arms, and in 1717 his was one of four instrument-making workshops visited by Peter the Great. 
As Butterfield's investigations into magnetism show, he had a wider interest in natural philosophy than just the production of instruments to be used in its service. In October 1678, he had written to Robert Hooke 'expressing his desire to correspond with [the Royal Society] concerning philosophical, mathematical, and mechanical matters; and offering to communicate such things, as he should meet with [in Paris] of that kind'. The society made an immediate response by ordering a copy of Halley's planisphere of the stars to be sent to Butterfield when this was presented to it on 7 November. Martin Lister's visit to Butterfield in the summer of 1698 offered another chance of creating such contact and a correspondence ensued. The ten letters between 1698 and 1700 that have survived mingle personal and professional matters: settling Lister's affairs in Paris, finding some peach trees for him, distributing copies of his book among Paris acquaintances, news of Butterfield's magnetical activities, and a request to put him in touch with John Sellar. Extracts from one of these letters concerning magnetic sand from Sampierdarena (Genoa) were published in the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions' (20, 1698). Butterfield's wife was Pernette Bernier, daughter of the 'Maitre Artificier du Roi' Michel Bernier, and with her he had six children: Jean-Dominique (1678-1687), Dorothee ('b'. 1 Feb 1681), Georges-Michel ('b'. 30 Sept 1682), Jean-Baptiste ('b'. 23 Sept 1683), Georges-Michel ('b'. 5 Sept 1687), Jacques-Michel ('b'. 10 Nov 1688). Butterfield died, probably at the Quay de l'Horloge in Paris, where he certainly lived for an extended period, on 28 May 1724. He was probably buried at the church of St Barthelemy. 


@@@@@


doc= 53920


Evans, Lewis (c.1700-1756), cartographer and geologist, was born in Llangwnnadl, near Pwllheli, Caernarvonshire. Of his early life and parentage nothing is known. By 1736 he was a surveyor and map maker in Philadelphia. His first known work is 'A map of that part of Bucks County released by the Indians to the proprietaries of Pensilvania in September 1737' (1738, Logan MSS, Historical Society of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia), which showed the important land purchase by James Logan who had commissioned Evans to make the map. Evans wanted to make further maps of Indian lands which the colonial proprietors wanted to secure to enable the colony's peaceful westward expansion. In 1743 he and John Bartram the botanist were granted permission to accompany Conrad Weiser, provincial Indian agent, into Indian lands west of the settled parts of Pennsylvania and New York. Posing as a disinterested scientific observer, Evans was able, under Weiser's protection, to penetrate further westward than any other geographer to date. In 1746 he reduced a map for the board of proprietors of New Jersey and the knowledge he gained thereby and from seeing the maps which passed through the Pennsylvania land office and from further travel enabled him in 1749 to produce 'A map of Pensilvania, New-Jersey, New York and the three Delaware counties' which was the first delineation of so large a part of the territory in such detail. He was, however, aware that further advances depended on his being able to survey in the field, not just bring together pre-existing knowledge, but such surveys were impossible in Indian territory. 
In 1749 and 1750 Evans drew for Thomas Penn maps of the areas west of the settled part of Pennsylvania to help Penn decide which tract he should next purchase from the Indians, but Penn's 1750 plan that Evans and Bartram make a westward reconnaissance trip under a scientific cloak came to nothing. At the same time Evans gave Pehr Kalm, the Swedish naturalist, a map and geological information to guide him on his travels on the continent. On his return to Philadelphia, Kalm gave Evans geographical information about the areas he had visited. The manuscript of the map drawn by Evans for Kalm has not survived and just one engraved copy is known (facsimile in Jorgensen, 27). The map covers New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, part of Lake Ontario, and the St Lawrence River as far as Quebec, as well as the middle Atlantic colonies shown on his 1749 map, although Kalm complained in retrospect, in a letter of 30 October 1777 to Pehr Wargentin, 'Alla orter, dem jag i America besokte, finns wal ej har antecknade' ('none of the places which I visited in America is shown'; Jorgensen, 28). Kalm's published accounts of his journey included maps based on Evans's 1749 map. 
In 1751-2 Evans lectured in various colonies on natural philosophy including electricity in which he had been instructed by Benjamin Franklin. In 1752 he reissued his 1749 map and published 'A Brief Account of Pennsylvania' (1753). Piqued to find that he had been induced by Penn to include topographical information which was erroneous but which bolstered Penn's position in the Pennsylvania-Maryland border dispute, he undertook work for Penn's rival Lord Baltimore in 1753-4, trying in vain to unearth archival material which would bolster Baltimore's position. This in turn put him in bad odour with Penn who then did not commission him to map the western part of the colony as part of his strategy to ward off French claims. Instead Evans prepared a map on his own initiative. His 'General map of the middle British colonies' was accompanied by a booklet entitled 'An Analysis of a General Map' (both published in 1755). The latter described as treasonable the British authorities' failure to consolidate claims to the rich Ohio country. While his condemnation grew intemperate he also attracted criticism in the press for the effect his maps had allegedly had on the prosecution of the war against the French, he having provided General Braddock with two maps for military purposes. Finally he was indicted for libel against Robert Morris Hunter, governor of Pennsylvania, for allegations in the 1755 pamphlet. He was imprisoned in New York city in the spring of 1756. Suffering from 'a lingering indisposition' he was released on 8 June 1756, but he died there on 11 June. He left an eleven-year-old daughter, but no details of a marriage are known. 
Since his death Evans has been hailed as a prescient scientific observer -- ironically just the pose he adopted to cover his original political purpose. His map of the Atlantic colonies in its 1749 and 1752 states, his essay, and his journal of his 1743 journey, of which the original is lost but which was published in Thomas Pownall's 'Topographical Description of such Parts of North America as are Contained in the (Annexed) Map' (1776), show him to have been a keen and knowledgeable observer of the natural world, including its geology, geomorphology, and meteorology. He has been hailed as the first to recognize in America signs of isostatic adjustment. This process is held to occur when erosion strips material from an area and it becomes lighter and rises. The area where the eroded material is deposited becomes correspondingly heavier and sinks. The term 'isostasy' was coined in 1889, but nearly 150 years earlier Evans had described the process. He described the transport of eroded material from the Appalachians to the plains below, and the isostatic adjustment which would take place if the Great Lakes were drained of all or some of their water (he had inferred the existence of earlier larger lakes from raised beaches around Lake Ontario). His map has also been hailed as 'the first known document to show oil at the industry's birthplace' (facsimile edition by the Ethyl Corporation, 1953). He was certainly an astute and knowledgeable observer, and an ambitious cartographer, though these skills were in his lifetime bent largely to political ends. 


@@@@@


doc= 53921


Farquharson, Henry (c.1675-1739), teacher of mathematics and navigation in Russia, was a son of John Farquharson (died before 1691), from a branch of the family at Milton, Whitehouse, in west Aberdeenshire. He graduated after broadly based studies as Milne bursar (1691-5) at Marischal College, Aberdeen, and became Liddel mathematical tutor. In April 1698 he was probably introduced by the marquess of Carmarthen in London to the visiting tsar of Russia, Peter the Great, who recruited him to head the mathematics and navigation school planned for Moscow. Following a verbal contract with the Russian ambassador, Farquharson, together with Stephen Gwyn (died 1720) and Richard Grice (died 1709), students from the Royal Mathematical School at Christ's Hospital, sailed to Archangel on the 'Royal Transport', a fast schooner given by William III to Peter, reaching the port in June 1698. Temporarily overlooked by the tsar, they lived for a year in the Moscow house of Henry Crevett, an influential English merchant, and began teaching a few pupils. Their petitions in December 1700 and January 1701 for pay, lodgings, and a school in which to teach, resulted in a government decree founding the Mathematics and Navigation School in an old linen mill on 14 January 1701. However in June of that year the school was transferred to the Sukharev Tower, Moscow's recently renovated tallest secular building; originally one of the city gates, it housed Russia's earliest observatory, and survived until the Stalin era. The school, modelled on Christ's Hospital, ran two preliminary courses, the first, arithmetic under the gifted teacher Leonty Magnitsky (1664-1734), leading to the navigation section, where mathematics, trigonometry, astronomy, navigation, and surveying were taught. Farquharson, who was also answerable for all practical arrangements, initially gave lessons in Latin through an interpreter but came to speak Russian very well. By July 1703 there were 200 pupils; numbers rose to 500 within a few years, and 1200 specialists graduated from the school between 1701 and 1715. In the early 1700s Farquharson belonged to a select quasi-masonic Neptune Society, of which the tsar was warden, meeting in the Sukharev Tower. The tsar, fascinated by astronomy, supplied Farquharson with the telescopes, instruments, and books he requested, and corresponded with him about eclipses during his journeys. Farquharson and Gwyn were also members of the Glorious British Monastery, or a convivial 'bung club'. The school itself gave music and amateur stage performances on Sundays and holidays. Farquharson also proposed, and from 1705 to 1710 headed, a survey for a direct road between Moscow and St Petersburg via Novgorod which when completed, in 1718, saved 135 miles of travelling distance. In January 1709 the somewhat impetuous Grice was murdered on a late evening ride through Moscow's streets. Subsequently Farquharson himself narrowly escaped a similar fate. 
On 1 October 1715 Peter the Great founded the naval academy at St Petersburg in Kikin's House, the present site of the Winter Palace, or Hermitage Museum. Farquharson as senior professor of mathematics and Gwyn, as professor of navigation (until his death in 1720), moved to St Petersburg in January 1716 with 300 advanced students from the navigation section at Moscow where the Mathematics School remained under Magnitsky. Farquharson had a salary of over $500 per annum, free accommodation in the building shared with the Admiralty pharmacy, and allowances for beer and for food for his horse. The academy was headed by a president, with a director under him, but Farquharson assumed responsibility for its practical management and for all educational matters. He and a Russian colleague formulated the curriculum covering, in addition to mathematics and navigation, drawing, fencing, artillery, and fortification -- some time after 1722 Farquharson was made lieutenant of fortification, entitling him to hereditary noble status. Two hundred and fifteen graduates of the academy entered the Russian navy between 1715 and 1725, many of them sent abroad to complete their training in British, Dutch, Danish, French, and Italian navies. 
In 1703 and 1712 Farquharson acted as a consultant to Leibnitz, corresponding with him about scientific affairs and books published in Russia. Charles Whitworth, the British envoy to Russia, also recommended him in March 1713 as a correspondent for astronomy and cold phenomena to a Russian enquiries committee of the Royal Society (which included Newton and Halley), as well as the Scot Robert Erskine FRS (1677-1718), who was the tsar's chief physician and the director of the entire Russian medical services; the outcome of this recommendation is not known. The naval academy served as Russia's first scientific centre before the Academy of Sciences was established in 1725. In 1718-19 the apothecary chancery's library and museum, directed by Erskine, were moved into Kikin's House from Peter's summer palace, along with Erskine's and Archibald Pitcairne's outstanding libraries, later forming the nucleus of the Academy of Sciences' collections. Farquharson, constantly acquiring naval textbooks and scientific literature which he revised and edited for translation into Russian is credited with supervising thirty-eight translated works for his students (the academy had its own printing press in 1721). His joint 1703 translation of Adriaan Vlacq's Latin tables of logarithms, based on Henry Briggs's 'Arithmetica logarithmica' (1624), was Russia's second published technical book, incorporating Arabic figures which Farquharson introduced to Russia in place of Cyrillic numerals. He also reworked an abridgement of Euclid's 'Elements', translated and printed in 1719, as an introduction to Newtonian mathematics. Other subjects edited by him, some printed but many lost in manuscript, comprised navigation, mathematics, trigonometry, astronomy, and cartography. He probably also compiled a navigation manual, dating from 1703 and now in the British Library (Sloane MS 3227), as a guide for his students, and his model yacht, used for illustrating his lectures, is displayed at the Naval Museum in St Petersburg. Farquharson's comprehensive 'Cursus mathematicus' was ordered to be printed by the Academy of Sciences in January 1735. 
In June 1732 the naval academy moved across the River Neva to Prince Dolgoruky's mansion on Vasilyevsky Island, where today's Academy of Arts stands, near the Academy of Sciences building. An expert cartographer, Farquharson helped produce the first Russian bronze engraving of Mercator's map of America in 1715, superintending the country's earliest reliable hydrographic atlas of the Caspian Sea in 1731. During 1738 he co-operated closely with Joseph-Nicolas Delisle, the eminent professor of astronomy at the Academy of Sciences, in drawing up instructions for geodesists whose surveys culminated in the 'Atlas Russicus' (1745), the first general map of the Russian empire. He made valuable practical suggestions about these instructions in a letter, dated 17 June 1738, to the Academy of Sciences, whose president referred to him in this connection as professor of astronomy. In March 1737 Farquharson was elevated to the fifth highest Russian rank, that of brigadier, in recognition of his selfless and outstanding services in pioneering the mathematical training of navigators for the Russian fleet. Talented, versatile, level-headed, and greatly respected, Henry Farquharson devoted a solid forty years of his life to this innovative educational work. He died at St Petersburg on 19 December 1739 and was buried there, probably at St Sampson's cemetery, five days later. A measure of his indispensability is that attempts to find a British replacement between 1743 and 1745 proved abortive, and it was not until 1756 that Thomas Newberry ('fl'. 1748-1778), an experienced teacher and lecturer, was appointed professor of mathematics and navigation to the renamed noble naval cadet corps in St Petersburg; he remained there until 1762. 


@@@@@


doc= 53922


Frederick, Sir Charles (1709-1785), politician and antiquary, was born on 21 December 1709 in Madras, the third son of Sir Thomas Frederick (1681-1730), at that time a member of the council of Fort St George, on the east coast of India, and of Mary Moncrieff ('c'.1689-1767), his wife. He was educated at Westminster School and at New College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 19 March 1725; he entered the Middle Temple on 1 February 1728. Frederick was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1731 and of the Royal Society in 1733. In January 1736 he was chosen director of the Society of Antiquaries and served until 1738, when he resigned the office in order to travel abroad. With his elder brother John he travelled to Italy, and from Italy went as far east as Constantinople. He returned by way of Paris and was back in London by January 1741, when he again took up his post as director of the Society of Antiquaries. He declined re-election the following year after his election to parliament. Some of his reports on, and illustrations of, excavated antiquities remain with the society. His drawings of architectural antiquities survive in the three volumes, 'Ancient Buildings... Drawn by Smart Lethuillier, Esq.,... and by Charles Frederick, Esq.', which came into the hands of Horace Walpole and are now in the British Library. He was something of an amateur architect as well, for he designed the monument to Lucy, Lady Lyttelton, in Hagley church, Worcestershire, and the monument to Thomas Miller, bishop of Waterford, in Highclere church, Hampshire. 
Frederick was elected member of parliament for New Shoreham in 1741 and served until 1754, when he was elected for Queenborough, where the Ordnance office, for which he was by then working, had great influence. He sat for Queenborough until 1784, voting consistently for the government until 1782, when he followed North out of office, and confining his few interventions to matters relating to the Ordnance department. He was created knight of the Bath on 23 March 1761. 
In 1746 Frederick was appointed comptroller of the royal laboratory at Woolwich and clerk of the deliveries, the most junior of the 'great officers' who made up the membership of his majesty's honourable Board of Ordnance. There is some evidence that he owed his entry into the office to the patronage of the second duke of Montagu, a fellow member of the Society of Antiquaries and master-general of the Ordnance. As comptroller he was responsible for the firework display on 27 April 1749 in celebration of the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, for which Handel's 'Music for the Royal Fireworks' was composed. He was appointed to the post of surveyor-general, the second most senior of the civilian members of the board, on 10 April 1750, a post he held, along with the comptrollership of the laboratory, until 1782. As surveyor he was responsible for the procurement of military supplies, and can loosely be described as the technical member of the board. Almost his first action was to report to the board in June 1750 the 'many unaccountable Irregularities with which the Small Gun Office hath heretofore abounded' (TNA: PRO, WO 55/1816, 7-8) and under his direction 'A System and a Proposed Regulation for carrying on the Business for the future in the Surveyor General's Branch' was approved in January 1751. It laid down the records that were to be kept and the checks that were to be carried out to ensure that equipment supplied was in accordance with the specification, before any bills submitted could be approved for payment. This system lasted in its essentials until methods were changed under pressure of the needs of the wars against France at the end of the century. 
Frederick seems to have taken considerable interest in the design of small arms, and among other details personally approved the design of a new carbine for the officers of the Royal Artillery in 1750 as well as the pattern of firearms made especially for presentation to the Iroquois in North America in 1753. Unfortunately all the official letter-books of the surveyor-general's department have been lost, the only exception being one covering the years 1761-7, in the New York Public Library, which seems to have been used intermittently when Frederick was away from the office. It shows him involved in the details of gun salutes in honour of the king's coronation, in equipping military expeditions, and in negotiating supplies to such foreign clients as Algiers and Portugal. The deliveries to Portugal that began in 1762 marked the beginning of more than 130 years' imitation by Portugal of British arms design. The only non-ordnance entries are a few relating to government or other official posts in his constituency of Queenborough, part of the care expected of any member of parliament. 
On 18 August 1746 Frederick married Lucy Boscawen (1710-1784), eldest daughter of Hugh Boscawen, first Viscount Falmouth, and his wife, Charlotte Godfrey. They had six children: four sons, three of whom, Charles, Thomas Lennox, and Edward Boscawen, survived their father, and two daughters, Augusta and Lucy. His principal residence in London was in Berkeley Square. He also had a villa in landscaped gardens on the banks of the Thames at Hammersmith, bought for him out of money left for the purpose in the will of his grandfather, Thomas Frederick, and for many years he rented a 'shooting-house' near Boston in Lincolnshire. 
When Frederick lost his post at the fall of Lord North's ministry in 1782, he petitioned for a pension, pleading extreme poverty. This was granted by the Fox-North coalition, and he did not stand for parliament in 1784. He died at his villa in Hammersmith on 18 December 1785. His will ordered that he should be buried in the family vault in St Olave Jewry, London. An obituary appeared in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' of December 1785 and, by the terms of his will, his 'library and museum' were sold by auction in July 1786, and his Hammersmith villa in May 1787. 


@@@@@


doc= 53923


Hutcheson, Archibald (c.1660-1740), lawyer and economist, was the son of Archibald Hutcheson of Stranocum, co. Antrim. He was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1680, was called to the bar in 1683, and for the next five years practised as a barrister in England and Ireland. At the beginning of 1688 he was chosen attorney-general of the Leeward Islands by the governor, Sir Nathaniel Johnson, and he became noted for implementing a policy of complete leniency towards the islands' Catholic populace. A protestant, and possibly of Ulster-Scots presbyterian stock, he had a deep antipathy to religious persecution, which seems to have been a strong recommendation to the lords of trade in London. He retained his position after the revolution, although not without becoming caught up in the accusations of disloyalty to William III directed at Johnson's successor, Colonel Christopher Codrington, being himself accused of aspersing the king's name and of bias towards Catholics and Jacobites. Hutcheson was cleared of these denunciations, however, and continued his official legal duties on the islands until 1704 when he returned to England, settling permanently at St James's, Westminster, and re-establishing his legal practice. Having first married Mary Smith on 29 June 1697 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, he had following her death married Rebecca Bankes (died in or before 1715), a widow, on 19 August 1701 at Topsham, Devon. His interest in economic and mathematical questions led to his election as FRS in 1708. 
About 1710 Hutcheson became a legal adviser to the duke of Ormond, thus joining the extensive retinue of advisers, lawyers, and agents whom the duke employed to administer his vast, mainly Irish estate. Hutcheson's own Irish background and the close proximity to Ormond's London residence in St James's Square doubtless assisted what remained primarily a professional rather than political association. Hutcheson spent the early months of 1713 touring Germany in the company of the young duke of Montagu. During these travels, which included visits to several princely courts, he acted as a kind of self-appointed ambassador in support of the protestant Hanoverian succession to the British crown. At Frankfurt he was welcomed by the exiled duke of Marlborough, Montagu's father-in-law, who regarded him as a potentially useful tool in parliament. He also made a favourable impression with courtiers and politicians at Hanover. Upon his return to England, the duke of Ormond, as newly appointed warden of the Cinque Ports, was able to procure Hutcheson's return for Hastings in the autumn general election. 
Although Hutcheson had been regarded as a tory, presumably on the grounds of his pronounced attachment to the church, he had little liking for the administration of the earl of Oxford, and once in parliament co-operated closely with the whigs in opposition. Indeed, his intimacy with senior whig politicians, combined with the strong whiggish line which he took in the Commons during the 1714 session, set him apart from most other 'whimsical' or moderate tories, and political observers regarded him more as a whig. Hutcheson's sterling parliamentary services in helping to rally tories against the ministry were rewarded after the accession of George I with his appointment (in December 1714) as a lord commissioner of the Board of Trade with a salary of $1000. His accord with the new whig administration rapidly disintegrated, however, when proceedings were commenced in June 1715 to impeach the duke of Ormond, who, having aligned himself with the Stuart dynasty, was now in exile. Hutcheson gave a fulsome defence of his patron, and in January 1716 resigned from the Board of Trade. 
Hutcheson's marriage in August 1715 (by a licence dated 18 August) to Mary, Lady Gayre (died 1727), the widow of the wealthy West Indian merchant Sir John Gayre, gave him access to a fortune said to be worth $40,000 and obviated any further need he might have for a government salary. For the remainder of his career in parliament he cast himself as an independent critic of government. Hutcheson's continuing association with Ormond and his family inevitably prompted accusations that he was a crypto-Jacobite, but as he had become one of the duke's principal creditors and an authority on his tangled finances, it was no longer an association he could renounce without considerable personal loss. In July 1718 Hutcheson added fuel to public concern about the size of the national debt with the publication of his essay 'The Present State of the Public Debts and Funds', the main thrust of which was his argument that the debt had escalated sharply under the management of George I's whig ministers. Responding for the government, John Crookshanks, an excise official, claimed to detect flaws in Hutcheson's accounting methodology and demonstrated that the recent accumulations of debt had in fact been incurred during Queen Anne's reign. In advancing his case, Crookshanks played upon Hutcheson's supposed Jacobitism by exposing passages in Hutcheson's text which seemed redolent of a sympathy for the Stuarts. However, by the time Hutcheson published his 'Answer' in December 1719, the chief concern was not with responsibility for the debt but with the agency selected for its reduction: the South Sea Company. 
Hutcheson strongly opposed the company's proposals for taking over the national debt, and in a further pamphlet published as stock prices soared he warned that since stock values bore little or no relationship to their 'intrinsic' worth, financial disaster was inevitable. In the aftermath of the 'bubble' he proposed his own radical 'engraftment' scheme, and with several other prominent opposition MPs and peers led demands for the company's directors to be stripped of their estates and effects. He subsequently participated in the Commons' secret committee which investigated the scandal. His idiosyncratic efforts during 1721-2 to persuade Lord Sunderland to inaugurate a popular ministry, embracing 'country principles' and capable of governing a nation traumatized by the South Sea crisis, produced nothing but his own disillusion. His candidacy in tandem with a tory in a particularly violent contest for the populous constituency of Westminster during the election in the spring of 1722 only revived taunts of Jacobitism; and the following year, amid exposure of the Atterbury plot, he was forced to publish a strong denial of any involvement with the Jacobite conspirators. 
Hutcheson remained MP for Hastings, continuing to participate actively in proceedings until he stood down in 1727. In 1726 he was made a bencher at the Middle Temple, and on 30 October 1727, eight months after the death of his third wife, from whom he had previously separated by decree of chancery, he married another widow, Elizabeth Stewart, thereby acquiring property interests on the islands of Montserrat and St Kitts. Despite the jibes of certain detractors, his connection with Jacobitism was more apparent than real, for it was on the basis of his deep involvement in the complex financial affairs of Ormond and his brother, the earl of Arran, which continued into the early 1730s, that other prominent Jacobites whom he encountered presumed upon his personal support for their cause. He remained publicly active until almost the end of his life. He was one of the lords proprietors of Carolina and a member of the court of St George's Hospital, and in 1739 became treasurer of the Middle Temple. He died, probably aged eighty, on 12 August 1740; his fourth wife, Elizabeth, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 53924


Rittenhouse, David (1732-1796), instrument maker and astronomer, was born on 8 April 1732 at Paper Mill Run, near Germantown, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the second of ten children of Elizabeth Williams and Matthias Rittenhouse (1702-1779), a paper maker turned farmer. The elder Rittenhouse was of German Mennonite background, his wife of Welsh Quaker, but neither seems to have been strongly attached to either church; their son, who held deistical views, had a loose affiliation with the Presbyterians. 
Although he was without formal education (he was educated at home), Rittenhouse displayed a precocious mechanical talent: aged eight he made a model of a watermill and at sixteen he constructed a wooden clock. After 1750 he devoted himself completely to making clocks and surveying and other instruments. He was encouraged in this career by a local clergyman, Thomas Barton, a graduate of Trinity College, Dublin, who procured him books from London and introduced him to Philadelphia men of science. In 1768 Rittenhouse proposed to the newly established American Philosophical Society that it should make observations of the forthcoming transit of Venus, to determine the sun's parallax and thus the distance of the earth from the sun. Rittenhouse's observations, made at his farm at Norriton, were part of an international scientific undertaking. The American's observations were, in the judgement of Nevil Maskelyne, the astronomer royal, 'excellent and compleat' and did 'Honor to the Gentlemen who made them' (American Philosophical Society, 'Transactions', 1, 1771, 40). 
In 1771 Rittenhouse constructed the instrument for which he was most famous. This was an orrery, a mechanical representation of the solar system, that could reproduce the positions of the sun and planets 5000 years forwards and backwards. The first orrery was purchased by the College of New Jersey, a second was made for the College of Philadelphia, and eventually a third was authorized as a gift to the king of France. The instrument was described in journals and newspapers, it was illustrated in almanacs, and was the subject of public lectures. During their occupation of Philadelphia in 1777-8 the British army posted a special guard to protect it. Thomas Jefferson expressed a commonly held view of the marvellous creation and its inventor: 'He has not indeed made a world; but he has by imitation approached nearer its Maker than any man who had lived from the creation to this day' (Jefferson, 'Notes', 64). 
In 1766 Rittenhouse married Eleanor Coulston (died 1771), daughter of a Quaker farmer; they had two daughters. In 1772, the year after Eleanor's death, he married Hannah Jacobs (died 1799), like his first wife a Quaker. In Philadelphia, where he settled in 1770, Rittenhouse continued to make clocks, surveying and astronomical instruments, and even a pair of eye-glasses for George Washington. He compiled ephemerides for almanacs, and wrote on a wide range of subjects: the transits of Venus and Mercury, comets, eclipses, meteors, lightning and electricity, mathematical subjects, the geology of western Pennsylvania, and the power of snakes to fascinate birds. He used spider webs for the cross-hairs of telescopes and wrote about the illusion of reversible relief. He made improvements in Franklin's Pennsylvania fireplace. His most important invention was a compass equipped with a vernier. 
As a celebrated surveyor and astronomer, Rittenhouse was called on to assist in surveying the boundaries of Pennsylvania with Maryland, Virginia, New Jersey, and New York. A proposal to erect an observatory in Philadelphia, with Rittenhouse as public astronomer, died with the outbreak of the American war in 1775. 
In 1768 Rittenhouse was elected to the American Philosophical Society, which he served in many capacities and in whose 'Transactions' he published most of his papers. In an address to the society in 1775 he presented the history of astronomy, defended the science against the charge of being anti-religious, expressed opposition to slavery, and, voicing a common colonial attack upon European 'luxury' and 'decadence', expressed the wish that a bar could be raised between the Old World and the New that would 'make a voyage to Europe as impracticable as one to the moon' (Barton, 568). He was elected president of the society in succession to Franklin in 1791, and made it a national centre for the encouragement of science and scientists. 
With the outbreak of the American War of Independence Rittenhouse's life changed. In the next fifteen years he held a variety of public offices. As a member of the board of war he gave advice on the manufacture of arms and ammunition, and on the construction of defensive works on the Delaware River, and as state treasurer from 1777 to 1789 he had to cope with persistent problems of depreciated currency and of tax collection. He was chairman of the state convention that drafted a constitution that was more radical than that of any of the new states. Jefferson regretted these political activities: 'No body can conceive that nature ever intended to throw away a Newton upon the occupations of a crown' (Jefferson, 'Papers', 2.203). 
As Rittenhouse's reputation grew he received several honorary degrees, and he was elected to learned societies in Boston and Virginia. In the reorganization of the College of Philadelphia in 1779 he was chosen vice-president and professor of astronomy. There was some hope that he would accept an appointment at the College of William and Mary in Virginia. But lecturing did not appeal to him and he remained in Philadelphia, content modestly to call himself, and to be known as, a 'mechanic'. In 1787 Charles Dilly of London published 'Philosophical Papers of David Rittenhouse'. In 1792 Rittenhouse was appointed director of the national mint, where he designed several instruments and machines required for its work. He resigned the post three years later for reasons of health -- possibly a duodenal ulcer. On 16 April 1795 he was elected a foreign fellow of the Royal Society. 
Americans often linked Rittenhouse with Washington and Franklin as an example of American character and talents. Conservative federalists, however, did not forgive his radical politics, criticism of the federal constitution, and support of the French Revolution. John Adams, while admitting that Rittenhouse was 'an exquisite Mechanician', branded him as 'a good, simple ignorant well meaning Franklinian Democrat, totally ignorant of the World, as an Anchorite, an honest Dupe of the French Revolution' ('Adams-Jefferson Letters', 2.426). 
Rittenhouse died in his house, at 7th and Arch streets, Philadelphia, on 26 June 1796, and was buried next day in the floor of the private observatory he had erected in the garden. His body was subsequently removed to a Presbyterian burial-ground, and still later to Laurel Hill cemetery, Philadelphia. His personal property was appraised at $8941 16's'. 4died He was survived by his wife, Hannah, who deeded the observatory to the American Philosophical Society, and in 1799 bequeathed it $200 for its upkeep. 


@@@@@


doc= 53925


Walton, Jacob (d. 1743), mathematical controversialist, was a Dubliner whose antecedents are unknown. A gentleman of the same name and place whose will (now lost) was proved in 1719 could have been his father. From 1719 to 1740 Walton's name appears in lists of subscribers to a dozen books, all but two published in Dublin. In 1731 'Mr. Walton' attended the first meeting of the Dublin Society, and two years later his full name appeared in the list of members. He came to public notice in England in 1735 as J. Walton, author of 'A vindication of Sir Isaac Newton's principles of fluxions against the objections contained in 'The analyst''. The latter book had been published anonymously in London and Dublin in 1734 by George Berkeley (1685-1753), bishop of Cloyne. 
Berkeley's objections to fluxions (calculus) as expounded by Newton and Leibniz had centred around the logical absurdity of conceiving the ratio of two infinitely reducing quantities when both vanished; to believe in this fundamental construct of fluxions required an act of faith as great as that demanded by religion. Berkeley answered Walton, 'this Dublin Professor', in 'A Defence of Free Thinking in Mathematics' (1735), accusing him of evading many of the issues and with the parting shot 'I leave him to be tried by his Scholars' (p. 71). Walton's rejoinder was 'The Catechism of the Author [Berkeley] of 'The Minute Philosopher' Fully Answer'd'. Still anonymous, Berkeley issued 'Reasons for not Replying to Mr. Walton's Full Answer' (1735), in fact a sarcastic reply ('a facetious man... an opponent who writes on my side of the Question'; p. 4). Walton responded with an appendix to his 'Catechism' (added also to a second edition of Berkeley's 'Reasons'). All the tracts following Berkeley's first were published in Dublin in 1735, and all except 'Reasons' in London also. 
Walton based his counter-argument on Newton's 'Principia' and 'Quadratura curvarum'; while showing 'a good intuitive grasp of fluxions', he 'lacked deep philosophic insight' (Cajori, 93), and can be faulted on some explanations in his 'Catechism'. Berkeley had shrewdly pinpointed weaknesses in the formulation of the theory that Walton failed to address. The argument was taken up by British mathematicians, including James Jurin (1684-1750), Benjamin Robins (1707-1751), and Colin Maclaurin (1698-1746). The foundations of calculus still remained unsatisfactory, bedevilled by loyalty to Newton, shifting definitions, reliance on geometrical intuition, and lack of appropriate mathematical symbolism. The resolution emerged only in the early nineteenth century, through the work of A. L. Cauchy (1789-1857) and others. 
Since he did not use a forename on his tracts, Walton's identity became obscured. Influenced by Berkeley's reference and by Cajori (p. 69), the entry in the 'British Museum catalogue' (1964) reads 'WALTON (JOHN) Professor of Mathematics in Dublin University'. There was none such: Jacob Walton was probably a private teacher of mathematics. 
'Jacob Walton, a very eminent Mathematician', died on 12 July 1743 ('Dublin Journal') in Peter Street, Dublin; he was buried on 15 July in the city's parish of St Peter and St Kevin. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' added that he had 'left upwards of $4,000 to his two Maid-servants' ('GM', 443), perhaps indicating that he had no close relative. Such a large sum was unlikely to have come from teaching alone. 
Walton was one of those lesser mathematicians who, without original contribution, assimilated and disseminated Newton's ideas and techniques. For an Irish mathematician he was exceptional in having his writings noticed and reprinted in England. 


@@@@@


doc= 53927


Stout, Sir Robert (1844-1930), lawyer and premier of New Zealand, was born at Lerwick, in the Shetland Islands, on 28 September 1844, the eldest of the six children of Thomas Stout, a merchant and landed proprietor of Lerwick, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Smith. He was educated at the parish school, where he was appointed a pupil teacher at the age of thirteen. After qualifying as a teacher and as a surveyor, he decided in 1863 to emigrate to New Zealand. He arrived in Dunedin on 8 April 1864. Having failed to get employment as a surveyor on the Otago goldfields, he taught at John Shaw's Grammar School and then at the North Dunedin district school, before he was articled to a legal office in Dunedin in 1867. He completed his articles in three years instead of the customary five and was called to the bar in July 1871. That year he was one of the first students at the new University of Otago, where he gained first place in the mental and moral science and political economy examinations. Between 1873 and 1875 he was the university's first law lecturer: he became one of Dunedin's leading lawyers, an accomplished and forceful debater, and a formidable pleader before a jury. He was a tall, striking man with, in later years, a large white beard. 
Stout became involved in Dunedin's public life, in particular as a leader of free thought. He often engaged in religious and theological debates and became well known for his strong support for secular education. Keenly interested in politics and contemporary political theory, he was well read in such authors as Herbert Spencer and John Stuart Mill. On 20 August 1875 he was elected to the house of representatives representing Caversham, as an opponent of the 'Abolition of Provinces Bill', and on 20 December 1875 he was returned at the general election for the City of Dunedin. On 27 December 1876 he married Anna Paterson Logan ['see below'] in Dunedin. 
The 'Abolition of Provinces Bill' was enacted in 1876, but Stout remained in politics, and on 13 March 1878 was appointed attorney-general in the ministry of Sir George Grey, who had led the fight against abolition. He drafted much of the legislation put before the house by the Grey government. From 25 July 1878 he was also minister for lands and immigration. He resigned from the ministry on 25 June 1879, ostensibly to devote more time to his legal career, but also because of conflict with Grey over his own involvement and that of other ministers in the promotion of land and railway companies. He returned to the house in July 1884 as member for Dunedin East and in August formed a ministry with Julius Vogel as colonial treasurer. Stout was premier, attorney-general, and minister of education. The ministry lost a vote of confidence almost at once but returned in September and lasted until defeated in the general election of September 1887, when Stout himself lost his seat. Stout was premier only because of Vogel's physical disabilities. The two ministers and other colleagues were linked -- unbeknown to the public -- by the need for legislation to deal with the continuing problems of companies with which they were involved. Vogel's prestige waned as the ministry proved unable to lift the country out of depression. Stout was responsible for the 'Civil Service Reform Bill', intended to eliminate political patronage from appointments, and the 'Hospitals and Charitable Institutions Act' of 1885. The conferment on him of a KCMG in 1886 caused controversy, as he had not so far had a very lengthy political career. 
Stout returned to politics in June 1893 as member for Inangahua. The Liberal premier, John Ballance, who had died that April, had favoured Stout to be his successor, but Stout was outmanoeuvred by, and lost the leadership to, Richard John Seddon. From November 1893 to 1898 Stout was member for the City of Wellington. He was an influential champion of women's suffrage, and was largely responsible for the 'Married Women's Property Act' (1884) which empowered married women to acquire, hold, and dispose of property. After 1893 he grew increasingly critical of the development of party politics, which offended his strong individualism. Marginalized and frustrated in the new Seddon-dominated political atmosphere of the 1890s, he left politics in 1898 to devote more time to his family and his legal career. On 22 June 1899 he was appointed chief justice of the supreme court, a position which enabled him to concentrate on the law while continuing in public life at a high and influential level. He held this post until his retirement on 31 January 1926. 
As chief justice Stout decided more than 1400 cases, 450 of them as a member of the court of appeal. He consistently applied a liberal construction of statutes. While he was opposed to excessive government regulation, he saw a need to protect the public interest against the effects of monopolies. He did important work on the consolidation of statutes, and showed particular strength in the areas of criminal law, procedure, and cases involving the 'Family Protection Act'. He also took a leading role in the framing of the 'First Offenders' Probation Act' (1886). 
Stout made a major contribution to the development of New Zealand's university system. He served on the senate of the University of New Zealand from 1884 to 1930 and the council of the University of Otago from 1891 to 1898, and was chancellor of the University of New Zealand from 1903 to 1923. He was one of the prime movers in the establishing of a university college in the capital in the late 1890s and served on the council of Victoria University College, Wellington, from 1900 to 1915. Honorary degrees were conferred on him by the universities of Oxford, Edinburgh, and Manchester. 
In 1921 Stout was admitted a privy councillor. He served on the judicial committee of the privy council and was a member of the New Zealand legislative council from his retirement as chief justice in 1926 until his death, at his home, 238 The Terrace, Wellington, on 19 July 1930. He was buried at Karori, Wellington. Stout contributed to New Zealand's development in a remarkably wide range of spheres, gaining the highest office in politics, the law, and university education. His career exemplified the opportunities open to a person of ability and initiative in a new society such as New Zealand in the nineteenth century. 
Stout's wife, Anna Paterson Stout, Lady Stout (1858-1931), was born in Dunedin on 29 September 1858, the daughter of John Logan, a public official in Otago. Her parents had emigrated from Scotland and settled in Dunedin in 1854. She married Robert Stout in 1876 and between 1878 and 1894 she gave birth to four sons and two daughters. She shared with her husband many progressive political views. Anna became a strong advocate of equal rights for women, but for some time the priority she attached to her family life meant that she had little opportunity to give effect to these ideals. In the 1890s she became more active in women's and temperance movements, though her activism was limited by the restrictions imposed by her husband's career when in 1899 he became chief justice. However, when the family went to England for a visit in 1909, and Anna stayed on until 1912 while her children were studying, she became involved in the British suffrage movement, in particular the Women's Social and Political Union. Her views were listened to as one of the leading suffragists from a country where, since 1893, women had had the vote. This was a brief but intense period of personal liberation after the years of self-effacement in the interests of her husband's career. In later years Anna Stout was active in a range of organizations. Throughout her life she supported the social purity movement, which contested the double standard in the enforcement of laws relating to sexual morality. She suffered from ill health for some years before her death, at Hanmer Springs on 10 May 1931. She was buried at Karori, Wellington, on 12 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 53931


Godley, John Robert (1814-1861), colonial administrator and political reformer in New Zealand, the eldest son of John Godley of Killegar, co. Leitrim, and his wife, Katherine, 'nee' Daly, was born on 29 May 1814, probably in Dublin. He was educated at Harrow School, and from 1832 at Christ Church, Oxford, where he proceeded BA on 27 October 1836. Deeply religious and committed to social tradition, Godley was sympathetic to the Oxford Movement, which was developing at the time. He was called to the Irish bar in 1839, but practised little, if at all. He travelled in North America in 1842, and developed there further his interest in systematic colonization and self-government. His observations were published in his 'Letters from America' (2 vols., 1844). During his subsequent service as poor law commissioner and high sheriff from 1843 in co. Leitrim he unsuccessfully proposed state-funded mass emigration of Irish to Canada to alleviate the devastation of the potato famine. On 29 September 1846 he married Charlotte Griffith Wynne (1821-1907) ['see below'] of Foelas, Denbighshire, Wales; they had a son and three daughters. 
In 1847 Godley began collaborating with the like-minded Edward Gibbon Wakefield on a scheme for organized settlement in New Zealand. The resulting Canterbury Association first met in London on 27 March 1848, and land was purchased from the New Zealand Company, which also advanced funds in support of the venture. Godley proposed a scheme which provided for funds to be allocated out of the proceeds of land sales for the religious and educational needs of the community to be established. The association's aspiration would be described a century later by L. C. Webb as being 'to create in New Zealand a society of which the nexus was a common religious faith strong enough to resist those forces which in the Old World were breaking the ties of social obligation' (Webb, 226). 
A site was selected at the Port Cooper (Lyttelton) plains, with the main town to be named Christchurch, and preparations began for the religious and secular development of the settlement. In December 1849, beset by ill health, Godley left with his family for New Zealand aboard the 'Lady Nugent', having been appointed chief agent of the Canterbury Association. He was based in Wellington while awaiting the arrival of the first immigrant ships in December 1850, and he involved himself in the Colonial Reform League and continued his advocacy of self-government. His view of colonial management he stated briefly and emphatically: 'I would rather be governed by a Nero on the spot than by a board of angels in London, because we could, if the worst came to the worst, cut off Nero's head, but we could not get at the board in London at all' ('Memoir', 18). 
Godley's pragmatic oversight of the earliest development of systematic settlement in Canterbury brought him into conflict with the association, particularly over the leasing of pastoral lands in what had originally been presumed would be a small-scale agriculture-based economy. The association had stalled with Godley's departure from London: Wakefield reported that 'the affair lost its soul and body when it lost Godley, who both thought and acted for everybody' (Webb, 160). Initially slow land sales threatened the economic viability of the settlement and further loans (including from Godley) were required to keep the venture afloat. By now he had been appointed resident magistrate and commissioner of crown lands by the governor, George Grey, and Godley's struggle over the terms for pastoral leases prompted him to tender his resignation to the association in June 1851, his position being, he reported, 'too false and too painful to be endurable' (ibid., 199). He continued in the post, however, until the passing of the 'New Zealand Constitution Act' in June 1852 opened the way for Canterbury to become a self-governing province. In December of that year he departed for England with his family, despite a petition urging him to stand for election as superintendent of the new provincial government. He later wrote 'I shall never, as long as I live, cease to condemn myself for leaving New Zealand' (ibid., 208). James Edward FitzGerald, the first superintendent of Canterbury Province, wrote that, by the time of his departure, 'Godley was in all but the name, the governor of the settlement which he originated and formed' (ibid., 209). FitzGerald edited a selection from Godley's writings and speeches which was published in 1863: extracts from his letters to C. B. Adderley were published in the same year. A statue of Godley was erected in Cathedral Square, Christchurch, in 1867. 
On his return to England Godley continued to write on colonial reform and acted on immigration matters as an agent of the Canterbury provincial government. Following an appointment as commissioner of income tax in Ireland, he was from 1855 assistant under-secretary at the War Office under the secretaryships of Lord Panmure, General Peel, and Lord Herbert. In this post he continued to advocate self-reliance for colonies in the arena of imperial defence policy. He died of tubercular consumption at his home in Gloucester Place, Portman Square, on 17 November 1861. Charlotte Godley (1821-1907), his wife, born probably at Foelas in Denbighshire, the daughter of Charles Wynne Griffith Wynne and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Hildyard, was a keen participant in and observer of colonial life. Her 'Letters from Early New Zealand', written to her mother between 1850 and 1853 and first published for private circulation only in 1936, were published in 1951 and revealed her talent for description of people, places, and social mores. The 'Letters' are an important and often quoted source of insight into upper-class colonial society in New Zealand, and bear witness to her support and involvement in her husband's work. She died at Gloucester Place, Portman Square, London, on 3 January 1907. Their only son was John Arthur Godley (1847-1932), permanent under-secretary of state for India and first Baron Kilbracken. 


@@@@@


doc= 53932


Faelan (fl. 734) of Cluain Moescna in Meath, whose feast is 9 January and who was buried, according to local tradition, at Kilillin in Kintail. Later traditions make him the son of St Kentigerna (Caintigern), daughter of the Leinster king Cellach Cualann; she died in 734. Dedications to St Fillan are found throughout Scotland, from Ross to Galloway and from Argyll to Fife. Perthshire has several, especially round Loch Earn, where are found the village of St Fillan's, the hill known as Dunfillan, and the river valley of Strathfillan. 


@@@@@


doc= 53934


Essex, Margaret (bap. 1775, d. in or after 1808), composer, was baptized on 30 July 1775 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, the youngest of three children of Timothy and Margaret Essex. A brother William was born in 1773. Her elder brother Timothy Essex was also a composer. Very little evidence of Margaret's life survives, most of it from her printed music. Her publications date from between 1795 (when she was twenty) and 1807. On 2 January 1808 she married John Cambell at St George's, Hanover Square, London. Thereafter her publications ceased and her life remains untraced. 
Margaret Essex's connection with Timothy is confirmed by information given on her musical editions, which were all published in London at her own expense by Robert Birchall. Her earliest song, 'Absence', has words by T. Essex and copyright assigned to him. Her address is given here and elsewhere as 2 Newman Street, Oxford Street, London, which matches Timothy's in Doane's 'Musical Directory' for 1794. It is unclear whether this Timothy is her father or her brother. The date of 1765? given for Timothy's birth in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' is too late for the former but too early for the latter, whose Oxford degree dates from 1806. The fact that Margaret had a very thorough musical education indicates that her father was probably a musician. The publications of T. Essex, however, are undoubtedly those of her brother. 
During her years as an active composer around the turn of the century, Margaret Essex was probably employed as a governess or music teacher. All her published compositions are suitable for domestic music-making (songs and chamber music), and at least one is pedagogical. She addressed all but one of her dedications to single women, no doubt the daughters of wealthy families who were her pupils. Her thirteen published compositions comprise ten songs with accompaniment for piano or harp, a set of three accompanied piano sonatas, and two works for solo piano. Her songs demonstrate a genuine melodic gift, subtle and graceful. In particular, her 'Select Songs' (six songs published individually between 1802 and 1805) are carefully crafted for the skills of particular performers, presumably the dedicatees. 'Humid seal of soft affection' (no. 3) is a fine example of her lyrical style. 
Margaret Essex's output was small by professional standards but significant in that she was a woman who broke into the public sphere by publishing and copyrighting her works. In other respects she followed the strictures of contemporary society, writing music only for domestic performance, and retiring after her marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 53937


Sadler, Donald Harry (1908-1987), mathematician and astronomer, was born on 22 August 1908 at 10 St Mary's Place, Dewsbury, Yorkshire, the second son of James Wright Sadler, a master tailor, and his wife, Gertrude Jane Needham, formerly a schoolteacher. He attended the Wheelwright Grammar School in Dewsbury and won an open entrance exhibition to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained first-class honours in mathematics in 1929. He spent a further year in Cambridge before joining the nautical almanac office, then based in the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, in October 1930. 
Sadler became the seventh superintendent of the 'Nautical Almanac' in July 1937, having served for a year in an acting capacity. Over the next few years he carried through successfully several projects that had been initiated by his predecessor, L. J. Comrie, including the publication in 1937 of the first British 'Air Almanac', for use by the Royal Air Force for astronavigation. During the Second World War the nautical almanac office was based in Bath, and additional staff were appointed to provide the computing centre of the Admiralty computing service; in addition to the navigational almanacs, Sadler planned in detail and supervised the production of many special tables and diagrams for use by the services. Of particular importance was the computation of co-ordinates for use in plotting hyperbolic lattices on charts for the newly developed top-secret DECCA navigation system, which was first used on D-day. Sadler's considerable wartime services were recognized by appointment as an OBE in 1948; he also received the Thurlow award of the American Institute of Navigation in the same year. 
After the war Sadler's main efforts were first of all directed to the rationalization of the publication arrangements for the astronomical and navigational almanacs and tables that were produced by the nautical almanac office in co-operation with similar offices in other countries. He established a very good working relationship with Dr G. M. Clemence, the director of the nautical almanac office of the US Naval Observatory, and they eventually obtained agreement to the unification of the principal almanacs of the two countries. At the same time they introduced many improvements in their design. After the move of the nautical almanac office from Bath to Herstmonceux, Sussex, in 1949 to join the Royal Greenwich Observatory, Sadler, who was one of the chief assistants to the astronomer royal, became strongly involved in the administration of the observatory. 
Sadler made contributions to several astronomical and navigational organizations. He was a secretary of the Royal Astronomical Society from 1939 to 1947, and played a major role in running the society during the war; he was president in 1967-9. He participated in the formation and activities of the Royal Institute of Navigation, served as its president in 1953-5, and was awarded its gold medal in 1957. He later contributed to the formation of the International Association of the Institutes of Navigation. Sadler was strongly involved in the activities of the International Astronomical Union, firstly in scientific matters in Commission 4 (ephemerides), of which he was president from 1952 to 1958, and later in its administration; he was general secretary from 1958 to 1964 and introduced many improvements to its procedures. He represented the union on the council of the Federation of Astronomical and Geophysical Services and served as its president (1968-70). He received an honorary doctorate from the University of Heidelberg (1970) and several other foreign awards. In 1970 he gave up his day-to-day responsibility for the nautical almanac office in order to concentrate on the organization of the general assembly of the International Astronomical Union in Brighton in August. He was elected an honorary member of the American Institute of Navigation in 1979. 
On 22 December 1954 Sadler had married Flora Munro McBain (1912-2000), who was a member of the staff of the nautical almanac office from 1937 to 1974; she served as a secretary of the Royal Astronomical Society from 1949 to 1954. He was a keen competitor and played a variety of outdoor and indoor games at a good standard. He retired from the Royal Greenwich Observatory in February 1972, but kept up his interests in time systems and in navigation and produced a series of papers for the 'Journal of Navigation'. He wrote from memory a 'Personal history of HM nautical almanac office, 1931-1972' to supplement the formal record. Sadler suffered from angina, and he died at his home, 8 Collington Rise, Bexhill, Sussex, on 24 October 1987 and was cremated at Eastbourne crematorium on 2 November; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 53939


Trevelyan, Mary Katharine, Lady Trevelyan (1881-1966), political hostess and voluntary worker, was born on 12 October 1881, the youngest of three children of Sir (Thomas) Hugh Bell, second baronet and iron master (1844-1931), and his second wife, Florence Eveleen Eleanore Olliffe, Lady Bell (1851-1930), the author and social investigator. Her half-sister was the Arabic scholar Gertrude Bell, and her grandfather was Sir Isaac Lowthian Bell, first baronet, the steel manufacturer and Liberal MP. Molly, as she was universally known, had a comfortable childhood, but her home education consisted primarily of preparation for marriage. She developed a lifelong love of embroidery, music, and languages, and in 1917 she co-wrote a French textbook with her mother, from whom she also acquired an interest in social conditions. After studying briefly at Queen's College, London, she came out in 1899. Although her father was lord lieutenant of the North Riding of Yorkshire, there were few politicians in her family's social circle, so when she began a relationship with the Liberal MP Sir Charles Philips Trevelyan, third baronet (1870-1958), she regretted her lack of political knowledge. However, he hoped that her youth and beauty could be used for high ends, and after they married on 6 January 1904 and set up house in London she became a successful political hostess, arranging dinners and parties for political friends. 
As well as political entertaining Molly Trevelyan pursued a more public role after 1904 as president of the Northumberland Women's Liberal Federation (WLF). She became a popular speaker around the country and favoured women's suffrage, an issue which deeply divided the WLF, but she disliked militancy and did not feel strongly enough to work for the cause. Her husband also supported women's suffrage, but adhered to traditional notions of men's and women's roles, and Molly eventually abandoned her hope that their marriage would be an equal political partnership. She none the less helped him in various ways, from translating German material on land reform to campaigning energetically at every election until his last in 1931, including the difficult election of 1918 when he was attacked for having opposed the war. 
After Charles Trevelyan inherited his ancestral home of Wallington Hall, Northumberland, in 1928, they devoted much of the rest of their lives to the estate and the village of Cambo. She and Charles were keenly interested in their tenants' welfare and established a pension plan for schoolchildren. A deeply practical woman, she was not above putting her hand to any work the estate required, and planned and oversaw alterations to the tenants' cottages and farmhouses. In addition to estate work she was a JP and was active with numerous local, national, and international organizations, such as the Workers' Educational Association and the Association of Country Women of the World. She founded branches of the Girl Guides and the Women's Institute in Cambo, and served on the national executive of the National Federation of Women's Institutes for many years. In keeping with her temperance principles she also founded in Cambo a Band of Hope, which local children were pledged to join at a young age. She also played a leading role in the Folk Dance and Northumbrian Pipers societies, and made music an important feature of her family's life. Singing songs, accompanied by Molly on the piano, was a regular part of their domestic routine, and she and Charles also delighted their children, among them George Lowthian Trevelyan, by regularly reading to them from a diverse selection of classic literature. Such activities took the place of attending church on Sundays, for while Molly was Unitarian, Charles was agnostic. In appearance her clothes, hairstyle, and pince-nez gave her a Victorian air, and one contemporary described her as attractive in a 'no nonsense' sort of way. Her decades of public service, to politics and various other good causes, were recognized with an OBE in 1963, shortly before her death at St Catherine's Nursing Home, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 8 October 1966. Her ashes were scattered on moorland near Winter's Gibbet on the Wallington estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 53945


Hengler, Jenny Louise (b. 1849), equestrian performer, was born on 23 March 1849, at Lewes, Sussex, the second daughter of the circus proprietor (Frederick) Charles Hengler (1820-1887) and his wife, Mary Ann Frances Sprake ('c'.1828-1902). She performed as a juvenile artiste in her father's arenas from an early age, her first recorded appearance being in the 1856-7 winter season at Bradford, in the pantomime. A great beauty, she became one of the most celebrated 'haute ecole' riders of her day, setting the standard against which others were judged. In November 1865 the 'Liverpool Daily Post' called her 'the most remarkable feminine attraction of the day', and at the end of the season observed that, 'It is feared that when we see her next she will be much grown, but the flower will be expanded and more beautiful'. 
On 6 May 1874 Hengler married the putative Polish count Waldemar Alexander Oscar Kamienski, a rider who had been billed as Alexander Oscar at Hengler's since 1869. The wedding was not widely reported, and she never rode in any of her father's arenas again; however, as Jenny Louise Hengler-Oscar, she appeared in her husband's International circus, being noted at Newcastle upon Tyne in 1882. The Kamienskis later went to the United States, where Count Kamienski ran a horse training and riding school at Beretta College. They lived in Astoria, Long Island, with their three children, Philip, Charles, and Beatrice. She visited Britain in 1892, on the occasion of her sister Lydia's marriage, but nothing is known of her after this date. 


@@@@@


doc= 53946


Richard Manning Blagrove (1827?-1895), viola and concertina player, was born in Nottingham and studied the viola with Henry Hill at the Royal Academy of Music. He was also one of the first to study the concertina seriously. He played a solo at the Hanover Square Rooms on 12 March 1842, and later formed a concertina quartet with Giulio Regondi, George Case, and A. B. Sedgwick; their first concert took place in the Hanover Square Rooms on 12 June 1844. Some concertina works were written for him by Sir George Macfarren. He also appeared as a piano accompanist and a violist, succeeding his old teacher as principal viola in the Philharmonic Concerts and at the Three Choirs festivals until 1894. He taught the viola at the Royal Academy until 1890, then founded a series of concerts at Clapham Hall with his sons Stanley and Arthur and his pianist wife ('nee' Freeth). He died at his home, 23 Orlando Road, Clapham, London, on 21 October 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 53947


Port, Adam de (fl. 1161-1174), landowner, was the son of Roger de Port (died 'c'.1161) and his wife, Sibyl d'Aubigny, and grandson of Adam de Port (died 'c'.1138), who was probably sheriff of Herefordshire in 1130, and who had the honour of Kington, Herefordshire, in the reign of Henry I. The family came from Port-en-Bessin, Calvados, Normandy, and in 1086 Hubert de Port held Mapledurwell, Hampshire, as tenant-in-chief. Adam de Port should not be confused with his kinsman 
Port suffered forfeiture in 1171 for an attempt on Henry II's life, and, according to the chronicler Roger of Howden, was exiled in the following year. He was a notable participant in the rebellion led by Henry the Young King in 1173-4. Adam apparently joined the forces of William the Lion, king of Scots, who invaded the northern counties of England. In July 1174 he was with William as he marched against Alnwick. A force of Yorkshire men, however, attacked the Scottish force, defeated it, and captured the king. Port, apparently in the company of Roger (I) de Mowbray, was one of the few men of note to escape capture or death. It is not known what became of him after his escape. 
Port's lands meanwhile came into royal hands and passed to a succession of 'curiales'. In 1172 the sheriff of Staffordshire rendered account for Port's lands at Arley, and Henry de Longchamp, sheriff of Herefordshire, owed money in respect of Kington in 1190 and between 1193 and 1199. William fitz Audelin (in 1174), Robert de Chandos (in 1199), and William (III) de Briouze (during the last five years of the twelfth century), all answered for the scutage of Port's fee. In 1200 King John granted part of the honour of Kington to Robert Peverel, and Mapledurwell, escheated from Port's land, to Alan Basset, who also obtained his land in Wiltshire. Ralph 'de Arguilla' answered for Stratton, Wiltshire, of the escheat of Port in Kington, in 1212. It would seem probable that Port had no heirs to contest these alienations. 
The Port family had one house in its advocacy. The elder Adam de Port had founded Andwell Priory, Hampshire, as a cell or dependency of the abbey of Tiron in the early twelfth century, and had also made a number of other grants of land to Tiron as well as to the priory of Les Deux Jumeaux, another dependency of the abbey. The younger Adam de Port made few known grants to religious houses except to confirm the grants of his parents, Roger and Sibyl, to Andwell and Tiron respectively. 


@@@@@


doc= 53949


Morrison, Roderick (1656?-1713/14), Scottish Gaelic poet and harpist, was the eldest son of John Morison ('b'. 'c'.1630), tacksman of Bragar in the island of Lewis, and descended from the Morison breves, or hereditary judges, who were latterly located in Ness, Lewis. He is said to have fallen ill with smallpox while at school in Inverness, and lost his sight. Instead of following a clerical career, like a younger brother, he seems to have cultivated playing musical instruments, and is said to have spent some time in Ireland developing his skill as a harpist. From internal evidence in one of his poems he spent some time roving with a band of musicians and entertainers, before meeting Iain Breac, a chief of the MacLeod clan at Dunvegan, Skye, in Edinburgh, probably in 1681. By 1683 Morrison was established in Dunvegan, holding a farm in tack from the chief, and acting as harpist and apparently as poet in some situations. William Matheson, in his introduction to the edition of Morrison's poems, argues that he was not employed as a professional musician or poet, but rather enjoyed patronage as a fellow-gentleman who had highly developed artistic skills. Morrison had two younger brothers who were clergymen, one (Angus) the author of some entertaining verses. Roderick Morrison was married to Catherine Stewart, from Lochaber. The close relationship between Morrison and Iain Breac seems to have broken down after some years, and Morrison was given the tenancy of a farm in Glenelg, on the mainland opposite southern Skye, where he felt remote and estranged. This move may have taken place as early as 1688, the year of the Jacobite rising, and may be connected with Morrison's Jacobite sympathies. He came to have closer ties after this with John MacLeod of Talisker (also in Skye). 
Only seven poems survive with unambiguous ascriptions to An Clarsair Dall. Some of these are still sung, and there are published transcriptions of the song airs in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century sources, but the evidence of tunes for the harp composed by Morrison is scanty and inconclusive (Matheson, 169ff.). Two of the poems are about Iain Breac, one praising him in conventional eulogistic language but with personal and emotional commitment also, and the other a moving elegy on his death in 1693. Iain Breac was buried in Rodel, Isle of Harris, and Morrison is thought to have been at the funeral. In a stanza from this elegy he records Iain Breac's role as a patron of poets and musicians: 'Wrapped in the linen shroud did I leave the strength of the weak, the journey's end of men of song, as also the wealth of men of ancient lore, and the treasury of learned poets -- your death has set them in disarray; and since you went into the coffin I am no object of envy. ('Creach na Ciadaoin', 'Wednesday's bereavement', Matheson's translation)' Probably the best-known of Morrison's poems is addressed to Iain Breac's son Roderick, who succeeded him as chief. This poem creates as a main character the Echo of past generosity and greatness, who still resounds in Dunvegan but who has been replaced by a quite different image, that of the young fashionable spendthrift who spends most of his time in the south and who cares little for his family's native traditions. This gives an early and detailed picture both of the traditional, idealized concept of the clan chief and artistic patron, and of the de-Gaelicized chief: over the next two centuries the latter was to become the norm. One aspect of this revolution is detailed in the following stanza: 'He comes out of the shop with the latest fashion from France, and the fine clothes worn on his person yesterday with no little satisfaction are tossed into a corner -- 'The style is unmodish, not worth a plack. On the security of a townland or two, take the pen and sign a bond'. ('Oran do Mhac Leoid Dhun Bheagain', 'A song to MacLeod of Dunvegan')' This attitude was later to contribute to the clearing of clansmen and to the sale of estates to incomers. An Clarsair Dall is a percipient observer of such trends. The poet died in 1713 or 1714. His work has been carefully and judiciously edited by William Matheson. 


@@@@@


doc= 53950


Collinson, Francis James Montgomery (1898-1984), musical director and musicologist, was born on 20 January 1898 at Coates House, Manor Place, Edinburgh, the third of five children (three sons, two daughters) of Thomas Henry Collinson (1858-1928), organist at St Mary's Episcopal Cathedral, Edinburgh, and his wife, Annie Wyness Scott (died 1939). His father was Northumbrian, his mother Scottish. He attended Daniel Stewart's College, Edinburgh, leaving in 1914 to serve an apprenticeship under his father at St Mary's, where Francis had been a chorister. During the First World War he served for three years in motor transport in the Army Service Corps (having first been a Red Cross volunteer). On demobilization in 1919 he matriculated in music studies at Edinburgh University, studying under Professor Sir Donald Tovey. He threw himself into university musical life, playing in and conducting the Reid Orchestra, conducting the student Yahoo Orchestra (which he developed into a large-scale theatre orchestra), and composing the annual musical show run by the student representative council, the S. R. Ceenium. In the orchestra was his future wife, the law student Elizabeth Grant (1898-1983), whose grandfather had established the well-known Banffshire whisky distilling firm. He was described in the student magazine as the pleasantest person to work with in the university, honest, hardworking, efficient, tactful, and accommodating, yet stubborn and principled when necessary. His remarkable ability to compose, orchestrate, and rehearse to tight schedules -- while not neglecting his studies -- was matched by a rapidly assimilated knowledge of stage management, and although it clearly ran against the grain of his musical upbringing it is perhaps not surprising that after gaining a MusBac in 1923 he sought his fortune in the sphere of musical entertainment in London, marrying Elizabeth there on 3 March 1925. Their only child, Margaret Anne, was born in 1936. 
A quiet, gentle man, Collinson nevertheless managed to find a number of jobs as chorus master, including for the revival of John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera' at the Lyric, Hammersmith. He had the good fortune to be employed to copy out the band parts for Nigel Playfair's review 'Riverside Night' when the musical director, Alfred Reynolds, fell ill at the first rehearsal; Playfair asked Collinson to take Reynolds's place. He was thus launched on a successful career as a conductor and director of musical comedy and revue (recalling in later life that he was strongly advised to keep quiet about actually possessing a degree in music), working eventually for many years with the famous impresario C. B. Cochran and his equally famous Cochran's Young Ladies. He was catholic and eclectic in his musical career, and was proud not only of having conducted for both Cole Porter and Richard Tauber, but also of having restored William Walton's 'Ballet' from a single piano score when the original music was destroyed in the London blitz. In 1941 he published the acclaimed 'Orchestration for the Theatre', with an introduction by Cochran; it was reprinted in 1949. 
Theatre and revue were badly hit by the advent of the Second World War and in 1941 Collinson took charge of the BBC's 'Country Magazine' programmes, with their famous signature tune, 'The Painful Plough', of which he was to make many arrangements, including one for the bagpipe. The programmes, many of them outside broadcasts, involved Collinson in the study, collection, and arrangement of folk-songs (bringing the Copper family to public attention, for example) throughout Britain. He not only published these arrangements in a series with Francis Dillon from 1946 onwards but also issued three unique 78 r.p.m. recordings of folk-songs in the Gramophone Company's 'Plum Label' series. Now collector's items, the songs were beautifully delivered by the baritone Robert Irwin, accompanied by an orchestra conducted by Collinson. He composed a wide range of music, mainly for broadcasting, from 'folk' orchestral suites to musical comedy, and won the Italia prize in 1950 for his 'Rumpelstiltskin'. 
In 1951 Edinburgh University established the School of Scottish Studies, and Collinson was invited back as the first musical research fellow, concentrating on the collection, study, and transcription of traditional song in both Scots and Gaelic. This he carried out in his customary scrupulous and meticulous manner, and in 1966 he made his name in the field of traditional music with his comprehensive and scholarly book 'The Traditional and National Music of Scotland'. Thereafter, under the editorship of the great Gaelic folklorist John Lorne Campbell (1906-1996) he brought out three volumes of 'Hebridean Folksongs' (1969, 1977, and 1981), presenting to the world genuine Gaelic traditional song, previously traduced and popularized by Marjory Kennedy-Fraser in her highly successful art-song arrangements, 'Songs of the Hebrides' (1921-5). During this period he even ventured into the ultra-conservative world of the highland bagpipers; 'The Bagpipe: the History of a Musical Instrument' (1975) was very well received, but his piobaireachd 'The Lament for Calum Maclean', composed after the untimely death of a fellow worker in the school (brother to the great Gaelic poet Sorley Maclean), did not, unfortunately, enter the piping repertory. 
Highly arranged folk-song, sung by classically trained professional singers to orchestral accompaniment, no matter how beautifully done, was looked at askance by later scholars and performers of traditional song. But in 'Country Magazine' Collinson had been obliged to work to BBC practice, which was against 'untrained' singers marring the airwaves, and when such Scottish singers were eventually broadcast in the late 1950s, popular reaction was indeed remarkably hostile, even from fervent Scottish nationalists such as Hugh MacDiarmid. But Collinson more than compensated for such early 'transgressions' by the assiduity and accuracy of his later research and publication for the School of Scottish Studies. His writings, which cover in scholarly depth virtually the complete range of Scottish traditional music and song from both sides of the highland line, firmly remained classics in their field. It may well be regrettable that, as his 'Scotsman' obituary commented, he attracted no honours, not even from his own university; that would in no way have concerned this thorough, kindly, generous, and gentle musician who valued most of all in life a capacity to enjoy whatever he was engaged upon. Collinson died on 21 December 1984 in Peel Hospital, Galashiels, and was buried in Mortlach churchyard, Dufftown, Banffshire, on the 28th. 


@@@@@


doc= 53951


Patti, Adelina (1843-1919), singer, was born at Fuencarral 6, Madrid, on 19 February 1843, the last child of Caterina Barili-Patti (died 1870) and Salvatore Patti (1800-1869), Italian singers with, between them, eight musical children including Carlotta Patti. She was trained chiefly by her stepbrother Ettore Barili. From 1847 Salvatore managed a New York opera house, and his failure precipitated Adelina's concert debut at the age of eight (22 November 1851). Success brought lucrative tours of North America and Cuba, in which she took up 'Home Sweet Home' and 'Comin' thro' the Rye', which were always to be her concert standbys. In her operatic debut when she was sixteen at the New York Academy of Music, on 24 November 1859 (as Lucia), her 'brilliant execution... rank[ed] with that where the best singers end' ('New York Tribune'). After seasons in New York, New Orleans, and Havana, she sailed to England, where Frederick Gye, the manager of Covent Garden, engaged the unknown singer. Her debut in 'La sonnambula' (14 May 1861) established a 'phenomenon' peerless for over thirty years, as did her debut in Paris (16 November 1862). She divided the 1860s between the two cities, with excursions to Vienna, Berlin, and Madrid; St Petersburg and Moscow followed. 
In lighter parts (Lucia, Amina, Violetta, Linda) Patti displayed limpid high notes (reaching to f''') and a nightingale-like trill; in time the high notes lost their ease and the lower ones strengthened, though she was never a mezzo (her Carmen in 1885 was a rare failure). She had a 'scale... of absolute accuracy and evenness, a tone of perfect purity... faultless phrasing... wonderful economy of breath' (E. Eames, 30). In dramatic parts -- Leonora ('Il trovatore'), Valentine, Aida -- Verdi thought her an excellent actress; but she performed them seldom, and never sang Wagner (other than one song and one aria in concert) as a part of her intense professional care for her health and doll-like face and figure. She would not attend rehearsals, was exacting about fellow singers and billing, and never sang more than three times a week -- scarcely at all when not quite well. Bernard Shaw, who admired her voice and technique, noted that 'after two bars of really dramatic music' she would 'drop back into purely decorative roulade' ('Our Theatres', 3.193). 
Patti's letters show self-possession and an inflexible will demurely expressed. On 29 July 1868 she married the French Marquis Henri de Caux (1825-1889). The marriage soon collapsed; both had affairs, she with the married French tenor Ernest Nicolini 
(Nicolas; 1834-1898)
. Legal separation (granted to Caux in Paris on 3 August 1877) and divorce (15 July 1885) cost her half her fortune. At Craig-y-nos Castle, Ystradgynlais, Brecknockshire, which she bought in 1878, she and Nicolini led an extravagant late Victorian country life, with a staff of forty and a private theatre where she acted mimed plays; they married on 10 June 1886. After Nicolini's death (18 January 1898) she married on 25 January 1899 Rolf Cederstrom (1870-1947), a Swedish baron twenty-seven years her junior; both had become British subjects. Cederstrom cut down the staff (to eighteen) and the social life, and gave her the devotion and flattery she needed. 
Patti's brother-in-law and agent, Maurice Strakosch, had negotiated an early Covent Garden salary of $150 (rising to $400) a month, followed in 1863-7 by a fee per performance of $80, rising to $120. Caux pushed this up in 1872 to an ostensible $200, of which $60 was returned, supposedly without Patti's knowledge. With concerts, her average London income by 1869 was over $1000 a month. In the 1880s her tours of the Americas earned her about $5000 per performance ($8000 in Buenos Aires): she brought in more money than any other performer. In real terms (collocating easy travel, a wide middle-class audience, low theatre wages, and low taxes) she was the highest paid singer ever. In Britain she kept to concert tours from 1886, the last taking place in 1906-07. That her voice was past its best was shown in a failed 1903 American tour and in recordings of 1905-6. She suffered from heart trouble and died at Craig-y-nos on 27 September 1919. She had always kept in touch with her family; she was buried on 29 May 1920 near her father in the Pere Lachaise cemetery, Paris. 


@@@@@


doc= 53952


Jacob Perkins (1766-1849) and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Greenleaf (1770-1837). He was named after his father's brother-in-law and close friend, Angier March. Jacob Perkins, after a brief schooling, had been apprenticed to Edward Davis, a goldsmith, where he acquired his facility for fine metalwork and machinery. When Davis died in 1781, Jacob Perkins, aged fifteen, took charge of the business for his widow. Over the following years he embarked on a multitude of innovative projects, handing over the subsequent tedious business of production to family and friends. His most important lines were the manufacture of dies for coinage, and siderography: the technique of printing banknotes from a sequence of engraved steel plates, so as to defy counterfeiting. In 1809 he met Joseph Chessborough Dyer, a wealthy American who shortly afterwards went to England, where he acted as the patent agent for American inventors. Through this channel Jacob Perkins's siderographic plates became known in England. 


@@@@@


doc= 53953


Mocatta family (per. 1671-1957), bullion dealers and brokers, traces its origins in the City of London to 


@@@@@


doc= 53954


Beveridge, Annette Susannah (1842-1929), orientalist, was born in Mount Street, Stourbridge, Worcestershire, on 13 December 1842, the third child and daughter surviving to adulthood of William Akroyd (died 1869), a currier, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Walford, a daughter of the local livery stable owner. After his wife's death in 1849, Akroyd married Mary Anne Perks; three children of this marriage survived to adulthood. Akroyd, who became a prosperous businessman, was a notably energetic leader in civic affairs, in the Presbyterian-Unitarian chapel and in radical Liberal politics. Annette was deeply attached to him, and he was her lifelong model for uncompromising independence, plain speaking, and doing one's duty. 
Unitarianism was a determining influence in Annette Akroyd's life. In January 1861 it brought her to the Unitarian-led Bedford College in London, where she completed a three-year course of study. At the college her commitment to secular and to women's education was reinforced -- ignorant middle-class girls were just as needy in this respect as the poor, she once argued, and thus were equally fit subjects for philanthropy. On her father's death in 1869 the Akroyds moved permanently to London, where they were members of James Martineau's Little Portland Street Chapel. Throughout her life she expressed a desire for firmer faith, but seems to have been thwarted in attempts to achieve it by a tough-minded rationalism inherited from her father. 
In 1872 Akroyd went to India to start a school for Hindu girls, a mission inspired in part by Keshub Chunder Sen (1838-1884), leader of the Brahmo Samaj, a Hindu reformist sect with historic ties to the Unitarians. In a visit to England in 1870 Sen had urged well-trained Englishwomen to come to India to provide a secular education for Indian women; in October of 1872 Annette Akroyd sailed for Calcutta determined not to be a part of the Anglo-Indian set. Almost immediately, however, she fell out with Sen and his Brahmos, as they were referred to, about the control and curriculum of the school. Their conflict was entangled in internal Brahmo disputes and very quickly she was identified with one Brahmo wing and attacked by the press of the other. By May 1873 she had broken with the Brahmos, continuing to run the school alone until 1875. She was wounded by what she regarded as dishonourable behaviour on the part of the Brahmos, all the more so, perhaps, because the episode ended her social activism. Her perceptions about this experience coloured her sharp public opposition to the 'Ilbert Bill' of 1883, legislation which would have expanded the jurisdiction of native Indian judges over Europeans. 
On 6 April 1875 Akroyd married Henry Beveridge (1837-1929), a judge in the Indian Civil Service. Between 1877 and 1885 they had two daughters and two sons. Although she has been portrayed as domineering towards her son William Beveridge, Baron Beveridge, this characterization might legitimately be softened. Certainly she was a dutiful mother: her letters are full of anxiety about arranging for her children's health and education. Given life in the Indian Civil Service, such arrangements were not easy and fell almost exclusively on her. 
Her husband's scholarly interests and her own progressive deafness promoted Annette Beveridge's turn to scholarship. It is typical of her steely virtue that she never gave way to physical handicap, but her letters contain a few poignant hints of the social isolation she sometimes felt. Her first translation was made in 1890, from German, of F. A. de Noer's 'Emperor Akbar', the preface of which gives a rare glimpse into her idealism about the British empire. After resettling in England in 1890 she began to learn Persian, initially as a distraction from grief: between 1890 and 1893 two of her four children died. Her first oriental translation was of the 'Humayun-nama' (1902), from Persian. Her best-known translation is of Babur's autobiography, the 'Babur-nama'. Although this important sixteenth-century classic had previously been translated from Persian into English, she was the first to translate it from the language in which Babur wrote, Chagatai Turkish. The project consumed nearly twenty years of her life because of the research required on fundamental matters, such as establishing the authentic text and knowledge of a language then little known in the West. The 'Babur-nama' was published in four instalments between 1912 and 1921. Her translation is not felicitous from a literary point of view, but the hallmarks of her work -- the most complete of indices, and scrupulous footnotes and appendices on matters of fact -- have made it invaluable for later scholars. She died on 29 March 1929 at 26 Porchester Square, Bayswater, London, and was cremated on 2 April. Her husband Henry survived her by seven months. Her surviving son achieved lasting fame as the architect of the welfare state, and her daughter, Jeannette, married the historian R. H. Tawney. A scholarship in her name was established by her husband and children at Bedford College in July 1929. 


@@@@@


doc= 53955


Gordon, George (1801-1893), Church of Scotland minister and naturalist, was born on 23 July 1801 at the manse of Urquhart, Moray, the first son of William Gordon ('bap'. 1744, died 1810), minister in the Church of Scotland, and his wife, Margaret (1779-1864), daughter of Joseph Anderson, minister of the Church of Scotland at Birnie, Moray, and his wife, Jean Craig. Gordon's father's family was of the minor gentry, being a cadet branch of the Gordons of Beldornie. Gordon attended Elgin Academy for some years. He proceeded to Marischal College, Aberdeen, at the age of fourteen and graduated AM in 1819. During his twenties he spent time in Edinburgh attending some of the scientific classes at the university, starting with natural history in 1821 and ending with geology and botany in 1829. He returned to Moray and was given the living of Birnie, 3 miles south of Elgin, in November 1832. He married Anna Stephen ('c'.1813-1889) on 20 March 1834; they had eight children. 
Gordon became a champion of Moray. His interest was in the scientific and antiquarian aspects of a province which, to him, included the lands between the rivers Spey in the east and Beauly in the west. Initially botany took up his leisure time. Fresh from his botanical classes in Edinburgh under Graham in 1828 and 1829, he set about compiling 'Collectanea for a Flora of Moray', which he completed in 1839. He and his friends scoured the countryside, making the first records for most of the area and adding 'Pinguicula alpina', the alpine butterwort (now extinct), to the British flora. 
A particular friend was William Alexander Stables of Cawdor, near Nairn. Together Gordon and Stables made many contributions to the early records of northern Britain, as can be seen from H. C. Watson's 'New Botanist's Guide' (1835-7). In the 1840s Gordon set about recording the fauna of Moray, beginning with the vertebrates -- mammals, birds, and fishes -- then the invertebrates -- crustacea, echinodermata, mollusca, and lepidoptera. Most of his findings were published in the 1840s, 1850s, and 1860s in a series of articles for 'The Zoologist'. The work needed to compile these lists was supported by a large network of friends, both professional and amateur. Gordon's time in Edinburgh had left him with widespread contacts that he drew upon throughout his long life. An archive of his scientific correspondence in Elgin Museum records the quest for information, the lending of books and papers, and the support freely given to those less well informed. There are letters from more than 200 correspondents including William Hooker, Roderick Murchison, Charles Darwin, T. H. Huxley, and other eminent scientists of the nineteenth century. 
The geology of Moray proved to be of particular importance to scientists. Fossil fish had been found in its sandstones by Gordon and his friends in the 1830s. Partly as a result of the fossil collection, the Elgin and Moray Scientific Association (now the Moray Society) was formed in 1836 with Gordon as a founder member; this association built the Elgin Museum in 1843. Consternation was caused in geological circles when fossils of reptiles turned up in the sandstones which had always been considered to belong to the Old Red Sandstone formations of about 400 million to 360 million years ago. The controversy regarding the age of the sandstones of Moray continued throughout the nineteenth century; indeed, their geology is not fully understood, even today. The Carboniferous period, which is usually found between the Old Red (Devonian) Sandstone and the New Red (Permian and Triassic) Sandstone, is missing in Moray and the two periods of sandstones, although separated by over 100 million years, look remarkably similar. Gordon never accepted that the reptile-bearing sandstones were of New Red Sandstone age but he worked hard so that the truth might be discovered. Many cases of rock were sent south for Huxley to research. Geologists continuously visited Moray and were given the benefit of Gordon's sound knowledge of the area. His dedicated work on the geology of Moray was rewarded in 1859 with an LLD from Marischal College. 
In the great controversy over patronage that resulted in the Disruption of the Church of Scotland in 1843, Gordon was of the moderate party that supported the 'status quo'. In 1859 he became directly involved in the long running 'Elgin Academy Case' in which the presbytery of Elgin successfully defended the right of the Church of Scotland to appoint teachers and to inspect the burgh schools. 
Gordon remained active in science up to his death, which occurred at his home, Braebirnie, Mayne Road, Elgin, due to cardiac failure on 12 December 1893. He was buried at Birnie kirk on 16 December. Gordon's scientific collections and lists are important, but he made two other contributions to nineteenth-century science: wishing to share all his knowledge with anyone who was interested in Moray, he sought to draw the attention of great scientists to its uniqueness; and he understood that his scientific letters were of value for posterity -- he sorted them himself and fortunately his family gave them the care they merited. In these two ways he achieved his ambition of promoting Moray as a place of special interest to the naturalist, the geologist, and the archaeologist. 


@@@@@


doc= 53956


Brown, John Alexander Harvie-, of Dunipace (1844-1916), naturalist, was born on 27 August 1844 in Edinburgh, the only son of John Harvie (died 1880), landowner, and Elizabeth Spottiswoode, the daughter and heir of Thomas Spottiswoode of Dunipace, near Stirling. His father assumed the additional surname of Brown under the terms of the will of Alexander Brown of Quarter, Stirlingshire. Harvie-Brown was educated at Merchiston School and subsequently at Edinburgh and Cambridge universities (although he appears not to have graduated from either). At Cambridge he formed a friendship with Professor Alfred Newton, the ornithologist, a friendship that encouraged Harvie-Brown's interest in natural history. A man of independent means, Harvie-Brown was able to devote his life to the traditional highland laird pursuits with rod and gun and to ornithology. 
In the 1880s there was considerable interest in bird migration and Harvie-Brown initiated a scheme, developed by the British Association, to use records of migrating birds collected by lighthouse keepers. Much of Harvie-Brown's life was spent in producing a series of volumes on the vertebrate fauna of Scotland, his most important works. The first volume, co-authored with J. E. Buckley, was published in 1887, the 'Vertebrate Fauna of Sutherland, Caithness, and West Cromarty'; it was followed, over the next twenty-five years, by volumes on the Outer Hebrides, the Orkneys, Argyll and the Inner Hebrides, the Moray basin, the Shetlands, the north-west Highlands and Skye, the Tay basin and Strathmore, and the Tweed area. The books describe the distribution and abundance of the vertebrate fauna of each area, and have information on geology, topography, and climate. 
Harvie-Brown travelled widely in Scotland and in 1887 he built his own yacht, 'Shiantelle', to visit the islands and sea lochs of the west coast. He also travelled widely in Europe, especially in northern Scandinavia and Russia, and in 1905 he published a two-volume account of his experiences in 'Travels of a Naturalist in Northern Europe'. He was a prolific writer and was the founder, owner, and joint editor for twenty-five years of 'The Annals of Scottish Natural History', later to become the 'Scottish Naturalist'. He was a fellow of the Zoological Society and of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and an honorary life member of the American Ornithologists' Union. In 1912 he was awarded an honorary LLD by the University of Aberdeen. 
Harvie-Brown was a short, thickset, powerfully built man. As the laird of Dunipace estate, he was regarded with affection by his tenants, employees, and neighbours. He became seriously ill with influenza in 1899 and his health never fully recovered. He also suffered from asthma, and from a constant battle with his weight which rose to 25 stones. For the last few years of his life he was more or less confined to a ground floor study bedroom in his house, from where he kept up a continuous flow of correspondence. He died at his home, Dunipace House, Larbert, after a short final illness, on 26 July 1916 and was buried in the family graveyard at Dunipace, in front of the house. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 53958


Crossing, William (1847-1928), antiquary, was born on 14 November 1847 in Plymouth, Devon, the second son of Joseph Crossing, a canvas mill owner. He was educated at a clergyman's school in Plymouth, the Independent college at Taunton, and Mannamead School at Plymouth. He then joined the family business in Plymouth and later worked at the South Brent mill. Here, his lifelong fascination with Dartmoor lured him away from his job to explore the moorlands. 
The mill failed, and Crossing decided to earn his living by writing about Dartmoor. On 14 March 1872 he married Emma Witheridge of Ivybridge (there were no children of the marriage), and about this time he began to keep detailed notes of his expeditions and of the prehistoric and historic remains which he had found. His early researches were directed mainly towards medieval stone crosses, many of them almost forgotten and neglected; he wrote several books on the subject, the earliest being 'The Ancient Crosses of Dartmoor' (1887). A popular figure, Crossing made friends with farmers and moormen wherever he went: he would entertain the local people around a peat fire with his tin whistle or with improvised rhymes describing his day on the moor. He usually walked clad in leather gaiters and tweeds. 
By the 1890s Crossing was in some financial difficulties. A frequent contributor of articles to local journals, he now turned to journalism to pay his way. Two of his series of newspaper articles about Dartmoor were subsequently published as books, 'A Hundred Years on Dartmoor' (1901) and 'Gems in a Granite Setting' (1905). These titles were reprinted in 1967 and 1986 respectively, and others have appeared since. 
Crossing's numerous soakings on the moor were now beginning to affect his health and writing abilities (he was stricken with rheumatism), but in 1906 a benefactor, W. P. Collins, engaged him as tutor to his three sons. While he was thus employed, he was able to write his 'magnum opus', the 'Guide to Dartmoor' (1909, 1912, and 1914). This book ran to 528 closely printed pages and continues to be the standard topographical account of upland Dartmoor. It was reprinted in facsimile in 1965 with a lengthy introduction and is still in print at the beginning of the twenty-first century. 
Crossing's last years were saddened by the death of his wife, on 6 June 1921, while she was a patient in the Tavistock Institution, the local workhouse. Later his landlady destroyed his notes and papers gathered over a lifetime, and he in turn had a spell in the workhouse. Once again, he was rescued by Collins, who installed him in Cross Park House, a nursing home in Plymouth, and paid all the bills until Crossing's death there on 3 September 1928. On 6 September he was buried with his wife in Mary Tavy churchyard on the western edge of Dartmoor. 


@@@@@


doc= 53960


Mantell, Walter Baldock Durrant (1820-1895), naturalist and colonial civil servant, elder son of Gideon Algernon Mantell (1790-1852), geologist and palaeontologist, and his wife, Mary Ann Woodhouse (1795-1869), was born at Castle Place, Lewes, Sussex, on 11 March 1820. It was intended that he should be a surgeon and naturalist and he was apprenticed to his father in 1835. When this arrangement became unworkable, he served out the remainder of his apprenticeship (1836-9) under Ambrose Dodd (1806-1847) of Chichester. 
Mantell refused a partnership with his father and emigrated to New Zealand, having been granted free passage on the 'Oriental' in September 1839 as part of the Wakefield colonization scheme. On arrival the following January he took up land at Wainui but soon returned to town and accepted employment with the New Zealand Land Company, helping settlers at Wanganui and Taranaki. Between December 1840 and February 1844 he was variously clerk to the magistrates at Wellington, postmaster, and sub-collector of customs. In 1845 he was appointed superintendent of military roads, a position which brought him into contact with the Maori, and enabled him to learn their language. In 1848 he was appointed commissioner for the extinguishment of native titles in Middle (later South) Island. In this capacity he bought from the Ngai Tahu Maori some 30 million acres of land in exchange for cash and such promised improvements as schools, hospitals, and reserves. In 1851 he was appointed commissioner of crown lands for Otago and a justice of the peace. 
An active naturalist, Mantell sent large quantities of New Zealand specimens and much information to colleagues in England, including his father, Richard Owen, Charles Lyell, Charles Darwin, and John Gould. The specimens were primarily bones of the moa ('Dinornis maximus'), a large flightless bird only 200 years extinct. He also found, alive, the tahake ('Notornis mantelli') and the North Island brown kiwi ('Apteryx australis mantelli'), both of which were named for him. The kiwi became a national symbol of New Zealand. 
As a condition of his paternal inheritance, Mantell necessarily took a leave of absence and returned to England for three years (1856-9), where he met the distinguished naturalists he had assisted, was elected to the Zoological and Geological societies, and established further friendships with Thomas Carlyle and his literary circle: Jane Carlyle (1801-1866) described Mantell as 'a proud, shy man' (Howe, chap. 8); Geraldine Jewsbury (1812-1880) began a close association with him; others resented his caustic wit. Mantell was infuriated when the British government refused to honour promises he had made to the Ngai Tahu in good faith and resigned his commissioner's position. 
On returning to New Zealand in 1859 Mantell entered politics and was elected to the house of representatives for 1861-5. An outspoken friend of the Maori, he was twice appointed native minister and twice resigned. In 1869 he married Mary Sarah Prince (died 1873), with whom he already had a son ('b'. 1864). In 1866 he was appointed to the legislative council, serving until his death, at Sydney Street, Wellington, on 7 September 1895. He was buried in Wellington. Mantell contributed numerous papers to the 'Proceedings of the New Zealand Institute', of which he was a founder and sometime secretary. He was also president of the Wellington Philosophical Society (1870) and occasionally acting director of the Geological Survey and Colonial Museum. Following the death of his first wife he married, on 10 January 1876, Jane Hardwick (died 1906). 


@@@@@


doc= 53961


Mantell, Reginald Neville (1827-1857), civil engineer, was born in Lewes on 11 August 1827, the youngest, somewhat uncontrollable child of the surgeon Gideon Algernon Mantell (1790-1852) and his wife, Mary Ann Woodhouse (1795-1869). His brother was Walter Baldock Durrant Mantell (1820-1895). After desultory schooling at Lewes, Hanwell, and Clapham up to 1842, Mantell received valuable practical experience in civil engineering under Henry Carr in 1843. On 27 May 1844 he was formally apprenticed (at a cost to his father of $800) to Isambard Kingdom Brunel. Mantell worked on Hungerford Bridge (over the Thames at London) and, more importantly, on branches of the Great Western Railway. Living successively at Trowbridge and Swindon, he socialized extensively and collected fossils from newly made rail cuts in his spare time. These fossils were at first sent to his father, but Mantell later published on others himself. His finds, mostly interpreted by others, substantially resolved an important controversy regarding belemnites, confirming the identity of 'Belemnoteuthis' as an independent genus separate from 'Belemnites'. 
Brunel was so pleased with the quality of Mantell's work as an engineer that in 1847 he cancelled the last year of Mantell's indentures and paid him a salary instead. Nationwide economic decline prevented Mantell from achieving a permanent position, but in March 1849 he rode aboard several of Brunel's new (and decidedly unsafe) locomotives on a frightful series of test runs to ascertain their consumption of coke and water. Rescued from that dangerous occupation by parental generosity, Mantell toured America later the same year at his father's expense. After some further months in England, he returned to the United States in August 1850 to accept employment as a railway engineer in and around Paris, Kentucky, a frequently violent frontier town that left its imprint on him. 
Forced back to England by his father's death on 10 November 1852, Mantell oversaw the disbursement of his estate, returned briefly to Henry Carr, and then accepted a four-year position as district engineer in Allahabad, India. However, he proved unable to get along with the Hindus; he was successfully sued by one for battery and twice had his professional responsibilities curtailed as a result. In India he devoted his spare time to photography, the techniques of which he had learned in England from the well-known American photographer John Mayall. 
Caught up in the Sepoy mutiny, Mantell died (unmarried) of cholera on 30 June 1857 in his houseboat on the Jumna River at Allahabad. He was buried in Allahabad the same day, his effects being eventually returned to his brother Walter in England. Gideon Mantell's 'Thoughts on a Pebble' (1836; eight editions), a popular introduction to geology, was written for Reginald and dedicated to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 53965


Temple, Georgina Cowper-, Lady Mount-Temple (1821?-1901), religious enthusiast, was born on 8 October, probably in 1821 in Ireland, the ninth daughter and twelfth child of Admiral Richard Delap Halliday (1772-1837), who in 1821 assumed the name and arms of Tollemache, and his wife, Elizabeth Stratford (died 1861), daughter of John, third earl of Aldborough. At the time of Georgina's birth her father was still a serving naval officer. With three brothers and seven surviving sisters she would have felt the stimulation of a full family life and the influence of a religious father of a strong evangelical persuasion. After his death in 1837, Georgina lived quietly in London with her mother at 11 Chesham Place and at Brighton. She was slight of figure and tall, her hair golden brown, with an aquiline nose and light warm grey eyes. She married the Hon. William Francis Cowper (1811-1888) ['see 'Temple, William Francis Cowper-], apparent son of the fifth Earl and Countess Cowper, at St George's, Hanover Square, on 21 November 1848; his father was actually almost certainly Lord Palmerston, whom Lady Cowper subsequently married. Her marriage was one of complete happiness, finding in her husband a man sharing her own religious fervour with whom she could join in his philanthropic work. At the start she owned to feeling out of her element, so different was the world of gaiety and brilliance at the Palmerston's Broadlands to the quiet life of faith and prayer at home. In their Curzon Street house, where D. G. Rossetti took exception to rose-garlanded chintzes, the firm of William Morris & Co. was called in when the staircase needed renovation. 
John Ruskin was introduced to Mrs Cowper in 1853, having first seen her in Rome in the winter of 1840. In 1863 spiritualism and possibly occult phenomena brought them more intimately together. Ruskin was suffering from the complexity of his obsession for Rose La Touche and found in Mrs Cowper a ready sympathizer, sensitive to a mind in great distress. His letters to his tutelary power during the following decade demonstrate the claims he made on her never-failing loyalty. He called her Phile, Egeria, and Isola. He dedicated his second edition of 'Sesame and Lilies' (1871) to her. 
Lady Palmerston died in 1869; Broadlands, inherited by her son, who changed his name to Cowper-Temple, became Georgina's home, the centre of religious activity and philanthropic work, and also a refuge to their many friends. According to Leicester Warren there were no clocks or fixed hours: breakfast when one rose, luncheon when hungry, and dinner on returning home. Mrs Cowper-Temple was a vegetarian and total abstainer. Older now, though still upright and stately, her silvered hair suggested a halo; her eyes seemed those of a mystic while her countenance was one of deep serenity, though Arthur Benson observed that her smile was the sort that comes of having been told daily for many years that your smile is like a sunset or a strain of music. Her long plain dress of black merino worn with a high white mob cap bore resemblance to an abbess of the past. A necklace of little silver cherubs with a tiny ladder was her only ornament, sometimes relieved by a bunch of lilies of the valley at the neck. Giving herself unsparingly for all who came to her, she numbered among her friends not only clergymen, including F. D. Maurice, Charles Kingsley, bishops, and curates, but those from other walks of life, such as Charlotte Yonge, Louisa, Lady Waterford, the George Macdonalds, Louisa, Lady Ashburton, Thomas Carlyle, and Augustus Hare. The first annual religious conference at Broadlands was held in the Orangery and under the cedars in the park in July 1874. Here Mrs Cowper-Temple, as high priestess, found common ground with Quakers, spiritualists, Shakers, budding theosophists, nonconformists, ritualistic curates, and members of the Church Army: all were welcome. Working there on his predella for 'Dante's Dream', Rossetti found the company all on the parsonic tack (1876) and made a portrait drawing of his hostess (unlocated). 
Georgina's husband was raised to the peerage as Baron Mount-Temple in 1880 and died in 1888. Lady Mount-Temple presented Rossetti's 'Beata Beatrix' to the National Gallery in memory of her husband. She left Broadlands and their house at 1 Cheyne Walk, moving to no. 9, but living predominantly at Babbacombe Cliff, Torquay, built for them by W. E. Nesfield. Here she died on 17 October 1901 after five weeks' illness. Her funeral took place at Romsey Abbey on 21 October; a window erected to her memory there celebrates her work among the fishermen at Torquay, as does a statue raised in gratitude on Babbacombe Downs. At her death she left almost all her possessions to Mme Juliet Deschamps, whom she had adopted as a child in 1869. Other bequests went to the Church Army and the Victoria Street Society of Protection of Animals from Vivisection. In 1909 Mme Deschamps, who had inherited Rossetti's 'Blessed Damozel (Sancta Lilias)', gave it to the Tate Gallery in memory of Georgina Mount-Temple. 


@@@@@


doc= 53966


William de Brus, lord of Annandale (d. 1211/12), of whom almost nothing is known. The pipe rolls show him reluctant to pay King John's scutages, but making a part payment of $25 in 1209, and he died on 16 July in 1211 or 1212, having witnessed one charter of King William and bought for Hartlepool a market and fair at a cost of 20 marks in 1201. He had married a Christina, who bore two sons; the younger, who was a hostage in King John's hands in 1213, was possibly called William de Brus, and the elder was 


@@@@@


doc= 53967


Higdon, Annie Catharine (1864-1946), schoolmistress, was born on 30 December 1864 at Poolton cum Seacombe, Cheshire, the daughter of Samuel Schollick, a foreman shipwright, and his wife, Jane. She became a certificated elementary teacher, and when she married on 11 July 1896 was residing at Shepton Mallet, Somerset. Her husband, Thomas George Higdon ['see below'], was a fellow teacher. Early in married life the couple moved to London, and on 14 April 1902 took up joint posts at Wood Dalling council school in Norfolk. Annie Higdon, known as Kitty, was the head teacher and her husband an uncertificated assistant. As Christian socialists with strong egalitarian views they were dedicated to improving the lot of their pupils, many of whom came from poor labouring families. Kitty was deeply critical of the widespread illegal employment of children on the land. A confirmed pacifist, she taught her pupils to abhor cruelty to animals. She did much to promote the children's welfare by purchasing food, clothing, and footwear for them out of her own pocket. She also provided equipment for the school and conducted cookery classes in her own kitchen. 
In 1907 Thomas Higdon, with his wife's backing, became actively involved in promoting agricultural trade unionism. In what was regarded as almost a rural revolution, Thomas Higdon's efforts led to the election of labourers to the parish council in 1910, to which the Higdons were also elected, though Kitty retired without taking office. These developments, and Kitty Higdon's continuing demands for improvements to the fabric of the school, led to friction with the managers, many of whom were farmers. In December 1908 and July 1910 official inquiries into the couple's conduct were instituted under the aegis of Norfolk education committee. Although a threat of dismissal was withdrawn, they were transferred to Burston and Shimpling council school, where they took up duty on 1 February 1911. Their political activities and social concerns again led to clashes with their managers. After Thomas Higdon helped local labourers to oust sitting members at the parish council elections, himself heading the poll, the managers requested in November 1913 Norfolk education committee to remove Kitty Higdon from her post on disciplinary grounds. After an inquiry, the committee asked her to seek alternative employment; when she took no action she and her husband were dismissed as from 31 March 1914. 
Kitty Higdon was an excellent teacher, as reports by the school inspectors make clear. On 1 April 1914, as a protest against her dismissal, sixty-six of the seventy-two children on the register, with the support of their parents, came out on strike. As the dispute went on, it drew support from trade unions and other national labour organizations. Public meetings were held on Burston Green, addressed by leading political figures. The Higdons, meanwhile, began to teach the striking children, at first in the open air and then in a temporary 'strike school' held in a former carpenter's shop. A national campaign was launched to raise funds for a purpose-built property, and between April 1916 and December 1917 $1662 was raised, with the miners' union alone subscribing $401. The new building was opened on 13 May 1917 amid great celebrations. 
By 1919 the strike school still had forty pupils and throughout the 1920s and much of the 1930s it continued to prosper, drawing children not only from the immediate vicinity but from the wider community. Among them were two Russian boys, the sons of members of the Russian trade delegation in London. Kitty Higdon laid great emphasis on the inculcation of civic values, and older pupils were taken to trade union and political rallies. In a grudging tribute to the couple's sincerity, the Board of Education described them as 'persons who conceive themselves to have a 'mission''. The school building, described by the Higdons as the 'centre of a new living movement of educational and social activity', was used for meetings in support of various educational and socialist causes. 
The school remained open until shortly after Thomas Higdon's death in August 1939. Its eleven pupils were then transferred to Burston council school and Kitty Higdon entered a retirement home at Swainsthorpe, near Norwich, where she died on 24 April 1946. She was buried in Burston churchyard. 

Thomas George Higdon (1869-1939), schoolmaster, was born on 21 August 1869 at East Pennard, Somerset, a younger son of Dennis Higdon, a farm labourer, and his wife, Ann. He became a teacher on the basis of an Oxford local senior certificate and, after his marriage in 1896, taught at St James's and St Peter's School, Piccadilly, London, where he remained from 1899 until he and his wife moved to Wood Dalling. An outspoken critic of child employment on the land, his firm political beliefs and farm labouring background led to a close involvement in the agricultural trade union movement in Norfolk. He joined the union's executive committee in 1914 and, except for the period 1924-7, continued to serve until 1938. He acted as union treasurer from 1916 to 1920, and in 1917 was appointed a member of the agricultural industry's first central wages board. He was the author of at least two pamphlets. The first, 'Bodies without Abodes' (n.d., 'c'.1912), was a fictional account of labouring life and the tied cottage system; the second, 'The Burston Rebellion' (n.d., 'c'.1916), examined events surrounding the school strike of 1 April 1914. 
Thomas Higdon died at Mill Green, Burston, on 17 August 1939, after a long illness. Appropriately the simple funeral service five days later was conducted in the strike school, before his burial in the village churchyard. The school building, under the care of trustees, was still in existence in the 1990s. 


@@@@@


doc= 53968


Lushington, Vernon (1832-1912), lawyer and positivist, was born on 8 March 1832 in London, the fourth son of Stephen Lushington (1782-1873) and his wife, Sarah Grace, 'nee' Carr, and twin to Sir Godfrey Lushington, whom he closely resembled in appearance, abilities, and temperament. After their mother's death in 1837, the twins were brought up by a maternal aunt at their father's seat in Ockham Park, Ripley, Surrey, and spent a year at Cheam School. Vernon served for three years in the Royal Navy, studied at the East India College, Haileybury, and in 1852 matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took a first class in civil law in 1854-5, LLB in 1859, and LLM in 1885. Admitted to the Inner Temple in 1852, he was called to the bar in 1857. 
Early expressions of Lushington's social conscience were a pamphlet of 1855 defending the Crimean War as 'a fight for justice', journalism supporting trade union legislation, and relief efforts for unemployed factory operatives. He also taught at the Working Men's College, founded by his father's friend F. D. Maurice, and published in its magazine. His genial spirits were much admired by his colleagues, including Dante Gabriel Rossetti, whose fateful introduction to Edward Burne-Jones Lushington arranged. In the 'Oxford and Cambridge Magazine' (1856), founded by Burne-Jones and William Morris, Lushington wrote on paintings by Rossetti and Ford Madox Brown and a series on Thomas Carlyle. 
Lushington's legal career progressed steadily. In 1864 and 1868 he published reports of Admiralty court cases during the years of his father's eminence as an Admiralty judge. In 1868 he took silk and the next year became a bencher. From 1864 to 1869 he was deputy judge-advocate-general, and in 1869 he became secretary to the Admiralty. Upon his retirement in 1877 he was named a county court judge for Surrey and Berkshire, and served until 1900. Independently, he monitored abuses of martial law. 
Both Lushington twins adopted Auguste Comte's positivism in the 1870s, and participated in the joint translation of Comte's four-volume 'Positive Polity' (1875-7) under Richard Congreve. A few years later they joined Frederic Harrison and others and broke with Congreve to found a new positivist centre, Newton Hall, which in their affluence they supported generously. Vernon lectured there on the religion of humanity, science, and the arts; arranged musical programmes; led cultural pilgrimages; and wrote hymns, sonnets, and forty-nine entries for 'The New Calendar of Great Men', the positivists' biographical dictionary. He also had other verse printed privately. 
Lushington had a happy family life. On 28 February 1865 he married Jane (1834-1884), daughter of Francis Mowatt, a former MP. After her death he found consolation with their daughters, Katherine, Margaret, and Susan, all talented musicians. Kitty, who married Leopold Maxse, was the model for Mrs Dalloway in the novel by her friend Virginia Woolf; Susan, who remained single, was made an MBE for her work with amateur musicians. Lushington's London house was in Kensington Square, and his country residences were in Surrey, first at Pyrford, then at Cobham. He died of bronchitis at 36 Kensington Square on 24 January 1912 and was buried in Pyrford churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 53969


Hull, Edward (1829-1917), geologist, was born in Antrim town on 21 May 1829, the eldest son of the Revd John Dawson Hull ('c'.1801-1886). He attended schools in Edgeworthstown, co. Longford, and Lucan, co. Dublin. In April 1846 he entered Trinity College, Dublin, from where he was awarded a diploma in engineering in 1849, a BA in 1850, and a master's degree in engineering in 1871. He joined the Geological Survey of Great Britain under Sir Henry Thomas De la Beche (1796-1855) on 1 April 1850, and was trained in north Wales by Joseph Beete Jukes (1811-1869). His early survey duties took him into Cheshire, Gloucestershire, Oxfordshire, Shropshire, and Worcestershire, while between 1860 and 1867 he was responsible for mapping the south Lancashire coalfield. On 4 August 1857 he married Mary Catherine Henrietta (died 1901), daughter of Charles Turner Cooke of Cheltenham. They had two sons and four daughters, one of whom was Eleanor Hull (1860-1935), historian and founder of the Irish Texts Society. 
Some of Hull's early mapping was adjudged to be grossly inadequate, and about 1854 he came close to dismissal. However, his work improved somewhat and his career began to prosper when Sir Roderick Impey Murchison (1792-1871) succeeded De la Beche as director in 1855. Hull's cousin was married to Murchison's sister. When the geological survey of Scotland was organized in 1867, Hull became its district surveyor under Archibald Geikie (1835-1924), and he mapped in the Lanarkshire coalfield. In April 1869 Murchison sent him to Dublin to take charge of the Irish survey during the illness of Jukes, who was now that survey's director. Following Jukes's death, Hull became the Irish director in October 1869. 
In Ireland, Hull persisted with the sound methods devised by Jukes, and between 1869 and 1890 he supervised the preparation of the eighty-five sheets necessary to complete the survey's one-inch geological map of Ireland. For this achievement he deserves great credit (he himself had hoped for a knighthood), but many of his numerous personal publications are marred by superficiality in field examination and by sweeping generalization. For far too long he clung to belief in a glacial submergence, he sought to impose a tripartite division upon the Pleistocene deposits of Britain and Ireland, and in the south of Ireland he thought he had found solutions to problems which for long had baffled far more talented geologists. His survey revision of the geology of southern Ireland (1878-81) was a disaster which later had to be expunged from the one-inch sheets involved. Among Hull's many books the three most significant are, arguably, 'The Coal-Fields of Great Britain' (five edns 1861 to 1905), 'A Treatise on the Building and Ornamental Stones of Great Britain and Foreign Countries' (1872), and 'Contributions to the Physical History of the British Isles' (1882), the last of which pioneered the genre of the palaeogeographical atlas. 
While Irish director, Hull sometimes obtained permission to act as a private consultant, and in this capacity he visited Hungary in 1873 and the USA in 1890. In 1883-4 he led an expedition to the Wadi Araba on behalf of the Palestine Exploration Fund, with Horatio Herbert Kitchener as a member of his party. Hull was elected to the Royal Society in June 1867, was professor of geology in the Royal College of Science for Ireland in 1869-90, and president of the Royal Geological Society of Ireland (1873-5), but he was never elected a member of the Royal Irish Academy. He received an honorary LLD from the University of Glasgow in 1879, and the Murchison medal of the Geological Society of London in 1890. 
Hull retired from the survey on 30 September 1890. The following year he left Dublin to live in London, where he served as a consultant, mostly in the area of water-supply, and engaged himself in the affairs of the Victoria Institute. He died of bronchitis at his home, 14 Stanley Gardens, Kensington, London, on 18 October 1917. A hard-working man of shallow intellect, who was often the butt of his colleagues' ridicule, Hull's years in Dublin were sullied by his notorious feud with George Henry Kinahan (1829-1908), the survey's district surveyor. Kinahan believed himself to have been Jukes's rightful successor as director, and Hull's fussiness and petulance in the position only served to exacerbate the situation. 


@@@@@


doc= 53972


Ganly, Patrick (1809-1899), geologist, was born in the Rotunda Hospital, Dublin, on 15 October 1809, the son of Patrick Ganly ('c'.1783-1865), a bricklayer, and his wife, Ann ('c'.1779-1855). A Roman Catholic, he probably went to Eugene Finnerty's school in Cork; in 1827 he joined the boundary survey being organized by Richard Griffith (1784-1878) as an adjunct to the Ordnance Survey. Between 1830 and 1832 he worked as a civilian employee of the Ordnance Survey itself, and in 1833 he rejoined Griffith, this time in the office for the general survey and valuation of rateable property. In 1846-9 he was seconded to the board of works, for famine relief projects, and he may have worked in the United States during 1851-2. By 1853, the probable year of his marriage to Mary Elizabeth 
(Eliza; 'c'.1828-1894)
, he was back in the valuation office, and he remained there until he was declared redundant in May 1860. 
Within the valuation office Ganly was varyingly described as 'valuator' or as 'cartographer'. The true nature of his activities there over many years is rendered clear by a series of more than 600 of his letters (three volumes of letters in the Royal Irish Academy and one in private hands) addressed to Griffith and dating from between 1837 and 1847. The letters reveal that throughout the greater part of that period Griffith used Ganly as his geological field factotum. He clearly proved himself to be a painstaking and conscientious field geologist, inured to the problems of year-round fieldwork in an often harsh environment. 
Some of the detail on Griffith's pioneering quarter-inch (1:253,440) geological map of Ireland of 1839 is based upon Ganly's studies, and most of the revisions introduced into the map between 1839 and 1855 are the fruit of Ganly's investigations. Similarly, many of the geological papers published by Griffith owed much to Ganly's field activities, but for a variety of reasons Griffith chose not to acknowledge his indebtedness to Ganly. 
In 1841 Ganly entered Trinity College, Dublin, as an external student, and he graduated BA in 1849. During 1856 he joined the Geological Society of Dublin, and in a paper read there on 11 June that year he explained his discovery that cross-stratification might be used to indicate whether strata had been inverted. The paper was published in 1857, but its importance was overlooked by the geological world, and his discovery had to be remade some seventy years later. 
Of Ganly's life after 1860 little is known, but he seems to have practised as a civil engineer. Ganly's wife died in 1894, and he himself died at 52 Main Street, Donnybrook, Dublin, on 29 October 1899. He was buried in Glasnevin cemetery two days later. The grave is unmarked. 


@@@@@


doc= 53974


Muriel Catherine Canning Chapman (1894-1988) was born on 16 September 1894 in Rampisham, Dorset, the eldest daughter of Samuel Holmes, and his wife, Mabel Hoare Canning. About 1900 her father became a scholar, and later a theology lecturer, at Jesus College, Oxford, and she was educated at the Oxford High School for Girls, and then at Royal Holloway College, London, where she gained a BSc degree in 1916. In 1917 she became attached to the Society of Home Students, Oxford (later St Anne's College), and carried out research in chemical kinetics under the supervision of David Leonard Chapman. She matriculated at Oxford in 1920 (the first year that women were permitted to do so). 


@@@@@


doc= 53976


Jacques, Josephine Edwina (1922-1980), actress, was born on 7 February 1922 at 125 High Street, Sandgate, Kent, the daughter of Robin Jacques (died 1922), a lieutenant in the army education corps and a former test pilot in the Royal Flying Corps, and his wife, Mary Adelaide Thorn. Her father was killed in a flying accident the year she was born and Jacques and her brother, the book illustrator Robin Jacques (1920-1995), were largely brought up by their grandparents. She attended Godolphin and Latymer Upper School in London, and trained briefly as a hairdresser. She spent two years during the Second World War as a Red Cross nurse, and then as a welder, before making her stage debut in 1944 at the Players Theatre in London, singing Victorian songs. The Players was to be her drama school: she acted in plays and revues there, she directed, wrote song lyrics, and developed the persona she was to use in pantomime for years, the large, bossy, but vulnerable fairy queen, which she later said was her favourite part. She toured with the Young Vic company in 'The King Stag' as Smeraldina (1947-8), and by 1947 was working regularly in radio. She gained a national audience as the greedy child Sophie Tuckshop, who would regale listeners with terrifying accounts of epic binges, in Tommy Handley's popular series 'ITMA' (1948-9). From 1950 to 1954 she appeared with Tony Hancock in Eric Sykes's 'Educating Archie', and subsequently worked on the innovative 'Hancock's Half Hour'. Her film career was launched with a series of minor roles in Dickens adaptations -- 'Nicholas Nickleby' (1948), 'Oliver Twist' (1948), 'Scrooge' (1951), and 'Pickwick Papers' (1953). They reflected her talent for larger-than-life comedy which never lost its grip on humanity, while 'Old Mother Riley Meets the Vampire' (1952) showed her in a broader comic mode. On 10 November 1949 she married the actor John Le Mesurier (1912-1983); they had two children, and were divorced in 1965. 
Jacques excelled as a member of a comic team, generous in giving opportunities to fellow actors. Her skills were most evident in two areas. First, there was the BBC television series 'Sykes', which began in 1960 and has a claim to be the first native British sitcom. It starred Eric Sykes as a suburban shopowner living with his sister Hattie, and featured Richard Wattis as their superior neighbour and Deryck Guyler as Corky, the local policeman. Jacques provided a counterpoint to the childlike anarchy of Sykes with her study of a middle-class, slightly pretentious lady struggling to keep her dignity as the men made fools of themselves. Although the plots were undistinguished the visible teamwork within the quartet ensured a long life for the series, which ended with Jacques's death. 
Then there were the 'Carry on' films. Made by Peter Rogers and Gerald Thomas between 1958 and 1979, they never pretended to be more than low-budget family entertainment with an edge of vulgarity; they had little plot, relying on slapstick parodies of British institutions such as the National Health Service and the army. Yet they attracted some of the best comic actors of their generation, drawn by the prospect of regular pay for a limited commitment (typically, they were made in about six weeks). Jacques appeared in fourteen of the twenty-eight, and they show a comic talent of extraordinary versatility. In 'Sykes' her performance had to be a foil for the main character; in the 'Carry Ons' she blossomed. The comedy was superficially grounded in physical types like those on the seaside postcards they sought to emulate -- skinny henpecked men, busty blondes, enormous mothers-in-law. Jacques, a large woman, might have found her range limited, but discovered so many variations and shades in her roles that one is hardly aware of a typology at work. In 'Sergeant' (1958) she was a no-nonsense army doctor. In 'Cabby' (1963) she was the neglected wife of a taxi driver who sets up her own all-woman firm -- a truly original piece of comedy exploiting several facets of her comic style. There is her highly individual sexual attractiveness, in a bubblebath sequence where she preens before the mirror in a parody of the cheesecake shots of the day: the humour lies in her highly recognizable awareness of the gap between magazine glamour and reality; however hard she works to become a sensual beauty, her workaholic husband (Sid James) will never notice. There is a comedy of transformation as Jacques masterminds a battle of wits between rival cab firms, sending men off on false errands in a series of assumed voices. 
Jacques is enduringly associated with the role of hospital matron, which she played in five 'Carry Ons', often with Kenneth Williams as chief consultant. The comic duel between them was for many the high spot of these films. Both were well aware that they had been cast for seaside-postcard contrast: both ignored this and stressed what they shared -- authority, embodied in Jacques's size and bell-like voice and Williams's aristocratic face -- an authority always undercut by the indignity of bodily desire. In 'Carry on Matron' (1972) Williams pursued Jacques, to be brushed aside like a mosquito. In 'Carry on Doctor' (1968) Jacques was the pursuer, vamping a helpless Williams in a black negligee and a voice which purred like Eartha Kitt but, at a hint of resistance, took on the steeliness of Margaret Thatcher. The role embodied her particular talent: although often cast in broad comedy, she never played it broadly, but with an elegance of voice and body that belied all the cliches about women and weight. 
Jacques died suddenly from heart failure on 6 October 1980 at home at 67 Eardley Crescent, Kensington, aged fifty-eight. At her memorial service at St Paul's, Covent Garden, Kenneth Williams quoted the Victorian novelist Mrs Craik on 'the comfort of feeling safe with a person' ('Kenneth Williams Diaries', 621) which for him and many others summed up her qualities as both friend and ensemble actress. 


@@@@@


doc= 53977


Ridley, (William) Arnold (1896-1984), actor and playwright, was born on 7 January 1896 at 4 Pera Place, Bath, the son of William Robert Ridley, drill instructor, and his wife, Rosa Caroline Morrish. The author of 'The Ghost Train', one of the most popular plays, and later films, of the first half of the twentieth century, Ridley had virtually a second coming when, in his seventies and eighties, he played the 'doddery and doubtfully continent' ('The Times', 14 March 1984) Private Godfrey in the long-running BBC television series 'Dad's Army'. 
Ridley was educated at Clarendon School, Widcombe, and the City of Bath secondary school before studying for a certificate of the Board of Education in the elementary training department at Bristol University from 1914 to 1916. His first stage appearance was at the Theatre Royal, Bristol, in 1914 in 'Prunella' by Laurence Housman and H. Granville Barker. Ridley enlisted in the Somerset light infantry in 1916, saw active service in France and in 1917 was discharged with injuries that left him prone to black-outs. He taught for a short period before joining first Birmingham Repertory Company (1918-20) and then the Plymouth Repertory Company (1920-21), but the severity of his war wounds led him to begin writing. 

'The Ghost Train', Ridley's second play, a comedy thriller, was written in 1923 while he was working as manager of his father's boot shop in Manvers Street, Bath, and was reputedly prompted by a four-hour wait at Mangotsfield Junction Station, Gloucestershire. Originally rejected, it was first put on at the Theatre Royal, Brighton, on 22 June 1925, and on the London stage at St Martin's Theatre on 23 November 1925. It transferred first to the Garrick Theatre, then to the Comedy Theatre, and in all ran for 655 West End performances. It became a favourite with provincial repertory companies and amateur dramatic groups, and was adapted as a musical, 'Happy Holiday'. 
Arnold Ridley wrote some thirty further plays, sometimes in collaboration with others. Among the most successful were 'Third Time Lucky' (originally 'Unholy Orders'), 'Easy Money', in which he played the original Philip Stafford, at the Grand Theatre, Blackpool, on 24 February 1947, and 'Beggar My Neighbour', all of which became films. His plays were described as 'tightly plotted, witty, compassionate, often exciting, about ordinary people doing extraordinary things' ('The Guardian', 10 Jan 1976). In 1935 he formed his own short-lived film company, which produced 'Royal Eagle'. His first marriage, to Hilda Mary Cooke, was followed by another, to Isola Strong. 
Ridley enlisted in 1939 and went with the British expeditionary force to France as a public relations officer with the rank of major but was invalided out. For a few weeks in the 1940s he was a member of the Local Defence Volunteers at Caterham in Surrey. He joined the Entertainment National Service Association (ENSA) for which he directed 'The Ghost Train'. Through this he met his third wife, Althea Parker, an actress; they were married in 1947 and had a son, Nicholas. 
From 1942 to 1944 Ridley directed productions of the Malvern Company. He continued to act, sometimes in his own plays, and in 1953 took the part of Walter Gabriel in the stage adaptation of the BBC radio serial 'The Archers' at the Theatre Royal, Birmingham; in the 1960s and 1970s he was heard as Doughy Hood in the radio broadcasts of the same serial. He was also the vicar in the television series 'Crossroads'. His stage appearances included Juror no. 9 in '12 Angry Men' at the Queen's Theatre, London, in July 1964. 
Ridley played Private Godfrey in the eighty 'Dad's Army' television programmes, recorded between April 1969 and July 1977; in the stage version at the Shaftesbury Theatre, London, from 2 October 1975; and in its subsequent 27-week provincial tour. Ridley was the subject of the television programme 'This is your Life' in March 1976. He was made an OBE in 1982. 
Arnold Ridley described himself as 'always a repertory actor at heart' ('The Times', 8 Jan 1976). He was regarded in the theatre as a 'disciplined person' who 'learnt his lines and moves very quickly' (Pertwee, 54). He claimed never to have missed a performance or arrived late for a rehearsal, and once said 'the one thing I can't stand is inefficiency' ('Freshview', 5 Jan 1970). Off-stage his speech was 'brisk and schoolmasterly' and his eyes 'danced with humour and irony' ('The Guardian', 10 Jan 1976). 
Ridley had a lifelong interest in rugby football, joining Bath rugby club as a schoolboy in 1908. As its match secretary from 1929 to 1936 he 'did much to revise the fixture list and bring in the London clubs' ('Bath and West Evening Chronicle'). Ridley was its president from 1950 to 1952 and continued to support the side until 1982. He died on 12 March 1984 in hospital in Northwood; his funeral was held at St Anne's Church, Highgate, London, a week later. 


@@@@@


doc= 53978


Payne, Christopher Russell (1874-1952), naval officer, was born on 17 September 1874 at 2 Molesworth Terrace, Stoke Damerel, Devon, the son of the Revd Samuel Ward Payne, then chaplain of HMS 'Implacable', and his wife, Julia Florence Delmage. Payne joined the 'Britannia' as a cadet in 1888, passed as a midshipman in 1890, was promoted sub-lieutenant in 1893, and lieutenant in 1895. In 1897 he was in the 'Devastation' at Devonport when Captain Henry Bradwardine Jackson (later Sir Henry) was experimenting with wireless telegraphy at the Torpedo School. Payne qualified as a torpedo lieutenant at 'Vernon' in 1899, and was appointed to the torpedo depot ship 'Vulcan', under Jackson, on the Mediterranean station. 
After returning to 'Vernon' to requalify in torpedo duties Payne joined the staff in 1902 as lieutenant in charge of the wireless telegraphy department. In 1903 Payne, Jackson, and F. G. Loring inspected Marconi's new tuned system, recommending an immediate service trial and that all navy ships have three wireless telegraphy ratings in peace and an additional one in war, and emphasizing the role of wireless telegraphy training and practice. From 1903 to 1905 Payne served as torpedo officer in 'Duncan', again under Jackson, with special wireless telegraphy duties in the Mediterranean and channel. Jackson reported that Payne was 'Very zealous and capable in all respects. Has greatly assisted development of W/T. Strongly recommended for early promotion' (TNA: PRO, ADM 196/43, p. 502). 
Promoted to commander on 31 December 1905 and appointed to 'Exmouth' for wireless telegraphy duties in the channel, Payne returned yet again to 'Vernon' and was commander in charge of the wireless telegraphy department from 1906 to 1908. He served on the committee on entry and training of operators for wireless telegraphy, which led to the formation of the wireless telegraphy branch in 1907. With Loring he gave evidence to the select committee on the 1906 Radio-Telegraphic Convention. In 1908 he served on the committee on wireless telegraphy codes and ciphers. 
Their lordships at the Admiralty expressed their appreciation for good results in wireless telegraphy trials between 'Vernon' and 'Indomitable' and noted Payne's good work with high power stations at Horsea and Gibraltar as commander of 'Furious' (1908-9). But when a court of inquiry into the collision between 'Crusader' and 'Rother' considered he had committed an error in judgement, their lordships expressed displeasure and cautioned him to be more careful. However, he redeemed himself as their lordships conveyed satisfaction with him for designing a mechanism for experiments with submarine A1. 
Payne was recognized as a leading naval wireless expert. In 1912 he inspected the Poulsen system of wireless telegraphy between San Francisco and Honolulu, attended the House of Commons Marconi committee, and was recommended for service on the signal committee. Promoted captain on 31 December 1912 and appointed for special service, he visited the Universal Radio Syndicate works in Copenhagen, and was a member of the committee on wireless telegraphy under Sir Henry Jackson. 
Payne commanded 'Vindictive' (1913-15), which acted as a wireless relay station during the battle of the Falklands. After command of 'Celtic', he was appointed head of signal section of the Admiralty war staff in January 1916. When in command of 'Suffolk' (1917-19) he acted as British senior naval officer at Vladivostok in the rank of commodore. He ensured co-operation between the various forces, gaining universal regard for dealing with the political situation. 
Created a commander of the Legion d'honneur in 1918, Payne was appointed CBE and received the grand order of the Rising Sun in 1919. He was appointed to command 'Vernon' in April 1920 and after two years he was made an aide-de-camp to the king. Payne married late in life at Holy Trinity Church, Brompton, on 2 June 1921 Amy Dorothy Perrot Whinney ('b'. 1894), daughter of Sir Arthur Whinney (1865-1927), assistant accountant-general of the navy, and Amy Elizabeth Golden. They had four daughters: Julia Elizabeth, Penelope Mary, Diana Rosemary, and Susanna Delmege. 
Payne's last command was 'Malaya' from 1922 until his promotion to rear-admiral in 1923; but he was then not further employed and was placed on the retired list in 1925. In 1926 the director of the signal department paid tribute to the work of Jackson and Payne: '[they] carried the Navy from the beginning of Wireless Telegraphy through the darkest days to the efficiency of recent times. They never allowed the disheartening effect of failures, and there were many, to delay improvements and advances, and by their persistence and ready help and advice to all W/T enthusiasts under them they brought Naval W/T through the stages of wonder, ridicule, doubt and tolerance to almost its present state of reliability. (TNA: PRO, ADM 116/3403)' Promoted vice-admiral on the retired list in 1928, Payne did valuable work for the British Legion, the church, and charities. He died at his home, Copthorne, Dover House Road, Roehampton, of cerebral haemorrhage and arteriosclerosis on Friday 15 February 1952. He was survived by his wife. Gifted with a first-class brain, he proved to be a notable expert in the early days of wireless telegraphy. His exceptional knowledge was put to good use by the signal and torpedo schools and the Admiralty staff. 


@@@@@


doc= 53979


Loring, Frederick George (1869-1951), naval officer and wireless expert, was born on 11 March 1869 at Stonelands, Ryde, Isle of Wight, the eldest son of Admiral Sir William Loring (died 1895), and his wife, Frances Louisa Adams. From a naval family -- his grandfather Sir John Wentworth Loring (1775-1852) was lieutenant-governor of the Royal Naval College, Portsmouth, 1819-37 -- Loring was destined for the Royal Navy. He entered 'Britannia' in July 1882 as a naval cadet, going out to Australia as a midshipman. As a sub-lieutenant he served in the royal yacht, 'Victoria and Albert', in 1891 and was promoted lieutenant on 1 September 1891. He was a lieutenant in HMS 'Victoria' when she was rammed and sunk by 'Camperdown' off Tripoli on 22 June 1893 with terrible loss of life. Loring was awarded a bronze medal by the Royal Humane Society for saving two lives. 
Loring undertook the long torpedo course at HMS 'Vernon' in 1894, qualifying as a torpedo lieutenant in 1896. The same year he married Charlotte Elizabeth Arbuthnot (1862-1933), daughter of the Hon. James Edward Arbuthnot of Mauritius; they had two daughters, Evelyn Frances and Iris. Loring joined the staff of 'Defiance', the torpedo school at Devonport, where Captain Henry Jackson was experimenting with wireless telegraphy for naval purposes. Loring was one of the first to specialize in wireless telegraphy, becoming one of the navy's leading wireless experts. He served in the fleet during 1900-02 and from 1902 was in charge of the Admiralty shore wireless stations. Loring was selected to accompany Guglielmo Marconi to America in 1904 for wireless experiments, and in 1906 he was the Admiralty representative at the second International Wireless Telegraphy Conference at Berlin. In the same year he was elected as a member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers. 
Although specially recommended for promotion, Loring was found to be unfit for further sea service, but permission was given for him to accept the appointment as inspector of wireless telegraphy under the Post Office from 1 July 1908. He received an expression of the Admiralty's appreciation of his services in charge of war signal and wireless telegraphy stations and finally retired from the Royal Navy at his own request with the rank of commander in December 1909. In 1914 Loring was released from liability for naval service, but refused further promotion. 
Loring remained as inspector of wireless telegraphy at the Post Office, responsible for the operating staff, until 1930, and represented the Post Office at the international radio-telegraphy conferences at London in 1912 and Washington in 1927. He also acted as an assessor for wireless telegraphy for the Board of Trade, attending the safety at sea conferences in London in 1914 and 1929. Appointed a civil OBE in 1926 for his services to the development of radio, Loring retired from the Post Office in January 1930. He joined the International Marine Radio Company, of which he later became a director, and represented that company at the conferences in Copenhagen in 1931, Madrid in 1932, Lisbon in 1934, Bucharest in 1937, Cairo in 1938, and Stockholm in 1948. He finally retired from the company in 1950, having devoted over fifty years of his life to the interests of maritime radio. In 1949 he married Margaret Mackenzie, daughter of Montague S. Napier. 
Apart from his many naval and technical interests Loring had a distinct literary bent. In his early days at sea he wrote for a naval technical journal, and was the naval correspondent for the 'Western Morning News'. He also wrote poems and short stories, one of which, 'The Tomb of Sarah', achieved considerable success. He was co-author of a paper, 'A survey of marine radio progress, with special reference to RMS 'Queen Mary'', published in the Institution of Electrical Engineers' 'Journal' in 1937. Loring died of cardiac failure at his home, the Old House, Footscray, Sidcup, Kent, on 7 September 1951, aged eighty-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 53981


Anstie, John (1743-1830), clothier, was born on 7 September 1743 in Devizes, the eldest son of John Anstie (1698-1779), grocer and snuff maker, and his third wife, Mary ('nee' Sharpe). He was baptized at Devizes Baptist Church, and later became a prominent member of the congregation. On 4 April 1780 he married Mary Vesey ('b'. 1746) of Wotton under Edge; they had one daughter, Mary Ann, born in 1781. 
After being in partnership with his father, Anstie decided in 1784 to specialize in the clothing trade, manufacturing 'cassimere', a narrow twilled cloth made from Spanish wool mixed with silk, cotton, or mohair. Receptive to new technological developments, Anstie became a pioneer of his trade during the industrial revolution. He built in handsome classical style the first clothing factory in the west country, in Devizes in 1785. Here he installed spinning jennies, carding machines, and narrow hand-looms, also using scribbling mills and carding and spinning machines at nearby village watermills. In a pamphlet he wrote much later, 'Observations on the importance and necessity of introducing improved machinery into the woollen manufactory' (1803), he stressed the necessity of mechanization to avoid loss of trade to Yorkshire and France. However, his progressive outlook was tempered by a humanity based on patriarchal conventions and a deep-seated nonconformist faith. Technical progress, he thought, should be 'combined with a just regard for the interest of the common people'. He continued to use some domestic spinners and in 1787 arbitrated between Wiltshire narrow weavers and clothiers over the introduction of cassimere workshops. 
Anstie was also heavily involved in European trade, from France to Russia; in 1793 he had $17,500 of stock in continental agents' hands and supplied such monarchs as George III, Queen Charlotte, and Marie Antoinette. The wool export controversy of 1782-8 made him a national political figure. He acted as chairman of the General Wool Meeting in London to oppose the wool growers' agitation, led by Sir Joseph Banks and Arthur Young, for the relaxation of the 1662 laws prohibiting wool export. Believing this would threaten the clothing trade, Anstie wrote three pamphlets, the most important of which was 'A general view of a bill for preventing the illicit exportation of British wool and live sheep' (1787); in this he drew attention to the prevalence of the smuggling of British wool into other countries and the necessity for stricter government protection of the clothiers' interests. Amid rancour between the manufacturers and the landed interest, he played a major part in collecting evidence, lobbying parliament, and preparing the details of a new stringent 'Wool Export Ban Bill', which was passed in 1788, thus illustrating the manufacturers' growing influence on economic policy. 
Because of his reputation as an authority on the cloth trade, Anstie was consulted, along with other leading manufacturers, by government ministers during the negotiations for commercial treaties with France and Ireland in 1784-6, and he was used as a publicist in the west country for Pitt's free-trade policy. Despite his opposition to wool export, he was an economic liberal, believing in 1786 that it was important to open new markets for British goods; and describing himself in 1789 as 'being from principle an Enemy to restrictions on Trade' (BL, Add. MS 38570, fol. 55). Anstie was also involved in the campaign to improve the quality of British wool, writing 'A letter to the secretary of the Bath Agricultural Society on the subject of a premium for the improvement of British wool' (1791). A man with strong scientific and mechanical interests, Anstie was also a member of the Bath and West of England Society for the Encouragement of Agriculture, the Arts, Manufactures and Commerce, serving on its manufactures and commerce committee and becoming a vice-president of the society in 1788. He was familiar with leading contemporary figures such as the first marquess of Lansdowne, Lord Hawkesbury, Richard Arkwright, and Thomas Coke of Norfolk. 
Unfortunately, the financial crisis of 1793 and the problems in Europe during the French Revolution and the revolutionary war seriously affected Anstie's business, and he was declared bankrupt in December 1793. His later years were spent in Southwark, from about 1808, and also in Bristol; he died in Wilson Street, Bristol, in October 1830. He was buried in St Paul's churchyard, Bristol, on 2 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 53983


Brackenbury, Hannah (1795-1873), philanthropist, was born at Leyland, Lancashire, on 17 November 1795, second of the three surviving children of Francis Brackenbury and his wife, Sarah Blackledge. Nothing else is known of her life until 1844, when she moved from Manchester to Hove, accompanied by her ailing brother, James Blackledge Brackenbury (1793-1844), with whom she had been living. He had made a fortune as a solicitor working for railway pioneers. He died at Hove on 31 October 1844, apparently a widower. When his only child, Harriette Mary Brackenbury (1833-1861), and his bachelor brother Ralph Brackenbury (1797-1864) died, the family money converged on Hannah Brackenbury. Publicly, she was the 'last in lineal descent of the ancient family of Brakenbury of Denton and Sellaby in the County of Durham'. Privately, she was more diffident. Robert Surtees (1779-1834) had worked out a pedigree for this family from 1222 to 1677, but he could not trace later descendants. Her father was probably the Francis Brackenbury born in 1769 who is mentioned by Surtees as a member of a yeomanly cadet branch which flourished near Richmond, Yorkshire, in the eighteenth century. 
In 1865 Hannah Brackenbury had an income of about $7000 per annum. She distributed about $100,000 in philanthropy between 1865 and 1872. William Henry Rooper (formerly incumbent of St Andrew's Church, Hove, which she attended) was an influential adviser, and so was Edward Lewis, J. B. Brackenbury's partner. Rooper was her agent in correspondence with Robert Scott, master of Balliol College, Oxford, which led (1865-72) to her endowment of eight Brackenbury scholarships at the college. She wanted to help students with ambitions in law or medicine, the professions of her brothers, and was persuaded that history and natural science were the appropriate foundations. Balliol was chosen because she believed that her medieval ancestors had been closely involved with the Balliol family. In fact, the only clear Balliol-Brackenbury connection is the Brackenbury tower of Barnard Castle, the main Balliol seat in England. This led Scott to joke that she might like to build a Brackenbury tower at Balliol. She took this bait, and eventually paid for most of the reconstruction of the Balliol Broad Street front (1867-8). She also established six Brackenbury scholarships at Manchester grammar school. 
Although in precarious health, Hannah Brackenbury was still a firmset, strong-looking woman, and in vigorous possession of her faculties; Rooper did not find her an easy person to direct or to keep to her intentions. From late 1868 she usually dropped the c in her surname, apparently thinking the spelling Brakenbury more authentic. In 1869 the Brakenbury mortuary chapel was attached to the church of St Nicolas, Portslade, at her expense, and she paid for new school buildings which were opened nearby in 1872. In her lifetime she was also a major benefactor to Owens College, Manchester (mostly for medicine), to Richmond School, Yorkshire (for Brackenbury scholarships), and to the Ardwick and Ancoats Dispensary in Manchester (for the first Ancoats Hospital building with beds). 
Hannah Brackenbury died at home (31 Queen Adelaide Crescent, Hove), of heart failure after a short illness, on 28 February 1873, and was interred on 7 March in the vault beneath the Brakenbury Chapel. Probate was granted based on a valuation under $160,000. Her lengthy will made provision for her housekeeper-companion Alice King; there were bequests for many friends and their children; the University of Durham received $9000 for professorships; but the greater part of her estate was distributed among numerous hospitals, asylums, and charities (mostly medical). 


@@@@@


doc= 53984


Bruce, Edward, earl of Carrick (c.1280-1318), soldier and claimant to the Irish throne, was the third, or possibly fourth, son of Robert VI de Brus (died 1304), son of the claimant for the Scottish throne, and Marjory, countess of Carrick. He had two older brothers, Robert (King Robert I), and Neil, and was probably older than Alexander and Thomas; he also had four sisters, the oldest, Isabel, married to Erik II, king of Norway. 
Nothing is known of Bruce's childhood save a hint that for a time he was fostered with an Irish family; in 1304, not yet knighted, he was in the household of Edward, prince of Wales, in Scotland. With the murder of John Comyn in February 1306 and seizure of the Scottish throne by his brother, Robert, he was drawn into the desperate war for the family's right. In the early phase he is depicted by Barbour as being with Robert, but also sent as messenger to Comyn, a task which other sources ascribe to his brothers Thomas and Alexander, never mentioned by Barbour. They, not Edward, were sent to Ireland to bring help, and died on the gibbet for it; his brother Neil, taken at Kildrummy, met the same end. Thus by February 1307 Edward was the sole surviving brother of the king, apparently sticking fairly closely to him during the fraught summer of 1307. A month after the Bruce victory of Inverurie, Edward Bruce led an invasion of Galloway on 21 June 1308 by forces from the western seaboard, suggesting that he had been there since autumn 1307. The campaign was outstandingly successful, with victories at the Cree (against overwhelming odds, according to Barbour) and the Dee; English forces and hostile Galloway kindreds were driven from the west and Buittle became the westernmost English stronghold from 1308 to 1312. As Edward retired north he took Rutherglen. 
Bruce appears at the St Andrews parliament of March 1309 as lord of Galloway, but is not prominent in the following years. Strikingly it was Thomas Randolph, not Bruce, whom the king appointed as royal lieutenant, and in 1312 Randolph became earl of Moray before Bruce was given the much smaller earldom of Carrick (1313) with no trace of the regalian powers conferred on Moray. Barbour ascribes to him the taking of Dundee, in early April 1312, but it was surrendered to the king in terms of a prior agreement during a siege, and Bruce's role was probably subordinate. 
In 1314, however, Carrick seems to have seized an initiative. The northern English counties had bought a truce to last until 29 September, but Edward II had promised to be in Scotland by 24 June. The king gave Moray the task of taking Edinburgh Castle, but during that siege, on 27 or 28 February 1314, Douglas took Roxburgh Castle by surprise; on receipt of the news the king sent Carrick across country to render its defences ineffective. Then, on 14 March, Edinburgh fell, and, according to the Lanercost chronicle, the Scots marched to set siege to Stirling, a siege which the life of Edward II ascribes to King Robert. Carrick cannot have been with them, for on 16 April with an army he invaded Cumberland, burning towns, killing people, and rustling cattle, all because the blackmail due had fallen into arrears. Barbour is emphatic, however, that the agreement for the surrender of Stirling if not relieved by 24 June, was made by Carrick and forcefully deprecated by the king. Barbour is wildly wrong in ascribing this agreement to the absurd date of Lent 1313; record evidence reveals that it was made about mid-May 1314, which would fit with Carrick's taking over the siege after his Cumbrian campaign. And it looks as though during all these months the king was in uncertain health. 
That illness, probably recurrent, had receded when Edward II approached Stirling. The king had placed Carrick in command of one of the three Scottish divisions, and when the battle of Bannockburn opened, it was by an assault of the English van upon Carrick's force. Evidently they held steady and wreaked carnage among the English cavalry, but no individual role is ascribed to Carrick then or in the aftermath, until, about 1 August, he led a large force which devastated Northumberland, took blackmail from Durham, and returned by the west, ravaging sometimes, taking money at others. 
Carrick had shown his want of judgement at Stirling, but the return of the king's daughter and her proposed marriage now raised the critical issue of the succession; at an assembly at Ayr on 27 April 1315, it was agreed that Carrick, as 'a vigorous man, most highly skilled in warfare for the defence of the freedom of the kingdom, and his heirs male' should succeed the king unless he had a son, but if he did and died, the regent for the child was to be not Carrick but Moray (Dickinson, Donaldson, and Milne, 1.149-50). In fact Carrick was already in communication with the kings and chiefs of Ulster, with whom it was later said he had been brought up, and the Ayr assembly must have agreed to back his decision to cross, and to drive the English from Ireland, with the aid of Ulster chiefs and recognition of him as king of Ireland. 
King Robert and Carrick had always been conscious of the Gaedhealtachd off Britain's western seaboard, seeking allies and troops there in difficult times. Now they committed themselves, with men and supplies from lowland and Gaelic Scotland, to establishing a permanent Bruce kingdom in Ireland, to reconciling the native Irish rulers sufficiently to replace their rivalries with a royal authority strong enough to conquer Dublin and other urban centres of English power. Neither Carrick nor Robert showed the slightest acquaintance with a strategy which might have achieved those ends. 
Carrick landed near Carrickfergus on 26 May 1315, with a force which included Moray. In early June (and not, as is often said, in May 1316) he was recognized as king of Ireland, and, after a foolish delay of about a month, he crossed into Airgialla. Outside Ulster he ravaged and burned, pressing south into Louth, then retreating to Coleraine and Connor, where he had an encouraging success in battle against the earl of Ulster and government forces. At the end of that year he again marched south, picking up Moray and reinforcements at Dundalk. Avoiding Dublin he marched through Wicklow, almost into Carlow, and defeated an incompetently led government force at Arscoll (or Skerries) before returning to Ulster in February 1316. About the end of August 1316 he at least secured the surrender of Carrickfergus Castle, probably with King Robert's help, and they both returned to an assembly at Cupar, Fife, on 16 September 1316, where Edward and the Scottish magnates put their seals to an unusual royal charter confirming Moray's possessions; relations between Moray and Carrick seem to have been fraught. 
Late in 1316 Edward was back in Ireland, and, confident of the control of the Irish Sea by his privateers, sent a letter which almost defies belief to 'all those [in Wales] desiring freedom'. The Welsh and the Scots, 'who proceed from one root of origin or kinship and country in the beginning', have suffered from the oppression of the English. If it is the will of the Welsh, he will carry forward their joint struggle if they will commit to him the prosecution of their cause and the chief lordship which their prince formerly exercised ('Regesta regum Scottorum', 5, no. 571). About the same time the native Irish of Ulster were preparing their Remonstrance against English misdeeds to Pope John XXII, a document where Edward is invoked as king only at the very end and because he will protect the liberties of the Irish church; he had little support in his 'kingdom' and none in Wales. 
None the less, in January 1317 King Robert and Moray, committed to the whole enterprise, crossed to Ireland, and with Edward launched an assault on the south. Dublin was in a panic as they approached, but perhaps because the Scots lacked supplies in what were lean years, they made no attempt to seize or besiege it, and the force went on to ravage south and west as far as Limerick and Tipperary, returning north without achieving anything decisive. From the return of Robert and Moray to Scotland in May 1317 a silence falls on Carrick's activities until, in October 1318, probably buoyed by the promise of reinforcements from Scotland, he marched again. Outside Dundalk, at Faughart, a government force under John Bermingham blocked his way. Urged to await reinforcements under King Robert which had just arrived at Carrickfergus, he refused, and without support from the native Irish, most of whom were heartily sick of him, attacked the stronger enemy on 14 October 1318. He was killed, his body decapitated, and the head taken to Edward II by Bermingham. King Robert went home to sort out the succession yet again. There is much colourful detail about the Irish war, but a confusion of the first two campaigns, in Barbour's poem; it is possible that behind this there lies a minstrel's account of Edward Bruce, written in the last year of his life. 
The explanation of Barbour for the sorry tale of his end was that Edward found Scotland too small for himself and his brother; Fordun is blunter, claiming that Edward asked Robert for half the Scottish kingdom, and when refused determined to win Ireland. Other sources make much the same comment, bearing out Barbour's judgement that Edward was brave but completely lacking in 'mesur', that moderation which we would call common sense. Even his marital life was a mess. He seems to have been affianced to Isabel, daughter of John, earl of Atholl (executed 1306), probably to mark the earl's commitment to the Bruces in the early summer of 1306; they had a son, Alexander, and they may even have married, as Barbour's confused account claims. If so, the marriage was annulled, for he married another Isabel, daughter of William, earl of Ross. In 1306 William had handed over to the English Elizabeth, queen of Robert I, and may have been responsible for their taking the earl of Atholl. According to the papal dispensation of 1317, the marriage of Edward was arranged to end Ross's feud with the Bruces, and therefore can be dated to the earl's submission to King Robert in October 1308. There were no surviving children. The Atholls bore a lasting grudge against Edward, wherefore Isabel's brother, Earl David, deserted the Bruce cause at a critical moment, the battle of Bannockburn. 
Robert I conferred the earldom of Carrick on his own son and heir, David, a practice which the Stewarts later revived, and which continues today. In 1326 or 1327 Isabel of Atholl and her son, Alexander Bruce, earl of Carrick (d. 1333), received grant of lands in Dumfriesshire and later the king gave Alexander, his 'nephew', land in Angus and Wigtownshire. His role, if any, at the end of Robert's reign is obscure, and he is not named as participating in the Weardale campaign of 1327, nor is he a witness to royal charters. On the outbreak of war in 1332, Alexander Bruce seems to have avoided serving in the Guardian's army at Dupplin, but when the newly crowned king, Edward (Balliol), came south to spend Christmas at Annan, Bruce joined him. The party was interrupted by a patriotic assault which killed Henry Balliol, and from which Bruce escaped only because he was recognized by the earl of Moray. By the time Edward III invaded and set siege to Berwick in the summer of 1333, Bruce had been bribed back to loyalty to David II by the conferment of the earldom of Carrick; he was in the Scottish army which, seeking to relieve the town, was thoroughly defeated at Halidon Hill on 19 July 1333. Carrick was one of five earls killed. He had married Eleanor, daughter of Sir Archibald Douglas ('Tyneman') and sister of William, first earl of Douglas, but they had no surviving children. She remarried several times and died after 1376. 


@@@@@


doc= 53985


Momma, Jacob (d. 1679), copper and brass manufacturer, was born in Stolberg, in the Rhineland of Germany, the son of Leonard and Barbara Momma, members of a group of protestant brass manufacturers. Having previously been settled in Aachen, religious persecution had persuaded them to move to the city outskirts at Stolberg. Several gravestones still commemorate the Mommas and other brassworking families in the town's protestant graveyard. 
One branch of the family established brass and copper manufacture under royal patronage in Sweden during the seventeenth century. Jacob Momma, however, moved to England where, with German partners Daniel Demetrius and Peter Hoet, he leased Esher Mill in Surrey in 1649. The partners adopted traditional European brassmaking methods, using crushed calamine -- the zinc carbonate ore, which they obtained from Mendip in Somerset -- alloyed with copper, imported from Sweden in the absence of English supplies. Water-powered hammers were employed to flatten brass ingots to produce sheets of the metal and also to form hollowware vessels; and wire was also drawn by water-power. 
Momma petitioned unsuccessfully to parliament in 1656 for relief against high duties imposed on imported Swedish copper. A few months later he was brought before the court of the Society of Mineral and Battery Works, the monopoly established in the reign of Elizabeth I, for failing to pay charges for leasing their brass manufacturing rights. Although in defence he pleaded ignorance of this moribund organization, his payments remained outstanding for some years. At some point Momma married and had at least two sons. 
Momma was naturalized by 1660 when he purchased the Esher premises outright. A year later he was appointed as constable and served as a juror in 1663, having thus attained the respect of his local community. At this time he and his partners were again petitioning parliament for assistance for the industry, claiming that their manufacturing concerns were almost lost and that their fires were going out. Separately, he pleaded for higher tariffs against imported brass wire. Protection was sought from the price manipulation of exports controlled by powerful Dutch merchants whose practices in England varied from the dumping of cheap foreign brass to the withholding of copper supplies. Momma succeeded in obtaining a degree of support from the Society of Mineral and Battery Works, but neither petition succeeded. 
In an attempt to obtain copper at more economic prices, Momma was briefly involved from 1665 in mining copper at Ecton Hill, Staffordshire (later a hugely successful and profitable mine). There he is credited with the introduction of gunpowder to English mining technology and also of a new kind of bellows in smelting his ore at the nearby Ellastone Mill. However, the whole project, managed by his son Jacob, was abandoned at a loss of $300 a few years later when it was found to be unprofitable. The younger Jacob returned to Esher to manage the copper mills, where brass production and manufacture was still surviving in spite of economic pressures. During the 1660s the Esher premises were taxed on twenty hearths, believed to have been related to the brass-making processes. The Momma family appears to have continued this business until the 1670s when two brassworks were demolished. Jacob senior claimed that he had lost $6000 in attempting to make the works pay. 
Jacob Momma died in 1679, probably at Esher, and two copper mills at Esher involving both sons, Jacob and William, survived only briefly after their father's death. A failed scheme for producing brass farthings and a business exporting Mendip calamine were also revealed in papers of a dispute in 1686 over family property. In the early 1690s a new company led by William Dockwra, benefiting from political change and technical innovation, succeeded in reviving the Esher brass and copper works of Jacob Momma. 


@@@@@


doc= 53986


Carmichael, Alexander (1832-1912), folklorist, was born on 1 December 1832 and baptized on 8 December on the island of Lismore, in western Argyll; his parents were Hugh Carmichael and his wife, Betty, 'nee' MacColl. The Carmichaels were a family of long standing in Lismore, and an earlier Bishop Carmichael, known as An t-Easbaig Ban ('the fair-haired bishop'), is referred to as a remote relative. Carmichael entered the civil service, and worked in the customs and excise division, with periods of service in Greenock, Dublin, Islay, Cornwall, Skye, Uist, Oban, Uist again, and finally Edinburgh. 
Carmichael seems to have been deeply interested in collecting Gaelic lore from his early years, and he continued to make collecting expeditions well into his seventies. Several of his main working locations provided excellent opportunities for his collecting, and he made expeditions to other Gaelic areas (such as Lewis and Sutherland). He married Mary Frances MacBean ('b'. 1841)) on 13 January 1868, and they lived on South Uist in the outer isles until 1882, when they moved to Edinburgh. Mary Carmichael was greatly supportive of her husband's work, and contributed to the artistic presentation of his main work, 'Carmina Gadelica'. She was not a Gaelic speaker but their children were. 
During the family's Edinburgh years the Carmichael home was regarded as a centre of Gaelic-related activity, and Carmichael was widely admired by younger contemporaries such as the Revd Donald Lamont and the Revd Kenneth MacLeod, both well known for their Gaelic literary work. Part of MacLeod's vivid portrait of Carmichael may be quoted: 'Year in year out, for nearly sixty years, Dr Carmichael was on pilgrimage throughout Gaeldom. To many of us he seemed, both in temperament and in activity, as one of the Iona brethren re-born in the nineteenth century. His very appearance was suggestive of Iona: the stately and venerable figure undoubtedly was, while the Scots bonnet might easily be mistaken for a biretta, the shepherd's crook for a pastoral staff, and the long dark cloak half-concealing the kilt, for a monk's habit. ('Celtic Review', October 1912)' Carmichael's daughter Elizabeth Catherine (Ella) [Elizabeth Catherine Watson (1870-1928)] was born on 9 August 1870 and played an important part in the Edinburgh Gaelic world, helping to found Gaelic societies and a Gaelic choir. Donald Lamont recalls her as a very attractive fellow student in the 1890s, and she acted as editor of the 'Celtic Review' from 1904 to 1916. In 1906 she married William John Watson, who became professor of Celtic at Edinburgh University; their son, James Carmichael Watson, succeeded his father in 1938, but was killed in 1942 during the Second World War. Ella herself died on 30 November 1928. The Carmichael dynasty in Edinburgh was a distinguished one, but all too brief. 
It is notable that Alexander Carmichael contributed at an early stage to the collections of J. F. Campbell of Islay, including his 'Popular Tales of the West Highlands' (1860-62) and his collection of heroic and Ossianic balladry, 'Leabhar na Feinne' (1872). He supplied Gaelic proverbs for Sheriff Nicolson's collection (1881) and contributed several papers to the 'Transactions of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland' (with drawings by Mary Carmichael). For W. F. Skene's 'Celtic Scotland' he wrote a chapter on old highland land customs, and was later asked to write a more elaborate paper for the crofter royal commission report. He contributed frequently to periodicals and papers such as 'An Gaidheal', 'The Highlander', the 'Celtic Review', and the 'Inverness Courier'. Alexander Carmichael died at his home, 15 Barnton Terrace, Edinburgh, on 6 June 1912, and was buried on Lismore. 
Carmichael's overwhelming achievement was the collection of material which resulted in the volumes of 'Carmina Gadelica'. The central core of this work is an extensive collection of runes, prayers, invocations, work songs, and so on, which touch on virtually all aspects of Gaelic communal and private life. Some aspects of that life were, of course, affected, undermined, or lost before Carmichael's time, but his patient and intimate searches often brought him into contact with some of the last repositories of ancient tradition, especially in the outer isles. This body of lore had many different aspects and sources. Some of it was securely embedded in Christian belief, often related to the early Celtic church and its saints; other items have a pagan resonance, and many grew out of the natural habitat, with its flowers, herbs, animals, weather, and seasonal changes. A short summary of the categories of the collection gives some idea of its range and flavour: prayers; seasonal hymns; addresses to the saints; blessings for household or other tasks, such as reaping, milking, and herding; incantations or charms to cure ailments such as toothache, jaundice, and indigestion; prayers to the sun and moon; blessings on stock; and waulking songs. 
Only a very small number of these verses have ascribed authors, but it is clear from internal evidence that they originated in different parts of Gaelic Scotland, and were of both oral and literary origin. Some were presumably composed by clerics, and many by ordinary members of the community. A number of the hymns are Gaelic versions of well-known Catholic hymns. It is likely that some of the pieces had their origins in the middle ages and probably earlier. The highest rate of survival seems to have been in Catholic communities which in Carmichael's day still retained an undiluted Gaelic ethos. 
The first two volumes of 'Carmina Gadelica' appeared in 1900, with translations and annotations by Alexander Carmichael. They have a high incidence of unusual words and expressions, and some of the translations are guesswork. There is also some suspicion that the Gaelic texts were over-edited by Carmichael, and supplemented where there were gaps. These two volumes were reissued in 1928, with some light editing by Ella Carmichael, and volumes 3 and 4 appeared in 1940-41, edited by J. C. Watson, the collector's grandson. Volume 5, consisting of songs rather than runes and prayers, appeared in 1954 and was edited by Angus Matheson, who also edited volume 6 (1971), consisting mainly of glossaries and indexes. In 1992 a volume was published that consisted of the translations only, with an informative preface by John Macinnes. In the later part of the twentieth century the translated versions developed a cult following. 
Soon after the publication of the first two volumes suspicions arose that Carmichael, evidently an admirer of James MacPherson's Ossianic work, was prone to polishing and perhaps romanticizing some of the 'Carmina'. In 1976 Hamish Robertson published 'Studies in Carmichael's 'Carmina Gadelica'' in 'Scottish Gaelic Studies', volume 12. This exposes some of Carmichael's dubious practices, and suggests that Watson was less rigorous than might have been expected in dealing with this problem. John L. Campbell, in an article in the same journal (vol. 13, 1978), rebuts some of Robertson's criticism, and John Macinnes gives his assessment in his preface to the 1992 edition. In sum, there appears to have been interference with both Gaelic texts and translations, but this does not seem to undermine crucially the wide-ranging and fascinating collection of verse lore which Carmichael rescued in the final decades of its secure existence. 


@@@@@


doc= 53987


MacAlpine, Neil (1786-1867), lexicographer, was born in Kilchoman, island of Islay, the son of Dugald McAlpine, a house carpenter, and his wife, Betsy, 'nee' McAlpine. After attending university and theological college (probably in Edinburgh) he spent much of his life as a parochial schoolmaster at Kilmeny in Islay, having failed to secure a charge either before or after the Disruption of 1843. During the famine of 1846 he arranged for a boatload of food to be brought to Islay, and thereby incurred the wrath of the landlord, John Ramsay; as a consequence he lost his teaching post, and had to survive on a salary of $5 a year as registrar of his parish, and latterly on parochial benefit. MacAlpine died, unmarried, on 14 December 1867 at Kilmeny. John F. Campbell, the Islay folklore collector, described him in 1860 as 'a clever eccentric man' (Mackechnie, 1.53). 
MacAlpine is remembered for his Gaelic-English dictionary, entitled 'The Argyleshire Pronouncing Gaelic Dictionary', which was first published in Edinburgh in 1832 and was still in print in the 1970s. It was intended for use in schools (the Gaelic schools network, begun in 1811, had expanded greatly by the middle years of the century). It is an intelligent culling of existing works, such as Armstrong's 1825 dictionary and the 'Highland Society Dictionary' (1828), with new input especially from Islay usage, but also from other sources, notably from Allan Ross, a Lewis colleague who worked for a time in Islay. MacAlpine quotes Skye, Lochaber, Harris, and Perthshire usages, and specific printed sources, gives imitated pronunciations throughout in a fairly consistent way, and provides a good range of examples of usage. An English-Gaelic section was compiled about 1845 by John Mackenzie, who was unduly critical of MacAlpine, but who justifiably remarks that MacAlpine's work 'has the merit of being the first to present a Dictionary divested of antiquated Irishisms' (preface to 'Dictionary', 1934 edn, x). 


@@@@@


doc= 53988


Maclean, John (c.1680-1756), Gaelic poet and Church of Scotland minister, was the son of Ewen Maclean, laird of Treshnish, a group of Hebridean isles 51/2 miles south-east of Coll and 3 miles west of the entrance of Loch Tuadh on the Isle of Mull. The Treshnish Macleans formed the second branch of the family of the Macleans of Ardgour. Sinclair states that Ewen Maclean had two natural sons named John and Lachlan (Sinclair, 'Clan Gillean', 330-35). He married Margaret, daughter of Neil Maclean of Drimnacross on Coll, and they had two sons, Hector and a second boy named John. The poet John is said by Sinclair to have been Ewen's eldest son (ibid. and Sinclair, 'The Maclean Bards', 221-34). John Patterson Maclean, however, refers to him as Ewen's third son (J. P. Maclean, 275-8). Whatever their order of birth, it was the other John who succeeded Ewen as the last Maclean of Treshnish. Their brother Hector Maclean became the minister of Coll. 
Maclean married Isabella, daughter of Charles Neil Bane Maclean, and had one son and three daughters. On 25 February 1702 he was licensed to preach and on 13 September 1702 was inducted to the pastoral charge of Kilninian and Kilmore on Mull. His predecessor, John Beaton, had become a prey to a feud between the Macleans of Duart and the Campbells of Ardnamurchan, and as a result was forced out of his charge. Beaton was the learned last member of the famous Mull medical family and had recorded the contents of the family's manuscript library. In Coleraine, in the north of Ireland, probably in February 1700, Beaton met Edward Lhuyd, the renowned Welsh polymath and keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, who, backed by subscribers, was making a grand tour of Celtic countries in search of archaeological, botanical, historical, and linguistic material, including Gaelic dialects. 
Lhuyd later compiled a list of twelve questions, the answers to which would assist him with his researches. The questions related, 'inter alia', to information about Gaelic grammar, dictionaries, or vocabulary; fashions and customs of the highlanders; old coins, utensils, or arms; burrows or artificial mounds; old highland poets, historians, and physicians; Gaelic Christian names, and so on. On 13 April 1701 they were sent to John Maclean by the Revd Robert Wodrow, an ecclesiastical historian, with the request that he put them to Beaton, whom Wodrow had unsuccessfully tried to contact directly. Maclean succeeded in meeting Beaton and obtained informative responses to nine of the questions. Maclean's reply to Wodrow of 20 April 1702, written at Inveraray, was printed in 'Analecta Scotica: collections illustrative of the civil, ecclesiastical and literary history of Scotland' (1st ser., 1834, 121-5) and is reproduced in 'Edward Lhuyd in the Scottish Highlands, 1699-1700' by J. L. Campbell and Derick Thomson (1963, 25-36). 
In 1704 Edward Lhuyd published his 'Archaeologia Britannica', containing a Gaelic-English vocabulary. In 1707 a second edition was issued containing complimentary poetical addresses from highland ministers, including one from John Maclean. A translation of this poem from the original Gaelic is contained in 'The Literature of the Highlanders' by Nigel Macneill (2nd edn, 1929, 271-2). Very few of Maclean's poems in Gaelic survive. Four, including his tribute to Lhuyd and an elegy for his wife, Isabella, appear in the Revd A. Maclean Sinclair's book 'The Gaelic Bards: from 1715 to 1765', and these four together with another, about the marriage of his daughter Anna, are printed in the first part of the same author's volumes 'Na baird leathanach'. 
As a minister Maclean was testified by the presbytery of Mull to be a man of great zeal for the interest of religion and the dignity of the ministerial character. He died on 12 March 1756 in the fifty-fourth year of his ministry, and was buried beside his father in Kilninian. He was succeeded as minister of Kilninian and Kilmore by his only son, Alexander. 


@@@@@


doc= 53989


Smith, John (1848-1880), poet, was born in Iarsiadar, Uig, on the island of Lewis, the son of Janet (or Joan) MacDonald, a general servant from Bernera. He was recognized as the son of Peter Smith, a sheep farmer; a gift for composing poetry ran in this family. John spent five years at the University of Edinburgh, anticipating a career in medicine, but tuberculosis cut short his university career and brought his life to an early close. About 1874 he returned to Uig, where he died in Crulivig on 27 December 1880. 
Most of Smith's surviving poetry seems to have been composed in the last seven years of his life. It has acquired a strong historical relevance because of contemporary events in Uig and the adjoining island of Bernera, from which John's mother came. The Bernera riot took place in 1874, when the island of Lewis was owned by Sir James Matheson and his chamberlain was Donald Munro. In a series of cynical manoeuvres, Munro gradually excluded the people of Uig and Bernera from their grazing and shieling rights on the border between Lewis and Harris, and subsequently also from the vicinity of Iarsiadar, where they had lately built a 7 mile stone dyke to mark off their grazing land from the deer forest. They were given smaller and poorer lands in Bernera at a similar rent and with no compensation. This led to an incursion on Stornoway of some 150 men, led by a piper; when Sir James Matheson was told what Munro had done -- apparently without his knowledge or approval -- the decision was reversed and Munro was taken to court and dismissed. 
Smith's poetry deals powerfully and poignantly with these events, and one poem in particular, 'Spiorad a' Charthannais' ('The spirit of kindliness') can be regarded as the classic condemnation of landlords who inspired or condoned tyranny exercised over smallholders in the highlands. This situation was often associated with the development and protection of sporting estates, and resulted regularly in the clearance of tenants from the land. Practices of this kind had been going on for a hundred years, but the Bernera riot and risings in Skye in the following decade led eventually to the setting up of the Crofters' Commission, and improved conditions of tenancy for crofters and smallholders. The poetry of Mary Macpherson of Skye is often also cited as an important factor in these developments, but Smith's contribution was earlier and sharper. Of the 'clearers' he says (in translation from his Gaelic original): '
They handed over to the snipe 

the land of happy folk, 

they dealt without humanity 

with people who were kind. 

Because they might not drown them 

they dispersed them overseas; 

a thralldom worse than Babylon's 

was the plight that they were in. 

' He has the worm reflecting on the banquet it enjoys from the dead landlords and their bailiffs: '
The wriggling worm will praise you then 

for your flesh's enticing taste, 

when it finds you placed before it 

on its table, silent now, 

saying 'This one's juicy flesh 

is good for earthy worms, 

since he made many hundreds thin 

to feed himself for me.' 

' Smith also composed humorous and satirical verse, a wry commentary on pharisaical Christians, a poem on Bannockburn, and a mock-Ossianic ballad. The survival, and appearance in print, of Smith's surviving work is largely owed to John N. MacLeod, who published a collection of poetry from Lewis in 1916, and gave a detailed introduction, from which the above summary of events is derived. 


@@@@@


doc= 53990


Watson, William John Ross (1865-1948), Gaelic scholar, was born in the parish of Kilmuir-Easter, in Ross-shire, on 17 February 1865, the son of Hugh Watson, blacksmith, and his wife, Maria Ross; he was a native speaker of the Gaelic of that area. He graduated in classics at Aberdeen University in 1886, and repeated the first class he had achieved there at Merton College, Oxford, in 1889 and 1891. He was rector of Inverness Royal Academy from 1894 to 1909, and head of the Royal High School in Edinburgh from 1909 to 1914, when he was appointed to the chair of Celtic in the University of Edinburgh. At Oxford he had attended the classes of Sir John Rhys, and during his Inverness years he was friendly with Alexander MacBain. These influences helped to focus his scholarly gifts on Celtic, and especially Scottish Gaelic, studies. In 1904 he published 'The Place-Names of Ross and Cromarty', and place-name study remained an abiding preoccupation. In 1916 he delivered the Rhind lectures on archaeology, and from these there ultimately came his most extensive and ambitious book, 'The History of the Celtic Place-Names of Scotland' (1926). The study of place names in Scotland had never been organized under the detailed county-by-county system used in England, and Watson had to break new ground in many different ways: as collector, organizer, and philologist. He was well aware of the tentative nature of some of his conclusions, especially on names of Welsh, Pictish, and Norse origin, and he may have relied overmuch at first on MacBain's etymological findings. Some of the detail in his explanations of names has been challenged, but his book is still widely consulted, and Watson deserves great credit and lasting recognition for this monumental achievement. 
In the course of his own schooling, and especially during his rectorship at Inverness, Watson must have been acutely aware of the inadequate range of textbooks for Gaelic students, and he made two important contributions in this area, publishing an anthology of Gaelic prose from the twelfth century to the twentieth in 'Rosg Gaidhlig' (1915) and of Gaelic verse from the sixteenth century to 'c'.1900 in 'Bardachd Ghaidhlig' (1918). These anthologies were long used in school and university teaching, and helped to create more rigorous editorial procedures. 
Watson now expanded his literary studies very purposefully, studying the surviving body of classical Gaelic verse dating from medieval and early modern times. He published editions of individual poems and discussions of this genre as practised in Scotland, in 1917, 1922, and 1931, and in 1937 there appeared his major contribution to such researches, 'Scottish Verse from the Book of the Dean of Lismore'. Here he presented the first scrupulously edited text of many poems from this sixteenth-century manuscript, which includes a large range of classical verse and heroic balladry. It was a daunting task, and one which could not be definitively completed by any one individual, but there were few advances on his work in the succeeding half-century. Appropriately, this was the first volume in the series published by the Scottish Gaelic Texts Society, a society which owed its establishment largely to Watson. He had published regularly in the 'Celtic Review' and also in the 'Transactions of the Gaelic Society of Inverness', and he edited the 'Transactions' for many years. In 1913 and 1915 he published articles in the 'Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland' on circular forts in Lorn and Perthshire. Hugh Watson, a son of his first marriage and a prominent lawyer in Edinburgh, continued the family connection with the Scottish Gaelic Texts Society, acting as secretary into the 1960s. 
Watson retired from the chair of Celtic in 1938 after a distinguished career which established new parameters in several fields of Celtic study. After the death of his first wife, he married, in 1906, Elizabeth Catherine (Ella) Carmichael, daughter of Alexander Carmichael. Their only son, James Carmichael Watson, succeeded his father in the chair of Celtic in 1938, and edited two volumes of Alexander Carmichael's 'Carmina Gadelica' before losing his life in 1942 during World War Two. Watson died in Edinburgh on 9 March 1948, and was still a positive influence on Gaelic scholarship at the end of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 53994


William [i] Fairbank (c.1688-1759), surveyor and schoolmaster, born in Sheffield about 1688. It was quite common to practise these two professions as both demanded similar skills, although once a surveyor became well established and busy it could prove difficult to remain in the field, surveying for days at a stretch, without jeopardizing the running of a school. The family were Quakers from about the end of the seventeenth century. William married Emma (died 1756), widow of William Broadhead of Sheffield and daughter of John Clark of Swinton, near Rotherham, on 9 December 1725 at the Friends' meeting-house in Sheffield; they had three sons and two daughters. He was a committed Quaker, being appointed representative at a meeting of Friends in 1733 and that year having his goods distrained for non-payment of tithes. He left maps and plans dated 1737 to 1750, but the surviving maps are a tiny proportion of the many plans his daybooks show him to have drawn. He also kept a school in Sheffield, possibly at White House, Bramall Lane, at least from 1753 until his death, which occurred at a roadside inn outside Sheffield on 5 December 1759 as a result of a riding accident the previous day; he was buried in the Quaker burial-ground in Sheffield. His youngest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 53996


Josiah Fairbank (1777-1844), both of whom had been helping their father in the business, formed a partnership after his death. In 1808 they published a revised map of Sheffield, then growing rapidly. William [iii] was never very active in the family firm and long before he died, unmarried, at Sheffield on 15 July 1846 his brother Josiah took sole control and moved the business to East Parade, Sheffield, from where he valued the whole of Sheffield and Halifax for rating purposes, built roads, and constructed reservoirs, as well as continuing with private estate mapping. He married Sarah Carbutt (1783-1853) of Leeds and they had seven sons and four daughters. Josiah left the Society of Friends shortly before his death on 23 April 1844 in Sheffield. He was buried in Sheffield general cemetery. Three of his sons became surveyors in the business and of these 


@@@@@


doc= 53997


William Fairbank Fairbank (1805-1848) became his father's partner. He married Frances Royston Fisher. He inherited much parliamentary work from his father -- some road projects, but mainly railway schemes. The pressure of work in the railway mania and its subsequent collapse in 1844-5 led to his suffering a stroke in 1846 after which he worked only from his office, not in the field, and on 29 May 1848 he had a second, fatal, stroke while in his garden at South Street, Sheffield. He was buried at Ecclesall; he was survived by his wife. 
The death of William Fairbank Fairbank brought the Sheffield surveying family to a close, although his brothers Josiah Forster Fairbank (died 1899) -- who had been in the family firm until the railway collapse of the 1840s -- and John Tertius Fairbank, and other descendants, continued surveying outside Sheffield. The several thousand maps, plans, drawings, and elevations in the Fairbank collection are particularly valuable for those involved in legal disputes over rights of way and boundaries, and for students of the geography and history of Sheffield and the surrounding area, since the large-scale plans and their careful annotations provide evidence of local landownership and landholding over a very considerable period. The collection includes the first known maps of many localities and the field and account books also shed light on the daily routine and livelihood of the family as surveyors, schoolmasters, and building contractors. 


@@@@@


doc= 53998


Gillies, William (1884-1958), political organizer, was born on 5 December 1884 at 79 Grove Street, Glasgow, the fourth of six children of James Gillies ('b'. 1839), journeyman marble cutter, and his wife, Agnes Wilson (1852-1943). He received elementary education and started his political career with the Glasgow Fabians. He was briefly secretary to this group in 1910, organizing a meeting at which one of the speakers was the leading Fabian Sidney Webb. 
Gillies joined the Labour Party research staff in 1912. His position gave him exemption from service in the First World War, and he rose to the secretaryship of the information bureau. On the creation of an international department in January 1922, he was appointed its head, at a salary of $525 p.a., to serve both the Labour Party and, until 1925, the Trades Union Congress. He was also a member of the Labour Party international and imperial advisory committees, both of which reported to the international department. Collating information from these sources, and from the Labour and Socialist International, he reported directly to the national executive committee of the Labour Party. His expertise was reflected in his membership of the committee of the Royal Institute of International Affairs, Chatham House. 
The successful re-formation of the Second International was the basis for Gillies's powerful position in the Labour Party. When in the research department, he helped with arrangements for convening the rump of the International, which had collapsed during the First World War. He was present with Arthur Henderson at the conference in Hamburg in May 1923, which was the occasion for the International's re-formation and its acquisition of the title Labour and Socialist International. The British Labour Party provided its secretariat and formed its administrative committee, to which Gillies was co-opted. When the Labour and Socialist International moved to Switzerland in 1925, he became the most regular British delegate, and was often the only one. He was appointed in 1929 to the International's executive committee and in 1930 to its bureau, the major decision-making forum. He consolidated his position at the International through alliance with its 'Scandinavian', anti-communist wing and became a leading opponent of collaboration with the Third, Communist, International, which was the policy of the 'Latin' wing. Gillies was strongly in favour of armed resistance to fascism, while central European affiliates preferred neutrality. A member of the International Socialist Committee for Labour Palestine, he propounded the British Labour Party's pro-Zionist position in opposition to the secretary of the International, Friedrich Adler. Gillies's championship of these various causes meant that he was viewed as obstructive, but he never departed from British Labour Party policy. 
Gillies had been a founder member of the 1917 Club formed to 'Hail the Russian Revolution', but his experience of Third International activities in Europe fostered a virulent anti-communism. He blamed German communists for weakening German social democracy and coined the term 'communazis' to express their culpability. Communist international ancillary, or 'front', organizations, purporting to have political neutrality, were his especial 'betes noires', and he built a huge collection of information on such bodies. This collection resulted in the publication in 1933 of 'The Communist Solar System'; its authorship is open to doubt, but it may be judged a team effort to which Gillies substantially contributed. His work here led him to identify the organizations which he suggested, often successfully, for proscription by the Labour Party at its annual conference. 
In the 1930s Gillies's work with refugees increased. He was helpful in making cases for immigration and in arranging payment for articles in labour movement periodicals. His single most dramatic act was to help with the evacuation of refugees from Prague in March 1939, when the German invasion was under way. As a member of the Workers' Travel Association, whose activities included running cruise ships, plus excursion trains in Czechoslovakia, he was in a position to make an ambitious programme of refugee evacuation. 
As well as to 'The Communist Solar System', Gillies contributed to Labour Party publications on international affairs and produced 'International Service', a brief account of Labour and Socialist International activities, and 'Aids for Study in International Relations', a series of annotated bibliographies for local Labour parties. 
The final stages of Gillies's career were unhappy. His memoranda about the future of Germany, expressing scepticism about the possibility of rebuilding social democracy there, offended German Social Democrats in exile and, with his judgement rendered suspect, he took early retirement in 1944. His ill temper was as legendary as his expertise. Denis Healey, who succeeded him as international secretary, remembered him as 'a cantankerous Scot who distrusted foreigners and hated all Germans' (D. Healey, 'The Time of my Life', 1990, 57). However, Gillies's assistant, Christine Howie, worked for him from 1922 until her retirement. Gillies joined the Transport House (Labour Party and Trades Union Congress headquarters) social club and was admired by the leader of the Transport and General Workers' Union (and later Foreign Secretary) Ernest Bevin. 
Gillies remained unmarried; he was close to his younger sister Agnes, and lived with his mother. He enjoyed walking tours and claimed to drink the juice of three oranges daily. Photographs show him as a short man; in 1918 Beatrice Webb referred to him as 'that little dwarf Gillies' and summarized his character as 'an honest, oversensitive and obstinate minded but well informed little Glaswegian Fabian' (N. Mackenzie and J. Mackenzie, eds., 'The Diary of Beatrice Webb', 1983, 326). Gillies died on 26 January 1958, from pneumonia, influenza, and generalized atheroma, at his home, 113 Bourne Way, Beckenham, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 53999


Watts, Charles Albert (1858-1946), freethought editor and publisher, was born at 72 Hill Street, Walworth, London, on 27 May 1858, the eldest son of Charles Watts (1836-1906), secularist and journalist, and his first wife, Mary Ann Tomkins (1836-1870). He was educated at national schools and night school, and at the age of twelve followed his father into the freethought movement. In 1870 he was apprenticed to Austin Holyoake (1826-1874), who ran a printing and publishing business in Johnson's Court, Fleet Street. He continued there when his father took over the business on Holyoake's death, and took it over himself when his father went to North America in 1882; the arrangement was made permanent when his father settled in Canada in 1884. He established Watts & Co. as the leading freethought publisher in Britain, and also initiated new departures in periodicals and organizations. At first he preferred the rubric of agnosticism, under the influence of Herbert Spencer and T. H. Huxley, but he later adopted that of rationalism, on the advice of F. J. Gould (1855-1938). 
In 1884 Watts launched the 'Agnostic Annual', which continued as the 'RPA Annual' and later as the 'Rationalist Annual', and edited it until 1943. At the beginning of 1885 he launched a monthly paper, 'The Agnostic', which lasted only until the end of the year; but in November 1885 he launched another monthly paper, 'Watts's Literary Guide', which continued as the plain 'Literary Guide', and edited it until 1946 (possibly a record). 
Watts took his father's part in the quarrel with Charles Bradlaugh in the National Secular Society in 1877, and joined him in the rival British Secular Union in 1878. When this collapsed on his father's departure, he worked to form a new freethought organization. In 1885 he called for an agnostic press fund and in 1889 for a propagandist press fund. In 1890 he founded the Propagandist Press Committee, which in 1893 was renamed the Rationalist Press Committee and in 1899 incorporated as the Rationalist Press Association Limited (RPA), with the veteran G. J. Holyoake as chairman. He served as managing director until 1930 and as vice-chairman until his death, and was largely responsible for making it the main sponsor of freethought publications in English. 
Unlike his father and most other freethought leaders Watts was a poor speaker and writer (all the publications listed under his name in the British Library catalogue were written by his father). He concentrated instead on editing and publishing, and on laying personal and financial foundations for such work. He secured the endorsement of the RPA by distinguished sympathizers as honorary associates and the involvement of wealthy supporters as financial benefactors. The main benefactors were George Anderson, Henry Cooke, Lady Florence Dixie, Sydney Gimson, Clair Grece, Lord Hobhouse, Herbert Leon, T. Pepperell, marquess of Queensberry, and Horace Seal. The honorary associates included William Archer, A. W. Benn, Arnold Bennett, Georg Brandes, J. B. Bury, Georges Clemenceau, Patrick Geddes, J. B. S. Haldane, J. A. Hobson, Julian Huxley, Leonard Huxley, Ray Lankester, H. J. Laski, Cesare Lombroso, Bronislaw Malinowski, Hiram Maxim, John Morley, Bertrand Russell, Leslie Stephen, G. M. Trevelyan, Graham Wallas, H. G. Wells, and Emile Zola. The membership of the RPA rose steadily during the rest of his life, and he launched several successful series of cheap publications which sold millions of copies. He was also a strong though silent supporter of the ethical movement. 
In 1930 Watts was forced by ill health to retire from full-time work, though he remained editor of his periodicals and maintained daily contact with the office until his death, when a third generation of the family took over from him. On 14 September 1885 he married Sarah Chater (1862-1915), the daughter of a Nottingham druggist. They had three children: a son, Frederick Charles Chater Watts (1896-1953), who succeeded his father as managing director, and twin daughters Gladys, later Dixon (1886-1971), and Sallie (1886-1915), who also worked for the organization, as later did their granddaughter Marion Watts. On 14 October 1916 Watts made a second marriage, to Bessie Maud Wright (1880-1960), the daughter of a London mariner. In 1938 they left London and settled in the Oxfordshire village of Sibford Gower, where he died on 15 May 1946, having served the freethought movement without pause for seventy-six years, done what he could to make it respectable and reliable, and established some of its most stable periodicals and organizations. A secular cremation was held at Oxford and a memorial service was held at Conway Hall in London on 10 October 1946, after which his ashes were interred at Highgate cemetery. 
Watts contributed editorial material to most issues of his magazines and occasional autobiographical articles to the 'Literary Guide', including 'About personal matters' (June 1918), 'Some reminiscences of no. 17 Johnson's Court' (January 1924), and 'Twilight thoughts' (April 1924). Obituaries appeared in the freethought press, including the 'Literary Guide', 61/7 (1946) and 61/11 (1946). But, as he said himself, his true biography appeared in his publications and his organization. Although he soon shed the vestiges of his family's Calvinism, he always remained a puritan in his personal and professional character. He worked long hours for most of the days of his extensive career, inspired many colleagues to follow his lead, earned a formidable reputation not only among freethinkers but in the wider world of publishing and the press, and enjoyed a happy private life with his family and friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 54000


Read, James (1777-1852), missionary in Cape Colony and political activist, was born on 3 December 1777, in Abridge, Essex, the son of Joseph and Susannah Read. A carpenter of little education, by early manhood he was a member of the Hackney church of the Anglican evangelical John Eyre. In November 1798 he set sail for the south seas under the aegis of the London Missionary Society (LMS). The LMS vessel was captured by the French off Brazil, and it was a year before Read could return to London, after vicissitudes which included stays in Montevideo and Lisbon. Undeterred, he next set sail for Cape Colony, and arrived in Cape Town in September 1800. 
The then British governor, Dundas, feared that evangelicals would further destabilize the war-torn eastern frontier of this recently acquired colony. He therefore refused Read permission to join his elderly Dutch colleague, the strong-willed, unconventional Johannes Theodorus van der Kemp, in his mission to the Xhosa of Ngqika beyond the colony. Read evangelized British soldiers instead, until 1801, when van der Kemp abandoned the Xhosa mission and the two missionaries met in Graaff-Reinet, a small settlement in the north-east of the colony, plunged into conflict between Africans and white farmers. There Read began his lifelong work among the Khoi-Khoi, once semi-nomadic cattle herders but now devastated by colonialism. 
Despite violent settler resistance Read and van der Kemp ministered to a group of about 700 Khoi-Khoi refugees who had fled from frontier warfare. In August 1801 the two briefly visited Ngqika. In 1802 they led a small group of Khoi-Khoi to Botha's Farm, Algoa Bay. After an attack by other Khoi-Khoi who saw this group as having sold out, the community moved to Fort Frederick during the 1802 British withdrawal. In 1803 the incoming Batavian regime allotted new land for what would become Bethelsdorp, the first permanent African mission station of the LMS. On 20 June 1803 Read married Elizabeth Valentyn (1779-1849), a Khoi-Khoi convert. The couple had four surviving daughters and three sons, including James Read junior (1811-1894). In 1805 van der Kemp ordained Read after the congregation 'called' him as minister. 
Emotional religious conversions occurred at Bethelsdorp at a time of great stress for the Khoi-Khoi and other groups, including former slaves. The station earned intense colonial opprobium in the 1800s and 1810s, in large part because landless labourers used residence there to escape 'de facto' forced labour on white farms. Laziness and sexual debauchery were said to be rampant, and the missionaries were accused in colonial circles of living like the Khoi-Khoi instead of 'raising' them up. There was also conflict over Khoi-Khoi obligations to carry out public work, and over conditions in the Khoi-Khoi regiment in Cape Town. In 1805 Read and van der Kemp were detained at the Cape by Governor Janssens, a Batavian. The incoming British permitted the pair to return in 1806. Read and van der Kemp continued to complain about settler violence against the Khoi-Khoi; in 1808 Read published a vivid account in the 'Transactions of the London Missionary Society'. In the wake of high-level official comment, which may have pushed the government to establish district circuit courts in 1811, a series of court cases in 1812 lodged by Read and certain Khoi-Khoi plaintiffs threw the eastern Cape into turmoil; the judges' report may have concealed the truth, but the so-called 'black circuit' remained a significant Afrikaner grievance against the British. 
In 1811 van der Kemp died, and Read became the LMS African superintendent. In 1816 he helped to revive a mission to the Xhosa and then led a large team of men and women from Bethelsdorp to found a mission beyond the colony to the southern Tswana Tlhaping. In 1817, however, dissatisfied LMS missionaries at the Cape accused Read and several others of sexual immorality and political insubordination, revealing that Read had had an illegitimate son with Sabina Pretorius, a Khoi convert. LMS directors dispatched two investigators, one of whom, John Philip (1775-1851), replaced Read as superintendent. Read was removed from Dithakong in 1820 and compelled to make a public confession at Bethelsdorp. He and his wife continued to work at Bethelsdorp, under James Kitchingman's headship. 
Shortly after his return Read again earned official sanction after lodging accusations before the incoming acting governor, Sir Rufane Donkin, about maltreatment of the Khoi-Khoi. Although Donkin found the accusations malicious, in 1821 John Philip examined evidence which substantiated Read's claims and triggered his own campaign for race-blind legislation in southern Africa. The role of the work of Philip and Read in the 1828 passage of ordinance 50, which 'inter alia' removed racial distinctions from Cape law, has been disputed; the LMS certainly took the credit, however, earning both loyalty and scorn as a result. 
In 1829 a settlement of 'free' Khoi-Khoi was established on recently conquered land at Kat River as a buffer between settlers and Xhosa. Members of this community called Read as their minister. Read helped relay Khoi-Khoi protests against Cape Colony's restoration of vagrancy legislation in 1834 after the abolition of slavery, and the authorities in London then overturned the legislation. When frontier warfare began again in 1834-5, Read channelled Xhosa complaints to Philip, who, through Thomas Fowell Buxton, had indirect influence with the Colonial Office. Meanwhile, Governor D'Urban banished the Reads from Kat River; Read blamed the governor for the death of his seventeen-year-old daughter during the move. In 1836-7 Read, Philip, James Read junior, Andries Stoffels, and Dyani Tshatshu travelled to London to testify before the House of Commons select committee on Aborigines -- a committee engineered by Fowell Buxton in part to publicize south African issues. D'Urban was recalled, and land was returned to the Xhosa, but Read returned to Africa in February 1838 to find himself one of the most hated men in the colony. 
Kat River Khoi-Khoi ran important missions, co-ordinated by Read, among neighbouring African communities, including San and Thembu groups. Read argued throughout for an African clergy and for congregational autonomy in the choice of ministers, including the right to dismiss white missionaries. By the 1840s the majority of other LMS missionaries were infuriated by what they saw as Read's attempts to undermine their authority with local peoples. Tensions culminated in the mid-1840s when a large faction of the LMS, spearheaded by Henry Calderwood, tried unsuccessfully to oust Read, confirming the latter's growing isolation. 
In 1846 frontier warfare erupted again. Kat River settlers, including Read and his sons, supported the colonial side, but the community was none the less subject to colonial abuse and was not recompensed for losses; thereafter it was maladministered, and harshly. It continued to bear the brunt of racially discriminatory economic policies as British settlers gained more political power. In 1851 many Khoi-Khoi, including a large minority of Kat River inhabitants, and other members of what was coming to be called the 'coloured' community, joined the Xhosa side during further frontier warfare as a consequence of their treatment by the colonial administration and the settlers. Read and his son James desperately tried to prevent the rebellion but were told by rebels that Read's 'writing to London' was no longer effective. In the disastrous aftermath of the failed rebellion, the government encouraged the purchase of much of Kat River by white land speculators. The elderly Khoi-Khoi 'veldcornet' Andries Botha was condemned to death (though the sentence was later commuted) in a trial which was widely seen as a judgment on the entire Kat River Khoi-Khoi community, and particularly on James Read. 
Read died at Eland's Post at the Kat River settlement, deeply depressed, on 8 May 1852, on the same day that Botha's death sentence was announced. He was buried locally, at Philipton. Caught between colonial ambiguities and convinced of his own failure, he probably had a greater impact in a variety of ways than most other missionaries of his generation. 


@@@@@


doc= 54001


Hayward, Walter Scott (1855-1910), yachtsman and boat designer, was born on 17 April 1855 at 20 St James Walk, Clerkenwell, London, the son of James Robertson Hayward (died in or before 1880), ironmonger, and his wife, Eliza Isabella Greely. Nothing is known about his education or early life, but he joined Royal Temple Yacht Club, London, in 1871, sailing at various south coast venues before moving to Manchester in 1877 and joining Cheshire and New Brighton sailing clubs. In 1879 Hayward became one of the very few amateur yachtsmen who passed the Board of Trade's professional examination for yacht masters before the First World War. In Southport on 2 August 1880 he married Louise Eleanor, daughter of John Robson Ivy, a Southport silk merchant; they had one daughter and at least five sons, including the writer and actor (Harold) Richard Hayward. On the marriage certificate Hayward's occupation is given as manufacturer. Three years later, in 1883 he was elected to membership of the prestigious Royal Mersey Yacht Club as a 'merchant'. 
It is probable that by the 1880s Hayward's business interests were in the marine area, and by then he had emerged as the leading small yacht racer in the north west. Although British yacht clubs remained solidly middle-class, Hayward believed that they should widen their membership by reducing the cost of sailing and recruiting far more actively among younger employees in the growing urban professions who, with improved rail networks, could now afford weekend travel to coastal venues. With this in mind, he successfully founded the West Lancashire Yacht Club (WLYC) in 1894 and also established his reputation as a yacht designer. Hayward's contribution became particularly significant in the 1890s because British sailing was then dominated by the conservatively minded Yacht Racing Association (YRA) which supported an elaborate system of rating formulae for all racing boat designs. Its approach inadvertently encouraged wealthy owners to spend heavily, often with scant regard for safety, on new yachts which exploited loopholes in the ratings. The YRA's committee of like-minded yachtsmen could only respond ineffectively with further rules aimed at stopping what was barely distinguishable from cheating. 
By contrast, Hayward advocated using small 'one-design' yachts regulated by independent local class associations, with very strict rules giving the wealthy no room for manoeuvre. Indeed, Hayward took a lead of national significance in 1898, when he co-operated with Manchester electrical engineer Herbert Baggs to design the 'Seabird' yacht for the WLYC. The yachting press immediately praised its excellent seaworthiness and extremely low on-the-water price limit of $35, which certainly encouraged wider middle-class participation, with the Seabird being rapidly adopted by other clubs in the north west, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales. Hayward never patented the design, and so did not receive any royalties for what became a very popular boat. He later founded the Seabird Association in 1906, which ultimately enabled the Seabird to become one of the oldest surviving one-design classes in the world. 
In the late 1890s Hayward settled near Belfast, where his daughter Gladys, having been taught to sail by her father, became one of the few British women to gain national recognition as competitive helms before 1914. Hayward was a unionist and member of the Church of Ireland, attending Jordanstown church. His restless energy reveals a sociable man who never single-mindedly pursued yachting. He rode with the New Ross harriers and foxhounds, perhaps recalling earlier robust sporting triumphs like his victory in the British amateur single stick championship. Another of his ventures attracted publicity in 1896 when he designed the largest motor yacht to have been launched on the Mersey. From 1906 he followed this up by turning to motor boat racing and establishing Messrs W. Hayward & Co., marine motor engineers, in Belfast, while the congested districts board of Ireland commissioned him to develop the use of motorized fishing boats along the west coast. 
In 1910 Hayward travelled to Vladivostok on the Trans-Siberian Railway to advise Russian fishermen about the use of motor boats. He planned to continue to Hong Kong, where two of his sons were opening a car dealership, and then to visit San Francisco on his way home. But he fell ill before arriving at Hong Kong and was admitted to the Peak Hospital. Only partially recovered, he left for England via Suez with one of his sons on the SS 'Pembrokeshire'. He died from tubercular disease of the left lung on 15 August 1910 as the ship passed through the Red Sea and he was buried at sea the next day. 


@@@@@


doc= 54002


Potter, Lewis (1807-1881), shipping agent and banker, was born on 27 May 1807 at Falkirk, the son of James Potter (1775-1839), a timber merchant and brick manufacturer, and his wife, Janet, 'nee' Wilson (1781-1831). He was apprenticed to David Chapman, a shipping agent in Glasgow, who had a small fleet of coastal sailing smacks trading down the west coast to Liverpool. Potter became a partner in the firm in 1832, when its name was changed to Chapman and Potter. Five years later the firm extended its agencies to include Dublin and the Isle of Man, and in 1839 Potter became sole partner. On 16 December 1833 he married Margaret Muirhead (1814-1881), daughter of George Anderson Muirhead; they had three sons and eight daughters. 
During the early 1840s in Glasgow there was intense speculation in Australian investments. To take advantage of the 'mania', Potter set up a new merchant and shipowning business in 1848 in partnership with Andrew Wilson -- Potter, Wilson & Co. Wilson left within less than two years, and Potter took Wilson's eldest son, Andrew, into the partnership. Later they were joined by Potter's youngest son, John Alexander Potter. Together they soon became one of the largest Antipodean shippers in the west of Scotland, acting as agents for most of the leading Glasgow merchants and shipowners in the trade, including James Nicol Fleming, and Buchanan, Wilson & Co. Through their agent, Glen Walker, they speculated heavily in Australian land and became wealthy men. Potter was reputed to have an annual income of over $17,000 or $18,000 and the partners sometimes to earn commissions of over $100,000. 
Between 1857 and 1859 Potter purchased Udston and adjoining properties for $40,000 to form a large estate near Hamilton in Lanarkshire. Coal was soon found on the estate, raising its value to $120,000. Although his bankers were the National Bank of Scotland and the British Linen Bank, he was invited to join the board of the City of Glasgow Bank in 1859 after payments had been suspended the year before. The object of this invitation was to bring together the bank's Australian interests with those of Potter to form the Australian Land and Investment Company. When the company in turn merged with James Morton's New Zealand interests in 1866 in the wake of the Overend Gurney crisis to form the New Zealand and Australian Land Company, Potter became a director with a shareholding of over $60,000. The new firm continued to speculate heavily in land, borrowing enormous sums from the City of Glasgow Bank, which raised funds by extending its branch network throughout the west of Scotland. Little of the borrowing by either the Potters or the New Zealand and Australian Land Company was secured by the bank. Several of the more able directors, sensing that the bank was committing the cardinal sin of lending long and borrowing short, resigned in the late 1860s and early 1870s. Potter and his friends, who knew little of sound banking, were left in control. Potter on his own admission began to withdraw from business in the early 1870s, handing over to his son John Alexander Potter. 
The economy spiralled downwards in the 1878 recession, and the City of Glasgow Bank collapsed on 1 October with debts of over $5 million, sending shock waves throughout the banking world. Since the bank was unlimited, each shareholder faced eventual calls of $2750 for every $100 of stock. Many families were ruined, and throughout 1879 lists of shareholders who had to meet further calls or no longer had any resources appeared regularly in the Glasgow press. Only 254 of the 1819 shareholders remained solvent when the affairs of the bank were finally wound up, though the depositors were paid in full. 'The collapse of the bank was a traumatic experience for Glasgow: nearly 2000 families suffered severe loss; many were ruined' (Checkland, 471). The catastrophe had similar repercussions in both New Zealand and Australia. 
Potter, personally, and his businesses were heavily indebted to the bank. In the processes of winding up the bank's affairs he was declared bankrupt and his property sold. Udston House was purchased by Robert McAlpine. Along with his fellow directors he was tried for fraud early in 1879 in a blaze of publicity, when it emerged that the accounts had been deliberately falsified, probably since 1866. Although he denied knowledge of the bank's reckless advances for foreign speculations, Potter was found guilty. As it was believed that he was more culpable than his fellow directors, he was sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment. He was released, apparently in good health, from Perth prison in July 1880, but died a broken man a year later, on 17 June 1881, at 15 Warrender Park Road, Edinburgh. Unlike other contemporary fraudsters -- Jabez Balfour or Whittaker Wright -- there were many, including the lawyer and investment manager David Murray, who believed Potter, an old man, had been harshly treated for crimes that were more a reflection on the management than on the directors of the bank. 
The collapse of the City of Glasgow Bank arguably precipitated the worst British financial crisis of the nineteenth century, and all the Scottish banks suffered a very substantial fall in their paid-up capital. It also led to a major inquest into Scottish banking and necessitated the introduction of new banking legislation. 


@@@@@


doc= 54005


Traill, William Atcheson (1844-1933), promoter of electric railway traction, was born at Ballylough House, Bushmills, co. Antrim, the third son and sixth child of William Traill, a local protestant landowner, and his wife, Louisa French. His brother Anthony Traill (1838-1914) became high sheriff of Antrim and, in 1904, provost of Trinity College, Dublin. Educated at private schools, William went to Trinity College, Dublin, taking an engineering degree in 1865 and the master of engineering, M(Ing), in 1873. 
Traill joined the geological survey of Ireland in 1868 and became an expert in water supply. He resigned in 1881 to promote his life's work, the electrically powered Portrush, Bushmills, and Giant's Causeway Railway and Tramway Company (to use its final name) founded by himself and Anthony Traill to transport local minerals. Capital was raised from friends at Trinity, although Sir William Siemens ($3500) and Lord Kelvin ($1000) were also shareholders in the $20,000 company. Despite many efforts, the goods business never materialized, and the line became a summer season only tourist business until its closure in 1949. 
Steam services began early in 1883, electric cars working sporadically from September 1883. Regular electric services began on 5 November 1883 following the completion of a hydroelectric plant at Walkmills, the railway being the first to use hydroelectric power. The line was initially 6 miles long with another 2 mile extension to Giant's Causeway opening on 1 July 1887. Traill patented (no. 3277, 1883) a conduit system of burying the live rail in a pipe with electrical contact by means of a mechanism he devised. He used a simple third rail system on the rural stretches, but steam trams were used in Portrush until 1900 when a 500 volt overhead cable was installed along the entire route. The conduit patent was sold to an American company 'for a small sum' (McGuigan, 'Giant's Causeway Tramway', 105). Conduits were popular with tramways, but they installed devices independently invented in America in 1884. 
Traill showed that electric railways worked, thereby inspiring many more electric railway lines. He devoted his life to his company and local affairs, though he was on the general council of the British Association. Traill was married first to Harriet Jane Wrigley, who died in 1888, then to Elizabeth Greer; they had a son ('b'. 1890) and a daughter ('b'. 1891). He met his third wife, Nora Westwood (died 1953) in 1895, when he rescued her from drowning off Portrush. He died at his home, Rockhaven, Port Stewart, north Antrim, on Thursday 5 July 1933, survived by his third wife, and daughter. His last few weeks had been spent in organizing the railway's jubilee. 


@@@@@


doc= 54007


Kalecki, MichaL (1899-1970), economist and policy adviser, was born on 22 June 1899 into a Polish-Jewish family in Lodz, now in Poland, then occupied by Russia. He was the only child of Abram Kalecki (died 1933), the owner of a small cotton mill, and his wife, Klara Segalla, who died in unknown circumstances during the Second World War. His father, described by Kalecki as a 'victim of technical progress', lost the mill in 1913 and became a bookkeeper in his brother's company. Kalecki enrolled in the I Philological Lycee in Lodz, where he completed four grades before the outbreak of war. The German occupation authorities closed the school in 1914-15, but Kalecki then enrolled at the Father Ignacy Skorupka II Philological Lycee in Lodz. After receiving his secondary school certificate in 1917 he began studying at the Warsaw University Engineering College. His studies were interrupted after two terms when he was drafted into the army, and he served for seven months in the VI telegraph battalion in Lwow: he was later discharged from the army in 1921 on health grounds. 
Kalecki was able to begin mathematical studies at the department of philosophy of Warsaw University in February 1920, and transferred to the engineering college of Danzig University a year later. He received the first degree certificate in 1923, but discontinued his studies in 1925 shortly before graduation to support his family because his father had lost his job. He returned to Lodz where he undertook some tutoring and worked for a number of firms including one in the field of credit intelligence. He began his own study of economics about this time, studying first such writers as Rosa Luxemburg, Turan-Baranovski, and Marx. Only at a relatively late stage was he exposed to the ideas of neo-classical economics then dominant in Polish academic circles. His attitudes were also strongly influenced by the prevailing levels of unemployment in Poland. In 1927 he moved to Warsaw and earned his living in a range of jobs, including making engineering calculations of reinforced concrete constructions. He also started writing for the journals 'Preeglad Gospodarczy' and 'PrzemysL I Handel', mainly on the operations of large businesses and on business conditions in particular markets. In December 1929 he became a research fellow at the Institute for the Study of Business Cycles and Prices (ISBCP), headed by Edward Lipinski. Initially he studied the structure and operation of cartels, and later business fluctuations and national income in Poland. He was also involved in political journalism and maintained close connections with left-wing socialist movements. He married Adela (Ada) Szternfeld (1903-1994) on 18 June 1930. 
In 1933 Kalecki published a paper in Polish under the title 'Outline of a theory of the business cycle' (reprinted as chapter 1 of M. Kalecki, 'Selected Essays on the Dynamics of the Capitalist Economy, 1933-1970', 1971) in which he presented the basic idea of the importance of fluctuations in investment expenditure as a generator of business cycles. This and some related papers form the basis of the claim that Kalecki published some of the key ideas of Keynes before Keynes himself (1933 versus 1936). 
In 1935 Kalecki received a twelve-month Rockefeller scholarship to enable him to study abroad. He visited Sweden for the first three months of 1936, and then travelled to England in April 1936. There he made contact with leading British economists such as Keynes, Joan Robinson, and others who were developing ideas similar to his own. He resigned from the ISBCP in November 1936, protesting against limits on the freedom of research. He received an extension of his Rockefeller scholarship, and then a scholarship from Cambridge University to enable him to complete his first book, 'Essays in the Theory of Economic Fluctuations' (1939), based on papers written in the late 1930s. In this book, as well as providing a theory of the business cycle, Kalecki also advanced a theory of the distribution of income (between wages and profits) based on the market power of firms. The idea of the 'principle of increasing risk' was developed, whereby the investment undertaken by a single firm is limited by the increasing risk which would be entailed by more investment reflected in a rising cost of finance. 
Kalecki was appointed a statistical assistant for the economics department of Cambridge University and the National Institute of Economic and Social Research from October 1938 to February 1940. This was followed by a move to Oxford where he was employed at the Oxford University Institute of Statistics. There he worked on the British war economy, particularly rationing, war finance, and then post-war reconstruction, and made frequent contributions to the three weekly reports on economic matters published by the institute. He contributed to the major and influential study 'The Economics of Full Employment: Six Studies in Applied Economics' (1944). He argued that full employment could be achieved through deficit spending by government, through redistribution of income from higher- to lower-income groups, but that the stimulation of private investment was not a satisfactory way to achieve full employment. During this period he developed the arguments that the political and social problems involved in the achievement of full employment were much greater than the economic problems involved. 
In 1945, after some time working for the French ministry of national economy, Kalecki moved to the International Labour Office in Montreal, Canada, where he worked mainly on post-war reconstruction and full employment. In July 1946 he returned to Poland for three months as an adviser to the ministry of reconstruction, the ministry of finance, and the central planning office. At the end of 1946 he was appointed deputy director of a section of the economics department of the United Nations secretariat. During his time at the UN he supervised a range of studies on food shortage and inflationary pressures, and made major contributions to the annual 'World Economic Report'. He spent two months in 1950 as economic adviser to the Israeli government. He resigned from the UN at the end of 1954 in response to the restrictions placed on himself and others by the intervention of the USA under the influence of McCarthyism. 
From the beginning of 1955 Kalecki's home was in Poland. The first two years of his return to Poland coincided with the growth of overt political opposition to the Polish government; the Poznan workers' uprising in June 1956 and the spread of strikes across Poland; and the spontaneous creation of workers' councils in October 1956 (the 'Polish October'). In April 1955 Kalecki was appointed chief adviser to Hilary Minc, the deputy prime minister. From December of that year he was also employed by the Institute of Economics of the Polish Academy of Sciences where he headed research on the capitalist economies. In October 1956 he was appointed deputy chairman of a joint Polish United Workers' Party (PUWP) and the government 'commission to assist the proper development of workers' initiative in workplace management' established in response to the spontaneous formation of workers' councils. In June 1956 he received his first academic title as professor of economics, conferred by the central qualifications commission, and in July he was appointed professor of economics in the Institute of Economics of the Polish Academy of Sciences. In January 1957 he was appointed one of the deputy chairmen of the economic council at the Council of Ministers. In September 1957 Kalecki was appointed chairman of the commission of perspective planning, but his official role effectively ended in 1960. During a visit to India as an economic adviser on financing the third five-year plan there, the perspective plan for which he had supervised the preparation was heavily criticized and rejected. In May 1960 he was dismissed from the board of the planning commission, but appointed scientific adviser to the chairman of the planning commission with a much narrower range of powers. In 1959 he was awarded the officer's cross of the order of the Rebirth of Poland. 
In the last decade of his life Kalecki was heavily involved with problems of economic development, including seminars organized at the academy of sciences, Warsaw University, and the central school for planning and statistics. By 1968 the political climate in Poland had changed considerably for the worse, and Kalecki's outspokenness and disagreement with the country's heavy industry investment programme (and an element of antisemitism) brought him into disfavour. 
Kalecki made substantial contributions to the analysis of developed capitalist, socialist, and developing economies. His writings on the economics of socialism were undertaken only after his return to Poland in December 1954. He was directly involved in many of the debates of the mid-1950s on the development and organization of the Polish economy. His general approach could be summarized as seeking a departure from the system of bureaucratic centralism, the main lines of development in the economy being centrally planned, with the market mechanism used in a subordinate role. He further advocated a substantial increase in self-management by workers (under a system of workers' councils), while acknowledging that there would be tension between central planning and workers' councils. He was heavily involved with teaching and research in the area of development planning from the late 1950s to the late 1960s, organizing courses and seminars on underdeveloped economies. 
Many of Kalecki's major writings on capitalism, socialism, and developing economies were republished after his death in 'Selected Essays on the Dynamics of the Capitalist Economy, 1933-1970' (1971), 'Selected Essays on the Economic Growth of the Socialist and the Mixed Economy' (1972), and 'Essays on Developing Economies' (1976). He died on 17 April 1970 of a cerebral haemorrhage and was buried in the Alley of the Meritorious in the Powazkowski cemetery in Warsaw. 


@@@@@


doc= 54009


Rutter, Francis Vane Phipson (1876-1937), art critic and museum curator, was born on 17 February 1876 at 4 The Cedars, Putney, the youngest son of Henry Rutter (died 1896), a solicitor, and his wife, Emmeline Claridge Phipson. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School and at Queens' College, Cambridge, graduating in 1899 with a BA degree in Semitic languages. After minor successes as a journalist, in 1901 Rutter became sub-editor of the 'Daily Mail' and then editor of 'To-Day' (1902-4). Leonard Rees, recognizing his versatility, had appointed him art critic of the 'Sunday Times' in 1903, and he learnt his trade on the job and in Paris, where cafe life in the Latin quarter facilitated discussions with the leaders of the fast changing new art movements. When the French art dealers Durand-Ruel staged a superb impressionist exhibition in London in 1905, Rutter initiated a 'Sunday Times' fund to buy for the National Gallery. The gallery rejected a Monet; however, a Boudin, 'The Entrance to Trouville Harbour' (National Gallery), was later accepted, following the intervention of Sir Claude Philips and D. S. McColl. 
In Paris in 1907 Rutter was persuaded that French-based artists would exhibit in London under a non-juried society similar to the Societe des Artistes Independents and persuaded his progressively minded friends from the Fitzroy Street Group (founded in the same year), Walter Sickert, Harold Gilman, and Spencer Gore, to back the formation of the Allied Artists' Association. With Lucien Pissarro advising, Rutter, a born organizer, collected some eighty members, and in July 1908 exhibited over 3000 works in the Albert Hall. For four years he ran this successful but unprofitable international London salon which 'discovered' Walter Bayes, Robert Bevan, and Charles Ginner, and gave Brancusi, Epstein, and Kandinsky their first London showings. He also edited its mouthpiece, the 'Art News', until financial pressures caused his resignation. On 30 August 1909 he had married Thirza Sarah 
(Trixie; 'b'. 1887/8)
; she was the daughter of James Henry Tiernan of the New Zealand constabulary. In 1912 he accepted the $300 a year curatorship of Leeds City Art Gallery. 
Encouraged by G. B. Shaw, Rutter became a Fabian Society member; he was also a supporter of the suffragettes. In 1910 his efforts to end the isolation of British art were eclipsed by an establishment figure, Roger Fry, who had 'an immense 'succes d'execration'' with his 'Manet and the post-impressionists' exhibition, which introduced Cezanne, Gauguin, and Van Gogh to an outraged public (Rutter, 'Art in my Time', 145). In support, Rutter rushed out a small book, 'Revolution in Art' (expanded in 1926 into 'Evolution in Modern Art'); the title was inspired by Gauguin's declaration that 'in art there are only revolutionists or plagiarists' (F. Rutter, 'Revolution in Art', 1910, 30). From Leeds, Rutter continued to champion innovation in his 'Sunday Times' 'Round the galleries' column, and in October 1913 the Dore Gallery in Bond Street commissioned him to organize the Post-Impressionist and Futurist Exhibition. Arranged chronologically from Camille Pissarro to the vorticists, led by Wyndham Lewis (who had quarrelled with Fry), Rutter's selection showed his unrivalled knowledge of European developments in modern art; his foreword to the exhibition catalogue explained the variety of work that had been loosely labelled 'post-impressionist'. 
In Leeds, Rutter's intention to build a modern art collection had already been dashed by the attitude of 'boorish' ruling councillors, and his standing slumped in June 1913 after his wife (whom he was to divorce about 1920) connived in the escape of a suffragette arsonist, Lilian Lenton. Before he resigned in 1917 to work at the Admiralty in London, he combined with Michael Sadler -- a collector of Gauguins and Kandinskys and vice-chancellor of Leeds University -- to found a Leeds Art Collections Fund. This assisted with purchases and exhibitions, including the first major Constable exhibition and a post-impressionist exhibition in June 1913 which was held at the Leeds Art Club. The two outsiders had reinvigorated the club, originated by Holbrook Jackson and A. R. Orage, who now edited the 'New Age'. Young Herbert Read, critic and theorist of modern art, was greatly influenced by Rutter and by club discussion of new art movements; in 1917 he joined Rutter as co-editor of 'Art and Letters'. This quarterly failed in 1920, despite support from Osbert Sitwell. Read was also attracted by Rutter's plan for an authors' co-operative on the lines of the Allied Artists' Association, where Rutter resumed the reins from 1915 to 1919. Rutter opened his Adelphi Gallery in London in 1919, showing small works by David Bomberg, Edward Wadsworth, and Ginner, but, valuing above all his 'liberty and leisure', he soon turned to concentrate on writing, publishing some twenty books and numerous additional articles in 'Apollo', the 'Burlington Magazine', 'The Studio', 'The Times', and the 'Financial Times'. 
Tall, with an emphatic manner, Rutter cared passionately about art and artists. Before his death from bronchitis at his home, 5 Litchfield Way, London, on 18 April 1937, he owned some eighty paintings, the finest by his friends, the 'lovable' Gore, Gilman, Ginner, and Lucien Pissarro, who all supported his Leeds activities. He left his estate to his second wife, Ethel Dorothy ('b'. 1894/5), daughter of William Robert Bunce, a coal merchant, whom he had married on 29 March 1920. Rutter was buried on 21 April 1937 at Hampstead. 


@@@@@


doc= 54011


Wise, George (1855-1917), religious controversialist, was born on 4 November 1855 at 25 Bermondsey New Road, London, the fourth son of William Wise (died 1871), an illiterate tanner, and Sophia Wise (died 1891), 'nee' Slade, niece of John Pounds (1766-1839), accredited founder of the ragged school movement. After a brief formal education, either in Bermondsey or Portsmouth, Wise began work in a London office. He was baptized in 1873, joining the congregation of the Baptist Metropolitan Tabernacle, but five years later reading J. C. Ryle's tract 'What do we Owe to the Reformation?' (1877) led him to seek confirmation in the Church of England. A brief flirtation with scepticism followed, but attendance at Christian Evidence Society lectures not only resolved his doubts but also encouraged him to undertake further study. Although Wise's later reputation among his supporters for profound scholarship was misplaced, he was justly described as an 'omnivorous reader' and 'a dual personality, who had in him both the schoolmaster and the agitator' ('Liverpool Daily Post and Mercury', 3 Dec 1917, 6). 
About 1882 Wise became a lecturer for the Christian Evidence Society, working as a full-time staff member from 1886. It was in that capacity that he moved to Liverpool in 1888, so beginning a connection with the city which continued until his death. For three years Wise worked in Liverpool under the auspices of the Christian Evidence Society and the YMCA, concentrating on Christian apologetics in debate with secularists. He was a very effective platform speaker, and his work received the commendation of religious leaders in the city: Bishop Ryle presented Wise with a complete set of his tracts in 1891 as a form of testimonial. 
When Wise's official work for the Christian Evidence Society came to an end he stayed in Liverpool, and began to add polemical protestantism to his anti-secularist message. In the context of Liverpool's endemic sectarian tensions, Wise found many opportunities for aggressive protestantism. A further dimension was added, moreover, by the controversies surrounding ritualism in the Church of England, latent throughout this period, but breaking out with renewed virulence in 1897. A year later Wise founded his own organization, the British Protestant Union, to co-ordinate the campaign against 'a trinity of evils -- Romanism, ritualism, and infidelity' ('Liverpool Courier', 6). 
In the early years of the twentieth century George Wise played a major role in the turbulent politics of Liverpool, for the religious and ethnic geography of the city gave considerable influence to such a prominent protestant figure. In November 1900 Wise stood for election to the Liverpool school board and he topped the poll, achieving a vote of 107,063, double that of any other candidate. Three years later he won a decisive electoral victory in the Kirkdale ward and became a city councillor. Wise was a popular and hard-working councillor, although disqualified from re-election in 1906 by his new status as a nonconformist minister. 
The activities which made Wise a significant element in the calculations of Liverpool politicians also brought him into conflict with the police authorities. Disowned by the YMCA in 1898, Wise acquired a hall in Potter Street which became a base for his protestant work. Public demonstrations outside ritualist churches, inflammatory speeches, and marches and mass meetings in Roman Catholic areas of the city, including burlesques of Catholic rites, fanned the flames of sectarian violence. On several occasions Wise was ordered by the Liverpool stipendiary magistrate to cease holding open-air meetings. In 1903 he opted instead to serve two months in Walton gaol, being met on release by 60,000 supporters. Another brief spell in prison followed a further outbreak of rioting in 1909, provoking a parliamentary inquiry into the disorders. 
The satirical weekly 'The Porcupine' described Wise, a lifelong bachelor, on a court appearance in 1902: 'He is a sturdily-built, bespectacled man under the medium height, looks about fifty years of age, wears side whiskers with moustache turning slightly grey. While there is the light of intelligence in his eyes, there is nothing to bespeak the religious fanatic. When seen in the streets he is generally attired in frock coat, white tie, and soft slouch hat, the headgear being replaced by the orthodox 'stove-pipe' on Sundays. ('The Porcupine', 1)' In 1903 Wise's supporters bought the Welsh Methodist chapel on Netherfield Road, which became the Protestant Reformers' Memorial Church. Already a powerful preacher, Wise also proved to be a conscientious pastor, and his church grew from small beginnings to claim the largest congregation in the city, with a full programme of ancillary activities. 
Contemporaries ascribed the breakdown in Wise's health in 1917 to concern for those of his congregation injured or missing in action in the First World War. Protracted illness ended with his death from myocarditis and dropsy on 29 November 1917 at his home, 3 Swanston Avenue, Walton. Vast crowds attended the funeral service at the Protestant Reformers' Church, which was followed by interment on 4 December in Anfield cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 54013


Nugent, James (1822-1905), social reformer and Roman Catholic priest, was born on 3 March 1822 at Hunter Street, Liverpool, the eldest of nine children, three boys and six girls, of John Nugent, fruiterer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Rice (1803-1887). He was baptized a Catholic at St Nicholas's Church on 17 March. His father was a Catholic from co. Meath and his mother was a convert to Roman Catholicism. On the completion of his education at a private academy in Queen Square, Liverpool, from about 1827 to 1837, his father's ambition for him to be a merchant was overruled by his devout mother and the local priest who encouraged him to enter the priesthood. 
Trained at St Cuthbert's College, Ushaw (1838-42), and the English College in Rome (1843-6), Nugent was ordained at his local church of St Nicholas's, Liverpool, on 30 August 1846. His first ministry was at St Alban's, Blackburn, and then at St Mary's, Wigan (March to December 1848). He then moved back to Liverpool, in the midst of a crisis of poverty and disease, where ten out of twenty-four priests had died, and where the Irish immigrants needed hope and a brighter future. 
Nugent's whole life was given to the task. As an educationist he opened on 7 November 1850 a Catholic middle school for boys in Rodney Street, and by 31 October 1853 had opened the Catholic Institute, becoming its first director. He served the educational needs of both children and adults for the next ten years and set the tone which was to be followed by his successors. 
Nugent felt the need to look after street children, whom he called nobody's children, his slogan being 'Save the child'. He set up shelters, training schools (one on the River Mersey), and residential homes. Later, he assisted a large number of the children to emigrate to the New World. He became the pioneer of children's emigration and travelled extensively in the USA on a mission which was encouraged by Archbishop Ireland, a fervent colonizer. Some of the schemes were total failures, such as the attempt of 1882 to settle poor families from Ireland on farms in Minnesota. 
As the first Catholic chaplain at Walton gaol (appointed under the act of 1863) Nugent saw how drink made men and women criminals, and he established the Total Abstinence League of the Cross, a movement which spread to India, America, and Australia. He also saw the potential of the press, and in 1861 established a printing press that produced newspapers including the 'Northern Press' (renamed the 'Catholic Times' in 1872), which soon had a circulation of 73,000. 
At the time Nugent retired in 1885 he was still extremely active, travelling extensively and overseeing the building of new churches such as St Joseph's, Blundelsands. Honours came his way: he was created a monsignor in 1892, was given a testimonial by Liverpool city council in 1897, and his portrait by Sir James Shannon, later based in the Walker Art Gallery, was painted. On a return journey from New York in 1903 he had a serious fall. His health declined and two years later a chill which he caught in Southport turned to pneumonia. He died at Harewood, Duke Street, Freshfield Road, Formby, on 27 June 1905 and was buried at Ford cemetery, Liverpool, on 30 June. Ten thousand mourners gathered for his funeral. A statue to his memory was unveiled on 8 December 1906 and placed in St John's Gardens, Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 54017


Williams, Thomas (1895-1958), minister of the Presbyterian Church of Wales, was born on 23 January 1895 in Fronolau, Boduan, Caernarvonshire, the son of John Thomas Williams (1867-1921), a carpenter by trade but a poet by delight, and his wife, Ann Hughes (1868-1905). The family moved to the Nefyn area in Caernarvonshire, and then settled in Bodeilas in the vicinity of Pistyll, where he was brought up. His mother died on 23 October 1905 and his father subsequently remarried. He left the primary school in Nefyn in 1909 to work at the Eifl granite quarry, where he had a miraculous escape when a stone fell on his fellow quarryman Robert Jones, of Llithfaen, killing him. Though he identified himself with the locality to the extent that he was known as Tom Nefyn or Tom Nefyn-Williams, the experience in the quarry unnerved him so much that he decided to emigrate to Star City, Canada. However, war was declared: he enlisted with the Royal Welch Fusiliers and saw action in the Dardanelles, where he caught enteric fever. He saw further service in the Middle East and was hospitalized in Egypt. Williams returned to Britain from the war in 1919 as a convinced pacifist, and addressed meetings for the Fellowship of Reconciliation. He produced two pamphlets, one in Welsh, 'Dagrau Cain -- dagrau Crist' ('The tears of Cain -- and tears of Christ') (1935), and the other 'At Sulva Bay: what a Soldier Learnt at Gallipoli' (n.d.). 
Williams's evangelistic fervour convinced him of the need to hold open-air meetings and, starting at his home base in Nefyn, he never wavered from the itinerant ministry, resuming the traditional style of pastoral ministry when he came back to Llyn after the Second World War. As an evangelist he possessed a pleasing tenor voice which attracted audiences. In 1921 he entered the Rhondda Bible School which met in Ynys-hir, and then entered the colleges of the Presbyterian connection in Bala and Aberystwyth. Ordained in 1925, he accepted a call to Ebeneser Chapel in the mining village of Tumble in east Carmarthenshire. He married Ceridwen Roberts Jones of Coed-poeth, near Wrexham, in 1925 and they had three children. 
Williams began to seek those who had left the chapel because of their socialist views, and he took up social concerns, such as bad housing. The houses which he visited in High Street belonged to the coal company. After the survey he contacted the company managers and shareholders detailing the condition of the houses. He sided with the miners in the 1926 strike and introduced a great deal of innovation to the chapel services, such as a small orchestra and the involvement of young people. The chapel flourished under his ministry, with often 200 people attending the weekly devotional gathering. All this created controversy and opposition with the local presbytery of south Carmarthenshire, and three out of eight elders of Ebeneser resigned. In 1928 he produced a pamphlet, 'Y ffordd yr edrychaf ar bethau' ('The way I look at things'), which expressed his unorthodox, almost humanistic, theology questioning the denomination's Calvinistic confession of faith. This became a source of acute bitterness within the South Wales Association. The matter dragged on from one association meeting to another with the result that finally a resolution was passed at Nantgaredig on 28 August 1928 expelling him on the grounds of heterodoxy. His farewell service at Tumble on 9 September 1928 attracted 4000 people to an open-air service at the local football ground. A testimonial of $700 helped him to attend Woodbrooke settlement, Birmingham, and his followers in Tumble established a non-denominational chapel called Llain-y-Delyn. They were disappointed that he did not stay with them, and that within three years he had returned to the Presbyterians, accepting a call in 1932 to Rhosesmor in Flintshire. He moved to Bethesda, a slate-quarrying town, in 1937, then to Pwllheli in 1946, and finally in 1949 to Edern. During the period 1932 to 1958 he became a preaching celebrity, a Welsh Billy Graham travelling extensively and drawing sizeable congregations. 
Williams kept his friendship with many of the Christian socialists, and his second son was baptized in Bethesda with the assistance of the Labour MP George Lansbury, but he declined an invitation to stand as a Labour Party candidate for the Cardiganshire constituency in the 1929 general election. Williams wrote a great deal in the religious press, and his autobiography 'Yr ymchwil' ('The research') (1949) has been invaluable for historians of Welsh Presbyterianism. A maverick within Welsh nonconformity, more popular with lay people than most of his ministerial contemporaries, Williams had a saintly appearance and epitomized the gifted communicator. He died suddenly after a Sunday evening preaching service at Rhydyclafdy, near Pwllheli, on 23 November 1958, and was buried at Edern on 26 November. His funeral was the largest to be held in the Llyn peninsula during the post-war period. 


@@@@@


doc= 54018


Roberts, John (1880-1959), historian and minister of the Presbyterian Church of Wales, was born in Porthmadog, Caernarvonshire, on 16 October 1880, the son of the Revd John John Roberts (1840-1914), better known by his bardic name of Iolo Caernarfon, and his wife, Ann Williams (1846-1910) of Castellgoed in Eifionydd. Roberts was educated at a local school and, from 1891, at the county school in Bala, which had a remarkable headmaster, John Cadwaladr Evans, a Latin scholar. He found himself among a group of talented schoolchildren, all studying the classics, including John Edward Hughes (1879-1959), later of Brynsiencyn, and Robert Thomas Jenkins (1881-1969), who became a lifelong friend. From Bala he entered Jesus College, Oxford, where he graduated in the classics and then read theology. In 1903 he married Annie Jones Hughes (died 1959) of Porthmadog, and they had four sons and two daughters. Their son John became an international rugby player for Wales. 
Ordained in 1905, John Roberts served as a minister in Aberdyfi before moving in 1906 to David Street Welsh Presbyterian Chapel in the Dingle area of Liverpool, where he remained for seven years. In 1913 he received a call to the Presbyterian chapel in Pembroke Terrace, Cardiff, as a successor to a versatile minister, Revd Dr John Morgan Jones. In the inter-war years John Roberts became a natural leader for Welsh Presbyterians in his presbytery, which included not only Cardiff but also the depressed areas of the Rhondda, Aberdar, Merthyr and Rhymni. Most of the valley chapels in south Wales had a minister, but found it increasingly difficult to fulfil the financial commitments. The connectional debt in 1935 was over $400,000, and of that sum the debt of the Glamorgan and Monmouthshire presbyteries was $271,489, 60 per cent of the whole. Roberts persuaded the associations in north and south Wales, as well as east Glamorgan Welsh Presbytery, to raise at least $15,000 each. He then travelled to other presbyteries to plead for more assistance; in 1938 he resigned from his pastorate to become the full-time secretary of the Sustentation Fund for South Wales, and in 1948 he became secretary of the newly amalgamated Sustentation Fund for the whole denomination. The end result was to place ministers and their families on a more secure financial footing, with each individual chapel paying according to its membership every quarter to the office in Cardiff, while ministers were paid a minimum monthly salary and a pension on retirement. Roberts thus has the distinction of being the architect of modern Welsh Presbyterianism. 
Within the denomination Roberts became a highly respected leader, elected moderator of the general assembly in 1943 and in 1947 moderator of the south Wales association. He was constantly invited to appear at preaching festivals and was regarded as an authority on the history of Welsh preaching. His study of the history of the connection bore fruit in the prestigious Davies lecture of 1930, which was subsequently enlarged and published in Welsh in 1931 under the title 'Methodistiaeth Calfinaidd Cymru' ('Welsh Calvinistic Methodism'), with an English-language edition appearing in 1934. These volumes were highly acclaimed by professional historians when they appeared and they have since become classics. 
Roberts took an active part in the life of Wales, and led a deputation to London in 1932 on behalf of the depressed valleys, to plead their cause before the prime minister, Stanley Baldwin. A committed supporter of the Labour Party, Roberts succeeded David Lloyd George as chairman of the consultative council on religious broadcasting within the BBC. The University of Wales awarded him an honorary doctorate of divinity in 1954, and his denomination organized a testimonial for him, though he never actually retired. He died in St David's Hospital, Cardiff, on 29 July 1959, and his ashes were scattered in the garden of Thornhill crematorium on the outskirts of Cardiff. After his death the administrative offices in Richmond Road, Cardiff, where he had worked, were renamed Ty John Roberts. 


@@@@@


doc= 54020


Hughes, Goronwy Moelwyn (1897-1955), lawyer and politician, was born in Llwyn Onn, Cardigan, on 6 October 1897. Baptized Goronwy, he was always known as Ronw. A Welsh-speaker, he was the eldest of the six children of the Revd Dr John Gruffydd Moelwyn Hughes (1866-1944), a former moderator of the Welsh Presbyterian church, and his wife, Anna Maria Lewis. After attending council schools in Cardigan, he entered University College Wales, Aberystwyth, where his studies were interrupted by the First World War. While serving with the West Yorkshire regiment he was wounded in 1916. He transferred to the Royal Flying Corps and served as a pilot (1917-19). After the war he returned to Aberystwyth and graduated BA, before going on to Downing College, Cambridge, where he graduated LLB, obtained first-class honours in the law tripos, and won the chancellor's gold medal in English law. He joined the Inner Temple and was called to the bar in 1922. 
Moelwyn Hughes practised on the northern circuit, where his reputation in transport and commercial law grew rapidly (he once successfully represented Billy Butlin in litigation over property which subsequently became the Pwllheli holiday camp). He also lectured in international law at the London School of Economics and in commercial law for the Law Society, and was an examiner for the Council of Legal Education and for London University. He wrote extensively, and edited the seventh edition of Lord Birkenhead's 'International Law' (1928), as well as contributing the sections on agency, bills of exchange, money, and moneylending to the 1931-5 edition of 'Halsbury's Laws of England'. He also wrote jointly with Dingle Foot a standard work on rail and road traffic legislation. This ensured the continued demand for his services at hearings of various transport tribunals. On 11 May 1929 he married Louise Mary 
(Lulu; 1902-1973)
, the only child of (Frederick) Arthur Greer, lord justice of appeal. They had two sons and one daughter. 
Brought up in the Welsh radical tradition (he was active in the Fabian Society in his earlier days), Moelwyn Hughes unsuccessfully contested two general elections for the Liberal Party: at West Rhondda in 1929 and at Southport in 1931. He joined the Labour Party in November 1934 and stood unsuccessfully as its candidate for Cardiganshire in 1935. He was, however, elected unopposed at a by-election at Carmarthen in March 1941 and held the seat until his defeat by a Liberal at the general election in 1945. He made a modest contribution to parliamentary proceedings during those war years, inquiring, for example, about school funding under Rab Butler's 'Education Act' 1944 and condemning excessive costs in undefended divorce proceedings. He returned to parliament for North Islington in 1950 but retired owing to ill health in the autumn of 1951. There had been speculation whether he might have become one of the law officers in 1950 (he had worked with Sir Hartley Shawcross on war crimes prosecutions) but events surrounding one of the public offices he held suggest that this would have been unlikely. During his first spell as an MP he was appointed king's counsel (1943) and during his second he was made a bencher of his inn (1950). 
Outside parliament during the momentous years of the first Attlee government, Moelwyn Hughes was none the less extremely active in public affairs. He was chairman of the Greater London water inquiry (1947), special assistant commissioner for Wales under the Local Government Boundary Commission (1946-9), and recorder of Bolton (1946-53). The latter no doubt prompted his appointment as commissioner for inquiry into the Burnden Park, Bolton, football disaster in 1946, when thirty-three spectators were crushed to death by the sheer pressure of numbers in the stadium. In analysing the circumstances, which in many respects uncannily rehearsed the Hillsborough disaster in 1989, Moelwyn Hughes's report attributed the tragedy to the unanticipated size of the crowd (85,000 as against the expected 50,000), the admission of too many spectators to the fatal enclosure, unauthorized entries, and, perhaps crucially, the lack of machinery to ensure proper co-operation between police and club (since turnstile officials and keys were not readily available). Bolton Wanderers Football Club itself was not blamed but the club felt a great deal of remorse. Anticipating the post-Hillsborough disaster legislation, Moelwyn Hughes recommended that football grounds be made subject to safety licensing and that a centralized system at each ground be installed to count the number of spectators present. No legislation followed, merely an inadequate system of voluntary licensing for all grounds of at least 10,000 capacity. 
As chairman of the cotton manufacturing commission from 1946 to 1949 Moelwyn Hughes was aware of the need to improve industrial productivity. To this end he suggested that where factories could demonstrate that redeployment had occurred, incentive payment schemes (which the official papers called the 'Moelwyn Hughes system') might be introduced. They would replace the industry-wide uniform price list legally enforceable by orders issued under the 'Cotton Manufacturing Industry (Temporary Provisions) Act 1934' to prevent undercutting by employers. The scheme anticipated the later growth of plant-level bargaining. 
From April 1946 to 31 January 1950 Moelwyn Hughes chaired the Catering Wages Commission. His resignation from that body dovetailed with his campaigning as Labour Party candidate for North Islington at the general election of February 1950. However, the timing hides the controversy which would undoubtedly have precipitated his resignation in any case. The sixth report of the commission, published in December 1949, had criticized what it considered to be inadequate government steps to support and encourage the dollar-earning potential of the British tourist industry, pointing to the absence of what later generations would call 'joined-up government'. The report quoted from correspondence passing, among others, between the president of the Board of Trade, Harold Wilson, and the commission, and appeared to suggest that the government had ignored the commission's recommendations. A number of ministers, including Wilson and George Isaacs, the minister of labour, took exception to what they claimed was a breach of confidence in publishing the correspondence, and Isaacs wrote to Moelwyn Hughes condemning his alleged indiscretion. It was an accusation which hurt him deeply and, more importantly, which he vehemently rejected. One department, he insisted, was aware that the correspondence, drafted in formal style, would be published and none was marked private and confidential. On his resignation, the ministry press release announcing his departure gave no hint of the dispute. His replacement pro tem was Sir John Forster, president of the industrial court. 
Moelwyn Hughes was also a member of the Rushcliffe committee on legal aid and advice, appointed in 1944, which unanimously recommended a publicly funded system of legal aid. The principle was eventually adopted in the 'Legal Aid and Advice Act 1949'. Both the Society of Labour Lawyers and the Haldane Society of Socialist Lawyers, of which he had been a prominent member, presented to the inquiry evidence which did not fundamentally challenge the role of private legal practice, although they favoured wider lay involvement in the administration of the scheme than eventually obtained. 
Moelwyn Hughes accepted a range of appointments in the public service, where his professional skills could be displayed and where he could bring forward fresh ideas; his useful and thoughtful analysis of the Bolton disaster of 1946 was again cited, many years after his death, in the unfortunate circumstances following the Hillsborough, Heysel, and Bradford City football disasters involving English fans in the 1980s. He died at 6 Heather Gardens, Golders Green, Middlesex, of heart failure, on 1 November 1955, and was cremated three days later at Golders Green crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 54021


Evans, William (1883-1968), writer, was born on 22 April 1883 at Vale View, Cwm-bach, Llanwinio, Carmarthenshire, the sixth son of the nine children of the Revd Dr Daniel Evans (1850-1928) and Mary Davies (1853-1932). His father was heavily involved in local politics and culture; he was also editor of the journal 'Y Celt'. In 1890 he accepted a call to Cwmafan, near Port Talbot, and his son was educated at the local school, then Port Talbot county school (1893-1900) and the University College of Wales, Bangor, where he graduated BA in 1905; he then spent a year at Mansfield College, Oxford. 
Evans was ordained in 1906 at the English-speaking Congregational church at Dolgellau, and met there his future wife, Nesta Wyn Edwards (1883-1968), an organist and a first-class honours graduate of the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth. They were married on 28 December 1910 and settled at Bridgend, Glamorgan, where he had moved in 1909 as minister of the English Congregational church. In 1916 he accepted a call to Richmond Road English Congregational Church, Cardiff, but in 1925 he returned to Bridgend to serve as minister. He was well loved; the 'Glamorgan Gazette' in 1925 referred to his 'winning gifts of rich humour, geniality and kindness'. 
By this time Evans had become a well-known bardic figure, having won the crown at the national eisteddfod of Wales on three occasions: in Abergavenny (1913), Birkenhead (1917), and Pwllheli (1925). He was extremely skilled at writing lyrics in both Welsh and English. The volumes 'Songs of the Heather Heights' (1914), 'A Quire of Rhymes: Short Poems' (1943), 'Where I Belong' (1946), and 'Further Poems' (1955) praised the beauty of the countryside of west Wales and the Vale of Glamorgan. A convinced pacifist, he voiced his anti-war philosophy in 'Dail iorwg' ('Ivy Leaves'; 1919) and 'Unwaith eto' ('Once more'; 1946), while 'Atgof' ('Memory') is perhaps his finest lyric on the subject. He wrote a great many poems for the eisteddfod movement, poems that were recited in chapel and cultural gatherings. These were compiled in 'Darnau adrodd' (1932) and a follow-up, 'Darnau newydd' (1944). 
Evans also edited the poems of Thomas Jones (1820-1876) as 'Gweithiau Taliesin o Eifion' (1922) and published three volumes of prose in Welsh, 'Gweithio englyn' (1948), an introduction to traditional versecraft, 'Y filltir deg' (1954), and 'Colofnau Wil Ifan' (1962), which included a selection of his weekly columns for the daily newspaper 'Western Mail'. He collaborated with musicians such as David Evans, Haydn Morris, and T. Hopkin Evans in writing or translating a variety of songs. His admiration for D. Afan Thomas (1881-1928) led him to write a biography, 'Afan: a Welsh Music Maker' (1944). 
Evans was also a playwright. 'Dreams Come True' (1916), a biblical drama in three acts, was followed by the Welsh-language plays 'Y dowlad' (1922), 'Yr het goch' (1933), 'Helbulon llenor' (1938), and 'Flynyddoedd o flaen Adda' (1938). 
In addition to contributing cartoons for the 'Western Mail', Evans was a regular columnist and broadcaster. He retired as pastor of Bridgend in 1947, and that same year was made an honorary MA by the University of Wales. Between 1947 and 1950 he was archdruid of the national eisteddfod and, at a service to celebrate the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953, he became the first nonconformist ever to preach from the pulpit of the Anglican cathedral in St David's, Pembrokeshire. 
Evans died on 16 July 1968 at his home at 14 Park Street, Bridgend, six months after the death of his wife; he was buried at Rhyd-y-main, Merioneth. A collection of his poems, 'Bro fy mebyd a cherddi eraill', published in 1998, includes the most impressive of his lyrics from his volumes 'Dros y nyth' (1915), 'Dail iorwg' (1919), 'Plant y babell' (1922), 'O ddydd i ddydd' (1927), 'Y winllan las' (1936), 'Unwaith eto' (1946), and 'Haul a glaw' (n.d.). A Bridgend road is named in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 54027


William Willett (1837-1913) and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Box. The two William Willetts established the leading firm of speculative housebuilders in late Victorian London, constructing over a thousand substantial middle-class homes. 


@@@@@


doc= 54028


Parsons, Mary, countess of Rosse (1813-1885), photographer, was born on 21 July 1813 at Heaton Hall, Bradford, the elder daughter of John Wilmer Field (1775-1837), landowner, and his first wife, Ann Wharton-Myddleton (died 1815). She and her younger sister, Delia, were educated at home by their governess, Susan Lawson, who is reputed to have encouraged Mary's inquiring mind and wide-ranging interests. After 1827 the family spent most of the year at the London house in Hanover Square. On 14 April 1836 she married William Parsons, Lord Oxmantown (1800-1867), who, on the death of his father in 1841, became third earl of Rosse and inherited his family estates and Birr Castle, King's county. The first of her eleven children, a daughter, was born in 1839, but only four sons, Laurence Parsons (1840-1908), Randal (1848-1936), Clere (1851-1923), and Charles Parsons (1854-1931), survived beyond childhood. 
Mary Parsons's marriage settlement and substantial inheritance enabled her to pursue her scientific and artistic interests and to participate in those of her husband, who was president of the Royal Society (1849-54) and a commissioner for the Great Exhibition of 1851. She is said to have mastered sufficient astronomy to assist him with calculations, and supported him practically and financially in the construction of his giant telescope, completed in 1845. This was to feature repeatedly in some of her most successful and evocative photographs, one of which, 'Mouth of the Great Rosse Telescope at Parsonstown', was reproduced as the engraved frontispiece to 'Curiosities of Science' (1858). Others, such as 'Lord Rosse's Three-Foot Telescope' (Castle Ward album) and the various stereoscopic images of the early 1860s, were more technically informative and were reproduced in 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' (1861) and exhibited at the Dublin International Exhibition of 1865. 
Early in 1854 Lady Rosse took her first photographs, initially using the waxed paper process and then working extensively with collodion, which she applied to portraiture, photographing both notable figures, such as the mathematician and astronomer Sir Thomas Romney Robinson, and finely composed informal groups of her family and friends, images that are paralleled in the photography of the ladies Nevill at Eridge Park, Kent, and the early work of Lady Hawarden at Dundrum in neighbouring co. Tipperary, in common with whom she used shadow as a compositional element. She was proposed as a member of the Dublin Photographic Society (later the Photographic Society of Ireland) in November 1856 and in 1859 was awarded the society medal for the best paper negative. From the grounds of Birr, she created picturesque views of the castle, the River Camor, and the town of Birr: the sort of images she might have contributed to the Amateur Photographic Association of which she became a member in 1863. She experimented too with photography from the yacht 'Titania', which the family chartered for seven years. 
Lady Rosse was a woman with great energy and determination. In a successful attempt to alleviate local poverty during the Irish potato famine of 1845, she initiated extensive work to provide local employment; in collaboration with her uncle Richard Wharton-Myddleton she redesigned and organized the rebuilding of the castle demesne. Subsequently she built a nursery wing, a stable block, gatehouse, and entrance gate. She was also responsible for the design and on-site manufacture of cast-iron and bronze gates, with heraldic embellishment to the keep gates. She recorded the new building photographically and frequently used the arch of the keep gate as a background for group portraits. Her design ability is also evidenced by a massive oak armorial sideboard, a Gothic bedroom suite, and a Gothic monument to the memory of her father in St Paul's Church, Shipley. 
Early portraits of Mary Parsons portray her as a slim, elegant, dark-haired woman; later she appears more formidable, but seldom without a smile. She excelled as a hostess, was devoted to her sons, and played a major part in their upbringing and education. After the death of her husband in 1867, she left Birr to spend the rest of her life at 10 Connaught Place, London. Always an independent woman, she maintained interests in her Heaton and Shipley estates and in global investments, particularly railway stock. She died on 22 July 1885 in her London home, and was buried at Birr. Many of her photographs are in the collection of the Birr Scientific Foundation, Offaly. 


@@@@@


doc= 54031


Henry, Augustine (1857-1930), botanical collector and dendrologist, was born on 2 July 1857 in Dundee, the first of six children of Bernard Henry ('c'.1825-1891) and Mary MacNamee. His father, at one time a gold-prospector in California and Australia, was a native of the townland of Tyanee on the west bank of the River Bann in co. Londonderry. Soon after Austin (as Augustine was called within his family) was born, the family moved to Cookstown, co. Tyrone, where his father was in business as a flax dealer and owned a grocery shop. 
Henry was educated at Cookstown Academy and in Queen's College, Galway. He studied natural sciences and philosophy, graduating with a first-class bachelor of arts degree and a gold medal in 1877. Henry then studied medicine at Queen's College, Belfast, where he obtained his master of arts degree in 1878. For a year he was in the London Hospital, and during a visit to Belfast in 1879, at the suggestion of one of his professors, he applied for a medical post in the Chinese imperial maritime customs service. Henry completed his medical studies as rapidly as he could, became a licentiate from the Royal College of Physicians in Edinburgh, passed the Chinese customs service examinations (for which he required a working knowledge of Chinese), and left for China in the summer of 1881. 
Henry's first posting was in Shanghai, but in March 1882 he was assigned to Ichang (Yichang), a port on the Yangtze (Yangzi) River more than 900 miles inland in Hupeh (Hubei) province. There he served as the assistant medical officer and also performed customs duties. Bored by the routine of life within the small European community, Henry began collecting plants in the vicinity of Ichang in November 1884. Four months later he contacted the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, offering to collect specimens and seeking assistance with identification. As a result, Henry became one of the most important botanical collectors to have worked in central China, although he regarded this work as a hobby. He undertook two long field trips in the Hupeh-Szechwan (Sichuan) region, and also paid native collectors for specimens. During the next four years he accumulated a vast collection of pressed, dried specimens; the first set is preserved at Kew. In April 1889 he was transferred to Hainan where he stayed four months. 
At the end of a year's home leave, on 20 June 1891, Henry married Caroline Orridge ('c'.1860-1894), daughter of a London jeweller, at St George's, Bloomsbury, London. They travelled to China, and were based in Shanghai before transferring to Taiwan. Henry wrote 'Notes on Economic Botany of China' (1893) during this period. The tropical climate did not suit Caroline, who became progressively more ill with tuberculosis. She sought respite elsewhere, and in January 1894 left for Denver, Colorado, USA, where she died in September 1894; the couple had no children. A genus of tropical Chinese primroses was named 'Carolinella' in her memory; because the few species are indistinguishable from 'Primula' it is no longer regarded as distinct. After his wife's death, Henry decided to remain in China and was transferred to the isolated southern cities of Mengzi and thence Simao, where he continued his duties within the customs service as well as continuing to collect plants and to publish notes about the Chinese flora. He resigned and left for Europe on 31 December 1900. 
By 1901 Henry was famous as a botanical collector; the Royal Horticultural Society of London recognized this by awarding him the Veitch memorial medal in 1902 and the Victoria medal of honour in 1906. He stayed in London from the spring of 1901 until the autumn of 1902, sorting his botanical collections at Kew. During this period he helped to finance the establishment by his friend Miss Evelyn Gleeson of a craft centre at Dun Emer in Dublin; this centre made a most important contribution to the Celtic revival. Henry gradually decided to make a career in forestry, and persuaded the Irish authorities to secure a place for him in the School of Forestry, Nancy, France. While Henry was studying there, Henry John Elwes (1846-1922), a wealthy arboriculturist, asked him to collaborate on a monograph about trees cultivated in Ireland and Britain, so he left France and set to work visiting estates, plantations, and gardens throughout Britain and Ireland to record, identify, and measure trees. 'Trees of Great Britain and Ireland' was printed privately by Elwes in seven volumes with an index volume between November 1906 and July 1913. 
Early in 1907 Henry became reader in forestry at the University of Cambridge; he remained there until January 1913 when he became the first professor of forestry in the Royal College of Science, Dublin (later part of University College, Dublin). He retired in 1926 and died at his home, 5 Sandford Terrace, Clonskeagh, co. Dublin, on 23 March 1930. A lapsed Roman Catholic, Henry was buried with the rites of that church in Dean's Grange cemetery, Dublin. 
Henry had married Alice Helen 
(Elsie; 1882-1956)
, daughter of the physician Sir Lauder Brunton, on 17 March 1908; they had no children. Elsie Henry was herself a keen amateur botanist and dendrologist, and she organized her husband's herbarium of voucher specimens for 'Trees of Great Britain and Ireland' and presented it to the National Botanic Gardens, Glasnevin, along with some of his profusely annotated books. The Henrys had a wide circle of friends and acquaintances including the Yeats family, George Russell (pseudonym A. E.), and George Bernard Shaw and his wife. 
As an expert with unequalled knowledge of the exotic trees cultivated in Ireland (and their performance in Irish conditions) Henry gave evidence to the committee of inquiry into Irish forestry established in 1907. He advocated commercially viable plantations of more than 500 acres, planted with conifers from the north-western coastal region of North America. This recommendation was largely accepted, and Henry is highly regarded as the 'father' of Irish commercial forestry. There is a memorial stone at Avondale in co. Wicklow, and a memorial plaque in Portglenone Forest, co. Antrim. 
Henry's accomplishments in China were recognized when a wing of the Fan Memorial Institute of Botany in Peking (Beijing) was named in his honour (although this no longer exists), and fascicle II of 'Icones plantarum Sinicarum' was dedicated to him. An uncounted number of plants bear names that mark Henry's exploration of the Chinese flora; examples include 'Acer henryi', 'Parthenocissus henryana', and 'Rhododendron augustinii'. Henry himself introduced an orange-blossomed lily, 'Lilium henryi', and of this plant, Ernest Wilson, Henry's successor as a botanical explorer in China, wrote: 'It is particularly fitting that such a notable addition to our gardens should bear the honoured name of a pioneer who has done so much to acquaint a sceptical world of the floral wealth of interior China' (Wilson, 80). 


@@@@@


doc= 54032


Knowles, Matilda Cullen (1864-1933), botanist, was born on 31 January 1864 at Ballymena, co. Antrim, one of three daughters of William James Knowles, an insurance agent and amateur archaeologist. From an early age she was interested in botany, and as a girl she became friendly with Robert Lloyd Praeger (1865-1953). They botanized together in Antrim and Londonderry, and in the late 1890s Miss Knowles undertook the survey of co. Tyrone for Praeger's 'Irish Topographical Botany' (1901). She published her first paper in 1897 on the plants of co. Tyrone. 
Subsequently, with her sister Catherine, Matilda Knowles went to Dublin and attended the natural history classes at the Royal College of Science. By June 1902 she had joined the staff of the Science and Art Museum, Dublin, on a temporary basis to assist Professor Thomas Johnson (1863-1954); in 1907 she was promoted to assistant in the botany section, working at first, under the direction of Johnson, on listing the flowering plants and ferns (vascular plants) native and naturalized in Ireland. In the preface to 'Hand List of Irish Flowering Plants and Ferns' (1910), Johnson acknowledged that 'Though I am responsible for the List, and the form it takes, its preparation is due to my assistant, Miss M. C. Knowles'. When Johnson retired as custodian of the botany department in 1923, Miss Knowles was placed in charge of the collections, and although she was due to retire in 1929 she was granted extensions until her death. 
Miss Knowles is highly regarded as a student of lichens, non-flowering, often microscopic plants formed by symbiotic fungi and algae. The stimulus that led her to study lichens was the Clare Island survey, initiated in 1908, during which she assisted Annie Lorrain Smith (1854-1937) of the British Museum (Natural History), London. They visited the island, situated off the south-west coast of co. Mayo, collecting and cataloguing lichens in 1909 and 1910. Smith's report on the island's lichen flora was published in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy' (1911). 
Miss Knowles published her first paper on Irish lichens in 1912. She studied the zonation of the maritime and marine lichens on the rocky coast at Howth, co. Dublin, and in 1913 published her work in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Dublin Society'. This paper is now recognized as a pioneering ecological study because Knowles defined for the first time three zones characterized by lichens of conspicuously different colours, grey highest up the shore, then orange, and black nearest the sea. Praeger prompted Matilda Knowles to list all Irish lichen species and record their distribution according to the vice-counties scheme of his 'Irish Topographical Botany'. With the collaboration of about thirty naturalists she assembled data on 802 lichens, including about twenty new to Ireland. 'Lichens of Ireland', her principal work, was published in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy' in 1929. 
Miss Knowles named three new species in her paper on the Howth lichen zones: 'Acarospora benedarensis' (its name is derived from Ben Edar, the Irish name for Howth) is a synonym of 'Acarospora smaragdula'; 'Verrucaria lorrain-smithiae' is a synonym of 'Verrucaria sandstedei'; 'Lecania atrynoides' is accepted as distinct. While she received no academic recognition during her lifetime, two lichens, 'Lecidea matildae', named by A. H. Magnusson in 1956, and 'Verrucaria knowlesiae' named by P. M. McCarthy in 1988, honour her. She was regarded as an 'accurate and energetic botanist, a charming companion, and a wise and trusty friend' (Praeger, 'Irish Naturalists' Journal', 193; 'Journal of Botany', 231). Following a short illness, Matilda Knowles died at the Mercer's Hospital, Dublin, on 27 April 1933. 


@@@@@


doc= 54034


Stelfox, Arthur Wilson (1883-1972), naturalist, was born in Belfast on 15 December 1883, the youngest child of James Stelfox (1842-1910), civil engineer, and his wife, Jennie McIlwaine, daughter of the rector of St George's, Belfast. After attending Campbell College in Belfast, he went in 1907 to London to train as an architect; he became an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1909. 
Early interested in natural history, Stelfox was publishing papers on molluscs as early as 1904 and on Irish plants by 1906. He took part in the Royal Irish Academy's Clare Island survey of 1909, 1910, and 1912, and considered his resulting report on the land and freshwater Mollusca of the area, published in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy' in 1912, to be his best paper. Unhappy with Woodward's 1913 monograph on the small freshwater bivalves 'Pisidium', Stelfox, Charles Oldham, and R. A. Phillips formed the 'Pisidium'-Club, a collaboration which resulted in a definitive paper in the 'Journal of Conchology' in 1918 (the species 'Neopisidium Stelfoxi' Pirogov & Starobogatov was later named in his honour). 
In 1914 Stelfox married Margarita Dawson (Daisy) Mitchell (1886-1971), a botanist who published much on the Mycetozoa (slime moulds) in Ireland. About this time he also began pioneering experiments in the breeding of land snails ('Helix aspersa' and various species of 'Cepaea'), work which was published in the 'Journal of Conchology' in 1915, 1918, and 1968. 
In 1920 Stelfox joined the staff of the National Museum of Ireland in Dublin. From this time he began to specialize in the Hymenoptera (particularly parasitic Hymenoptera). He ordered the pioneer collection of A. H. Haliday which had been reduced to chaos some hundred years earlier and prepared a number of public exhibits. Although he acted as 'de facto' keeper for a number of years, Stelfox was unsuccessful in gaining the post on a permanent basis; in 1930 Patrick O'Connor was appointed instead. During his years at the museum Stelfox became increasingly interested in (and skilled at) the identification of animals from remains found at various archaeological sites; an important paper on the subject was published in 1938 in 'Irish Naturalists' Journal' (a journal he had been instrumental in establishing in the mid-1920s). 
Stelfox retired from the museum in 1948. In 1956 he moved from Dublin to co. Down, taking with him the plants which had made his garden at Harolds Cross so well known (he was said to have had every British species of 'Carex' in cultivation and also grew plants extinct in their wild habitats in Ireland). As in Dublin, his Down residence was an open house to which younger botanists were always welcome. Until 1972 he continued to produce a steady stream of papers, many of which appeared in the 'Irish Naturalists' Journal'. Between 1927 and 1966 he published eleven major entomological papers in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy'; his full malacological bibliography comprised eighty-two titles. With his wife he wrote 'The National Programme for Rural Science or Nature Study' (1928) addressed to teachers of rural science, at that time a popular subject with Irish educationists. In 1966 he donated his Hymenoptera collection to the Smithsonian Institution; it then numbered in excess of 90,000 specimens. Beirne's vilification of Stelfox in the entomological supplement to the 'Irish Naturalists' Journal' (1985) was an undeserved treatment of a man who was generous, endlessly patient with enquiries, and scrupulously honest in his dealings. Stelfox died in Downshire Hospital, Downpatrick, co. Down, on 19 May 1972. He was buried at the city cemetery in Belfast. 


@@@@@


doc= 54036


Clarke, Edward Marmaduke (c.1806-1859), scientific instrument maker, was born in Ireland. Little if anything is known about his parentage, early life and education, or family life. One source identifies him with the Edward Clarke who traded in partnership with Richard Spear, a prominent Dublin instrument maker, from 1815 to 1819 before setting up in his own right as an optician. This however would require a rather drastic reappraisal of Clarke's probable date of birth. He is thought to have taken an active role in the formation of the Dublin Mechanics' Institution in 1826. By the early 1830s Clarke was settled in London, working for the scientific instrument making company of Watkins and Hill, who were among the largest London dealers in philosophical apparatus, specializing among other things in electromagnetic apparatus. Clarke was employed by Watkins and Hill to investigate the possibility of producing locomotion by means of electricity, an area of increasing interest among London's practical electricians. 
Not long after arriving in London Clarke set up an instrument making company in his own right. Within a few years he was embroiled in controversy with Francis Watkins (of Watkins and Hill) and in particular with his protege, the American instrument maker Joseph Saxton, over the invention of the magneto-electric machine. In 1833 Saxton had developed such a machine, in which coils of wire fixed in front of the poles of a horseshoe magnet were rotated to produce an electric current. The machine was demonstrated at the Cambridge meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in June 1833 and later put on display at the Adelaide Gallery, as the National Gallery of Practical Science was known, where Saxton was employed as an instrument maker. Watkins had been instrumental in staving off charges that Saxton had been guilty of plagiarizing the machine from one developed by the French instrument maker Hippolyte Pixii. A few years later Clarke put his own version of the magneto-electric machine (or magnetic electrical machine as he described it) on the market, writing extensive descriptions in the scientific press to advertise his new product. Saxton publicly accused Clarke of piracy, alleging that his machine was simply a variation of Saxton's own invention and that no experiment could be conducted with it that could not equally well be carried out with Saxton's. In the spring of 1837 Clarke played a key role in the foundation of the short-lived Electrical Society of London. The society's first meeting was held at his shop on the Lowther Arcade near the Strand. The establishment of the society was inspired by the electrician and popular lecturer William Sturgeon, in whose recently founded 'Annals of Electricity' Clarke had published a detailed account of his magnetic electrical machine. The society's meetings soon moved from Clarke's 'Laboratory of Science' to the Adelaide Gallery, which also had its premises on the Lowther Arcade. 
By the mid-1840s Clarke appears to have largely abandoned his scientific instrument business; he was in any case the proprietor of the Rodney Iron Works in Battersea by 1845. In the early 1850s he embarked upon another ambitious project. He was the projector and then the first proprietor of the Royal Panopticon of Science and Art in Leicester Square, which, having been granted a royal charter on 21 February 1850, opened to the public on 16 March 1854. A building in Saracenic style, designed by the architect T. Hayter Lewis, was constructed to house the new exhibition. The panopticon was based on two previous institutions established during the 1830s, the National Gallery of Practical Science and the Royal Polytechnic Institution. Both those institutions had been established with the aim of exhibiting the latest in science and invention to the public. Although the Adelaide Gallery had been converted into a casino in 1845, the Royal Polytechnic Institution was still a going concern in the 1850s. Clarke was the resident proprietor of the panopticon until his resignation in 1856. Shortly afterwards the panopticon itself closed down, and the building became the premises of the Alhambra Palace. Clarke died of apoplexy at 4 Birchin Lane, Cornhill, in the City of London, on 26 January 1859. 


@@@@@


doc= 54037


Seymour, Sir Michael Culme-, third baronet (1836-1920), naval officer, was born on 13 March 1836 at Northchurch, Berkhamsted. He was the son of Sir John Hobart Seymour, second baronet (1800-1880), who took the additional surname Culme after the death of his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of the Revd Thomas Culme, on 6 March 1841. After attending Harrow School he entered the navy in 1850. He had early experience of active service in the Second Anglo-Burmese War of 1852 and in the Baltic operations of the Russian War in 1854 and then moved to the Black Sea theatre, where he served ashore with the naval brigade at the siege of Sevastopol. He was then appointed to the 'Calcutta', which would carry the flag of his uncle Admiral Sir Michael Seymour, on the China station. Here he benefited from the excellent education provided by the naval instructor John Knox Laughton. He was promoted lieutenant on 25 May 1857, and served as flag-lieutenant during the Second Opium War. He was engaged at the desperate boat action in Fatshan (Foshan) Creek and the capture of Canton (Guangzhou) and the Peiho (Beihe) forts. As flag-lieutenant he was promoted commander on 6 June 1859, when his uncle's command ended. Between June 1861 and July 1864 he commanded the gun-vessel 'Wanderer' in the Mediterranean. He was promoted captain on 16 December 1865, and married Mary Georgiana Watson (died 6 March 1912), daughter of Richard Watson MP of Rockingham Castle, Northamptonshire, on 16 October 1866. They had three sons and two daughters, one of whom -- Mary Elizabeth (1871-1944) married the naval officer Trevylyan Dacres Willes Napier. 
In 1869 Seymour was appointed naval aide-de-camp to the queen. In 1874-6 he served as private secretary to his near neighbour George Ward-Hunt, the first lord of the Admiralty. In 1876 he commanded the ironclad 'Monarch', and in 1877 moved to the 'Temeraire'. She was part of the squadron that Admiral Sir Geoffrey Phipps Hornby led up the Dardanelles in 1878. He served as flag-captain to the commander-in-chief at Portsmouth, Admiral Sir Alfred Ryder, between 1879 and 1881. He succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his father in September 1880. Promoted rear-admiral on 6 May 1882, he was appointed to the particular service squadron in 1885 under Hornby, and was then commander-in-chief on the Pacific station from 1885 to 1887. As a vice-admiral (19 June 1888), he was commander-in-chief of the Channel Fleet from 1890 to 1893, and he reached the rank of admiral on 13 May 1893. This would normally have been the end of his sea-going career. However, in July 1893 he was dispatched to command the Mediterranean Fleet by the first lord of the Admiralty, his close friend and relative by marriage Earl Spencer. He replaced Admiral Sir George Tryon, who had been lost with the 'Victoria'. The appointment was critical: Britain's international position was intimately identified with the Mediterranean Fleet, and any sign of weakness would encourage the newly formed Franco-Russian alliance to challenge British pre-eminence at sea, upon which rested the whole fabric of the empire. 
Seymour remained in the Mediterranean until 1897, restoring the morale and good order of the fleet. He also reversed the radical tactical thinking that Tryon had made a feature of his regime, and it is to his command that Andrew Gordon (in 'The Rules of the Game') attributes a reaffirmation of the signal-driven and over-centralized tactical methods that failed at Jutland. A master of steamship handling and formal evolutions, Seymour selected a staff of future admirals to carry through his counter-reformation, including Francis Bridgeman, John Rushworth Jellicoe, and Hugh Evan-Thomas. Officers who had served in Seymour's fleet held the majority of high commands up to and during the First World War. His impact on the real fighting efficiency of the fleet, particularly gunnery, was less satisfactory. On leaving the Mediterranean he spent the years 1897-1900 as commander-in-chief at Portsmouth, and became principal aide-de-camp to the queen in 1899. He was also awarded the GCB and GCVO during his career, which had benefited from a close family connection with the royal family stretching back to the first baronet. When he retired, on 13 March 1901, he was awarded the honorary rank of vice-admiral of the United Kingdom, which he held until his death. Seymour maintained a lively and well-informed interest in the service for the rest of his life, not only through the career of his eldest son, also called Sir Michael Culme-Seymour ('b'. 29 Aug 1867), but also through his many distinguished subordinates, notably Jellicoe, who always looked back on his period under Seymour's command with particular nostalgia. He died at his home, Wadenhoe House, at Oundle in Northamptonshire, on 11 October 1920. His eldest son, the fourth baronet, held important naval commands before his untimely death on 2 April 1925 as a vice-admiral. Culme-Seymour's association with royalty, and especially with the sailor-prince, later George V, had a curious consequence. There was a fairly persistent rumour, quite unfounded, that George, then Prince George, had in 1890 in Malta married Mary, Culme-Seymour's elder daughter. In February 1911, F. Mylius was prosecuted for perpetrating this libel in a republican squib. Culme-Seymour gave evidence in the king's favour, and Mylius was imprisoned for twelve months. Mary (died 1944), who also gave evidence, as did other members of the family, was in fact legitimately married in 1899 to Vice-Admiral Sir Trevylyan Napier. 
A slight, spartan figure with, as an admiral, a white naval beard, Seymour had enormous reserves of physical energy, and continued to win foot races even after his appointment as commander-in-chief of the Mediterranean Fleet. He was also a fearsome martinet with a mania for order. Although his career was made by early promotion, secured by his uncle, his determination and force of character were seen to great advantage in helping the service to recover from the 'Victoria' disaster at a time when Britain's international position was threatened. 


@@@@@


doc= 54038


Henry Holden (1814-1909), classical scholar and headmaster, was born at Birmingham on 7 July 1814, the second son of Henry Augustus Holden (1785-1870), a clergyman, and his wife, Mary Willetts Holden. He was the elder brother of Luther Holden, surgeon and anatomist. Educated at Shrewsbury School under Samuel Butler, he matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, in 1832, the holder of one of the earliest scholarships at that college to be awarded by open competition. Gaining first-class honours in 'literae humaniores', he graduated BA in 1837 and MA in 1839, and was ordained in the latter year. He was incumbent of Upminster from 1839 to 1845. As headmaster of Uppingham School from 1845 to 1853 (and predecessor to Edward Thring), with Richard Dacre Archer Hind he edited 'Sabrinae corolla in hortulis regiae scholae Salopiensis continuerunt tres viri floribus legendis' (1850), a collection of poetical extracts with translations into Latin or Greek, which was highly influential on the practice of versification in schools and universities. Holden was headmaster of Durham Cathedral school from 1853 until 1882, then vicar of South Luffenham, Rutland, from 1881 until 1898. He was married: first, on 19 January 1847, to Elizabeth Margaret Anne (died 1853), daughter of the Revd Richard Edmonds, and second, on 19 December 1857, to Georgiana, daughter of Byron Aldham, a merchant. He retired to Boscobel, Streatham Common, London, where he died on 30 March 1909. 


@@@@@


doc= 54039


Ecgberht I (d. 673). Later hagiographical texts, which may preserve some genuine historical information, mention that Eorcenberht had a brother named Eormenred (another Frankish name) and describe him as king; he may have ruled jointly with Eorcenberht (although Bede does not mention him), or he may perhaps have acted as an under-king. Eormenred is said to have died before Eorcenberht, leaving to his brother's care his two sons, AEthelberht and AEthelred. After Eorcenberht's own death, Ecgberht arranged for the murder of his cousins, presumably to secure his own position. Later, as compensation for his blood-guilt, he gave land to their sister AEbba (or Domneva), which she used to found a monastery in Thanet. In 669 the minster at Reculver was established by Ecgberht's mass priest Bassa on land granted to him by the king. Ecgberht also seems to have been involved in the foundation of the minster at Chertsey in Surrey, which is an indication that his power extended, at least for a short time, beyond the frontiers of Kent. Ecgberht died in July 673. Although his two sons, Eadric (d. 686) ['see under 'Hlothhere] and Wihtred (d. 725), were passed over initially and his brother Hlothhere (d. 685) succeeded him, they did become kings later. 


@@@@@


doc= 54040


Heard, Henry Fitzgerald (1889-1971), writer and broadcaster, was born on 6 October 1889 at 69 Victoria Park Road, South Hackney, London, the second of three sons of the Revd Henry James Heard (died 1931) and his wife, Maud Jervis Bannatyne (died 1892). His paternal grandfather, the Revd John Bickford Heard (1828-1908), gave the Hulsean lectures in 1892. At the time of his birth Heard's father was the incumbent of Christ Church, South Hackney. After the death of his mother Heard was looked after by a grandmother who belonged to the Plymouth Brethren. 
Heard, who was known as Gerald, was educated first at Hamilton House and Lansdowne Proprietary in Bath, and then at Sherborne School, Dorset, between May 1904 and July 1907. At that time the school was headed by the son of the bishop of Durham, Frederick Brooke Westcott, who excelled in the teaching of divinity and exercised a charismatic influence over his students. Like his father and grandfather, Heard went on to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1908 and received his BA in the history tripos (second class) in 1911. Intending to take holy orders as his father and grandfather had done, he became a theological exhibitioner at Caius in 1911. However, he did not take holy orders in the end, although his subsequent career as a peripatetic mystical preacher may be viewed as the fulfilment of his spiritual vocation. He rejected doctrinal Christianity due to the influences of his Cambridge years, when he was exposed to psychical research, anthropology, and the humanist philosophies of Goldsworthy Lowes Dickinson and J. McT. E. McTaggart. 
Heard was employed as a private secretary to Lord Robson (1852-1918) between 1913 and 1914. He did not serve in the First World War, having been rejected by the military on physical grounds, and about 1916 he probably suffered a nervous breakdown over his crisis of faith. From 1919 to 1923 he was employed as a live-in secretary to the agricultural expert and retired Irish statesman Sir Horace Plunkett in Foxrock, Ireland. The precise nature of the relationship is unclear. While working for Plunkett, Heard became interested in utopian living and began his career as a writer, although his publications were mostly sporadic until the late 1920s. He wrote for the revived 'Irish Statesman' under the editorship of George Russell (A. E.), and worked on his first two books, 'Narcissus: an Anatomy of Clothes' (1924) and 'The Ascent of Humanity' (1929). In 1923 republican forces tried to burn down Plunkett's house with Heard in it. Their relationship was already floundering at this point, so, although both men moved to England and Heard continued with Plunkett in a secretarial capacity until the statesman's death in 1932, Heard moved in with Christopher (Chris) Wood (died 1976), heir to a jam fortune. Heard was a trustee of the Plunkett Foundation for Agricultural Cooperation from 1924 until 1948, and was both the executor and main beneficiary of Plunkett's will. 
From the late 1920s until his emigration to America in 1937 Gerald Heard was an influential figure in intellectual circles in London. Described as 'one of the most penetrating minds in England' by E. M. Forster (Nicolson, 87), 'the cleverest man in the world' by Evelyn Waugh ('Diaries', 321), and 'our prophet' by Naomi Mitchison (Mitchison, 107), he made, as Aldous Huxley put it, 'his mental home on the vacant spaces between the pigeonholes'. A self-proclaimed 'scientific humanist', Heard sought to reconcile science and religion within a 'third morality' -- the title of his 1937 work. Heard's 'third morality' reflected many of the intellectual currents of his day, including idealist philosophy, pacifism, modernist theology, eastern religious philosophy, and psychical research. Heard's writings and influence are significant for their suggestion that philosophical idealism 'relocated' to popular intellectual arenas; that there was a continuing interest in spiritual matters; and that eastern religious ideas offered new ways to approach the spiritual dilemmas previously addressed by psychical research. 
Heard expounded his 'third morality' in several books on the 'historical anthropology of consciousness' (Dunaway, 23). These included a trilogy -- 'The Ascent of Humanity' (1929), 'The Social Substance of Religion' (1931), and 'The Source of Civilization' (1935) -- and 'The Emergence of Man' (1931), a reworking of Winwood Reade's 'The Martyrdom of Man' (1872). He also proselytized his theories in popular science broadcasts for the BBC, and in articles and reviews which appeared in a range of mostly left-leaning periodicals, particularly the feminist 'Time and Tide'. He founded his own magazine, 'The Realist -- A Journal of Scientific Humanism', in 1929; it was well received but short-lived. Heard's popular idealism appealed especially to women, both in 1930s Britain and in post-war America, although his work was read by most prominent London intellectuals between the wars. 
Like another charismatic religious leader of the 1930s, the Oxford Group movement leader Frank Buchman, Heard sought to promote his views within spiritual groups. These groups were active at Maude Royden's inter-denominational Guildhouse Church, the South Place Ethical Society, and at Dartington Hall, the co-operative educational community founded by Dorothy and Leonard Elmhirst in Devon. These groups are significant both as early examples of group therapy and for reflecting the larger intersection between Pauline theology and psychology in this period. Less successfully, Heard sought to form spiritual groups within H. R. L. Sheppard's Peace Pledge Union, of which he was a leading member and to which he recruited Aldous Huxley. Heard was also involved with the Howard League for Penal Reform, the Society for Psychical Research, the Federation of Progressive Societies and Individuals, and the Cranium Club. 
Disillusioned with the future of pacifism and convinced of Europe's imminent destruction, in 1937 Heard emigrated to California with his partner, Chris Wood, along with his friend Aldous Huxley and his family. In the summer of 1937 Heard and Huxley visited Georgia O'Keefe at Ghost Ranch, New Mexico, and O'Keefe painted a symbolic portrait of Heard as a tree ('Gerald's Tree I', 1937, Georgia O'Keefe Museum, Santa Fe, New Mexico; Mitchell, 3-7). Heard expounded his pacifist 'third morality' throughout the war, founding an eastern-influenced mystical community for the training of pacifists -- Trabuco College -- near Laguna Beach, California, in 1941. The community was visited by Christopher Isherwood, Aldous Huxley, Ezra Pound, and others, and was taken over by the Vedanta Society in 1949. 
Heard continued to promote his spiritual ideas after the war through further books and lectures. The latter were given at the Coronet Theatre in Hollywood (1955-7 and 1959-61), the Harvard Divinity School (1961), and the New School for Social Research (1953), as well as on television and radio. He wrote numerous books on spirituality as well as several acclaimed works of science and detective fiction: these included 'Doppelgangers' (1948) and 'A Taste for Honey' (1941). The latter became a film, 'The Deadly Bees' (1967). He also supplied several celebrities -- Dave Brubeck, Clare Boothe Luce, and others -- with spiritual counselling, and introduced some to LSD before Timothy Leary. For a time he was seriously preoccupied with flying saucers. 
Heard's relationship with Chris Wood ended about 1953, and he lived out the latter years of his life with Jay Michael Barrie (1912-2001), a former singer who lived at Trabuco as a monk until about 1955. Barrie worked for Heard in a secretarial and managerial capacity from the 1950s onwards, and nursed him through a five-year illness and two strokes until his death in 1971. 
Slight in stature with striking pale blue eyes, Heard had great presence. This stemmed partly from his reputation as a brilliant 'Wellsian supermind' who read 2000 books a year (Furbank, 136), and partly from his personal charisma and melodious voice. Along with Aldous Huxley and Christopher Isherwood, Heard has been credited with contributing to the spread both of mystical religious ideas and a 'counter-cultural tradition' in America (Robb, 46). By the time of his death in Santa Monica on 14 August 1971, Heard had become a public intellectual in California. 


@@@@@


doc= 54043


Bauza, Felipe (1764-1834), hydrographer, was born in Palma, Majorca, in the Spanish Balearic Islands. He entered the Spanish navy at the age of fifteen, and experienced active service as he rose through the ranks. His career as a hydrographer began under Tofino y Varela, surveying for the maritime atlas of Spain, and continued on the circumnavigation under Alessandro Malaspina, 1789-94, when he took charge of the charts and plans made during the voyage. On the way back, Bauza and his shipmate Espinosa y Tello travelled overland from Valparaiso to Buenos Aires, making geophysical, magnetic, and surveying observations. After further active service, he was posted in May 1797 to the hydrographic office in Madrid. In the war of independence against Napoleon's troops in 1810, Bauza found himself fighting alongside British troops at Cadiz. He subsequently returned to Madrid and in 1815 succeeded Espinosa y Tello as director of the Deposito Hidrografico. Honours accrued to Bauza: in 1807 membership of the Spanish Academy of History; in 1816 membership of the Royal Bavarian Academy and award of a Russian order; in 1821 membership of the Academy of Sciences of Turin; and in Britain, election to the Royal Society in 1819, in recognition of his skills in astronomy and hydrography. 
Bauza was elected in 1822 as a liberal member of the Spanish Cortes, representing his home district of Palma, during the troubled years of civil strife. In 1823 Ferdinand VII exiled those who opposed him and Bauza found himself condemned and with a price on his head. With financial assistance from Henry Richard Vassall Fox, third Baron Holland, one of many English sympathizers, he joined the flood of refugees making for Gibraltar. He had married Teresa Ravera of Madrid, and they had a son, Felipe (1802-1875), later a prominent geologist, and two daughters, Ana and Amelie. He parted company with them at Gibraltar in October, having made a British will in which he stated that he was worth less than his wife had brought to the marriage, and that she and their children should be his sole inheritors. Then, with as many hydrographical charts and documents as he could take with him, Bauza made his way to London, where he at first stayed at Holland House and took English lessons. 
After a few months Bauza found a permanent home in Johnson Street, Somers Town, in north London, in the heart of the Spanish exile community, which included over a thousand families. A cultured man, he was welcomed into London literary and scientific society, especially among hydrographers and astronomers to whom he was already known. He corresponded with Fernandez de Navarrete, his locum tenens in Madrid, and responded to British requests for information on matters of navigation in those parts of South America which he had visited and charted, and which, as the Spanish empire decayed, were of growing interest to the Admiralty. The hydrographer of the navy, Captain W. E. Parry, introduced him into the Royal Society, where he regularly attended meetings, and he became a member of the Athenaeum. Captains Philip King, John Purdy, F. W. Beechey, and John Franklin often sought his help, but Bauza's closest associations were with Captain Basil Hall, concerning the Pacific coast of the Americas in 1826, and with Captain W. H. Smythe, at whose house he found a warm welcome. Together they checked Smythe's chart of the Strait of Gibraltar and Bauza offered data on a shoal at Tarifa which had escaped Smythe's notice. The British hydrographers were also eager to learn about the organization at the admired Madrid office. Bauza visited William Herschel's observatory at Slough. In 1826 he spent three months in Paris and was invited to meet Alexander von Humboldt. The Spanish naval ministry instructed him to send plans and descriptions of the instruments at the Royal Greenwich Observatory, and he assisted with the order put on the London instrument maker Thomas Jones for similar apparatus for the San Fernando observatory; when Jones dallied over the order, Bauza was called on to investigate the delay. In August 1826 the death sentence on Bauza was confirmed, ending hope of return. However, in the early 1830s he was corresponding with Trinity House over the cost and procurement of lighthouses for Spanish ports. The new hydrographer, Francis Beaufort, introduced Bauza as a member of the Royal Geographical Society in 1831, and consulted him on the prospective voyage of the 'Beagle' under Fitzroy. 
On 25 October 1832 Queen Christine, the Spanish regent, declared an amnesty for the exiles but Bauza was unable to take advantage of it. He died at his home from a massive cerebral haemorrhage on 3 March 1834 and was buried on 8 March 1834 in a vault at the Catholic chapel in Moorfields, in the City of London. His obituarist in 'Nautical Magazine' commented on Bauza's excellent qualities, and his kind and affectionate disposition. His wife appeared in Gibraltar on 10 March 1835 to prove his will. His son studied in Madrid, then spent a considerable time in Paris and in Freiburg, but it is not known if he was able to meet his father in France. Some of the papers which Bauza brought from Spain are now in the British Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 54046


Rudd, Margaret Caroline (b. c.1745, d. in or before 1798?), courtesan and accused forger, was born in Lurgan, co. Armagh. Much was written of her life and exploits but little can be verified. Her father, Patrick Youngson, was reported to have been an apothecary; her mother, Marjorie Stewart, was said to be the illegitimate child of a local landowner and linen merchant, John Stewart. Some accounts say that she was orphaned early and raised by her maternal uncle, the legitimate son of her mother's father. All agreed that she went to a boarding-school at Downpatrick, where she evinced both academic and flirtatious talents. At seventeen, she met and soon married Valentine Rudd, a young soldier, in Ireland as a recruiting officer. After leaving Ireland for England, the two soon spent Rudd's small patrimony, and, gossip had it, when the money was gone Mrs Rudd eloped with another young military man who was lodger in the house in which they lived. 
It is unclear how and with whom Mrs Rudd spent the next several years; after her rise to fame many stories were told of this time, most of them improbable. It is likely that she set up as a courtesan, or 'demirep', of fashion, and, for a while at least, lived with Joseph Salvadore, an important international trader and merchant. In 1770 she met and soon began living with Daniel Perreau (c.1734-1776) ['see under 'Perreau, Robert], a bankrupt West Indies merchant and stock speculator of Huguenot descent. By 1775 they had had three children, and Mrs Rudd passed in the world as Mrs Daniel Perreau. 
When, in March 1775, Daniel's identical twin brother, Robert Perreau, a well-established and trusted London apothecary, was found to have attempted to secure a bank loan on the basis of a forged bond, Mrs Rudd was soon implicated, and in fact denounced by both brothers, as the mastermind behind the plan. It emerged that a much more complex series of similar forgeries had occurred. When brought before the magistrates, Mrs Rudd asked for, and was granted, immunity from prosecution in order to testify against the brothers. Since forgery was a capital offence, such immunity was a valuable acquisition. Though the brothers were tried and found guilty, Mrs Rudd neither testified nor was dismissed after their trial. Instead, a case was brought against her, for, it was argued, she had been improperly given protection and was herself responsible for the crimes, of which the brothers were innocent dupes. 
The brothers' executions were delayed while the judges pondered these issues. Throughout this period public interest was intense, and a prolific newspaper discussion occurred over who was to blame and what was to be done. The case provided the public with the opportunity to discuss the nature and workings of the law in general, and to consider the propriety of the magistrates' powers, the role of judges, and of capital punishment itself. Several months later, for what may have been the first time in Britain, a witness's immunity was withdrawn, and Mrs Rudd put on trial. The jury returned a most peculiar verdict, that on the basis of the evidence put before them, she was not guilty. The brothers' fate was sealed. After their executions Mrs Rudd was reported to have become the mistress of the rakish Thomas Lyttelton, second Baron Lyttelton (1744-1779), and then disappeared from public view until the 1780s. With the publication of James Boswell's journals, however, it is now known that she and Boswell had become acquainted shortly after the case, and that Mrs Rudd had become his mistress for some time in the mid-1780s. She briefly surfaced with the publication of a tract denouncing Lord Rawdon for his perfidy in withdrawing support from a needy member of his family, herself, and for a novel, 'The Victim of Prejudice'. The press reported her death at different times, though Valentine Rudd remarried in 1798, so she may have been dead by then. 
Contemporaries found Mrs Rudd's case fascinating and troubling in a series of ways. A woman of very feminine mien, it was said she possessed a 'masculine' understanding and a vigorous, sarcastic pen. Her self-defence in the press was one of the first times that a woman had written so prolifically on her own behalf under her own name. Claiming to be of aristocratic lineage and to be a much-wronged wife, she used the rhetoric of female weakness and sensibility to move the hearts and change the minds of the public. But to many she seemed to be a Circe, using and discarding men to satisfy her desires for self-promotion and material advancement. She seemed in many ways to embody both the allure and the risks of commercial credit, and to exemplify the untrustworthiness of appearance as well as the dangers of both personal and fiscal impersonation and forgery in an age of capitalism and revolution. 


@@@@@


doc= 54048


Stokes, Jonathan (1755?-1831), physician, the son of Jonathan Stokes (died 1807?), was probably born at Chesterfield, Derbyshire. His family had originated in Worcester, where his father was a nurseryman; Stokes was living in the city in 1775, perhaps as an apprentice, and he went from Worcester as a medical student to Edinburgh University in 1778. In 1780 he acted as clerk to Francis Home, the clinical professor at Edinburgh Infirmary, and in 1781 was a corresponding member of the Society of Antiquaries (Scotland). He was also president of the Royal Medical Society, to which he presented several papers, including one on foxglove therapy; he also presented a paper to the Natural History Society on the nomenclature of fossils. Stokes gained his MD in 1782 with a thesis on dephlogisticated air; a fellow student was James Edward Smith, later founder of the Linnean Society. Stokes became friendly with the younger Linnaeus in London during May-August 1781, when Stokes was cataloguing the late John Fothergill's Upton garden for auction. He began practice in 1782 in Stourbridge, Worcestershire, his name being a late addition to the 1783 'Medical Register'. At this time he was also gathering plants in France, the Netherlands, Germany, and Austria, returning to London by 15 May 1783, when he was Joseph Priestley's guest at a Royal Society meeting. 
On 10 June 1784 at Dronfield, Derbyshire, Stokes married Ann Rogers ('bap'. 1 April 1755, died 'c'.1840), a minor poet and friend of Anna Seward, 'the Swan of Lichfield'. Stokes was already acquainted with William Withering, to whom his MD thesis was dedicated, and by 1783, he had joined the Lunar Society of Birmingham. The relationship of Stokes and Withering, which developed into friendship, was long-standing, and both personal and professional. Their collaboration began when Stokes wrote the historical preface on digitalis to Withering's 'Account of the Foxglove' (1785), as well as contributing the details of six patients he had treated using Withering's method. The two men remained on good terms when Stokes went to live in Shrewsbury (1785-6), and until his move to Kidderminster, Worcestershire (by August 1787). Withering then planned an enlarged second edition of his 'Botanical Arrangement' (1776), but owing to 'the multiplicity of his own professional engagements' it was Stokes who prepared both the plates and the reference bibliography -- as well as adding six new plants -- to this second edition, the first two volumes of which appeared in 1787. However, Withering quarrelled with Stokes about the younger man's claim to a share in the new edition; he accused Stokes of retaining and mutilating over 120 of Withering's volumes, as well as not returning botanical specimens and letters. Stokes refused a lump sum in payment and demanded both royalties and a share in the copyright. The quarrel continued after Withering's death, although the books were returned in 1790. By 1788 Stokes had ended his links with the Lunar Society, whose members, except for Erasmus Darwin, appear to have sided with Withering in the dispute. On 16 February 1790 Stokes was elected as one of the first sixteen associates of the newly founded Linnean Society. 
In 1795 Stokes moved back to Derbyshire and spent the rest of his life at New Square, Chesterfield, where he had an extensive practice. Stokes had a son, Jonathan Rogers (died 1818), who also trained in medicine at Edinburgh; while one of his daughters, Honora (1791-1792), was the goddaughter of Anna Seward, with whom both Jonathan Stokes and Ann Stokes were on friendly terms. Anna Seward considered that Stokes was 'an extremely skilful physician', soft-voiced, 'a man of education and the gentleman', but no public speaker. She also thought his political sentiments, as 'a dissenter and consequently a democrat', had harmed him, although a 'worthy and ingenious man' ('Letters of Anna Seward', 3.329). 
Stokes was an instinctive classifier; his scientific interests were many, apart from medicine. He was concerned with pneumatic chemistry, zoology, ornithology, and geology, as well as horticulture, and botany. His many European and American contacts helped him to expand both his knowledge and his collections of the flora of different areas. In 1812 he published 'A Botanical Materia medica' in four volumes. His most eccentric interest was in a reformed orthography, which he used in 'Botanical Commentaries' (1830), rejecting double letters and silent terminals in words, as well as apostrophes and many capital letters. 'Botanical Commentaries' was his major work: however, only the first volume was published. It is clear from this book that he had travelled very widely in Britain observing and collecting plants, especially in the midlands and the north. He wrote to learned journals on topics as varied as erysipelas, sugar beet, and inoculation, as well as on his geological research. His extensive network of friends and professional acquaintances included Sir Joseph Banks, C. L. L'Heritier, D. Solander, and P. M. A. Broussonet. Stokes had his own herbarium, but his large collection of plants was sold and dispersed after his death. He died in Chesterfield on 30 April 1831 and was buried at St Mary's, Chesterfield, on 9 May; he left no will. He is commemorated by the plant 'Stokesia'. His wife died about 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 54049


Edwards, Robert Walter Dudley (1909-1988), historian, was born on 4 June 1909 at 7 North Frederick Street, Dublin, the eldest of the two children of Walter Dudley Edwards (1862-1946), civil servant, and his wife, Bridget Therese McInerney (1871-1956), a nurse. His father was a Quaker, from Worcestershire, but Edwards was brought up in his mother's religion, Roman Catholicism. Apart from a brief interlude after the Easter rising of 1916, when, at her insistence, he successively attended Patrick Pearse's school, St Enda's, Rathfarnham, and its associate Scoill Bhride, at Ranalagh, he was educated at the Catholic University School. He entered University College, Dublin, in 1926, graduated in 1929, and read law for a year, again at his mother's insistence, while settling down to the study of the laws against the nonconformist churches in early modern Ireland for which he was awarded an MA in 1931. 
There followed two years in London, where Edwards attended the Institute of Historical Research and, as he later delicately phrased it, learned the historian's trade after a manner that had not been possible in Dublin, where his teachers 'had had little connexion with historical research' (Edwards, 1). There he prepared the thesis on the penal laws against Catholics for which he was awarded a doctorate in 1933 by the University of London. The revised first part of this study was published in 1935 as 'Church and State in Tudor Ireland'. In 1933 Edwards married Sheila O'Sullivan 
(formerly Julia Sullivan; 1905-1985)
, a teacher from Cork with interests in folklore. They had three children, Mary, Owen, and Ruth, the latter two both notable authors. 
Edwards was elected to membership of the Royal Irish Academy in 1936, awarded the degree of DLitt by the National University of Ireland in 1937 for published work, and appointed to a lectureship in modern Irish history in University College, Dublin, in January 1939; he was promoted to statutory lecturer in the following year and succeeded in 1944 to the professorship, a post that he was to retain until his retirement in 1979. By that stage he had produced a significant body of both editorial and original work, notable for its wide chronological range, and become involved, in partnership with Theodore Moody, with whom he had shared lodgings in London, in a programme for the improvement of historical writing in Ireland which is commonly held to have begun the professionalization of Irish history. The two men shared not merely a concern to impose closer fidelity to the evidence and to improve scholarly practice, but also a belief in the ameliorative power of an informed understanding of the past. 
The outcome was the foundation of the Ulster Society for Historical Studies. The Irish Historical Society began life separately in 1936, but the two bodies became complexly intertwined through the Irish Committee of Historical Sciences in 1937, of which Edwards was secretary, and combined to launch 'Irish Historical Studies', jointly edited by Edwards and Moody, which first appeared in March 1938. Edwards retained his joint editorship until 1957, when eye trouble forced his resignation. By then he had diverted his energy towards raising a new generation of rigorously trained historical scholars, not only by strengthening the undergraduate course and promoting research activity in University College, Dublin, but also through the foundation of the Irish Universities History Students' Association (1950) which, with its annual conference and its associated 'Bulletin' (1956), performed for students the integrative function that the Ulster and Irish historical societies performed for their teachers. 
A man of commanding presence and a compelling lecturer and conversationalist who revelled in paradox and allusion, taught that questions were more important than answers, and regarded shock tactics as a necessary teaching strategy, Edwards's influence owed more to personality than to example. Persistent eye trouble restricted his own research activity and for many years he eked out publications from the materials he had accumulated as a young man. Perhaps in compensation, he became increasingly concerned with the collection and preservation of the sources. In the 1970s he embarked upon a fresh constructive phase which contributed greatly to establishing the profession of archivist in Ireland. He was the main force behind the founding in 1970 of an Irish Society for Archives, which published the first issue of its 'Bulletin' a year later, the initiation of a graduate diploma course in archival studies in 1972, and the creation of a department of archives in University College, Dublin, in 1970, which was designed as a research centre for the history of the modern Irish state and for which, as director until 1979, he acquired major collections of twentieth-century material. 
After his retirement Edwards collaborated with Dr Mary O'Dowd in a valuable critical description of the sources of early modern Irish history, published in 1985. He had already begun to publish freely: a survey of Irish history appeared in 1972, an illustrated account of 'Daniel O'Connell and his World' in 1975, and a narrative account of Tudor Ireland in 1977. These are works of indifferent quality, slackly written and unoriginal. As an obituarist noted: 'The pity is that nothing that Dudley wrote captured the flamboyance, the arrogance, the perverseness, the passion, the erudite intuition, and the theatrical instinct that made him what he was, a great performer whose exuberance irradiated 'the dismal muse of Irish history'. (Clarke, 127)' Edwards died on 5 June 1988 at his home, 21 Brendan Road, Donnybrook, Dublin, and was buried at St Fintan's cemetery, Sutton, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 54052


Mathew, Mary (1724-1777), diarist, was the eldest daughter of the six children of Theobald Mathew (died 1745) and his wife, Catherine Shelley. The family were wealthy landowners with estates in co. Galway, co. Limerick, and co. Tipperary. Nothing is known of the early life of Mary Mathew. In adult life she lived in co. Dublin, and began to keep a diary from August 1772. It is for this diary, written during 1772 and 1773 and providing glimpses of her day-to-day life, that she is known. 
Mary Mathew was wealthy in her own right, inheriting money from relatives and the rental of some property from her father. Her finances appear, however, to have been controlled by her brother Thomas, who succeeded to the family property on the death of his father in 1745. Mary refers to the difficulty of getting the money owed to her from Thomas, and her frustration at his delay in forwarding her moneys is evident from her diary. 
Mary Mathew also kept a record of her expenditure between 1747 and 1777. There are references to payments made to servants, and her expenditure on clothing and household goods is also noted. The accounts, which appear in the back of the same manuscript as the diary, are most detailed after 1760. Mathew was on friendly terms with many of the titled families of the time who were regular visitors to her home in Portmarnock, co. Dublin. Her diary provides an insight into the work and wages of servants of the period, as well as an account of the life of a lady of leisure. She enjoyed an active social life, visiting the theatre and attending balls and assemblies. Like many diarists of the period she hoped that the discipline of keeping the diary would allow her to lead a more useful life or at least be conducive in making her use her time and energy in a more worthwhile manner. However, her diary shows her to have been unreflective, and she felt she gained little from the diary, concluding in August 1773: 'This day ends the year of this journal. I think my time past in so trifling a manner tis not worth recording so here I end' ('Diary', 46). She died, unmarried, in Dublin in 1777. 


@@@@@


doc= 54053


Hill, Frederic (1803-1896), civil servant, was born on 29 June 1803 at Hill Top School, Gough Street, Birmingham, the sixth of the eight children of Thomas Wright Hill (1763-1851), schoolmaster, and his wife, Sarah Lea (1765-1842). Two of his five brothers achieved professional eminence, Rowland Hill as a postal reformer and Matthew Davenport Hill as a criminologist and penal reformer; another brother was Edwin Hill. Frederic was educated at his family's school which, under the name Hazelwood (from 1819), gained an international reputation for its progressive regime. At the age of thirteen he became an assistant teacher at the school. In the early 1830s he was an active 'Reform Bill' campaigner, becoming a member, later a council member, of the Birmingham Political Union. With the passing of the 'Reform Act' he turned his attention to educational questions and published 'National Education: its Present State and Prospects' (1836). Between 1832 and 1856 he was investment manager of the Hill family fund, which was created to provide financial support to any of the siblings who encountered straitened circumstances. 
When, in 1833, Hazelwood was sold, Hill's teaching career came to an end. He had long cherished the idea of entering the civil service, and his brother Matthew advised him, as a preliminary, to study the law. On 25 November 1834 Hill was admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn. He was called to the bar on 29 January 1840, but never practised as a barrister. In 1834 he was appointed parliamentary secretary to Matthew's friend Sergeant Wilde (later Lord Truro). In the following year he obtained one of the newly created prison inspectorships. The home secretary, Lord John Russell, appointed him to the Scottish district, which also comprised Northumberland and Durham, on the grounds that 'there is most work to be done there and I know you will do it' (Hill, 116). Hill's initial salary of $600 per annum was raised to $700 in 1841. Hill was shocked by the state of the Scottish prisons: he found most of them insanitary, insecure, cold, and damp. Inadequately supervised, the prisoners were indolent, drunken, overfed, foul-mouthed gamblers. In his first report (1836) Hill proposed numerous reforms. 
Hill helped prepare the 'Act to Improve Prisons and Prison Discipline in Scotland' (2 & 3 Vict. c. 42) which created a board of directors of Scottish prisons, on which Hill served from September 1839. He was then able to influence policy and practice in the Scottish prison system. He was especially concerned to achieve the abolition of the treadmill and handcrank and the introduction of useful labour for which prisoners would be paid at market rates for the voluntary performance of work in excess of ten hours a day. He also presided over the abolition of flogging and the introduction of the 'separate system' of prison discipline. In April 1840 Hill married Martha Cowper ('b'. 1802/3), a sister of the inventor Edward Shickle Cowper. They had three daughters. 
In 1847, partly on the grounds that his work in Scotland was finished, but also because he wished to live nearer to his brothers and aged father, Hill obtained a transfer to the inspectorship of an English prison district (initially northern England and north Wales). He found the English prisons in his charge to be largely unreformed. His attempts to change them were hampered by county justices, and the resulting frustration was a factor in his resignation of the inspectorship in 1851. Although Hill's professional association with prisons ceased at this point, he remained actively interested in questions of crime and punishment, especially through his membership of such bodies as the Law Amendment Society, the Reformatory and Refuge Union, and the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science. In 1853 he published 'Crime: its Amount, Causes and Remedies', in which he set out his criminological and penological ideas. Among these were opposition to the death penalty (he thought murderers should be permanently imprisoned), support for indeterminate sentences from which prisoners could obtain their release only by giving evidence of reformation, and the imposition of charges on parents whose children were incarcerated. 
In June 1851 Hill was appointed assistant secretary to the postmaster-general and, therefore, deputy to his brother Rowland. Although this position was probably inferior to that of prison inspector, Hill remained in it until its abolition in 1875. His salary on retirement was $1400 per annum, at which point he was granted a civil service pension of $1000 per annum. Hill's achievements at the Post Office included several reforms of postal practice along with the introduction of new systems of ventilation and fire precautions. It was at his suggestion, in 1854, that the postmaster-general began to submit an annual report to parliament. Hill compiled the first fourteen of these himself. Hill's last years at the Post Office were marked by policy disagreements with heads of departments. After his retirement articles in the Post Office's magazine described him as 'somewhat reserved and silent' and intensely conservative in his attitude towards personnel aspects of civil service reform ('St Martin's-le-Grand', vols. 4 and 7). 
In addition to the books already mentioned Hill wrote newspaper articles and pamphlets on a variety of subjects including punishment, local government, and civil defence. Between 1836 and 1847 he compiled annual reports as an inspector of prisons. Between 1847 and the mid-1860s he gave evidence to official inquiries on crime, punishment, and railways. He continued to lecture and write on public issues until late in life. In retirement he was also active in charitable work, being a co-founder of the Hampstead branch of the Charity Organization Society and a member of Hampstead's board of guardians. His autobiography, 'Frederic Hill: an Autobiography of Fifty Years in Times of Reform' (1893), was completed and edited by his daughter Constance. Hill died on 17 November 1896 at his home, Inverleith House, 27 Thurlow Road, Hampstead. His body was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 54055


Hanbury, Sir Thomas (1832-1907), merchant and gardener, was born at Bedford Road, Clapham, Surrey, on 21 June 1832, the third of five surviving sons and one daughter of Daniel Bell Hanbury (1794-1882), pharmaceutical chemist, and his wife, Rachel, 'nee' Christy (1802/3-1876). Daniel Hanbury (1825-1875) was his eldest brother. His parents were members of the Society of Friends and Thomas was sent, aged nine, to school at Croydon, then at Epping, where most of the scholars were Friends. He remained a member of Kingston monthly meeting throughout his life, though all his children resigned. 
In 1849, after a brief commercial tutoring by Josiah Richardson, Hanbury was employed by William James Thompson & Sons, tea brokers of Mincing Lane, London. Four years later, with funding from his uncle, he and three companions set up as Hanbury & Co., tea and silk merchants, at Shanghai, arriving during the Taiping uprising of 1850-64. The European merchants lived in a settlement outside the city walls, socially isolated from the Chinese residents. Exceptionally Hanbury chose to learn Mandarin. He travelled widely and was soon respected by the Chinese merchant community. As a member of the Anglo-American Municipal Council of Shanghai he contributed to the planting of gardens and the establishment of a hospital. He became a director of the first railway built in China and from his premises sent the first telegraphic message between Shanghai and Hong Kong. 
In 1857 the original partnership was dissolved and Hanbury recruited Frederick Bower to a new partnership as Bower, Hanbury & Co., before returning to England in 1858-9 for a holiday. Adding to his business interests, Hanbury traded in currency for Rothschilds; when the American Civil War interrupted exports of cotton, he bought up Chinese cotton to supply the British market. Investing his growing capital, he became the largest property owner in Shanghai. 
During a second visit to Europe in 1866-9 Hanbury went to the south of France, where his brother Daniel had sketched and botanized, and in the spring of 1867 he made his first visit to La Mortola, sited on a small promontory midway between Menton and the Italian town of Ventimiglia. Its setting so entranced him that in 1867 he bought the ruined Palazzo Orengo and its surrounding grounds, intending that he and Daniel, whose interest lay in medicinal plants, would create a botanical garden. 
In March 1868 Hanbury married Katharine Aldham (1842-1920), eldest daughter of Thomas Pease of Westbury-on-Trym, near Bristol, and also a Quaker. Daniel began planting a garden at La Mortola while Thomas and his wife returned to Shanghai to settle his business. They chose to make the journey by sea to New York, crossing by train to San Francisco then sailing via Japan to Shanghai where Cecil, the first of three sons and one daughter, was born. They left China in 1871, settling at La Mortola, where they restructured the house and employed gardeners to landscape and plant the 18 hectares of land, regenerating the woodland surroundings by plantings of Aleppo pines and carob trees. Citrus was among their distinctive introductions; over twenty varieties were growing there in 1890. After Daniel died in 1875, Thomas, and later his son Cecil, continued the planting, maintaining the original objectives of scientific experiments in acclimatization, and useful and instructive collections, inspired by their Quaker principles. 'Hortus Mortolensis', first published in 1889, listed 3600 species growing there. In 1893 Joseph Hooker described La Mortola as 'a garden of exotic plants, which in point of richness and interest has no rival among the principal collections of living plants in the world' (Quest-Ritson, 70). Close links were established with Kew, to which numerous succulents, citrus, and bamboos were sent. Regular reports appeared in the 'Gardeners' Chronicle'. As it matured, the garden was mentioned in 'Baedeker' and other guidebooks, attracting many visitors who were wintering in the south of France, among them Queen Victoria, royalty from Germany and Russia, the prince of Wales (later Edward VII), and other members of the British royal family, as well as such gardeners as Canon Ellacombe. 
The scant education available in Liguria, only recently amalgamated with a unified Italy, led Hanbury to build two local schools and to fund their teachers until, with the advent of compulsory education, the Italian government assumed this charge. He also provided other buildings to house libraries, and assumed the presidency of the civic hospital at Ventimiglia. His wife played a part in his many acts of philanthropy. For his services to education Hanbury was created in 1868 cavaliere, later commendatore, of the order of saints Maurizio and Lazzaro; in 1885 and 1888 he was created cavaliere, then commendatore of the Cross of the Crown of Italy. He bought another villa, in which he established the Hanbury Botanical Institute, consisting of a laboratory, herbarium, and museum. It was formally dedicated during the 1892 International Congress at Genoa, and the Italian government awarded him a gold medal as a benefactor of public instruction. He donated plants to many towns along the French and Italian rivieras, presented a monumental fountain to the town of Menton, and paid for the Museum Praehistoricum, a small building to house the prehistoric skeletons and stone tools discovered in 1892 and subsequently in the adjacent cave of Barma-Grande. In 1901, in recognition of his overseas services, Edward VII created Hanbury KCVO. 
Hanbury was also keen to improve the study of botany and horticulture in Britain. In 1892 he presented his brother's books and collection of materia medica to the recently founded Pharmaceutical Society. In 1903 he presented to the Royal Horticultural Society the 60 acre garden at Wisley, in Surrey, which he had purchased from the estate of the industrial chemist George Fergusson Wilson, who had died in the previous year. This enabled the society to move its experimental garden from the pollution and cramped location of its existing site in the London suburbs at Chiswick. The society awarded him its Victoria medal of honour in 1903. 
Even in his last years Hanbury was looking for new commercial ventures. He invested in the Pacific Island Company which traded in guano from Ocean Island. On a trip to Palestine in 1889 he sought in vain to purchase the land containing the reputed tomb of Jesus and he continued to acquire land in Italy. He died at La Mortola on 9 March 1907 after a short illness. Some 7000 local people followed his coffin to San Remo, where he was cremated. 
His eldest son, Sir Cecil Hanbury (1871-1937), MP for North Dorset, inherited La Mortola in 1920, and bequeathed it to his widow, Dorothy Hanbury-Forbes (died 1972), who restored it after the damage and neglect of the Second World War. It was purchased by the Italian government in 1960 and since 1983 has been managed by the University of Genoa, to which in 1998 it was conceded in perpetuity. 


@@@@@


doc= 54056


Berlepsch, Emilie von (bap. 1755, d. 1830), author and traveller, was baptized on 26 November 1755 as Dorothea Friderika Aemilia von Oppel, at Gotha, Thuringia, daughter of Carl Georg von Oppel (died 1760), lord of the manor of Wellerswalde, near Oschatz, Saxony, and vice-chancellor of the duchy of Saxe-Gotha, and Amalie, countess of Donhoff (died 1768), lady in waiting to the duchess of Saxe-Gotha. After her father died, her mother married 'Legationsrat' ('Counsellor') Friedrich Ulrich von Stirn, and, possibly because of the marriage, Emilie was placed under the guardianship of her uncle, Johann Siegmund von Oppel, at Weimar where she received a good private education. On 2 March 1772 she married at Weimar Friedrich Ludwig von Berlepsch (1749-1818), subsequently 'Hofrichter' ('judge') at the court of the elector in Hanover. She lived there and in Schloss Berlepsch, near Gottingen, and at Weimar, where she became a devoted disciple of J. G. Herder, leader of the pre-Romantic movement in Germany. She moved in literary circles, publishing two slim volumes of poetry. 
Wavering between elation and depression, Emilie von Berlepsch took refuge in Switzerland in 1793-5. The sublime landscape peopled by innocent shepherds, which she knew from literature, seemed to exist in reality, and she came to love the country as a peaceful idyll. Its invasion by France in 1798 roused her to violent protest. In 'Einige Bermerkungen zur richtigern Beurtheilung der erzwungnen Schweitzer-Revolution' (1799) she gave 'a fairer assessment of the revolution imposed on Switzerland by force', and she vowed she would not visit the country as long as it remained occupied by French troops. Instead she decided to visit Scotland where she hoped to regain the paradise lost in the Alps. Again literature -- this time Ossian and Burns, both admired by Herder -- was her guide, and she also saw Britain as a bulwark against French imperialism. Her host was the Revd James Macdonald, a Hebridean and promoter of cultural exchange between Scotland and Germany, whom she had met at Weimar soon after her first marriage ended in divorce in 1795. She spent the winter of 1799-1800 in Edinburgh and toured the highlands the following summer with Macdonald. 'Caledonia' (4 vols., 1802-4), dedicated to Herder, is her account of the country and her emotional response to it. She recalls passages from Ossian in Glencoe and is distressed to be unable to reach Staffa. In the first long notice in German given to Robert Burns, she praises him as a true poet according to Herder's criteria, a creative genius drawn from peasant stock. By her prose paraphrase in German of 'The Cotter's Saturday Night' she tries to win to the ranks of his admirers those put off by his dialect. She saw the highlanders as noble savages, and, although aware of their lack of development and poverty, was full of praise for their frugal life, discipline at work, thrift, and pride in their history -- all reminiscent of the Swiss. Her observations on Edinburgh upper-class society centre on the role of women. Her long excursus on British women writers singles out Mary Wollstonecraft as a kindred spirit. She evidently knew Wollstonecraft's work thoroughly and draws to her the attention of a German public which had largely forgotten her. She claims the right of women to write books on any subject, hitherto a male preserve, and indeed her own work, she proudly remarks, was the first of its kind by a German woman. 
Emilie von Berlepsch returned home disillusioned after Macdonald had refused to marry her. On 5 June 1801 she married the commoner August Heinrich Harmes (1762-1839) from Mecklenburg with whom she lived by Lake Zurich from 1804 to 1817. Bad fortune and ill health drove the couple back to Mecklenburg-Schwerin where they lived precariously on the benefaction of the grand duke. She died at Lauenburg on the Elbe on 27 July 1830. 'Caledonia' received some critical notice at the time, but later descriptions of Scotland, inspired by Scott's fiction, eclipsed her work, rather than claiming it as a forerunner. Interest in her was revived in the later twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 54057


Scholderer, (Julius) Victor (1880-1971), bibliographer, was born in Clarendon Road, Putney, London, on 9 October 1880, the only child of German emigres Otto Scholderer (1834-1902) and his wife, Luise Steurwaldt. His father, a distinguished painter of the Frankfurt school, first left Germany for Paris, and then as a result of the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 moved to London. Both parents became naturalized British citizens, but never really settled down happily to life in Britain; they returned to Germany in 1899. 
Educated at St Paul's School and Trinity College, Oxford, Victor Scholderer entered the service of the British Museum Library in June 1904, filling the gap caused by the premature death the previous autumn of R. G. C. Proctor (1868-1903). Thereafter he gave his undivided attention to the library for the next sixty-six years, and some of his best work was completed after his official retirement in 1945. Armed with a formidable knowledge of Latin and Greek literature, bilingual in English and German, and with an excellent command of French already perfected during a year's residence in Paris in his student days, he was ideally equipped to face his life's work. This was the bibliographical study of early printed books, particularly those of the fifteenth century, of which the British Museum had already the best collection in the world and the British Library now has about 10,500 editions. Scholderer quickly developed an acute eye for early typefaces, and worked for many years on the specialized catalogue of the British Museum's incunabula (known as 'BMC'), which is still incomplete. From parts 2 and 3 (Germany), through parts 4-7 (Italy), to the massive part 8 (France), Scholderer was responsible for more of this immensely exacting work than any other individual member of staff. He could inspire awe, even fear, in his colleagues, but was never unjust or unfair, and, as far as anyone else was aware, was hardly (if ever) guilty of an error in his work. He never wrote a full-scale book, but one of the best results of his career was a steady stream of articles, mostly short, all exquisitely written, and not without the occasional touch of wry humour. Each solved some problem, outlining in as few words as possible the career of some early printer or humanist scholar, and paving the way for further research. After his official retirement he gave more of his attention to the museum's collections of Italian and German books of the sixteenth century, and was largely responsible for the publication of the invaluable short-title catalogues of these books, Italian in 1958 and German in 1962, each of which for the first time presented the scholarly world with comprehensive indexes of the printers and booksellers. 
In 1927 Scholderer designed a Greek type (New Hellenic), of which he was very proud. The first book printed with it was the 'Prometheus Bound' of Aeschylus, prepared by Scholderer himself in 1930, and the type was used by 'The Times'. In the same year, 1930, Scholderer gave the Sandars lectures in bibliography at Cambridge. Entitled 'The invention of printing: facts and theories', they remained unpublished, but he returned to the same theme in later lectures, such as that read before the Bibliographical Society in London in March 1940 and published in 'The Library' in 1941. Then he wrote a short booklet, necessarily technical but very readable, on Johann Gutenberg, which the British Museum published in 1963 and later reprinted. In 1948 he gave the annual Italian lecture of the British Academy, under the title 'Printers and readers in Italy in the fifteenth century', published in 1949. During the Second World War he supervised the evacuation of the museum's incunabula from London to Wales, and lived with them, and worked on them, in Aberystwyth for the duration of the war. 
In the 1950s Scholderer felt obliged to enter the controversy raging over the so-called Constance missal, a book not to be found in any British library. A copy had recently been acquired by the Pierpont Morgan Library of New York, and Scholderer was never in agreement with the keeper of printed books of that library, Curt F. Buhler, as to a very early date for the missal. He believed it to have been printed between about 1465 and 1473, probably at Basel, and his conclusions were apparently justified by the later researches of another American scholar, Allan H. Stevenson, an expert on paper studies of the fifteenth century. Nevertheless, it was characteristic of Scholderer that he always held Buhler in the highest regard as a fellow incunabulist and also as a personal friend. He was on friendly terms with all the leading bibliographical scholars of continental Europe. Perhaps not enough honours came his way, but he was an honorary doctor of the universities of Durham and Wales, president and gold medallist of the Bibliographical Society of London, fellow of the British Academy, and honorary fellow of the Pierpont Morgan Library (although he never visited America), and in 1961 he was appointed CBE. 
Victor Scholderer married Frida Marie, daughter of Otto Semler of Berlin, on 8 May 1913; there were no children. After her death in 1950 he was a lonely widower in a dingy London flat; but he loved cats, poetry, the music of Beethoven, and above all writing another poem or yet another short article or book review in his incomparable style, still tinged with a slight Teutonic formality at times, but never less than stimulating, briefly even amusing, and eminently instructive. The bibliography of his vast output of published writings appeared three times: in 'The Library' in 1955, in the selection of his 'Fifty Essays' (1966), and in the imposing Festschrift presented to him for his ninetieth birthday in 1970. Even at the third attempt, the bibliography was still not quite complete. The poems which he published at his own expense in two slim volumes ('The Avenue, and other Verses', 1959, and 'Women of Troy', 1965) are sensitive, tender, introspective, and difficult to understand. One of his greatest loves in literature was Goethe, on whose exhibition in the King's Library at the British Museum in 1949 he wrote a poem in German. Scholderer died on 11 September 1971 at Aberystwyth, which he had come to love during his wartime sojourn there. His body was cremated, possibly at Shrewsbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 54058


Groom, Charles Ottley (1839-1894), impostor, was born on 14 May 1839 at Merchiston, Tobago, the posthumous son of Charles Edward Groom (1815-1838), sugar planter, and his wife, Ann (1815-1895), daughter of Archibald Napier. His childhood was mainly spent in Sussex with a highly protective mother, with whom he lived until his death. He was a sickly child with precocious interests in natural history, science, and antiquarianism: 'My intellectual activity and vivid imagination was doubtless the cause of my delicacy. My mind was full of gigantic schemes, which were little influenced by my capacity for their execution' (Napier, 'Tommy Try', 57). His earliest works were ornithological. In 1873 his testimony to a House of Commons select committee assisted the enactment of the 'Wild Birds Protection Bill'. 
Among Groom's publications, 'Tommy Try, or, What he did in Science' (1869) is a charming if arch memoir of his boyhood. In 'The Book of Nature and the Book of Man' (1870) Groom vividly argued that humankind represented the microcosm of creation which all lower forms of life imitated. Its preface (ascribed to the dead Lord Brougham and Vaux) boasted that 'the author has strode the gulf between Physics and Metaphysics, Mind and Matter, Instinct and Reason, God and Man'. Groom in 1875 read a paper before the British Association promoting his vegetarian cure for alcoholism, and issued several vegetarian tracts. His book 'Lakes and Rivers' (1879) was published under the auspices of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. In his 'Prospectus' (1886), issued to attract subscribers for a complete edition of his works, Groom published testimonials to the greatness of his 'Book of Nature' from celebrities who were no longer living and who could not repudiate the grotesqueries foisted on them: he claimed that Victor Hugo attributed his deathbed Christian conversion to Groom's treatise and that he confessed, 'I never wished so much to steal a book as this' ('Prospectus', v). 
Groom's chief impostures were genealogical. They began with his change of surname to Napier (1865), although until the late 1870s he was usually known as C. O. Groom Napier (of Merchiston). He then adopted the title of prince of Mantua and Montferrat, and elaborated a pedigree tracing his descent from many great historical figures, most notably King David of Israel. It was on this basis that he described himself as prince of the house of David, in which title he claimed to have been certified by Sir George Jessel. He and his mother assumed the princely surname of Gonzaga. The prince also bore subsidiary titles, including prince of Ferrera, Nevers, Rethel, and Alencon; Baron de Tobago; and master of Lennox, Kilmahew, and Merchiston. On 24 March 1879 he held a banquet for 7000 guests in a specially constructed pavilion at Greenwich, the walls of which were hung with 700 illuminated leaves of vellum illustrating his pedigree. He was too unwell to attend the festivities, which were conducted on strict vegetarian and teetotal principles, with outlandish salads and sucking pigs modelled in piecrust and containing fruit and vegetable jellies. A beverage of his devising, curry champagne, concocted from curry powder and ginger beer, was served. The dipsomaniacs whom he had rescued by his vegetarian cure wore on their backs pieces of yellow silk embroidered with broken bottles. 
In 1882 the prince announced the Mantua and Montferrat Medal Fund, founded by a fourteenth-century Gonzaga ancestor to confer recognition upon eminent artists and scientists. His family, so he pretended, had awarded gold medals to Raphael, Michelangelo, Dante, Galileo, Columbus, Cervantes, Lope de Vega, Erasmus, Milton, Moliere, and Rubens; Shakespeare was so grateful for the award in 1614 that he intended to write a play about the family. Mantua medals were issued widely: if Froude, Gladstone, Huxley, and Shaftesbury were suspicious, Ruskin, Tennyson, Manning, and Leighton seem to have been duped. One recipient was Sir Richard Owen, whose medal is in the British Museum; Groom was later 'warned off the BM' (Sherborn, 61). In 1883 he announced that an eighteenth-century duke of Mantua and Montferrat had left money for educational purposes which, by accumulation, amounted to $750,000. A great meeting was held at Exeter Hall (15 June) to allot this sum for the establishment of a Welsh university. The prince read a long, rambling speech together with much implausible family correspondence, including a letter from Dante (July 1317) to his ancestor: 'Your medal cheers me from a melancholy deep as hell itself' ('The Times', 16 June 1883). This fiasco exploded most of his pretensions. He also issued in 1883 a vague but grandiloquent listing of the contents of his private museum, including natural history specimens, ancestral portraits by great masters, antiquities, and relics -- almost all probably bogus. 
The prince having become a director of the City of Genoa Waterworks Company (registered 1886), some bondholders sued him on grounds of misrepresentations in the prospectus. He settled with them in 1888, but one creditor petitioned for his bankruptcy over a debt of $1016 (December 1889). He obtained his discharge from bankruptcy in March 1890. 
The prince's manners were courtly, benevolent, and melancholic. He was characterized as 'a notorious rogue and thief', who 'sold false nuggets to Ruskin' and tried to kill the mineralogist Thomas Davies by dropping a boulder on him from a high ladder in the Strand (Sherborn, 62-3). He died of long-standing cardiac disease on 17 January 1894 at 18 Elgin Avenue, Maida Vale, his death being registered as that of Charles de Bourbon d'Este Paleologues Gonzaga, prince of Mantua and Montferrat. His mother (who was dying of stomach cancer) arranged for the posthumous publication of 'Visions of the Interior of the Earth, and of Past, Present and Future Events' (1894), an account of his trances under the charge of the Archangel Gabriel, patron saint of the house of Gonzaga. 


@@@@@


doc= 54059


Hardcastle, Joseph (1752-1819), merchant and evangelical activist, was born in Leeds on 7 December 1752, the younger son of John Hardcastle ('fl'. 1720-1766) and his wife, 'nee' Snowden, whose forename is unknown (died 1787). In 1766 he came to London to live with his uncle, Nathaniel Hardcastle; after attending school for two years he entered his uncle's counting-house and within a few years was managing its affairs. By family descent as well as by personal conviction Hardcastle was a convinced nonconformist and a member of the prestigious Independent church that met in Bury Street, St Mary Axe, whose past ministers had included the hymn writer Isaac Watts. Nevertheless he was not a narrow-minded partisan and sometimes attended the ministry of evangelicals within the Church of England, such as William Romaine, John Newton, and Thomas Scott, and occasionally was present at Moravian meetings where he heard of their missionary endeavours. In 1777 he married Anne (died 1827), daughter of John Corsbie of Bury St Edmunds, another old-established nonconformist family. They had nine children, four daughters and three sons surviving to adulthood. After their marriage they lived in Peckham, London, until October 1788 when they moved to Hatcham House, near Deptford, Surrey. 
Hardcastle became a valued friend of many of the Clapham Sect evangelicals, and when in 1791 the Sierra Leone Company was established to protect native Africans from slave dealers by promoting Christianity and the values of European civilization, he was appointed a director alongside William Wilberforce, Henry Thornton, and Thomas Clarkson. At Hatcham, Hardcastle put on display the instruments of cruelty -- the handcuffs, shackles, and thumbscrews -- used on African slave ships. He corresponded over several years with Wilberforce on matters relating to the treatment of slaves in the West Indies and the opposition of the East India Company to the work of Christian missionaries, and he took practical steps to secure the election to parliament of Wilberforce and like-minded evangelicals. 
In 1795 Hardcastle joined with others in the foundation of the interdenominational London Missionary Society and was elected as its first treasurer, holding this office for over twenty years. He generally chaired the meetings of its board of directors, and many of the early documents of the society -- instructions to missionaries, annual reports, addresses to the public, and letters to colonial governors -- were from his pen. On the Saturday of the society's annual missionary week Hardcastle would invite a large number of supporters representing many different denominations to meet socially at Hatcham. Sometimes the directors of the London Missionary Society held their meetings at Hardcastle's premises in Duck's Foot Lane, near London Bridge, which he shared with his business partner Joseph Reyner, whom he had known since childhood. In 1801 they moved a short distance to 9 Old Swan Stairs, Upper Thames Street. Here a commodious first-floor room was placed at the disposal not only of the London Missionary Society committee, but also of other societies with which Hardcastle and Reyner came to be associated. The Religious Tract Society, founded in 1799, of which Reyner was the first treasurer, at its committee meeting held there on 7 December 1802 (Hardcastle's fiftieth birthday) first discussed the idea of a 'Bible' society. Only a few weeks earlier, in October 1802, Hardcastle had been part of a London Missionary Society deputation to Paris to investigate ways of promoting the distribution of the scriptures in France. When the British and Foreign Bible Society was finally established in 1804 Hardcastle was a member of its first committee, and for several years subcommittees of the society met at Old Swan Stairs. He was the treasurer in London of the Scottish Missionary Society and until his death treasurer also of the Village Itinerancy Society. It has been calculated that as many as seventeen evangelical and philanthropic organizations had his support, and he showed himself to be a generous benefactor to numerous deserving causes ranging from the poor in his own locality to the families of deceased protestant dissenting ministers throughout England. 
Hardcastle had a reputation for combining integrity and diplomacy, prudence and decisiveness, in his business dealings, while in his personal relations he strove to maintain a mild and conciliatory disposition and thereby achieve the widest possible consensus for any proposed course of action. This happy union of gifts made Hatcham House a congenial venue for a broad cross-section of evangelical leaders who wished to confer together in a relatively relaxed atmosphere, while his London business premises proved an ideal location for the committee meetings of several important evangelical institutions that emerged at this time. And he himself thereby became a key factor in the smooth functioning of many of these societies. 
From 1812 until 1815 Hardcastle spent part of the year at Bayton, near Bury St Edmunds, in comparative retirement. At Hatcham in the spring of 1815 he suffered a slight stroke from which he made a rapid recovery, but a year later his resignation as treasurer of the London Missionary Society in effect signalled his retirement from public life and he relinquished the tenancy of Old Swan Stairs. In November 1817 he sustained another and more serious paralytic stroke, which prevented him thereafter from walking but did not, however, affect his mind or impair his speech. He died on 3 March 1819 at Hatcham House and was buried nine days later in Bunhill Fields, London. Memorial services were held at Hanover Chapel, Peckham, on 14 March 1819, and at Surrey Chapel, London, on 18 March 1819. 


@@@@@


doc= 54060


Halsted, Caroline Amelia (1803/4-1848), historian and author, was the daughter of John Halsted, a captain in the Royal Navy. She published her first work, 'The Little Botanist, or, Steps to the Attainment of Botanical Knowledge', in 1835. This was followed by 'Investigations in a Boudoir' (1836), an unusual textbook in which a mother and her daughter conduct a domestic 'grand tour' of their living room, investigating the origins and nature of the everyday objects around them. In 1839 Halsted turned to biography, publishing a 'Life of Margaret Beaufort', the mother of Henry VII. This work won her the Gresham commemoration prize for 1839, and was favourably reviewed in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', where she was viewed as a worthy successor to Lucy Aikin. The reviewer commented that the biography was written with 'care, research, and ability' and was 'far superior to some of the late histories by female hands' ('Gentleman's Magazine', 2nd ser., 12, 1839, 515). Later historians praised the biography for its recognition of Margaret Beaufort's political role and capacity, an aspect of her life neglected in preceding accounts, which had concentrated on her virtues as a patroness of religion and learning. 
Halsted's next work was 'Obligations of Literature to the Mothers of England' (1840), in which she enlarged upon a favourite theme, the importance of women's educative influence within the home for the development of English culture. This was awarded the Gresham commemoration prize for 1840. Her most significant work, however, was her 'Life of Richard III', a passionate defence of the character of the last Plantagenet king. Published in two bulky volumes in 1844, it was thoroughly researched and exhaustively argued. Building on the revisionist work of Sir George Buck, Horace Walpole, and Sharon Turner, the biography was based on a thorough knowledge of primary sources, and was the first account to make extensive use of Harleian MS 433, a register of Richard III's grants and writs. The portrait drawn of Richard as a 'preux chevalier' was undeniably a romanticized one, but her rebuttal of many of the traditional charges levelled against the king -- including the murders of Henry VI, Edward, prince of Wales, and George, duke of Clarence -- was cogently argued. Examining the deaths of the princes in the tower, she decided that Richard's guilt was not proven. Many of her conclusions, including her recognition of the importance of Richard's authority in the north of England, have been confirmed by modern research. Contemporary reviewers were generally favourable: the critic of 'The Athenaeum' gave her 'great credit for her laborious attempt to vindicate Richard's character', commenting on the 'patient care with which she has sought out, and marshalled her authorities' ('Athenaeum', 10 August 1844, 731). The 'Gentleman's Magazine' was more critical, accusing her of 'an inclination for fine and sentimental writing' and of paying too much deference to contemporary writers whose scholarship was inferior to her own ('Gentleman's Magazine', 2nd ser., 22, 1844, 273). 
On 8 June 1847, at Walmer in Kent, Caroline Halsted became the third wife of William Atthill (1807-1884), subdean and canon of Middleham in Yorkshire, a collegiate church founded by Richard III. Their relationship seems to have begun in a scholarly exchange, when she lent some manuscripts to Atthill, who was editing 'Documents Relating to the Foundation and Antiquities of the Collegiate Church of Middleham' (1847) for the Camden Society. She did not long survive the marriage, however, dying on 2 July 1848 at Middleham, aged forty-four. Continuing interest in the life and reign of Richard III means that fellow Ricardians keep Caroline Halsted's memory fresh; her 'Richard III' was reprinted in 1977 by Alan Sutton. 


@@@@@


doc= 54065


Thomas (fl. c.1170), poet, who, as 'mestre Thomas', wrote the romance of 'Horn' has, since Soderhjelm's demonstration in 1886, been distinguished from the author of 'Tristan'. It is true that he, too, is sophisticated and erudite, had an excellent clerkly training, shares many clerical prejudices, displays Latin influence, maintains a generally aristocratic tone, and is particularly sympathetic to music (he seems to have been an excellent harpist). At the end of the 'Horn', which is itself apparently a sequel to an earlier work on Aalof (Horn's father), Thomas leaves to his son Wilmot (Gilemot), who is presented as an excellent young poet, the task of composing a work on Hadermod (Horn's son). This suggests a date at the end of his professional career which might be put at 'c'.1170. The linguistic evidence suggests that Thomas was an immigrant to England. Anglo-Norman features of his language are relatively slight and there are clear signs of south-western origin, suggesting that he or his parents originated in the Loire valley. He may have studied at Poitiers. He has some knowledge of English, and seems to know Brittany and Dublin. The 'Horn' is filled with the spirit of the crusades and of the 'chanson de geste' and is written in rhymed 'laisses' of alexandrines. 


@@@@@


doc= 54066


William (fl. 1210/11-1227x38), poet, who was married with a family and spent much of his life in England, composing six religio-didactic works for lay audiences. The 'Bestiaire divin' ('Divine bestiary', 1210/1211) was the most popular, surviving in twenty manuscripts and a series of printed editions from the sixteenth to the nineteenth centuries. It was written for William's lord, Radulphus (possibly to be identified with Ralph of Maidstone, treasurer of Lichfield by 1215 and consecrated bishop of Hereford in 1234), on whose name he etymologizes in the epilogue. This was followed by the 'Vie de Tobie', written for William, prior of Kenilworth in Arden (1214-27), an Augustinian house in the diocese of Coventry and Lichfield, and by 'Les joies de notre Dame' (surviving in one manuscript only). The date of the short 'Vie de Sainte Marie-Madeleine' is uncertain. The other major work was the 'Besant de Dieu' (1226-7), partly inspired by Innocent III's theological work 'De miseria conditionis humanae', and containing allusions to the interdict (1208-13), the fourth crusade, the war against the Albigensians, Louis VIII's expeditions in the south of France, and the oppression of peasants by the ruling class. Finally, there is 'Les treis moz' (1227-38), which was written for Alexander Stavensby, bishop of Lichfield and Coventry (1224-38). There are no grounds for attributing to this didactic writer, William, the fabliaux 'La male honte' and 'Du prestre et d'Alison'. 


@@@@@


doc= 54067


McLagan, James (1728-1805), folklorist, was born at Ballechin, in Strathtay, Perthshire, in 1728. The birth or baptism of James, son of Donald McClagon, is recorded in the parish of Moulin, Perthshire, on 8 September 1728. He matriculated at the University of St Andrews in the 1750/51 session, and was ordained by the presbytery of Dunkeld in 1760. His first charge was the chapel of ease in Amulree, Perthshire. In 1764 he was appointed chaplain to the 42nd regiment (the Black Watch), which had originally been raised at Aberfeldy, Perthshire. He continued as chaplain until 1788; he served in the Isle of Man and was involved in the American War of Independence. The freedom of Glasgow was conferred on him in 1776. In 1788 he was admitted to the charge of Blair Atholl and Strowan, Perthshire, which he held until his death. In 1784 he married Catherine Stuart, daughter of James Stuart, the minister of Killin, who translated the 'New Testament' into Gaelic (1767). She was half her husband's age in 1784, and they had a family of four sons and three daughters. Their eldest son, James, became professor of divinity at King's College, Aberdeen. 
McLagan's great achievement was the collecting of Gaelic poems and songs, and Perthshire became the focus of this work. When he was interviewed in 1800 by John Leyden, the author of 'Journal of a Tour in the Highlands and Western Islands of Scotland' (pp. 258-61), McLagan told him that he had made collections of Ossianic ballads while still at school and college. This suggests that his interest in Gaelic verse started before 1750, and may have been in part a reaction to the failure of the Jacobite rising of 1745, which had strong nationalist implications for some highlanders, including James Macpherson, the Ossianic poet. McLagan corresponded with Macpherson in 1760 and 1761, Macpherson having been told that McLagan had a good collection of the kind of ballads in which he was interested; in 1800 McLagan recalled that he had given Macpherson 'about thirteen poems'. In 1760-63 Macpherson published his supposed translations of ancient Gaelic heroic balladry. 
McLagan was one of a group of men, mainly from Perthshire and Argyll, who made a sustained effort to record Gaelic poetry and song in the second half of the eighteenth century. Part of this effort was encouraged by the publicity and opposition engendered by Macpherson's publication. It is clear, however, that there was an earlier positive drive in addition to the post-1760 reactive one. Adam Ferguson, McLagan's predecessor as chaplain to the Black Watch, and later professor of philosophy at the University of Edinburgh, had shown some interest in Gaelic material, and put Macpherson in touch with Edinburgh friends who shared this interest. Jerome Stone collected ballads in the early 1750s; Donald MacNicol made a large collection of Gaelic poetry. Other close contemporaries, such as Joseph Macintyre from Glenorchy, Archibald MacArthur from Glenlyon, and John Stuart from Killin (McLagan's brother-in-law), were also involved in Gaelic collection and writing, and sometimes collaborated with McLagan in such work. 
McLagan maintained his interest in collecting Gaelic verse throughout his life. Just over a century after his death his collection, which had been preserved by his descendants, was given to Glasgow University Library. The surviving materials consist of 1650 pages, comprising some 630 separate items, largely anonymous and ascribed verse, with a small number of prose items. There are occasional Latin items, a small number of non-Gaelic verse items, a few prose items, genealogies, prayers, and so on. In many instances these manuscripts contain the earliest, or the only, examples of particular poems or songs, and they provide a highly valuable source. McLagan's material was drawn partly from indigenous Perthshire sources, including some manuscripts which are older than 1750. He also used his contacts, both ministerial and military, to acquire versions of poems and songs from other parts of Gaelic Scotland, such as Argyll with its islands, Ross-shire, Inverness-shire, Skye and the outer isles, and districts in Aberdeenshire and elsewhere that were still Gaelic-speaking in his time. Although this collection of manuscripts has been used by various editors over the years, at the end of the twentieth century much of it still remained to be fully exploited. 
Publication of secular Gaelic writing may be said to have begun as late as 1751, with the appearance of Alasdair Mac Mhaighstir Alasdair's poems, and no doubt this was an additional stimulus for eighteenth-century collectors and writers. It is likely that McLagan provided some material for the book 'Clan Feuds and Songs', published by John Gillies in 1780, and he was closely involved with the same publisher's book of 1786, known generally as the 'Gillies Collection', though Gillies himself had little or no Gaelic expertise. In 1792 an article by McLagan on the parish of Blair Atholl and Strowan appeared in the 'Statistical Account', volume 2, in which he voiced warnings about the perceptible weakening of Gaelic in that area. It is indeed fortunate that he personally preserved so much of the verse tradition while it was still available. McLagan died at Blair Atholl on 3 May 1805. 


@@@@@


doc= 54068


Rathborne, Aaron (b. 1571/2), land surveyor and author, was possibly trained by the London mathematician and teacher John Goodwyn, but his origins are obscure. From 1605 he was surveying estates in Yorkshire, Cumberland, Durham, and Lincolnshire, and he was one of those employed in the Jacobean surveys of crown lands. He surveyed land in Suffolk in 1613. 
Rathborne was lodging with Roger Burgis against Salisbury House Gate in the Strand, London, when he published 'The Surveyor in Foure Bookes' (1616). This influential textbook addressed the practical everyday needs of surveyors more realistically than had been done hitherto. Rathborne placed surveying firmly among the mathematical sciences and the first two books of 'The Surveyor' dealt with the elements of geometry, especially with those relevant to surveying. The third book described surveying instruments and their application. Rathborne was particularly concerned with the need to maintain professional standards and pointed out common errors in the use of the plane table (a popular surveying instrument), and suggested ways of overcoming them. He introduced a 'decimal chain' -- a predecessor to the one devised by Edmund Gunter -- in which each perch was subdivided into 100 parts, and discussed its employment in land measurement using geometrical methods. The title page to 'The Surveyor' promoted the use of the altazimuth theodolite (an instrument that enabled simultaneous measurement of horizontal and vertical angles) but Rathborne treated it dismissively in the text, as a complicated instrument already well described. Instead, he recommended his azimuth theodolite or 'peractor' (an instrument for measuring horizontal angles) and a circumferentor (a type of surveying compass) for measuring large areas. The final book of 'The Surveyor' followed earlier texts in discussing legal and manorial issues. 
Two years after this publication Rathborne was granted a patent to make a map of the cities of London and Westminster, as well as maps of York, Bristol, Norwich, Canterbury, Bath, Oxford, Cambridge, and Windsor. The co-patentee was Roger Bruges (probably his landlord of 1616). Rathborne was consulted about estate business in Galtres Forest in the North Riding of Yorkshire in 1622. Neither his later activities nor his date of death are known. 


