@@@@@


doc= 54070


Miller, William John Clarke (1832-1903), mathematician and medical administrator, was born on 31 August 1832 at Beer, south Devon, the son of Reuben Miller, a dissenting minister, and his wife, Ann. During his childhood he was educated at the village school, where he is said to have developed a love of books and of nature. His dissenting parents would not allow him to be educated at a conforming establishment, and at the age of fifteen, in August 1847, he entered the newly created West of England Dissenters' Proprietary School, Taunton. There mathematics and classics were held in equal esteem and Miller became proficient in both, though mathematics became his passion. Years later a fellow pupil remembered his characteristic posture as 'book in hand, probably Euclid's 'Elements'' (Record, 39). 
Miller became a mathematics master at the Taunton school about 1850. During his first year as a student there the school had formed a connection with the University of London which enabled it to award University of London degrees, and he graduated with mathematical honours in 1854. He then taught at several institutions before becoming vice-principal at the Congregational Huddersfield College in 1861. He was married; his wife, who outlived him, was called Harriette Emma. 
During the early 1850s a group of students and masters from the Taunton school started sending questions and solutions to the mathematical department of the 'Educational Times', a monthly journal of education, science, and literature (founded 1847); Miller's first contribution appeared in September 1850. The journal had a strong educational focus, and the editors wanted to see model solutions given to problems that juniors would encounter during their studies. However, Miller, who had greatly wanted to study at Cambridge but been prevented from doing so by his parents' religious stance, valued the journal more for the access it might give him, and others like him, to higher-level mathematics. In 1857 he wrote to the editors to express his desire to see original research flourishing in their journal via the publication of genuine unanswered questions. The editors published his letter and expressed approval of his sentiments, but professed themselves unable to fulfil its aims. In 1862 Miller, by now a major contributor to the journal, himself became its mathematical editor and was able put into practice the policy that he had first called for five years earlier. 
One of Miller's early decisions as new editor of the mathematical department (which comprised a substantial portion of the journal) was to issue, as a separate reprint, 'Mathematical Questions with their Solutions from the 'Educational Times''. For the first volume (June 1864) he put together a formidable list of subscribers, including George Boole, Arthur Cayley, Augustus De Morgan, and James Joseph Sylvester. In subsequent volumes, which appeared regularly at biannual intervals, the range of contributors grew rapidly, including a substantial number of fellows from the Oxford, Cambridge, and Dublin colleges, and many of the questions posed were of an original nature. By the tenth volume Miller's publication had developed a genuinely international reputation, and included contributions from several eminent continental mathematicians; later it also drew contributors from the United States. 
Though he held the editorship concurrently with his vice-presidency of Huddersfield College, Miller was assiduous and painstaking in his approach to the editorial task, sending out solutions to be scrutinized before publication, and correcting some of them himself (notably including those of such distinguished mathematicians as Sylvester and W. K. Clifford). The problems that he himself put forward were highly regarded by leading contemporaries. His journal was innovative and sometimes at the frontier of research; thus, many problems on probability theory occurred in the earlier volumes. In 1875 a separate volume was issued, exclusively devoted to geometrical problems and edited by Thomas Archer Hirst. By 1889 Miller could count 500 contributors drawn from four continents. 
Miller remained mathematical editor of the 'Educational Times' for thirty-five years. This occupation was by nature of a hobby, for professionally he made his living first as a teacher, and later as a medical administrator. He was appointed general secretary and registrar of the General Medical Council in 1876, whereupon he left Huddersfield; he remained in post until ill health forced his resignation in 1897, the same year as he gave up his editorship. His administrative abilities were greatly appreciated by the medical community, and the General Medical Council gave him a gratuity of $1000 on his retirement. 
During his editorship Miller collected likenesses of several hundreds of his mathematical contributors, forming a unique visual record of nineteenth-century mathematical life. He sold his collection in the late 1890s to the American David Eugene Smith, with the hope that it would not be dispersed. (The collection is now in Columbia University, New York, to whom it was bequeathed by Smith.) An indefatigable correspondent, in conjunction with his editorial work Miller also acted as a mathematical intelligencer at large, regularly receiving and passing on much mathematical news. His focus on editorial work was not his preferred choice. At a number of points in his career he attempted, without success, to break into the higher echelons of the mathematical professoriate, notably in the 1860s when he sought to become professor of mathematics at Owens College, Manchester. In later life he expressed regret that he had not forsaken editing for a more auspicious career. His services to mathematics were none the less remarkable for that. 
In 1896 Miller had been struck with aphasia, due to pressure of work, and he continued to suffer from this condition until his death. He died on 11 February 1903 at Castle Nursing Home, Kingswood, near Bristol, after a bout of influenza and bronchitis. 


@@@@@


doc= 54072


Mahler, Kurt (1903-1988), mathematician, was born on 26 July 1903 in Krefeld in the Prussian Rhineland, with his twin sister, Hilde (died 1934), the youngest of the eight children of Hermann Mahler (1855-1941) and his wife, Henriette, 'nee' Stern (1860-1942). Both parents were from the Jewish community; his father, a printer, owned a small business. The four oldest children died before Kurt was born. His brother Joseph, who inherited the printing business, died in a concentration camp, probably in 1945. The remaining child, Lydia (died 1984), married and lived in the Netherlands. 
Mahler was a sickly child and at five he developed tuberculosis of the right knee. Until the age of fourteen he had only four years of formal schooling. He then studied for two years in elementary technical schools and began an apprenticeship in a machine factory at Krefeld. During this time he became fascinated by mathematics and, entirely self-taught, was eventually reading books at university level. His work was brought to the attention of Felix Klein and his assistant Carl Siegel, and on their recommendation Mahler left the factory and was coached for university entrance while continuing his own mathematical studies. 
In 1923 Mahler entered the University of Frankfurt am Main, where Siegel was then professor. Siegel went overseas in 1925 and Mahler migrated to the University of Gottingen; he received his doctorate in 1927 from Frankfurt, and remained at Gottingen for further research, supported by his parents and the Jewish community of Krefeld. At Gottingen he developed new methods in transcendence theory, including his celebrated classification of transcendental numbers, and his work on 'p'-adic numbers contributed to their acceptance into general mathematical culture. 
When Hitler came to power in 1933 Mahler had just been appointed assistant in the University of Konigsberg, but had not yet taken up the post. Realizing that as a Jew he had no future in Germany, he left immediately for the Netherlands, proceeded to Manchester for the academic year 1933/4, supported by the modest Bishop Harvey Godwin fellowship, then, on a stipend raised by a Dutch Jewish group, spent two years at Groningen, where he developed an interest in the geometry of numbers. The cap of his tubercular knee was removed: over the next few years the infection disappeared, but he was left with a permanent limp. In 1937 he returned to Manchester, supported by small fellowships or temporary posts. While he was interned for three months at the outbreak of war, Manchester University awarded him the degree of ScD, and in 1941 an assistant lectureship, his first regular post. He lived from 1938 to 1958 in Donner House, Didsbury, a hostel for single university staff, and when it closed, bought himself a small suburban house. 
In the following years Mahler developed his work on convex sets and quadratic forms into a geometry of numbers of general sets in 'n'-dimensional space, including his influential compactness theorem. With his future now assured, Mahler moved steadily up the academic ladder. He took British nationality in 1946 and was elected to the Royal Society in 1948. The London Mathematical Society awarded him its senior Berwick prize in 1950, and its De Morgan medal in 1971; he was also a member of the Dutch and Australian mathematical societies. Manchester University created its first personal chair for him in 1952. Ten years later he went to Australia as professor at the Institute for Advanced Study in Canberra. This research post gave him freedom to travel and pursue his own studies, which he did with energy and enthusiasm. He also offered courses in number theory in the Australian National University. He was elected to the Australian Academy of Science in 1965 and received its Lyell medal in 1977. In 1968 he reached the statutory age of retirement, whereupon he took up a chair at Ohio State University, returning to Canberra in 1972 as emeritus professor. Mahler did not marry; an attraction of Canberra was that he could live in communal comfort at University House. Mahler was an excellent photographer, and kept up his knowledge of Chinese, begun in 1939 when he had considered taking up a post in China. He remained mathematically active until the end of his life. He died in Canberra at University House on 25 February 1988, leaving the bulk of his estate to the Australian Mathematical Society, which established a lectureship in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 54074


Williams, Elizabeth (1895-1986), mathematician and educationist, was born at 255 Wellington Buildings, Pimlico, London, on 29 January 1895, the second of four children of Ben Larby, a police constable, and his wife, Emily Elizabeth ('nee' Burton). Her childhood was divided between the south Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire countryside where her family had farmed for generations, and the London suburbs where the family lived during term-time while the children were still at school. She attended infant and primary schools in Chelsea and Forest Gate, before taking the first step on the newly established 'scholarship ladder' to East Ham Girls' Grammar School, where, aged sixteen, she passed the London matriculation examination. An application to enter the Pupil Teachers' Centre to train for elementary school teaching was unsuccessful, for, surprisingly in view of her longevity, she failed the medical examination. A chance suggestion led to her seeking entrance to London University to study mathematics and, despite being under age, she entered Bedford College in 1911. At college her appearance and erect posture gained her the nickname Elizabeth (she was thought to resemble one of the portraits of Elizabeth I) which she adopted and used throughout her life, both socially and in her publications. However her family continued to call her May, the name by which she had been known in her schooldays. An attempt to extend her county major scholarship to compensate for her youth was unsuccessful and as a result she graduated in 1914 with an upper second, rather than the wished-for first. 
Before beginning study for a teacher's diploma at London University, Elizabeth obtained her first experience of teaching, deputizing on the staff of the Nottingham High School for Boys for a teacher who had joined the army, a daunting task for a nineteen-year-old; she was the only woman on the staff, but she 'received the utmost courtesy, kindness and even respect' (Howson, 181). Back in London she came under the influence of John Adams (1857-1934) and Percy Nunn (1870-1944), both leading educationists. In 1916, now twenty-one, she was appointed senior mathematics mistress at Haberdashers' Aske's Hatcham Girls' School, New Cross. Her time there ended abruptly following her marriage, on 23 December 1922, to Richard Williams (1877-1960), a Dorset grammar school teacher whom she had met the previous year on a 'Bible' teaching course. In those days there was no place in state or endowed schools for a married woman. Accordingly the two opened their own private school in East Finchley with Elizabeth as headmistress. This 'little school' attracted the attention of Nunn which, in turn, led to her appointment in 1931 as lecturer in education at King's College, London. There she completed an MA thesis, 'The geometrical concepts of children from 5-8 years of age', an indication of the direction in which her interests were moving. Her work exemplified the growing belief that teacher-trainers should be involved in continuing investigation and experiment. In 1935 she moved to Goldsmiths' College, 'a great institution [which] led the way [in] so many teacher training developments' (Howson, 191). When the war came, Elizabeth, now with a family of three teenagers, was evacuated with Goldsmiths' to Nottingham. Following the war's end and the ensuing rapid expansion of teacher training, she became, in 1946, principal of the new City of Leicester College, and in 1951 of the old-established Whitelands College. 
By this time, Elizabeth Williams was nationally known and respected as a mathematics educator and a teacher-trainer. She was a secretary of the Mathematical Association and a member or chair of several important committees which published influential reports, for example, 'Primary Mathematics' (1955), 'Mathematics in Secondary Modern Schools' (1949-59), and 'The Supply and Training of Teachers of Mathematics' (1963). In 1965 she became the first married woman to be president of the association. Meanwhile, on the National Advisory Council for the Training and Supply of Teachers, she fought for the extension of the teacher-training course. Indeed, the then minister of education referred to her as 'the tigress', for her sweet face concealed a strong will. Her work was rewarded both by the establishment of the three-year course and, in 1958, appointment as CBE. That year also saw her official retirement from teacher-training, although her work continued and took on an international aspect. In 1956 she had spent three months in Kenya drawing up a national plan for teacher training, and in 1963-5 she became deputy director of the School of Education in Ghana. From then until her late eighties she visited many countries in Africa, south-east Asia, the Americas, and Australasia, organizing workshops, giving lectures, and advising ministries. Her writings included textbooks for Africa, guides for parents and teachers, and what became the standard reference book for teacher training, 'Primary Mathematics Today'. (This book, written with Hilary Shuard, first appeared in 1970. A third edition containing new work by Elizabeth Williams, written in her mid-eighties, appeared in 1982, and a fourth edition in 1994 after the death of both authors.) She died at the Lister Hospital, Stevenage, on 29 March 1986; her remains were cremated at Cambridge on 7 April. 
Elizabeth Williams made notable contributions to teacher training, in England and abroad, both in its methods and in defining its major aims and purposes. She also had a major worldwide influence on primary school mathematics and the way this was taught. Her career is of considerable interest since it belonged to the transition from the Victorian era to modern practice; she was, for example, the first married woman to hold a number of important educational posts. 


@@@@@


doc= 54076


Stewartson, Keith (1925-1983), mathematician, was born on 20 September 1925 in Barnsley, Yorkshire, the youngest of three children (two boys and a girl) of George Chalmers Stewartson, master baker, and his wife, Mabel. Following the family's move to Billingham, co. Durham, he was educated at Stockton secondary school (1936-42), from where he won a state scholarship and Kitchener memorial scholarship to St Catharine's College, Cambridge. In two years (1942-4) he completed the requirements for a first-class degree in mathematics and was awarded the Drury Jones prize. War service with the Ministry of Aircraft Production took him to first the gunnery range at Orfordness, Suffolk, and then the Guided Projectiles Establishment at Westcott; there his interest in applied mathematics was confirmed, and he received his first introduction to the problems of compressible fluid flow. 
In 1946 Stewartson returned to Cambridge, and in a three-year period of postgraduate work completed part three of the mathematical tripos, with distinction, and a PhD (1949) under the supervision of Professor Leslie Howarth, an authority on fluid dynamics. During this period Stewartson was awarded the Mayhew prize and a Rayleigh prize. In 1949 he was appointed as lecturer at Bristol University, with promotion to reader in 1954. While at Bristol he transformed the fortunes of the university boat club as coach. On 5 September 1953 he married (Elizabeth) Jean Forrester, a schoolteacher; they had three children, two boys and a girl. In 1958 Stewartson accepted the invitation of the University of Durham to take its newly created chair of applied mathematics. During his time there he played a major role in the creation, in 1964, of the Institute of Mathematics and its Applications, and was one of its first vice-presidents. In that year he was appointed as Goldsmid professor of applied mathematics at University College, London, in succession to W. R. Dean. He was elected FRS in 1965. 
Stewartson's early research work was concerned with the theory of boundary layers, a topic in fluid dynamics which relates to the layers of a fluid that are immediately adjacent to a solid boundary, though this description is less applicable to his own contributions, some of which involved the extension of boundary-layer theory to the layers which may appear in the midst of a (rotating) fluid without the presence of a solid boundary. His first research paper (1949) concerned the correlation between incompressible and compressible boundary-layer flows, and boundary-layer theory can be traced as a continuous, but not exclusive, thread in his research. Boundary layers are thin regions in which viscous effects, negligible elsewhere in the flow when viscosity is small, are important. Aeronautics in the Second World War stimulated their study, and in this aerodynamic context Stewartson made seminal contributions to the understanding of flow separation, in both the incompressible and in the high-speed compressible situations that can prove so catastrophic. The concept of multi-structured boundary layers which emerged from his studies was to breathe new life into the subject. 
In work which he carried out from the 1950s onward Stewartson made important contributions to the study of rotating fluids and to magnetohydrodynamics, extending his analysis from the motion of bodies in a rotating fluid to the motion of bodies in a conducting fluid subject to a magnetic field. His analysis helped explain the nature of the 'upstream wakes' that form ahead of an obstacle in a flow parallel to the rotation vector, or to the applied magnetic field. In both areas his major contributions were associated with boundary layers; in the case of rotating fluids the new types of boundary layer that he introduced became known as 'Stewartson layers'. These two areas of research merged in a geophysical context, where he contributed to an understanding of the effect of lunar-solar precession on fluid motions in the earth's liquid core, of the westward drift of the earth's magnetic field, and of the types of motion in the core that can contribute to the dynamo effect responsible for the earth's magnetic field. An area distinct from those above, which occupied much of his last decade, is stability theory. Laminar flows lose stability to the little-understood turbulent state. Stewartson demonstrated that in plane parallel flow the evolution of a small disturbance may terminate in a 'burst' at a particular location. The same methods were employed to study the stability of stratified shear flows. 
Over a period of more than three decades Stewartson established himself as one of the most mathematically profound, and original, applied mathematicians of his time. His development of the influential research school at University College, London, brought more collaborative ventures than previously, as did his frequent visits overseas, most often to the United States. To work with him was a challenging and rewarding experience, and he was never less than generous to his collaborators. Following a heart attack Stewartson died in University College Hospital on 7 May 1983; he was cremated at Golders Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 54078


Darwin, Leonard (1850-1943), scientist and eugenicist, was born on 15 January 1850 at Down House, Downe, Kent, the fourth son and eighth child of Charles Robert Darwin (1809-1882) and his wife, Emma Darwin, 'nee' Wedgwood (1808-1896). He was educated privately and at Clapham grammar school, but his happy and privileged home environment in the countryside of the North Downs was the strongest influence on his early development. At the age of eighteen he passed into the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, claiming in characteristically self-effacing fashion that he chose the army as his profession because he thought himself the stupidest member of the family. He was commissioned in the Royal Engineers in 1871 and worked at the School of Military Engineering at Chatham until, in 1874, he was chosen by Captain Abney, instructor of chemistry and photography, as the photographer on an expedition to New Zealand to observe the transit of Venus on 9 December. The day, however, was cloudy. After a two-year posting in Malta he returned to Chatham to succeed Captain Abney. 
In 1882 (the year of his father's death) Darwin married Elizabeth Frances Fraser (11 July), and with her and two Royal Engineers officers he set off once again to observe a transit of Venus, this time from Australia on 10 December. The day was cloudy once more. He returned at the end of April 1883, spent two years at the Staff College at Camberley as instructor in chemistry, and then moved to London on his appointment to the War Office intelligence department, where he was concerned with African questions. 
In 1886 the weather at last smiled on an astronomical expedition undertaken by Darwin, this time to Grenada in the West Indies to photograph a total eclipse of the sun. Soon after his return he joined the Royal Geographical Society; he was elected to its council in 1890 and served as president from 1908 to 1911. He resigned his commission in 1890, having attained the rank of major. He then entered the second phase of his long life, serving first on the London county council and then, in 1892, as the member of parliament for Lichfield. He was elected by a majority of only four, and lost the seat in the 1895 election. His experiences in parliament led to an interest in economics and thence to his book 'Bimetallism' (1897), of which Maynard Keynes wrote after Darwin's death: 'His book appeared towards the end of the long controversy [on the use of both gold and silver as the basis for currencies]. But his statement of the conflicting arguments was so clear and unbiassed that it remained the standard text-book... until questions on bimetallism had disappeared from the examination papers on economic theory. ('Economic Journal', Dec 1943)' A similarly balanced approach marked Darwin's next work, 'Municipal trade: the advantages and disadvantages resulting from the substitution of representative bodies for private proprietors in the management of industrial undertakings' (1903). 
In 1898 Darwin's first wife died, and on 29 November 1900 he married Charlotte Mildred Massingberd, the eldest daughter of his first cousin Edmund Langton (she had changed her name from Langton). There were no children of either marriage. The third and most important phase of his life did not start until he was sixty-one, when he was persuaded to succeed his father's cousin Sir Francis Galton as president of the Eugenics Education Society upon the latter's death in 1911. He held the presidency until 1928 (by which time the word 'Education' had been dropped). In 1926 his book 'The Need for Eugenic Reform' had appeared, shortly followed by the more popular 'What is Eugenics?' His greatest influence was through his support and encouragement of the young R. A. Fisher. The friendship between the two men, forty years apart in age, formed the intellectual link between Charles Darwin and Francis Galton on the one hand and Fisher on the other, and thus to neo-Darwinism and the foundations of modern statistics. Leonard suggested the topic of Fisher's classic 1918 paper 'The correlation between relatives on the supposition of Mendelian inheritance', and saw to its publication, personally defraying some of the cost. In 1930 Fisher dedicated 'The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection' to him, and when Darwin died in 1943 Fisher described him as the kindest and wisest man he ever knew. In 1912 the University of Cambridge conferred the honorary degree of doctor of science on Darwin. 
Darwin and his wife moved from London to West Hoathly, near Forest Row, Sussex, in 1921. Mildred Darwin died in 1940. Darwin died from bronchial pneumonia at home on 26 March 1943. He was buried at Forest Row cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 54081


Spiller, John (1833-1921), chemist and inventor of photographic techniques, was born on 20 June 1833, one of at least two sons of John Horatio Spiller, an architect. Educated at a private school at Crouch End, London, and the City of London School, he then entered the Royal College of Chemistry and stayed on after his coursework as a junior assistant to Professor A. W. Hoffman. At the age of twenty he assisted Dr John Percy at the Royal School of Mines in analysing British iron ores, and the results of their important work were published in the 'Memoirs of the Geological Survey'. Within three years, in 1856, his growing reputation led to an appointment as an assistant chemist at the Woolwich arsenal. In 1861 he founded a department there to teach the new art/science of photography; he also lectured on the art at the Royal Military Institute and the Royal Military Repository. He left Woolwich in 1868 to join his brother's colour firm, Messrs Brooke, Simpson, and Spiller, as their chief chemist: it was the first British firm to manufacture synthetic (coal-tar) dyes. His retirement after twenty years there led to no diminishment of activity. Spiller was one of the first to embrace the volunteer movement, achieving his commission in 1859 and finally retiring in 1877 as a captain of the 26th (Kent) rifles. 
In spite of achievements in many areas of chemistry and geology, it is for his work in photography that Spiller is best-known. It was in his youth at the Royal College of Chemistry that he met and formed a close friendship with William Crookes. Photography was their common interest and their first experiments together started about 1850 with the calotype process. Within two years Henry Talbot's pioneering invention was beginning to give way to the new negative process of wet collodion. Although this was much more sensitive and finely detailed than the calotype process, it involved a chemically volatile glass plate which had to be exposed and processed while wet, a great limitation for field or spontaneous use. In an 1854 issue of the 'Philosophical Magazine' Crookes and Spiller published their first paper on photography, on a 'Method of preserving the sensitiveness of collodion plates'. This described how, if a deliquescent salt was incorporated to keep them sufficiently moist, the plates could be made up ahead of time, packaged in light and tight containers, used in the field, and processed at a more convenient time. This presaged the later factory-made dry plates and the 'Art Journal' in 1854 rightly celebrated the improvement as one of the greatest importance. 
Spiller also published papers on methods of making photographs more permanent (a matter of enormous concern at the time), artificial lighting for photography, and the photography of solar eclipses. His scientific essays, of which nearly thirty were published, were dominated by photographic topics. He continued a close working relationship with Crookes until the latter embraced spiritualism in the 1870s, a development which proved a strain on the scientific beliefs which had been the basis of their association: their personal friendship, however, lasted late into their long lives. 
Spiller married (Caroline) Ada, the daughter of the well-known microscopist Andrew Pritchard FRSE; they had a daughter and two sons. Her brother, H. Baden Pritchard, succeeded Spiller in the photographic department at Woolwich and was later an influential editor in photography and a preserver of some of the earliest history of photography. Almost four years after Ada's untimely death (in October 1873) Spiller married, on 5 June 1877, Emma Davenport, daughter of Samuel Thomas Davenport, assistant secretary of the Society of Arts; they had one son. 
Born at a time when the stagecoach was the most common means of travel, Spiller came of age just as the art/science of photography was coming of age as well. His activity in this field spanned seven decades of enormous change. His formal admission into the Photographic Society of London (later the Royal Photographic Society) was delayed until 1867, but he rapidly gained the distinction of being the only person ever to fill all their major offices, rising from treasurer-secretary to vice-president to president in 1874-5. He was also the editor of the 'Photographic Journal', sometimes in conjunction with Pritchard and sometimes with Dr Hugh Welch Diamond, and was designated 'Lord Uriel of the Solar Club'. Most of his photographic output primarily recorded his technical experiments in the medium, but some competent amateur pictorial work which he did about 1857 with Dr John Percy survives. 
Spiller, who bore an uncanny physical resemblance to Field Marshal Lord Roberts, also took an active interest in church and civic matters. He died on 8 November 1921 at his home, 2 St Mary's Road, Canonbury, London. He was survived by his second wife. Chapman Jones, his obituarist, in a 1922 issue of the 'Photographic Journal', remembered him as being 'of a most kindly disposition, ever ready to lend a helping hand or step into a gap that needed filling... there are... many in the chemical and photographic world who are indebted to him' (Jones, 23-4). His photographs are in the Royal Photographic Society collection at the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television, Bradford, and the Gernsheim collection in the University of Texas at Austin. 


@@@@@


doc= 54082


Varley, Frederick Henry (1842-1916), electrical engineer, was born at 1 Charles Street, Somers Town, London, on 18 December 1842, the youngest of the seven sons of Cornelius Varley (1781-1873), scientific instrument maker and watercolour artist, and his wife, Elizabeth Livermore Straker. He was educated privately in Islington and his subsequent engineering career was probably influenced by his father's interest in science. Another strong influence was that of his brother Cromwell Fleetwood Varley (1828-1883). In 1859 Frederick joined the family firm, which made telegraph components and testing apparatus, many of which were for his brother. In 1865 he was involved in tests on the Atlantic telegraph cable, and in 1868 he acted as assistant engineer on the Lowestoft-Norderney section of the Reuter cable. He and his brother Octavius went into business as consulting engineers and manufacturers of cable testing equipments and instruments. Octavius died in 1871 but Varley used the title O. and F. H. Varley until the 1880s. During his career Varley took out several patents for telegraph apparatus including double current galvanometers and keys, ink-writing Morse instruments, and a system of block signalling for railways. 
Varley's subsequent areas of interest mirrored the growth of the electrical industry. In the late 1870s he produced flexible carbons for arc lamps, which he patented in 1882, and a lamp in which light was produced by passing electricity through a constantly falling stream of powdered carbon. He later developed an incandescent lamp filament by soaking fibres in compounds of boron, but the Varley diaphanous filament was not a success, partly due to the domination of the lamp industry by Swan and Edison's patents. Varley also produced and patented batteries and electric motors, and in 1881 helped Cromwell Fleetwood Varley with improvements to the cymaphen, his device for transmitting musical tones. Before the outbreak of the First World War Varley was working on A. T. Johnson's tuned reed wireless system. As well as electrical equipment he developed porous stone wicks for oil and petroleum lamps, and in 1890 he patented photographic apparatus. 
Like his brother Cromwell Fleetwood Varley, Frederick Varley was interested in spiritualism and the scientific recording of phenomena produced by mediums. In 1879 Charles Blackburn, a spiritualist investigator, commissioned him to build apparatus for recording the weight of mediums during seances. This was used on 7 October 1879 to monitor a medium called Mr Haxby. Another interest was shooting, and he designed apparatus for indicating target scores automatically. He also published a pocket book of marksmen's target diagrams in 1867. 
Throughout his life Varley lived in the Stoke Newington area of London, which was also the site of his father's works. He died at 82 Newington Green Road, on 12 March 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 54083


Guppy, (Agnes) Elisabeth (1838-1917), medium, was born Agnes Elisabeth White at 1 Gloucester Crescent, Regent's Park, London, the daughter of Charles Taylor White. Her parents died when she was eleven months old and she was raised by her maternal grandfather, the London sculptor William Ginsell Nicholl (1796-1871), who taught her sculpting and photography. She took her grandfather's name, and was known from an early age as Elisabeth Nicholl (or Nichol). From the age of nine she had visions of spirit figures, which persisted despite exercise and the water cure. In the early 1860s her photographic skills attracted Fanny Sims, an amateur photographer and sister of the naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace. Sims convinced her of her spiritual powers, and in December 1866 Miss Nicholl held her first seances in the Wallace household. Her powers caused tables to rap messages and nearby objects to levitate. Later that month she first produced the apports for which she became celebrated: fresh flowers materialized out of the darkness and fell onto participants' laps. During this period she became a professional mesmeric healer, which enabled her to finance private evening seances. Her mediumship was strengthened through collaboration with mediums such as Mrs Makdougall Gregory, Georgiana Houghton (died 1887), and Catherine Berry (1813-1891): her apports now included fruit and small animals, she began producing spirit drawings, and during one seance with Wallace she levitated herself onto a table. 
On 10 December 1867 Miss Nicholl married Samuel Guppy (1790?-1875), a rich and elderly spiritualist and amateur photographer. The newly wedded couple subsequently toured Europe and enthralled nobility and literati with seance apports. Elisabeth's first child, Thomas, was born in Naples during September 1869. On returning to England in July 1870 the couple lived in Highbury, where Mrs Guppy gave private seances and taught mediums such as Frank Herne and Charles Williams. Her most celebrated achievement occurred on 3 June 1871, when she was allegedly transported 3 miles from Highbury to a joint Herne-Williams seance in Holborn. A seance participant had jokingly asked the invisible spirits to bring her there -- considered an impossible feat, as she was an enormous woman. Minutes later an entranced Mrs Guppy appeared above the seance table, unaware of her new surroundings. 
In January 1872 Mrs Guppy became the first British medium to materialize spirit hands and faces. In the following March the London photographer Frederick Hudson used her mediumship to produce some of the first British spirit photographs. However, Mrs Guppy's stardom was soon threatened by the sensational young medium Florence Cook (1856-1904), who could materialize a fully formed spirit called Katie King. By late 1873 Mrs Guppy had grown so jealous that she devised plots to expose Cook as a fraud. Although she attracted attention for her own fully formed materializations, Mrs Guppy's subsequent sharp decline in popularity suggests that these plots tarnished her reputation. Investigators' opinion of Mrs Guppy was not always favourable: Lord Rayleigh, having attended several of her seances in mid-1874, decided he could not stand her 'even in the cause of science and philosophy'; in 1886 Eleanor Sidgwick supported her sister's suspicions that Mrs Guppy's materializations were caused by devices concealed inside her voluminous gown. 
Samuel Guppy died in April 1875 and Elisabeth later married William Volckman, a lawyer whom she had used to expose Cook in December 1873. From the late 1870s a protracted illness forced her to discontinue regular seances and take the water cure. By 1897 she had recovered and was once again producing apports and fully formed materializations in private seances. Elisabeth Guppy-Volckman died at 3 Norfolk Square, Brighton, on 9 December 1917. 


@@@@@


doc= 54086


Sturge, Sophia (1849-1936), peace campaigner, was born in Birmingham, on 5 January 1849, the second of the five children of Joseph Sturge (1793-1859), corn merchant, and his second wife, Hannah Sturge (1816-1896), daughter of Barnard Dickinson, ironmaster of Coalbrookdale, and his wife, Ann. The two families were members of the Society of Friends. Joseph Sturge was a well-known philanthropist, and Sophia was brought up in an atmosphere of strenuous piety and community service. After her education at home by governesses she embarked on a lifelong career of philanthropy and reform. At a time when women were claiming a share in public life she served as president of the Young British Women's Temperance Association and as a member of the Women's Liberal Social Council. From the 1860s she supported the women's suffrage campaign. Deeply moved by the sufferings of the Irish people, she sympathized with Irish home rule and went to Connemara in 1888, where, with financial assistance from some Quakers, she set up a basket-making industry in the village of Letterfrack. She lived there for seven years, pursuing this venture with great energy. Subsequently, in Ireland and the Scottish highlands, she attempted to set up cottage industries for making toys. As an authority on handicrafts she was consulted by the congested districts boards in Scotland and Ireland. Hoping to diminish unemployment and urban destitution in England, she was also associated with the land settlement schemes of Joseph Fels, an American philanthropist. 
Sophia Sturge's sympathies recognized no frontiers: from her parents she had inherited business-cum-philanthropic interests in the Caribbean island of Montserrat, and in her own right she supported reforms promoted by the early Indian National Congress. By the turn of the century world peace had become her chief interest. A strong believer in international arbitration, she attended peace conferences in Boston and Stockholm in 1904 and 1910. She opposed the South African War and assisted Norman Angell's peace campaign. In July and August 1914 she worked strenuously for the Neutrality League which attempted to keep Britain out of the First World War. Putting the strength of her convictions to severe tests during the war years, she not only pressed for a negotiated peace but also assisted enemy aliens in Britain through the Friends Emergency Committee and attempted to ameliorate the harsh treatment of conscientious objectors. After the war she went to the Netherlands where she helped German children to recuperate from their hardships. During the 1920s she promoted peace by participating in the conferences of the Union of Democratic Control and by travelling throughout Britain to address schoolchildren. Her published works were primarily directed to young people in the hope of fostering international understanding: they included books on Germany, the Netherlands, Denmark, and Norway; a tale called 'The Patriot' (1909); and 'The Children of Hunger', a collection of children's letters from Germany and Austria written in the aftermath of the First World War. 
Sophia Sturge never married; she lived in the parental home at Wheeleys Road, Edgbaston, until her mother's death, when, with her brother and sisters, she moved to 318 Hagley Road, Edgbaston. Later she moved to nearby Frederick Road. She lived frugally, but her home was always a base for her public life where she entertained local and international visitors. Vehement, even importunate, in pursuit of her good causes, she cultivated an impressive presentation of self. She was remembered as a 'beautiful tall lady' (Hughes 181) who dressed in a blue cloak (the colour of peace) with flowing draperies in the style of Elizabeth Fry. Her attitude to Quakerism was ambivalent: loyal to her parents' example, as a young woman she was none the less alienated by what she saw as restrictive Quaker customs and became a member of the Church of England. However, she resumed her Quakerism before her death. She died on 17 January 1936 at 39 Frederick Road and was buried on 21 January at Lodge Hill cemetery, Selly Oak, Birmingham. The registered cause of death was dermatitis herpetiformis and chronic rheumatism. 


@@@@@


doc= 54087


Preyer, Thierry William (1841-1897), physiologist and advocate of Darwinism, was born on 4 July 1841 at Moss Side, Manchester, the son of Thierry Preyer, merchant, and his wife, Adele, formerly Kutter (or Kutten). Both parents were originally from Germany and had presumably come to Manchester in connection with the father's business. 
Little direct information exists on Preyer's life; what family papers did exist were lost during the Second World War. The problem is compounded by the fact that Preyer's own autobiographical sketches contain false and contradictory information, reversing the order of his names to William Thierry, for example, and so leading a number of writers to believe that Thierry William was his father. 
Preyer's education began at home under visiting teachers, native speakers of English and German. After a brief attendance at Clapham grammar school, Clapham, London, he and his family moved to Germany in 1855, settling in Wiesbaden, Prussia. He spent two and a half years at the 'Gymnasium' in Duisburg, moved to Bonn where he passed his examinations in the autumn of 1859, and went on to study medicine and natural science at the university there. In the summer of 1860 he made a trip to Iceland, after which he moved to Berlin to prepare for a career in physiology. In the autumn of 1861 he moved to Heidelberg where, among other subjects, he studied chemistry with Bunsen, physiology with Helmholz, and zoology with Bronn. On 13 August 1862 he successfully completed his doctoral examination, submitting the first Darwinian thesis written in Germany. Shortly afterwards he went to Vienna to study physiology with Ludwig for a year, before returning to Berlin to work with Virchow and others. By 1864 he was in Paris studying with Bernard, and in the summer of 1865 he became a 'Privatdozent' in zoochemistry and zoophysics at Bonn, where he was given a doctoral degree (and apparently his 'Habilitation') in medicine and surgery. Preyer's educational achievements permitted him in 1869 to accept a position as 'ordinarius' professor of physiology in the faculty of medicine at Jena and director of the Physiological Institute. 
Preyer is probably best known for his book, 'Die Seele des Kindes' (1882), which was published in English as 'The Mind of the Child' (1888). It is considered a seminal work in developmental psychology, although Preyer was not associated with the group of psychologists who established the modern discipline. In 1868 he initiated a correspondence with Darwin that continued until shortly before the latter's death. He was an avid Darwinist and protagonist for natural selection. He produced a popularized translation of 'On the Origin of Species' and a biography of his idol, 'Darwin, sein Leben und Wirken' (1896); in 1891 he published copies of much of his correspondence with Darwin. At Jena he numbered among his friends William Roux, one of the founders of experimental embryology, and E. Ray Lankester, later one of the giants of late nineteenth-century British biology; the older Ernst Haekel apparently was not as close a friend as the younger men. 
From a British standpoint, Preyer's greatest significance is his role in popularizing Darwinism in Germany, particularly as one of the few who accepted the ideas in a relatively unqualified form. Most other German proponents of Darwin and British biology used the theses in the furtherance of their own arguments; Haekel, for example, adapted Darwin to the service of his own monistic metaphysics. For Preyer, all his efforts were designed to gather diverse data to support the theory as proposed and demonstrated by the British interpretations. In this particular he stands out from his better-known contemporaries. 
In 1888 Preyer resigned the professorship, apparently as a result of personal problems, and moved to Berlin where he lectured as a 'Privatdozent' until 1893 when he moved to Wiesbaden where he died after a lengthy illness on 15 July 1897. He was survived by his wife, Erika, and at least one son, Axel Thierry Preyer, who obtained his doctorate at the University of Leipzig on 20 November 1899 with a dissertation in zoology. 


@@@@@


doc= 54090


Fitch, Walter Hood (1817-1892), botanical artist and lithographer, was born on 29 January 1817 in Lanark, Scotland, the second son of five children of John Fitch (1790- 'c'.1850), cloth merchant, and his wife, Catherine Maria Hood (1786-1859), a milliner and dressmaker. After a year at Leeds grammar school, Fitch began his art training in 1828 in Glasgow, with Andrew Donaldson (1790-1846), the Scottish painter. This was augmented by a lithography course in 1829-30, after which he became an apprentice pattern-drawer in Glasgow's textile industry. 
In 1832 Fitch was introduced to botany by William Jackson Hooker (1785-1865), professor of botany at Glasgow University and editor of 'Curtis's Botanical Magazine'. Impressed by Fitch's great facility for speed, accuracy, and composition when drawing floral patterns for calico printing, Hooker bought him out of his apprenticeship mid-term. He showed great facility. Fitch also developed the art of lithography at a time when the process was rarely used for botanical work, and perfected an almost-legendary skill of working from rehydrated dried specimens. 
Fitch's first published plate, of 'Mimulus roseus', appeared in 'Curtis's Botanical Magazine' (61, March 1834, no. 3353). He was to make nearly 3000 drawings for this magazine and a further 9000 for other publications, ranging from small, woodcut illustrations for George Bentham's 'Handbook of the British Flora' (1862-5) to coloured lithographic folios of 'Victoria regia' (now 'amazonica') (1851) for J. D. Hooker's 'Illustrations of Himalayan Plants' (1855). His early works were outline pencil drawings with sepia-washed shading to guide the engraver who copied them onto copper prior to printing, but by 1836, working from dried plants for W. J. Hooker's 'Icones plantarum' (12 vols., 1836-54, 1867-76), Fitch had made his first original lithographs -- outline ink-drawings on transfer-paper for offsetting onto litho stone. Later he drew with litho chalk/crayon directly onto the stone, making a continuous tone for shading in place of the engraver's hatched line and so controlling the quality of his image. Unfortunately chalk litho-printing was temperamental and Fitch's work was often spoilt by inept printers, as was the zinc lithography for W. J. Hooker's 'Genera Filicum' (1838-42). However, by 1845 he was making successful chalk-lithographs for 'Curtis's Botanical Magazine'. The culmination of this first period of work was Fitch's visits to Woburn Abbey in 1838 and 1839 to make watercolours of cactus flowers for the duke of Bedford. 
In 1841, when Hooker became director of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Fitch (still paid by Hooker) accompanied him. He was to illustrate nearly every book issued from Kew over the next forty years. By 1844 he had begun plates for J. D. Hooker's 'The Botany of the Antarctic Voyage' (3 vols., 1844-59), followed in 1846 by work for other botanists. Living in various houses around Kew Green, he was an integral part of Kew's botanical milieu. On 5 December 1857 he married Hannah Toghill (1833-1929); they had eight children, all long-lived. 
Initially Fitch became known through his close association with the Hookers but his artistic skill and scientific accuracy enhanced the value of every botanical work he illustrated. He was in great demand for monographs, floras, textbooks, and works for popular science. In 1856 he was invited to work for the Linnean Society, where he was soon joined by his nephew 
In 1859 Fitch travelled to Madrid's Royal Museum to revive and draw eighty-year-old dried plants for Howard's folio 'Illustrations of Nueva Quinologia of Pavon' (1859-62). This boosted his reputation and he became completely freelance in 1860, but he continued to work for 'Curtis's Botanical Magazine' until he resigned in 1878 (John Fitch lithographed the magazine until 1920). Aged sixty-two, Fitch began to work on W. B. Hemsley's 'Biologia Centrali-Americana' (1879-88). 
Fitch's freest chalk lithographs were made for H. J. Elwes's 'Monograph of the Genus Lilium' (1877-80). 'The lilies he drew... in a standing position direct on the stone, which was poised at a slight angle, the bold freehand lines were laid on with an unerring sweep of the pencil' (Hemsley, 'Bulletin'). Fitch's work was more flamboyant than that of such predecessors as Ehret, Redoute, or the Bauer brothers, combining botanical accuracy with a flair for page design. In Britain and Europe he had little competition, being rivalled only by the Frenchman Alfred Riocreux (1820-1912), whose lithographs were wisely uncoloured -- a simple colour-guide was all that was required by botanists. In some of Fitch's work, a generalized, uniform colouring unfortunately spoiled the perspective of his drawings. (In fact, his better landscapes confirm his abilities as a painter.) 
Fitch's finished drawings were often developed from various starting points: he worked directly from observation, making his own dissections and analyses, from the rough fieldwork of botanists, from written or verbal descriptions, or from his own strong visual memory. He wrote, in a series of articles on botanical drawing for the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' (1869), that 'Sketching living plants is merely a species of copying, but dried specimens test the artist's ability to the uttermost and by drawings made from them would I be judged a correct draughtsman' ('Gardeners' Chronicle', 1869, 499). He was awarded a civil-list pension of $100 per annum in 1880 for his services to botanical science. 
Fitch was tall and of slim build. As a young man he was an easy-going, somewhat bohemian character, disliking the more formal side of Victorian society in common with his artist friend Marianne North (1830-1890). A sense of humour is revealed in his light-hearted botanical writings in the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' (1865-1879) and in some non-botanical work (W. D. Hooker, 'Notes on Norway', 1837 and 1839). He continued to paint landscape throughout his life and played the violin and flute by ear, yet botany had become so much his way of living that he even relaxed by botanizing on rambles with family and friends. In later life he suffered ill health and became bitter, convinced that he had given his all to botany and the Hookers for a pittance and was now unappreciated. Yet at the time of his death, his international reputation was high. 
Fitch provided important records of an immense number of plants new to botany. He was persuaded by the Hookers to donate nearly 3000 watercolour sketches to the Kew herbarium and library. These, together with thousands of published lithographs, remain his lasting contribution to botanical science and art. His name is commemorated in the genus 'Fitchia'. He died of apoplexy on 14 January 1892 at his home, Llewellyn House, Kew Green, and was buried on 20 January in Richmond cemetery, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 54093


Henslow, John Stevens (1796-1861), botanist and Church of England clergyman, was born on 6 February 1796 at Rochester, Kent. He was the eldest of eleven children; his father was John Prentis Henslow, a solicitor, and his mother, Frances, was daughter of Thomas Stevens, a wealthy Rochester brewer. Surrounded by many books on natural history and greatly encouraged by both his parents, the young Henslow began his education at home, continuing at day schools in Rochester and then, as a boarder, at a school in Camberwell. Here the drawing-master, George Samuel, a keen entomologist, introduced Henslow to eminent zoologists and entomologists. 
In October 1814 Henslow entered St John's College, Cambridge. At that time there was little choice of subject available, and his study was principally mathematical. He obtained a reasonable BA degree in January 1818 and became a fellow of the Linnean Society on 9 February 1818. Henslow added geology to his interests by accompanying the newly appointed Woodwardian professor of geology, Adam Sedgwick, on a tour of the Isle of Wight in 1819. Their idea to found a 'corresponding society' to promote science in Cambridge came to fruition in November 1819, when they established the Cambridge Philosophical Society. Henslow was, it may be assumed, judged too young to be an officer, but he became one of the secretaries in 1821 and held the office for eighteen years. 
On the death of Clarke, in 1822, the chair of mineralogy became vacant, and Henslow was elected. This election was a complex and acrimonious affair, but Henslow's part in it seems to have been entirely honourable. In succeeding Clarke, who was a popular lecturer and brilliant showman, he had taken on a difficult challenge. Henslow's style of lecturing, to quote Leonard Jenyns, his brother-in-law and biographer, 'was not what would be called eloquent, but he had a good voice and a remarkably clear way of expressing himself'. Being now assured of an academic career, Henslow married Harriet (1797-1857), daughter of Revd George Leonard Jenyns of Bottisham Hall, on 16 December 1823 and set up house in Cambridge. Two years later, on the death of Thomas Martyn, the professor of botany, he succeeded to this chair also and began his rejuvenation of botanical science in Cambridge. Shortly afterwards he resigned his professorship of mineralogy. 
In 1824 Henslow was ordained and obtained a curacy in Cambridge. Whatever struggle took place in his mind about the relative merits of a church or a university career, there is some evidence that the resolution of doctrinal difficulties affecting his Christian belief was important in shaping his future career. There is little difficulty in understanding his acceptance of the chair of botany, however. The aged Martyn had treated his professorship as a sinecure, and had ceased to live in Cambridge, or even visit it, for nearly thirty years. What survived of Cambridge botany was a small, traditional botanical garden unsuited, to use Henslow's own words, 'to the demands of modern science'; in it there was little or no botanical teaching or research. This was a real challenge to a gifted and enthusiastic young man, and he set about rescuing what he could from the old museum, planning a course of botanical lectures and practical 'demonstrations', and setting in motion the plans for the new Cambridge Botanic Garden on the present site of nearly 40 acres. Disarmingly, Henslow himself is quoted as saying of his election to the chair of botany: 'when appointed, I knew very little indeed about botany... but I probably knew as much of the subject as any other resident in Cambridge' (J. S. Henslow, 'Address to the members of the University of Cambridge on... the botanic garden', 1846). 
From 1825 to 1832 seems to have been a golden age for botanical science in Cambridge. Not only were Henslow's lectures well attended, but the more gifted pupils found the young professor charming, friendly, accessible, and very knowledgeable over the whole field of natural science. The field classes run by Henslow became very popular, partly because they took in zoology and geology as freely as botany, and the Friday evening soirees at the Henslow home overlooking Parker's Piece were brilliantly successful. The young Charles Darwin, who went up to Christ's College in 1828, fell under his spell, with important consequences for modern biological science. Darwin assessed his teacher thus: 'He had a remarkable power of making the young feel completely at ease with him, though we were all awe-struck with the amount of his knowledge... When I reflect how immediately we felt at ease... I think it was as much owing to the transparent sincerity of his character, as to his kindness of heart; and, perhaps even still more to the highly remarkable absence in him of all self-consciousness. (Jenyns, 51)' Thus began a lifelong friendship, which survived even the strain of the publication of 'The Origin of Species' in 1859. Ironically, Henslow, who had first recommended Darwin as naturalist for the 'Beagle', was in the chair for the famous meeting of the British Association in Oxford in 1860 when Thomas Henry Huxley clashed with Bishop Wilberforce over man's descent from the apes. 
Henslow's only substantial work, entitled 'The Principles of Descriptive and Physiological Botany', published in 1835, made widely available to British scientists the important work of De Candolle and other, mainly French, botanists. The book reveals how effectively Henslow had equipped himself with an all-round picture of botany as an important science, but already, by 1832, when he obtained the living of Cholsey-cum-Moulsford in Berkshire, the Cambridge halcyon days were nearly over. The new vicar of Cholsey resided in the village during the long vacation, but continued to live in Cambridge until 1839. In 1837 he accepted the lucrative living of Hitcham in Suffolk, but soon decided that he could not conscientiously discharge his duties there without leaving Cambridge. From 1839 onwards he attended to his minimum commitments in Cambridge, which included a lecture course in the Easter term, and an interest in the new botanic garden, which was officially opened in 1846, and which retains today many marks of Henslow's ideas. The far-sighted design of planting hardy trees in systematic groups was specifically chosen by Henslow for its educational value, and the whole purpose of the garden was explained by him in his 'Address to the members of the University of Cambridge on the expediency of improving, and on the funds required for remodelling and supporting the botanic garden'. This twenty-page pamphlet, dated 1846, sets out with admirable clarity what a botanical garden should do, in providing facilities for growing plants for teaching and research. Published at a time when there was still no regular teaching in the individual sciences in Cambridge, this document reads prophetically, and it is good to recall that, the year before he died, Henslow was able to examine the first tripos candidates for botany. 
A new career began for Henslow when the family left Cambridge for the rectory at Hitcham. He had already displayed in Cambridge an active interest in local politics, and had indeed incurred a good deal of criticism for his willingness to act as 'common informer' in a court case involving election bribery. (As an extraordinary witness to this affair there remained visible for more than a century afterwards an inscription in thick black paint on the wall of Corpus Christi College stating 'Henslow -- common informer'.) This wider concern for the good of 'the common people' Henslow increasingly exercised in and around his Suffolk parish. In spite of opposition, sometimes quite violent, among the local farmers, who saw in any education of the labouring classes a dangerous, even revolutionary step, he established schools, benefit and sports clubs, allotments, horticultural shows, and parish excursions. One of these excursions, held on 27 July 1854, took more than 200 parishioners by the newly constructed railway for a day visit to Cambridge, where, on a carefully planned itinerary, they were shown the new botanic garden and several colleges and university buildings, and taken to dinner at 2 p.m. in the hall of Downing College where, according to a pamphlet he had printed about the visit, 'the Vice-Chancellor and his Lady have kindly added to our ordinary frugal fare by the present of a Barrel of Beer, and Plum-puddings enough for the whole party'. 
The fame of Henslow's experiments in popular education reached far beyond Hitcham, and he was even invited by Prince Albert to give a short course of botanical lectures to the royal children. He made an important contribution to the development of scientific teaching in the University of London, where he acted as an examiner for twenty-two years, and pioneered the introduction of a practical examination. Henslow was also involved with the early years of the Ipswich Museum, acting as president of the managing committee from 1850. 
Henslow and his wife had three daughters, and three sons of whom one died in infancy. The eldest daughter, Frances, married the botanist J. D. Hooker (1817-1911) and the younger son, George Henslow, became a popular botanical lecturer. Harriet Henslow died on 20 November 1857. Henslow died at the rectory, Hitcham, on 16 May 1861, and of his funeral at Hitcham on 22 May, Jenyns records that 'church and churchyard alike [were] filled with the parishioners'. 

George Henslow (1835-1925), botanist, was born on 23 March 1835 in Cambridge. He was educated privately at the vicarage at Sawston, near Cambridge, then at King Edward VI's Grammar School, Bury St Edmunds. He entered Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1854 and graduated in 1858 with a first class in the natural sciences tripos together with a second class in both mathematics and divinity. After ordination his first curacy was at Steyning, Sussex, from 1859 to 1861, followed by two consecutive appointments as headmaster of grammar schools at Hampton Lucy, Warwickshire, and London (Store Street). From 1886 to 1890 he held the lectureship in botany at St Bartholomew's medical school, and was honorary professor of botany to the Royal Horticultural Society from 1880 to 1918. In 1897 he was appointed one of the original sixty holders of the horticultural society's Victoria medal of honour. Henslow was married three times. In October 1859 he married Ellen Weekley (died 1871); the couple had five children, but only one (also George), survived infancy. In 1872 he married Georgina Brook Bailey (1842/3-1876); following her death he married, in 1881, Katherine (1845/6-1919), widow of Richard Yeo. 
A large man with an impressive bearing, Henslow was an excellent lecturer, very popular with amateur gardeners and naturalists. His lectures were illustrated with large coloured wall-diagrams, many of which came to him from his father, who had used them in his own lectures in Cambridge. Though accepting the general idea of organic evolution, George Henslow found Darwinian natural selection unconvincing as a mechanism, preferring Lamarckian explanations as in his books 'The Origin of Floral Structures' (1888) and 'The Origin of Plant Structures' (1895). These views, combined with a somewhat authoritarian manner, made him less universally acceptable in scientific bodies such as the Linnean Society of London, of which he was a fellow. Henslow died at his home, Danehurst, 40 Branksome Wood Road, Bournemouth, on 30 December 1925 and was buried in Bournemouth cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 54094


More, Alexander Goodman (1830-1895), naturalist, was born on 5 September 1830 in London, the first of three children of Alexander More (died 1886). He was a delicate child and when, in 1834, his younger brother, George, died of scarlatina, the family moved to Renens, Switzerland. More was educated by a nursery-governess until he was nine, when he went to live with a tutor. When almost eleven he was sent to Mr Bailey's School in Clifton where he remained for two years, and in February 1842 he entered Rugby School. He was a good scholar and, although always sickly, a keen athlete. By this time his parents and sister, Frances (Fanny) Margaret, had settled at Bembridge, Isle of Wight. More entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in October 1851 to study the classics, but bouts of illness disrupted his studies and he left in February 1855 without graduating. While at Cambridge he became friendly with the botanists Charles C. Babington (1808-1895) and the Revd William W. Newbould (1819-1886), and with the ornithologists F. D. Goodman and Edward Newton. 
For the next twelve years More occupied himself studying natural history and visiting Ireland, especially co. Galway where his friends the Shawe-Taylors lived. Sometimes his sister, also a keen naturalist, accompanied him. He observed plants, birds, and insects. It is clear from More's numerous publications and correspondence that he was an all-round naturalist, interested in both plants and animals. He corresponded with a number of other naturalists, including Charles Darwin (1809-1882). 
More displayed a strong bias towards the study of distribution patterns. His major ornithological work, 'On the Distribution of Birds in Great Britain during the Nesting Season' (1865), reported the results of a survey for which he employed the same scheme of districts that Hewett C. Watson (1804-1881) had defined for recording plant distribution. More had also used the same scheme in an earlier paper, 'On the geographical distribution of butterflies in Great Britain', which he wrote in collaboration with Thomas Boyd. 'Contributions towards a Cybele Hibernica, being outlines of the geographical distribution of plants in Ireland', published in 1866, was compiled by More in collaboration with David Moore (1808-1879), director of the Royal Dublin Society's Botanic Gardens, Glasnevin. They also read a paper on the climate, flora, and crops of Ireland at the International Horticultural Exhibition and Botanical Congress, London, in May 1866. These botanical works contained one of the first maps to show plant distribution patterns by means of isopleths and points. 
In January 1867 More was appointed assistant naturalist in the Royal Dublin Society's Natural History Museum; the museum was transferred to government control in 1877. Following the death of Dr Alexander Carte in 1881 More was promoted to curator, but ill health obliged him to retire in July 1887. He never married. After their mother's death in 1888 he and his sister made their home in Dublin. More continued to write about a wide variety of topics and was working on a second edition of 'Cybele Hibernica' when he died at his home, 74 Leinster Road, Rathmines, co. Dublin, on 22 March 1895. He was buried at Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin. 
More (known simply as A. G. More) was a member of the Botanical Society of Edinburgh, the British Ornithological Union, and the Royal Irish Academy, and was elected to fellowships in the Linnean Society of London, and the Royal Society of Edinburgh. After his death Nathaniel Colgan (1851-1919) and Reginald Scully (1858-1935) completed the second edition of 'Contribution towards a Cybele Hibernica' (1898). On its title-page was the byline 'founded on the papers of the late Alexander Goodman More'; the omission of any reference to David Moore caused embarrassment to Fanny More, and she apologized to his son, Frederick Moore. David Moore had previously honoured his colleague by naming 'Isoetes morei'; this large quillwort from Lough Bray, co. Wicklow, is now considered to be a form of 'Isoetes lacustris'. 


@@@@@


doc= 54095


Oliver, Daniel (1830-1916), botanist, was born on 6 February 1830 at Newcastle upon Tyne, the first of the nine children of Daniel Oliver (1806-1878), a grocer, and his wife, Ann (1804-1878), daughter of Thomas and Ann Noble of Brockerby, near Carlisle. Since both his parents were members of the Society of Friends, Daniel attended the Friends' school at Wigton (1839-44). Partly on account of shyness he did not flourish academically, but his early interest in natural history developed considerably and he played a leading role in a school society largely devoted to natural history. Returning to Newcastle in 1844 he worked in the family business but, finding this employment 'utterly distasteful' ('Annual Monitor', 94), he paid increasing attention to natural history, publishing his first paper in 'The Phytologist' in 1847. His enthusiasm for natural history was further encouraged by fellow members of the Tyneside Naturalists' Field Club, including John Hancock and Sir Walter Trevelyan, and by several local Quakers. In his early twenties he was elected to the Edinburgh Botanical Society (1851) and the Linnean Society (1853). He also joined the Askesian Society (founded 1853) at which a number of scientifically able young Quakers from the Newcastle area, including George Stewardson Brady, Henry Bowman Brady, Robert Calvert Clapham, and David Richardson, read and discussed scientific papers. For six years, beginning in the 1851-2 session, Oliver lectured in botany at Durham medical school. 
Oliver's career took a dramatic turn in 1858 when, after writing to Sir William Hooker about the possibility of joining a surveying expedition, he was invited to join the staff of the herbarium at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. In 1864 he was appointed keeper of the herbarium and library, a position he held until his retirement in 1890. During this period of over thirty years he worked tirelessly tending, studying, and classifying the botanical collections sent to Kew from all parts of the world. As one contemporary noted, 'Probably no one man ever knew so much as he of those aberrant types which puzzle the most experienced botanists' (Britten, 91). He published approximately fifty papers in scientific journals, mostly descriptions of new and interesting species that he curated at Kew. His main publications, which included the first three volumes of the 'Flora of Tropical Africa' (8 vols., 1868-1934) and the 'First Book of Indian Botany' (1869), likewise contained an abundance of detailed botanical descriptions. He also wrote an official guide to the museum at Kew (1861) and a new and considerably extended edition of the 'Guide to the Royal Botanic Gardens and Pleasure Grounds, Kew' (1868). 
Soon after Oliver's arrival at Kew, Joseph Dalton Hooker, the assistant director, asked him to perform crossing experiments on Darwin's behalf. Darwin was clearly impressed by Oliver's abilities as an experimenter and by the wealth of information he possessed on botanical subjects. Soon they were both carrying out experiments on the physiological processes of the insectivorous plants such as 'Drosera', and regularly exchanging notes and specimens. When the chair of botany fell vacant at University College, London, Darwin strongly recommended Oliver for the post, praising 'the range of his knowledge of facts buried in all sorts of foreign publications', his 'philosophical caution' as an experimenter, and the 'high philosophical order' of his mind (Darwin, 7.48). Oliver was appointed to the professorship in 1860, a position he held until his retirement in 1888. 
Initially Oliver's main duty at University College was delivering annually a fifty-lecture course on general botany, principally to medical students. To enable him to spend much of the day at Kew, his class was scheduled during the summer months from 8 a.m. to 9 a.m., five days a week. In order to arrive in time, he arranged for the night-constable to rap at the window of his bedroom at 5 a.m. and an hour later a cab collected him from his home in Kew. Each lecture was illustrated by six specimens he brought with him and microscopes were used for demonstrations. Oliver's textbook, 'Lessons in Elementary Botany' (1864), passed through many editions and is said to have sold some 70,000 copies. In 1880 the scope of botanical education at University College was extended with the opening of a botanical laboratory and the appointment of an assistant. From 1859 to 1874 Oliver also lectured to the staff at Kew and in the 1870s he delivered lectures for women at the South Kensington Museum. 
Oliver was in close contact with most of the eminent botanists of his generation, including Darwin and Asa Gray, many of whom visited him at Kew. He was particularly close to John Gilbert Baker, a fellow Quaker, who was appointed his assistant at Kew in 1866 and became his near neighbour. When Oliver was elected to the Royal Society of London in 1863 his certificate was signed by Sir William Hooker, George Bentham, Charles Daubeny, George Busk, and three others. In 1884 Oliver received the society's royal medal for 'his Investigations in the Classification of Plants, and for the great services which he has rendered to Taxonomic Botany' (RS, council minutes, 6 November 1884). Other honours included the Linnean Society's gold medal (1892) and honorary degrees from the universities of Edinburgh and Aberdeen. 
From 1861 Oliver was one of the editors of the newly constituted editorial board of the 'Natural History Review' and compiled much bibliographical material for that journal. Like many systematists Oliver does not appear to have sided publicly either for or against Darwin's theory of evolution. One of his more sophisticated discussions was his informed criticism in 1862 of Oswald Heer's 'Atlantis hypothesis' which postulated that Europe and America were joined during the Miocene epoch. 
In 1861 Oliver married Hannah Hobson Wall (1833/4-1919), daughter of James Wall of Sheffield. They had three surviving children, including Francis Wall Oliver (1864-1951) who succeeded his father at University College, becoming Quain professor of botany in 1890. Although Daniel Oliver had earlier been a rather strict Quaker, in his middle years he dispensed with the more rigid aspects of Quakerism, although always remaining true to its essential teachings. A man of broad cultural interests, following his retirement Oliver had time to read extensively, listen to music, and develop his artistic talents. He collected English watercolours, Pre-Raphaelite art, and botanical illustrations, counting several artists, Ruskin included, among his friends. Possessing a 'decidedly nervous temperament' ('Annual Monitor', 95), possibly due to having suffered both a dog-bite and cholera during childhood, he had a tendency to retire from company. Oliver was not a charismatic lecturer and many contemporaries found him outwardly abrupt and somewhat forbidding. However, his many friends considered him an upright, modest man who was compassionate, companionable, well informed, and intellectually lively. He was blessed with good health which only deserted him during his short final illness. Following his death at his home, 10 Kew Gardens Road, on 21 December 1916, he was buried two days later in the burial-ground attached to Isleworth Friends' meeting-house. 


@@@@@


doc= 54099


Tegetmeier, William Bernhardt (1816-1912), naturalist and journalist, was born on 4 November 1816 at High Street, Colnbrook, Buckinghamshire, the eldest of three sons of Godfrey Conrad Tegetmeier (died 1841), a surgeon who had emigrated from the American colonies, and Sarah, widow of Carl Luer and daughter of a Dr Norman of Langport in Somerset. The family moved to London when Tegetmeier was twelve, and he was apprenticed in 1831 to his father for five years. From 1833 to 1837 he attended lectures at University College, London, taking honours five times. His training then continued at University College Hospital, where he acted as clinical clerk to John Elliotson. For about two years Tegetmeier assisted Frederick Gee in Brackley, Northamptonshire, but he revolted from the drudgery of provincial medical practice. 
In 1841 Tegetmeier returned to London, where he attended John Hoppus's lectures on mental philosophy at University College and practised as a mesmeric healer. He also briefly taught at a boys' school. In 1845 he became lecturer on domestic economy at the Home and Colonial Society's training college, and married Anne Edwards Stone (1826-1909), mistress of the infant department of the practising school attached to the college. Both were instantly dismissed as a result, but Tegetmeier was subsequently reinstated and held his position until 1866. He began to write schoolbooks, notably a 'Manual of Domestic Economy' (1858; 14th edn, 1894) which was widely used in industrial schools for girls. The Tegetmeiers lived in north London and had four daughters (two predeceasing their parents) and one son. 
From an early age Tegetmeier was an enthusiastic breeder of poultry and pigeons, both fancy and racing, and he became the leading authority on these birds and many other aspects of natural history. In 1853 some of his earliest writing on these subjects appeared in the 'Cottage Gardener' and as a short book, 'Profitable Poultry'. Tegetmeier's best-known works, the 'Poultry Book' (1867; enlarged, 1873) and 'Pigeons' (1868; enlarged, 1873), included coloured plates by his friend Harrison Weir. He also published standard works on pheasants and game birds. In 1855 Tegetmeier came to the attention of Charles Darwin, who was studying pigeons and other domestic birds as part of the research which led to the 'Origin of Species' (1859) and 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication' (1868). Tegetmeier introduced Darwin to the institutions of the fancy, took him to shows, and answered numerous queries in correspondence. 
Tegetmeier was also a keen apiarist. After he moved from Wood Green to Muswell Hill in 1856, he built observation hives in the garden and experimented on interbreeding and hive formation. His most significant finding, announced at the 1858 meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, involved the much debated question of how bees built their cells in the form of perfect hexagons. Tegetmeier showed that bees actually constructed cylindrical cells; only when raised up in contact with one another did these cells gain their characteristic mathematical regularity. Darwin extended these experiments and cited them in the 'Origin', recognizing that Tegetmeier had given a physical, material explanation to a phenomenon which many naturalists had seen as evidencing divine design. For his part, Tegetmeier became a convinced evolutionist, and always prided himself on his connection with the celebrated naturalist. 
With the success of his books, Tegetmeier increasingly turned to journalism as his chief source of income. In 1859 he began to write on natural history for the weekly 'Field', and within a few years became its chief correspondent on poultry and pigeons. Over a period of nearly fifty years Tegetmeier wrote thousands of articles, notes, and reviews on a wide variety of subjects. From 1882 he became principal leader writer and a frequent reviewer for 'The Queen', the leading women's weekly newspaper. Here Tegetmeier received extensive assistance from his wife and drew on his own knowledge of domestic economy. He was a firm tory, profoundly opposed to the campaign for women's rights and all extensions of the suffrage from 1832 onwards. He believed in a deity, but was not a Christian. 
'Old Teg', with his bushy beard, broad-brimmed hat, and immoderate enthusiasm for pigeons, poultry, cock-fighting, book-collecting, bee-keeping, and scientific zoology, became celebrated as one of the notable eccentrics of metropolitan journalism. In 1857 he was a founder of the Savage Club, whose members included George Augustus Sala, G. A. Henty, and Gustave Dore. Through burlesque and satire, the Savages celebrated the bohemian literary culture which flourished during the mid-Victorian expansion of periodical publishing. 
Tegetmeier died in Hampstead on 19 November 1912, and was buried in Marylebone cemetery, Finchley, on 23 November. 'If he was not a great man', an obituarist wrote, 'he was, at any rate, a great character' ('Daily Telegraph', 21 Nov 1912). 


@@@@@


doc= 54102


Rushton, Benjamin (1785-1853), hand-loom weaver and radical agitator, was born at Dewsbury in Yorkshire, but later moved to Halifax, where he found employment as a fancy-worsted weaver, residing at Friendly Fold in the village of Ovenden. He married Mary Helliwell ('b'. 1786) of Ovenden at Halifax parish church on 16 August 1809, but by 1851 was a widower, living with his daughter, son-in-law, grandchildren, and sons. His sons, Zimri and Henry Hunt Rushton, bore respectively the names of an obscure 'Old Testament' rebel leader and a celebrated contemporary radical orator, while his grandchildren's names commemorated the Chartist leader Henry Vincent and the legendary Swiss freedom fighter William Tell, reflecting the radical sympathies of this weaving family across two generations. 
At a public meeting in Halifax in January 1838, well before the publication of the 'People's Charter', Rushton supported a resolution calling for five of its six points, maintaining that 'until they had universal suffrage the aristocracy would continue to rob them'. He also proposed a motion for the repeal of the new poor law, lamenting the prospect of ending his days in a 'bastille' ('Halifax Guardian', 23 Jan 1838). He later addressed a vast Chartist open-air demonstration at Hartshead Moor in support of the first national petition in May 1839; harangued meetings of rioters in Halifax in August 1842, for which he was arrested and imprisoned; chaired a Chartist rally on Skircoat Moor in April 1848 in support of the third national petition; spoke at a mass meeting at Blackstone Edge on the eve of the return of Ernest Jones to Halifax, following his release from prison in July 1850; and served as treasurer for the West Riding Chartists. 
Rushton was remembered by contemporaries as a passionate speaker with a tendency to use 'rather broad language' (Wilson, 220). Occasionally his tone was menacing, for example, when he unambiguously advocated armed action and openly expressed sympathy with continental revolutionaries following the rejection of the third Chartist petition in May 1848; but the imagery and rhetoric of his public oratory drew heavily on the 'Bible'. He observed cynically at a general election meeting in 1841 that all the candidates were promising 'plenty of gold and silver like the stones in the Jerusalem streets and loaves as large as Goliath of Gath' while the banner of the Ovenden weavers proclaimed 'Be not ye afraid of them, remember the Lord, who is great and terrible, and fight for your brethren, your sons and your daughters, your wives and your houses' ('Halifax Guardian', 3 July 1841). 
Rushton was received into membership of the Methodist New Connexion at Salem, North Parade, Halifax, on 19 February 1815, and subsequently supported the development of the cause at Ovenden, serving as a Sunday school teacher and popular local preacher, appearing at chapel anniversary services in a clean brat, patched knee-breeches, highly polished clogs, and a tall hat. However, he became increasingly critical of organized religion and vociferously anti-clerical. At an anti-poor law meeting in Halifax in 1837 he criticized the whig government's provision of a salary of $15,000 for the archbishop of Canterbury and later seconded a resolution at Hartshead Moor binding the meeting 'not to attend any place of worship where the administration of services is inimical to civil liberty' (Yeo, 120). He probably withdrew from the Methodist New Connexion around the time of William Cobbett's appeal to Methodists to refuse to pay their dues, later declaring that 'he had given nothing to the parsons since 1821', but continued to preach on Methodist property until the end of the decade, to the growing consternation of the Methodist authorities (E. P. Thompson, 438). Thereafter he occupied the pulpits of radical and secessionist congregations across the West Riding, taking as his text 'The poor ye have with you always' on one documented occasion at the Chartist chapel at Littletown in the Spen valley (ibid., 439). His Methodist background and predominantly radical sympathies were characteristic of a generation of popular preachers who brought radical instincts into Methodism and Methodist insights into radicalism until expulsion or withdrawal severed their increasingly tenuous links with the Methodist movement. Indeed, before his death he pointedly requested that no paid minister be allowed to speak at his funeral. 
By 1847, in order to supplement his meagre earnings from weaving and enable him to buy shares in the Chartist land company, Rushton had acquired the additional occupation of tea dealer. He continued weaving into his late sixties and was observed by the Chartist Ernest Jones working on intricate patterns at his loom shortly before his death. Rushton died on 17 June 1853 at Friendly Fold, Ovenden, Halifax. He died, as he had lived, in poverty. The local Chartist executive decreed that he should have a public funeral at their expense on Sunday 26 June 1853 and that, in accordance with his wishes, a petition calling for the 'People's Charter' should be adopted 'over his remains' ('Halifax Courier', 25 June 1853). In the event, the petition was adopted at a rally held immediately after the funeral ceremony, which was conducted at the Halifax general cemetery, Lister Lane, by R. G. Gammage of the Chartist national executive and members of the Ovenden Oddfellows, of which Rushton had been an honorary member, with a eulogy hailing Rushton as 'a noble patriot' delivered by Ernest Jones (Vincent, 220). Rushton was borne to the grave by a hearse drawn by beplumed horses along a route lined, as Ernest Jones observed, by 'a continuous wall of human beings ranged for a length of two miles on either side of road' (Epstein and Thompson, 329). Five special trains brought Chartists from Bradford, and attendance at the funeral, estimated by the 'Halifax Guardian' at between 6000 and 10,000, was greater than that at the funerals of national Chartist leaders. The Chartist historian Dorothy Thompson has concluded that 'Rushton epitomised the type of West Riding local leader', the majority of whom were weavers, 'earning their living at their work but always taking time to attend, and very often chair great demonstrations or local meetings' (D. Thompson, 225-6). 


@@@@@


doc= 54104


Nairn, James (1629-1678), Church of Scotland minister and book collector, was born in Edinburgh early in 1629, the son of James Nairn ('c'.1585- 'c'.1656), a prosperous merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth Tod. He entered Edinburgh University in 1646 and graduated MA in 1650. After theological study, combined with a period as librarian of Edinburgh University, 1652-3, and then as chaplain to the countess of Wemyss, he was elected in 1655 to the second charge of the Canongate parish, Edinburgh. He moved to the first charge in 1656. 
Conforming to episcopacy after 1660, but influenced by anti-episcopal feeling in his parish, and uneasy about being too near the centre of political life, Nairn, a shy and retiring man, became minister of Bolton, Haddingtonshire, in 1662. He transferred to Wemyss in Fife in 1665. In 1670 he preached in south-west Scotland with five colleagues in an attempt to stem disaffection with episcopacy. This mission was instituted by Robert Leighton, archbishop of Glasgow, an influence on Nairn since the 1650s, when Leighton had been principal of Edinburgh University. 
Nominated bishop of Dunblane in succession to Leighton in May 1672 Nairn declined the appointment. Poor health was one reason for his decision (he was in Paris having bladder stones excised at this time), but dislike of government ecclesiastical policy was undoubtedly another. However, he did become a king's chaplain-in-ordinary in Scotland in 1675. His health, never robust, continued to decline and he left Wemyss for Edinburgh in April 1678. He died of a urinary infection at a house in the university precincts on 18 July 1678 and was buried on 21 July. He never married. 
Nairn made two bequests to Edinburgh University: $4000 Scots for divinity bursaries, and, more important, his book collection, numbering more than 1900 titles. This was a very large library in Scottish terms for the period. With a well-structured and wide content range, and collected over a relatively short period of time, it is a unique source for the study of the intellectual climate of Scotland in the Restoration period. A detailed catalogue, prefaced by a biography in Latin, was printed in the year of its bequest. It shows that Nairn was responsive to current European thought, as the collection contained works by Descartes and his followers and even Spinoza, as well as by Jansenist, Anglican, and mainstream Catholic scholars. Robert Boyle was particularly well represented and there were several contemporary works on natural history, medicine, and mineralogy. The library was also strong on Latin classics and works of history, geography, and political theory, but sadly weak on vernacular English literature. 
Nairn was admired by contemporaries as an eloquent preacher, and was an influence on several clerical colleagues, notably Gilbert Burnet, later bishop of Salisbury. He declared Nairn to be 'the brightest man I ever knew among all our Scotish divines' ('Bishop Burnet's History', ed. Burnet and Burnet, 1.215). Another friend was the theologian Lawrence Charteris. No literary remains by Nairn survive, except notes taken by others of some sermons, always delivered extempore. 


@@@@@


doc= 54105


Morris, Ivan Ira Esme (1925-1976), Japanologist, was born on 29 November 1925 at 45 Cromwell Road, London, the son of Ira Victor Morris and Edit Dagmar Emilia ('nee' Toll). His father, an American, was a member of a well-to-do family related to the Guggenheims; his mother the daughter of a Swedish general. His father was a journalist and both parents were successful novelists. Morris's childhood language was Swedish, and when he first attended school in Britain he was taunted because of his Swedish accent. His elementary and secondary schooling were in Britain (at some point he attended Gordonstoun School), and he struck everyone who met him as being English, but he had American as well as British citizenship, and during the Second World War studied at the Japanese language school of the United States navy. After the war, in 1946, he obtained his bachelor's degree at Harvard University. 
Morris subsequently returned to Britain and continued his study of Japanese at the School of Oriental and African Languages of the University of London. While writing his thesis on 'The Tale of Genji' (he received the degree of PhD in 1951) he became acquainted with Arthur Waley. He would later acknowledge his indebtedness to Waley, his teacher and model, by editing 'Madly Singing in the Mountains' (1970), a collection of remembrances of Waley written by friends. In the elegance of the English prose into which he rendered the Japanese classics, Morris was Waley's only successor. 
Morris entered the Foreign Office as senior research assistant after receiving his doctorate, then went on to Japan with a grant from the Royal Institute of International Affairs. His 'Nationalism and the Right Wing in Japan' (1960) reflects his early interest in Japanese politics. He and his students also translated 'Thought and Behaviour in Modern Japanese Politics' (1963), a collection of essays by the political scientist Masao Maruyama. His name, however, is most frequently associated with the works of Japanese literature, both classical and modern, that he translated and discussed. Perhaps his most beautiful translations are 'The Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon' (1961) and the diary he called 'As I Crossed a Bridge of Dreams' (1971), both works by court ladies of the eleventh century. His English was that of a virtuoso; the translation, into an idiom reminiscent of Defoe, of the seventeenth-century novelist Saikaku's 'The Life of an Amorous Woman' (1963) is nothing short of dazzling. It was typical of his scholarship that he verified each word in his translation to be sure it was used in the eighteenth century. Although he intended his books for non-specialists and was at pains to make his writings not only scholarly but a delight to read, no Western scholar of Japanese literature has given more attention to small details; there is a whole volume of footnotes accompanying 'The Pillow Book'. He loved research into minutiae, and could make the smallest item of information of interest by his witty presentation; but his original works, such as 'The World of the Shining Prince' (1964), a study of the Japanese aristocracy in the eleventh century, and 'The Nobility of Failure' (1975), were conceived on a grand scale. The latter work uses examples chosen from as far back as ancient Japanese legend and as recently as the kamikaze attacks of the Second World War to illustrate Morris's belief that the typical Japanese hero is a man who, having known glory, finally suffers defeat. Of his translations of modern Japanese literature, the best-known is 'The Temple of the Golden Pavilion' (1959) by Yukio Mishima. 
In 1960 Morris joined the department of east Asian languages and cultures at Columbia University, New York, where he taught Japanese literature and history and served as chairman of the department from 1966 to 1969. Apart from his teaching and scholarship, he wrote theatrical criticism, compiled puzzle books, and was an enthusiastic chess player. He was the founder of the United States section of Amnesty International and spent innumerable hours on behalf of prisoners of conscience. He was president of the American affiliate at the time of his death. His three marriages (the second to Ayako Ogawa, the third to Nobuko Uenishi) all ended in divorce. He died in Bologna of a heart attack on 19 July 1976, and was buried at Nesle, near Rozay-en-Brie, Seine et Marne, France, where he had a home. 


@@@@@


doc= 54106


Allen, George Cyril (1900-1982), economist, was born on 28 June 1900, at 5 Bertie Terrace, Park Road, Kenilworth, Warwickshire, the only child of George Henry Allen ('fl'. 'c'.1875-1940), a coachman and domestic servant who later became dispatch foreman at the Humber motor works, Coventry, and his wife, Elizabeth Sharman, daughter of a baker in Harpenden, Hertfordshire. He was educated at King Henry VIII School, Coventry ('c'.1911-18), and the University of Birmingham (1918-21), where he was a student in the faculty of commerce. There the economic historian Sir William Ashley, with his blend of economics and history, had an important influence on him. Allen wrote an MComm thesis, 'Restrictive practices in the copper mining industry', which was the first sign of his lifelong interest in the economics of industry. Ashley thought sufficiently well of it to send a copy to Keynes, then editor of the 'Economic Journal'. Keynes asked Allen to write a paper on the subject, and this appeared in the 'Economic Journal' in 1923. 
Ashley was also instrumental in giving Allen the opportunity of a teaching post in Japan. In 1922 he urged Allen to accept a two-year appointment as a lecturer in economics at the new Nagoya high school (later part of the University of Nagoya) in central Japan. Thus began Allen's lifelong study of Japanese economic affairs, and of Japan as a nation. Henceforward his academic work and his publications were shared between the study of the economics of British industry and the study of Japan. On his return to Britain, he took up a research fellowship and then a lectureship at his old university, Birmingham. In 1925 his article on Japan's currency and exchange rate policy was published in the 'Economic Journal'. His first book, 'Modern Japan and its Problems', was published in 1928, and the next year he published 'The Industrial Development of Birmingham and the Black Country, 1860-1927'. Both books were innovatory in their fields, and that on Japan was especially original, linking as it did a study of Japan's political and social organization with its financial and industrial systems. 
On the basis of these achievements Allen was appointed in 1929 the first holder of the chair of economics and commerce at Hull University College, at the age of twenty-eight. In the same year he married Eleanora (Nell) Shanks (died 1972), daughter of David Shanks JP of Moseley, Birmingham; they had no children. From 1933 to 1947 Allen was Brunner professor of economic science at the University of Liverpool, and from 1947 to 1967 professor of political economy at University College, London. In 1975 he retired to Oxford, and in 1980 was made a supernumerary fellow of St Antony's College, where he welcomed the foundation of the new Nissan Institute for Japanese Studies. 
Allen also had experience outside the university. In 1930 he served briefly as economic adviser to Lloyd George. During the war years he served in the Board of Trade, where he was mainly concerned with work on post-war reconstruction. He was an active member of the group of economists anxious to introduce legislation to control monopoly and restrictive practices. This led to the prominence given to the subject in the 1944 white paper on employment policy, and eventually to the legislation of 1948. From 1950 to 1962 he was a member of the Monopolies and Restrictive Practices Commission (from 1956 the Monopolies Commission). He also served on the Central Price Regulation Committee (1944-53) and on several other official committees. 
In 1945 Allen's Japanese expertise was called upon by the Foreign Office, where for six months he was in charge of the Japanese section of the economic and industrial planning staff. There his unique knowledge of the Japanese economy contributed to the formulation by the allied powers of policy towards Japan during the occupation. His optimism about Japan's economic prospects was almost unique in Britain at that time. 
In his last year at Hull, Allen published what was perhaps his best-known work, 'British Industries and their Organization' (1933), which was to go through five editions, the last in 1970. It combined a historical account of the industries covered with an analysis of their current economic problems. For many years this was by far the most valuable book on British industry. Allen continued to be a prolific author in his two chosen fields, but from 1938 the books he wrote were mainly about Japan and the Far East, though his articles, pamphlets, and other publications show a rough balance between his interests in Britain and Japan. His work was pragmatic rather than ideological, relying on detailed knowledge of the subject and emphasizing the importance of institutional and social factors. 
Allen made many visits to Japan, where he was much respected. He received the order of the Rising Sun in 1961 and the Japan Foundation award in 1980. His genial personality and acute analytical mind made him very well liked and regarded wherever he worked. He was appointed CBE in 1958 and elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1965. He died at his home, 15 Ritchie Court, 380 Banbury Road, Oxford, on 31 July 1982. 


@@@@@


doc= 54110


John Hawks (1770-1830), born on 19 February 1770. Increasingly, the firm's activities were focused on Gateshead, where the Hawks works covered 44 acres by the end of the 1830s, supporting a workforce of between 800 and 900. The Ouseburn workshops were relinquished before the eighteenth century was out, while Lumley forge was let to subtenants in the 1840s. The Bedlington works passed eventually to a cousin of the Hawkses, Michael Longridge (1785-1853), a pioneer of railway technology and an associate of Robert Stephenson, under whose superintendence the works became a training ground for a generation of celebrated engineers; some of the most distinguished, such as Sir Daniel Gooch, had links of kinship with the Longridges and the Hawkses. Meanwhile, the Hawkses' industrial eminence in Gateshead was reflected in local political prominence. Robert Shafto Hawks was knighted in 1817 for his role in suppressing riots in the winter of that year and for presenting a loyal address to the prince regent. His nephew and successor as head of the firm, 


@@@@@


doc= 54111


William [i] Hawks (1708-1755), a foreman smith at the iron manufactory established by Sir Ambrose Crowley (1658-1713) at Swalwell, 2 miles to the west of Newcastle upon Tyne. Hawks and his wife, Jane, had three sons, the eldest of whom, William [ii], was baptized at Gateshead on 29 June 1730. In the late 1740s Hawks decided to work on his own account and established a set of workshops on waste ground along the river foreshore at Gateshead. His scale of operations was modest when compared to the giant enterprise of the Crowleys and displayed little of the organizational and technological sophistication of that firm. Nevertheless, William [i] Hawks was able to exploit the availability of cheap scrap metal, which was carried up the Tyne as ballast by returning collier vessels. Scrap could be reprocessed into the nails, bolts, chains, shovels, and tools for which there was a brisk demand in the local coal industry and shipping trade. This was to be a lucrative niche, employing cheap materials, cheap energy, and simple technology (a hearth and a hammer), and allowing the accumulation of capital (albeit slowly) from a minimal initial outlay. However, the firm had not progressed much beyond this unspectacular beginning by the time its founder died intestate at the age of forty-six, for the administrators of his estate posted a bond of only $39. Hawks died at Gateshead on 23 February 1755, but his wife lived on until 28 February 1773. The works passed to the eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 54114


Duncan (I) Macduff, third earl of Fife (d. 1154), had succeeded Gille Micheil by 1136, but their relationship remains uncertain despite frequent claims that he was the son of his predecessor. With Duncan (I) the seniority of the earls of Fife among the Scottish nobility becomes readily apparent. He was a regular witness in the charters of David I, and, like his predecessors, appears in a prominent position in witness lists. With Earl Duncan the significance of the earls of Fife in promoting the acceptance of new feudal ideals flowing north from England is evident, for about 1136 the earldom of Fife was transformed into a fief held of the king in return for fixed service. Although the exact terms of the grant are not known, there can be little question that Fife was now held in return for knight service. An episode near the end of the life of Earl Duncan (I) is also illustrative of the premier position of these earls. Following the death in 1152 of Earl Henry, King David's son and designated successor, the king made provision to ensure the peaceful succession of Henry's eldest son, Malcolm, in which the earl of Fife played a crucial role. The twelve-year-old Malcolm was entrusted to the care of Earl Duncan, who was given a large army and ordered to take the boy throughout Scotia and proclaim him heir to the kingdom. This demonstrates not only the seniority of the earls of Fife, but also the fact that their allegiance to the Canmore dynasty was unquestioned. It has even been suggested that this duty of escorting the young prince shows that Duncan was meant to act as an unofficial guardian until Malcolm came of age. 
One major controversy surrounding the first earls is their relationship to one another. It has been noted that earls Constantine and Gille Micheil 'Macduff' both appear as witnesses to David I's charter to Dunfermline Priory about 1128, and that the latter is assumed to have been Constantine's son. But Gille Micheil is unlikely to have been styled Macduff in a Latin witness list if he were Constantine's son, and he is probably best regarded as tanist, or designated heir, to Constantine, perhaps a brother, nephew, or cousin. This same old-fashioned system of appointed succession makes it more likely that Duncan (I), Gille Micheil's successor as earl, was a son of Constantine rather than a son of Gille Micheil himself. But following the transformation of Fife into a fief in the time of Earl Duncan (I), primogeniture became the governing principle behind the succession. Thus, even though Gille Micheil did have a son named Aedh (Hugh), who might otherwise have been tanist to Duncan (I), on the latter's death it was his (presumed) son Duncan (II) who succeeded as earl, while Aedh became the ancestor of the lords of Abernethy. 
Earl Duncan (I)'s obit was recorded by the chronicle of Holyrood under the year 1154, and he was succeeded by 


@@@@@


doc= 54115


Duncan (II) Macduff, fourth earl of Fife (d. 1204), who seems to have been a minor at the time -- his first appearance as a witness did not occur until 1159, five years after his succession to the earldom, and he did not take Fife's accustomed position at the head of the comital witnesses to royal charters until as late as 1163. Duncan (II)'s tenure of the earldom was one of the longest on record, and the close connections between the earls of Fife and the royal house are readily apparent throughout his lifetime. Like his immediate predecessor, Duncan (II) was a regular witness to royal acts, and was in close attendance on the king. His seniority among the native earls is demonstrated by the fact that he had the privilege of speaking first in King William's council of 1173 when the decision was taken (against his advice) to go to war with Henry II of England; Duncan led a contingent of troops into Northumbria in the ensuing conflict. Following King William's capture at Alnwick in the summer of 1174 and his submission to Henry at York in 1175, the earl of Fife was one of several hostages given to secure the settlement. Between 'c'.1172 and 1199 he was justice in Scotia, responsible under the crown for the administration of justice north of Forth and hearing pleas civil and criminal. He may also have sat in the exchequer, probably established in Scotland in the 1180s or 1190s. 
In the thirteenth century the earldom of Fife passed regularly from father to son. Duncan (II)'s successor was his son Malcolm (I) who had been a frequent witness to royal charters from 'c'.1177. One of the prominent themes in the history of the earldom from the middle of the twelfth century is highlighted in the time of Malcolm (I), namely, the extension of the bounds of the earldom through royal grants and marriage alliances. Not only was Malcolm confirmed in lands in the west of Lothian that had been granted to his father and grandfather in return for knight service, but he also received further extensive grants from King William, including the area around Culross. The bounds of the earldom were extended further when Malcolm married Matilda, the daughter of Earl Gilbert of Strathearn, probably some time between 1194 and 1198. With this marriage came extensive lands held of the earl of Strathearn, but, more importantly, the marriage represents an alliance between a family that had continually demonstrated its allegiance to the house of Canmore and one whose loyalty had recently wavered, for Gilbert's father, Ferteth, had been involved in an attempt to capture King Malcolm at Perth in 1160. It was through such marriages that the social and political structures of feudalism were further spread throughout the Scottish kingdom, with the earls of Fife, as the senior members of the Scottish elite, once more prominent in their promotion. 
Malcolm (I) died about 1228, and was buried in the Cistercian monastery at Culross which he had founded in 1217. He left no children, and on his death the earldom passed to his nephew, Malcolm (II), the son of Duncan, a younger son of Earl Duncan (II). As might be expected, the name of Malcolm (II) figures prominently in the list of those nobles who guaranteed the treaty of York between Alexander II and Henry III in 1237, while in 1260 he was one of the Scottish nobles to whom the English king pledged the safe return of the queen of Scotland and her child. On the other hand, neither Malcolm nor his immediate successors, Colban and Duncan, made many appearances as witnesses to royal charters, and Malcolm himself seems to have played a curiously negligible role in the events surrounding the turbulent minority of the young Alexander III in the mid-1250s. He had been present at the inauguration of the young king (no doubt in his capacity as inaugural official), and was one of those named to the new regency council in 1255, but when this council was ousted in a counter-coup in 1257-8, Malcolm simply dropped out of sight, neither punished nor favoured by the king, until his reappearance in 1260. Perhaps this should be attributed to the Comyn ascendancy at this period, but, whatever the case, little more is known of his activities before his death in 1266. 
The next two earls of Fife succeeded as minors and enjoyed only brief tenure of the office. Malcolm (II) was succeeded by his teenaged son, Colban, who died 'c'.1270. Young though he was, Colban must have married, for on his death he left behind an eight-year-old son, 


@@@@@


doc= 54116


Duncan (IV) Macduff, ninth earl of Fife (1289/90-1353), was a posthumous child, born in late 1289 or early 1290 after the death of his father, and his minority was spent in England. This made it impossible for him to undertake the traditional role of the earls of Fife at the inauguration of John de Balliol as king of Scots on St Andrew's day 1292, which was therefore delegated by Edward I to Sir John de St John (died 1302). In 1306-7 Edward I and Edward II arranged his marriage to the nine-year-old Mary de Monthermer, daughter of the earl of Gloucester, for which a papal dispensation was granted in 1307. 
During the years of Duncan (IV)'s wardship in England, two other members of the house of Fife assumed prominence. The first was Macduff, a younger son of Earl Malcolm (II), who claimed to have been dispossessed of certain lands given to him by his father, and to have been denied justice by King John. In spite of the famous appeals which he made to Edward I on this issue in 1293, Macduff remained a patriot, for in 1297 he and his two sons joined William Wallace, and he fought and died at the head of the men of Fife at the battle of Falkirk in 1298. No less prominent in this period was Isabella Buchan (nee Macduff), countess of Buchan, the sister of Duncan (III), who in the absence of the earl of Fife placed Robert Bruce on some substitute for the stone of enthronement at Scone on 25 March 1306, and was subsequently incarcerated by the English in a cage at Berwick Castle, from which she was not released until 1310. 
Following the judgment of forfeiture at the Cambuskenneth parliament of 6 November 1314, Earl Duncan freed himself from English tutelage, and, leaving behind his wife (who did not join him in Scotland until January 1320), came into King Robert's peace. The earliest evidence that he was restored to his lands comes from an inquest of October 1316, but his seal was attached to a document of April 1315, which may indicate that he had been received into the king's peace by that date. Part of the reason for Duncan's restoration may have lain with King Robert's need to make a declaration on the succession, and the central part played by the earl of Fife in the inauguration of the king would make his adherence to the cause of the crown more important than that of any other noble. The details of the restoration were worked out by 23 August 1315, when an indenture was made between the king and Earl Duncan at Crichton. By its terms the earl resigned his earldom to the king and received it back, with an entail which eventually brought it to Robert Stewart, duke of Albany (died 1420). Thus, at the age of about twenty-five, the earl of Fife was restored to his lands, due in large measure to the seniority of the earldom and the role of the house of Fife in the inauguration of the Scottish monarchs. 
Earl Duncan (IV) maintained his allegiance to Robert I during that king's lifetime. He was the first of the Scottish nobles named in the letter of the Scottish barons to Pope John XXII (the so-called 'declaration of Arbroath') in 1320, and he was present in Edinburgh in 1328 for the conclusion of peace between the two realms. Duncan fought with the Scots at Dupplin in August 1332 against 'the disinherited' of Edward Balliol, and Fordun records that 360 men-at-arms were killed fighting under his banner. But he was subsequently captured and, in return for his liberty, joined Balliol. Thus, when Balliol was inaugurated as king in September, it was the earl of Fife, along with William Sinclair, bishop of Dunkeld (died 1337 -- formerly one of King Robert's most ardent supporters), who performed the ceremony. With the return of King David II from France in 1341, Duncan again changed sides, and was captured with that monarch and many other Scottish magnates at the battle of Nevilles Cross on 17 October 1346. He was subsequently tried for treason by Edward III and sentenced to a traitor's death, but he obtained mercy and was allowed to return to Scotland to raise money for his ransom, set at 1000 marks, in 1350. He died in 1353, and his daughter Isabella succeeded as countess of Fife. There were no children of any of her four marriages, and in 1371, some eighteen years before her death, she resigned the earldom to Robert Stewart; it passed to the crown after the forfeiture of the Albany Stewarts in 1425. 
The earls of Fife were the wealthiest of the Scottish magnates. In 1294-5 the lands of the earldom, then in wardship, were assessed at $432 per year, with the majority of this income derived from rents. Although this placed them on a par only with a modest English baron, their income was fully three times that of Neill, earl of Carrick, who died in 1256. Befitting their status as the premier nobles in the kingdom, the earls of Fife were generous benefactors of the church. Earl Malcolm (I) founded a Cistercian monastery at Culross, while Earl Duncan (I) had endowed a Cistercian nunnery at North Berwick between about 1136 and 1150. Duncan (I) was probably also responsible for the foundation of two hospitals, at Ardross and North Berwick, on the north and south ends of the ferry across the Forth. The patronage of reformed religious orders by these native lords represents yet another way in which they were instrumental in striking a balance between old and new in Scottish society. 


@@@@@


doc= 54117


Ames, Richard (bap. 1664?, d. 1692), satirist, was born of 'Plebean Extraction' (Ames, 'Last Search', sig. A2'v'); he can probably be identified with a 'Richardus Emms', son of Richard and Maria, baptized in St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, on 5 January 1664. He was apprenticed to a tailor in 1678. John Dunton the bookseller describes him as 'Mr 'Ames', originally a 'Coat-seller; but had always some Yammerings upon him after Learning' and 'the Muses'' (Dunton, 247). Both of his parents were dead before 1683, the date of a letter in which he expresses his dissatisfaction with his humble status as a 'Mechanick' and his love of learning: 'I... had rather have the possession of a Library, than be master of both the Indies... The current of my Inclinations never were, nor ever will be to a Trade, Business and my self being Antipodes... my thoughts are engaged in other affairs, which hath so great an influence over my actions, that I often doe things diametrically opposite to the commands I receive. (Ames, 'Letter on education')' Ames's elegy on Richard Baxter, praising Baxter's 'Heavenly Piety' and efficacy as 'kind Physician of the sickly Soul' (Ames, 'An Elegy on the Death of... Mr. Richard Baxter', 1693), suggests that Ames was a dissenter; elsewhere he strongly attacks clergy who claim that 'none were to be Saved out of the Pale of the Church of England' (Ames, 'Jacobite Conventicle', sig. A2'r'). Several of his works are strongly anti-French and anti-Jacobite. His best-known poem, 'Sylvia's Revenge, or, A Satyr Against Man' (1688), an answer to Robert Gould's violent misogynist satire 'Love Given O're' (1683), went through twelve editions. Its sequel, 'Sylvia's Complaint' (1692), similarly assumes a female persona defending 'her Injur'd Sex' against unjust allegations and criticizing the 'unbounded 'Arbitrary Power'' husbands exercise over their wives (R. Ames, 'Sylvia's Complaint', 1692, sig. A2'r', 14). Ames also wrote several poems arguing a contrary position, including 'The Female Fire-Ships: a Satyr Against Whoring' (1691) and 'The Folly of Love: a New Satyr Against Women' (1691). Dunton's claim that 'you might engage him upon what Project you pleas'd, if you'd but conceal him' (Dunton, 247) is borne out by Ames's authorship of 'The Pleasures of Love and Marriage' (1691), an answer to his own poem 'The Folly of Love'. 
As well as these satires in heroic couplets, Ames is the author of a number of comic poems in anapests on the general theme of drinking and conviviality, whose common theme is the declining quality of the claret served in London taverns: 'The Search after Claret' (1691), 'A Farther Search after Claret' (1691), 'The Last Search after Claret' (1691), and the posthumously published 'The Bacchanalian Sessions' (1693), the last of which contains a prefatory poem 'To the Memory of Mr Richard Ames'. Two late poems, though largely conventional, can be seen to some extent as palinodes: 'Fatal Friendship, or, The Drunkard's Misery' (1693), advertised as 'by a young Gentleman, a little before his Death; who lately fell an unhappy Sacrifice to the Bottle', and 'The Rake, or, The Libertine's Religion' (1693), presenting its 'late 'Author'' as a penitent. Dunton writes: '
'Wine and Women' were the great Bane of his Life and Happiness... a little before his Decease, he said to me, with a Deal of Concern: 'Ah' Mr. 'Dunton''! with what another Face does the World appear, now that I have Death in View'. (Dunton, 247)' Ames died 'in a hospital' in London, some time before 25 October 1692. 
Though he is listed in the British Library catalogue as 'Richard Ames of Lincoln's Inn', there is no reliable evidence linking him to the inns of court; his name does not appear in the register of admissions to Lincoln's Inn, and the attribution on the title-page of 'Lawyerus bootatus & spurratus, or, The Long Vacation' (1691) to 'a Student of Lincolns-Inn' simply reflects the persona used in the poem, suitable for a satire on attorneys whose only concern is the size of the fees they receive. There is a useful essay by Hugh Amory on the canon of Ames's writings, which draws on extensive lists of 'Books written by the Author' in 'The Bacchanalian Sessions' and 'The Folly of Love'. 


@@@@@


doc= 54119


Dymock, Cressy (fl. 1629-1660), agriculturist, was possibly the son of Sir Thomas Dymocke, from the Lincolnshire/Nottinghamshire borders, but little is known of his background. He entered Gray's Inn on 3 August 1629. Surviving poetry in the British Library suggests a ready pen and naive wit. Dymock attributed his commitment to agrarian reform to Samuel Hartlib, whom he met about 1648. In the early 1650s he became one of Hartlib's most loyal admirers, promoting machines for setting corn and grinding, rabbit-farming schemes, and intensive husbandry, mostly known only through Hartlib's papers. He appreciated the weaknesses of contemporary agrarian production and tackled them with mechanical and other innovations. He understood that intensive husbandry involved a planned farming environment. His layout of an ideal farm, which Hartlib published as 'A Discoverie for... Setting Out of Land' (1653), deplored the 'Want of Enclosure'. At the same time, Dymock was particularly proud of his 'universal engine', the 'wedding of strength and tyme' which was advertised in print in 1651. Dymock also contributed to Hartlib's other agrarian publications. 
Dymock was not a landowner and finding a suitable location and backers for his schemes proved problematic -- the nearest he came to success was in 1653 at Wadworth, near Doncaster, on a cousin's farm. His mechanical drill and roller worked well but the labourers proved 'extremely Churlish', a problem he had anticipated in his proposed 'Colledge of Husbandrye', reflecting the utilitarian educational notions of Hartlib's circle. By the Restoration, however, Dymock was poor. His claim 'to the office of [king's] Champion' in the forthcoming coronation (an office to which he believed his family had ancient rights) was disappointed and he apparently died shortly thereafter. 


@@@@@


doc= 54124


Oertling, Ludwig (1818-1893), maker of scientific instruments, was born in Schwerin in the grand duchy of Mecklenburg-Schwerin on 18 August 1818, one of thirteen children and the eldest child of Johann Oertling's second marriage. Mecklenburg, which lies between Berlin and the Baltic Sea, suffered during the Napoleonic wars against Prussia and Russia, and both Ludwig and his elder half-brother Johann August Daniel (1803-1866) emigrated. Johann was apprenticed to Karl Philip Heinrich Pistor (1778-1847), a notable instrument maker in Berlin, where he later set up his own successful instrument making business under the name August Oertling. Ludwig travelled to Paris and then to London with other German nationals, about the time of Queen Victoria's marriage in 1840 to her cousin Albert, duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. 
Oertling married Caroline Rowlatt (died 1893) at St Bride's, Fleet Street, in the City of London on 1 January 1846; there were two children, Henry Rowlatt Augustus (1848-1921) and Amelia Charlotte Mary (1852-1941). In 1847 Oertling was running his own scientific instrument making business at Jewin Street in the City, but by the time Henry was born the family had moved to 13 Store Street, Bloomsbury. By 1851 Oertling was already employing five workmen. 
August Oertling's son Friedrich Leopold ('b'. 1831) joined Ludwig Oertling as his apprentice and in 1861 the latter went into partnership with Edward Wilds Ladd (1800-1879) at premises in Bishopsgate and Moorgate Street in the City. Ladd had previously worked for Robert Brettel Bate, and his expertise enabled the firm to expand into the production of hydrometers for the excise. By the time Henry was old enough to join the firm, Ladd had retired and Oertling had moved to large purpose-built premises in Turnmill Street, Clerkenwell, where the firm remained until after the First World War. 
Oertling manufactured standards of weight and measure for a variety of commercial and industrial needs; he also developed, built, and maintained chemical, assay, and bullion balances noted for their high degree of accuracy and sensitivity, a tradition that was maintained throughout the 150 years of the firm's existence. Oertling gradually replaced the traditional steel knives and planes in balances by polished agate, and devised ever more effective arrestment systems. These ensured that the beam and pans were always lowered gently and smoothly into position so that the knives on which they turned aligned accurately on the planes and kept wear to a minimum. He produced balances to a wide range of designs to meet the needs of customers. These included private individuals with a keen interest in science like John Bennett Lawes, founder of the Rothamsted Experimental Station in Hertfordshire; laboratory suppliers such as Griffin & Co. and Jackson and Townsend; and science-based firms such as the pharmacists Allen and Hanbury and the platinum manufacturers Johnson Matthey. A rapid expansion in scientific education in the second half of the nineteenth century brought a demand for research and student balances from, among others, the Royal College of Chemistry in London, Owens College (later to become Manchester University), Trinity College, Dublin, and Harvard College (later the University), Cambridge, Massachusetts. He supplied large financial institutions, including the Royal Mint and the Bank of England, and many mints and assay offices around the world including Ottawa, San Francisco, Melbourne, and Madras. Oertling balances were ordered by the warden of the standards, H. W. Chisholm, for the comparison and verification of standard weights by the standards commission. He also supplied scales and weights and measures to inspectors of weights and measures as parliamentary legislation worked to improve standards of commercial weighing throughout the kingdom and from mill to market place. 
In 1873 Oertling travelled to St Petersburg to discuss with the chemist D. I. Mendeleyev (1834-1907) the design of his new balance, and in 1886 he made a balance for J. H. Poynting, with which Poynting determined the mean density of the earth in 1891. George Hogarth Makins, assayer to the Bank of England, came to Oertling with his ideas, from which evolved a whole family of assay balances with delicate skeleton beams. By 1893 the finest was accurate to 0.005 mg; they came into use by assay offices around the world. For the banks he designed an improved machine which would weigh individual gold coins and rapidly sort those too light or too heavy into separate containers, and bullion balances for weighing the gold bars. Sir William Ramsay (1852-1916) and Lord Rayleigh (1842-1919) used his balances but the majority of sales went to more humble customers such as Lionel John Beale of Long Acre, surgeon and medical officer of health for St Martin-in-the-Fields, who bought a simple balance costing $3 in 1847 for the dispensary serving his patients who lived in the back streets of Seven Dials and Covent Garden. 
Instruments of such quality made by a skilled and stable workforce attracted attention at international exhibitions and Oertling received the highest awards on each occasion that he exhibited: at London in 1851, 1862, and 1885, and in Paris in 1855. His daughter said of him that he was a most lovable man and as good as he was clever. He died of heart disease at his home, Mecklenburg House, Kingston Road, New Malden, Surrey, on 2 September 1893 and was buried five days later in Norbiton cemetery, Kingston upon Thames. 


@@@@@


doc= 54126


Underwood, Thomas Richard (1772-1835), watercolour painter and geologist, was born on 24 February 1772 at 43 Lamb's Conduit Street, Holborn, London, the only son of Thomas Underwood (died 1808) and his wife, Susannah (died 1804/5). Nothing is known of his early education or training in watercolour drawing. At an early age, he married Jane Eleanor Stageldoir, a dancer at Drury Lane, and they had at least two children. There was a separation before 1803. 
In company with Turner, Girtin, and many others Underwood worked regularly at the home of Dr Monro, and from 1789 to 1802 he exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy. He was a founder member of the Sketching Society (known as 'the Brothers'). In 1792 he was appointed draughtsman-in-ordinary to the Society of Antiquaries who have a number of his original drawings -- engravings of some of these appeared in 'Archaeologia' (vols. 11-14). The range of subjects depicted in his works suggests he travelled widely in England and Wales. His circle of acquaintances also included Wordsworth, Coleridge (to whom he was known as Subligno), Southey, and the Wedgwood brothers Josiah, John, and Thomas, possibly through their connection with Dr Beddoes' Pneumatic Institute in Bristol. 
In 1800, Underwood became a proprietor of the newly founded Royal Institution, and the following year he pressed Count Rumford to appoint Humphry Davy assistant lecturer there. Shortly after Davy's appointment, he and Underwood holidayed together in Penzance. In 1802, after the peace of Amiens, he made a visit to France. The following year he agreed at the last minute, as a substitute for Coleridge, to return as secretary-companion to Thomas Wedgwood. They reached Geneva before turning back. Some time after the resumption of hostilities on 16 May 1803 the pair were parted; Wedgwood escaped, but Underwood was arrested at Calais and detained in France until 1814. During this period his financial support was provided by the Wedgwood family through their Paris banker. 
For a time Underwood lived with some degree of freedom in Paris until the English were ordered to Verdun. He then went into hiding until 1806 when, with the help of 'tribun' Pictet, he was allowed to return to Paris and study at the Louvre. On several occasions he secured a passport to travel to Rigny Usse and to Roucy to draw landscapes. In Paris he renewed his acquaintance with Rumford, who had settled at Auteuil, and made friendships with many scientists, including Ampere, Humboldt, Thenard, Gay-Lussac, and the Brongniarts. When Napoleon gave Davy special permission to travel through France in 1813, Underwood acted as his escort, introducing him to the scientific community, enabling him to acquire some iodine, taking him to meetings of learned societies and accompanying him to the empress Josephine at Malmaison. 
Early in 1814 the allies invaded France, and during the siege of Paris it was only the intervention of the empress that allowed Underwood to remain in the city. During the first four months of 1814 he kept a journal of the siege, which was later published in the 'London Magazine', 1825, under the title 'The journal of a detenu'; it gives a unique account of Paris under siege. His detention came to an end with the entry of the allies into Paris and in June he left for England. However, he soon returned to France and made Paris his home for the rest of his life. 
With his knowledge of Paris and his friendly manner, Underwood was uniquely placed to welcome visiting English scientists and introduce them to their French counterparts, as may be seen from his correspondence with Adam Sedgwick (1822-9) and Thomas Webster (1820-27) particularly. Underwood's letters were full of the latest scientific intelligence: books about to be published; papers read to learned societies; the current state of scientific debate; opinions on contemporaries. On his frequent visits to England he carried geological specimens and letters which aided the rapid exchange of knowledge, especially the correspondence between Faraday and Ampere on electro-magnetism. 
Underwood's own scientific interests seem to have centred on the field of geology, especially the extinct volcanoes of Auvergne and the geology of the Paris basin. His letters to Sedgwick contain carefully drawn and densely annotated sections which reveal him as an accomplished geologist. In London he was a member of the Royal Institution and a member (later fellow) of the Geological Society; in Paris he was a member of the Societe Philomathique, the Societe Geologique, and the Societe Linneenne. He died on 11 July 1835 at Chamarande, near Paris, and was buried there. The principal beneficiary of his estate in England was his daughter, Eleanor Gawan, and in France his sole executor, one Marie Dassau. 


@@@@@


doc= 54128


Rolleston, William (1831-1903), farmer and politician in New Zealand, was born at Maltby Hall, Yorkshire, on 19 September 1831, the third son and ninth child of George Rolleston (1791-1868), a Church of England clergyman and squire, and Anne Nettleship (died 1851), the daughter of a well-known family of Lincolnshire scholars. The physiologist George Rolleston was his brother. His family background was upper middle class rather than aristocratic, as some of his political opponents imagined. After studying at Rossall School, Lancashire, he took up a scholarship at Emmanuel College, Cambridge. Much to his disappointment he won only a second-class degree in the classical tripos of 1855 and, disillusioned with his prospects in England, decided to emigrate. The premature death of his mother in 1851 removed his main tie to England, and he sailed to Canterbury in 1858 with $500 earned during two years of tutoring. 
Rolleston began colonial life as an employee on a high country sheep farm at Waireka (Lake Coleridge), where he became notorious for swearing at his bullocks in Greek. In 1861 he took up a run at the Rakaia Forks (Mount Algidus). He remained wary of run-holding because he lacked the capital to make a real success of the enterprise. Once he became engaged to (Elizabeth) Mary Brittan, the daughter of a Canterbury land developer, he determined on a more secure form of employment. He seemed rather relieved when he sold out at a profit in 1865 to take up the post of under-secretary of native affairs in Wellington (he had already had experience of local administration). The couple were married at Christchurch on 24 May 1865. 
Rolleston turned to politics in 1868, when he stood for and won the superintendency of Canterbury Province, a position he held until the abolition of the provinces in 1876. He was also member of the house of representatives for Avon (1868-84). Many of his supporters hoped for an administration which favoured the squatting interest, but Rolleston frustrated them by promoting closer settlement and enforcing policies opposed to land monopoly. Big landowners and their lawyers found their way around his regulations rather easily, but felt aggrieved at the superintendent's even-handedness. Rolleston also worked closely with Charles Bowen, the champion of the idea that primary education should be compulsory, free, and secular, and helped establish the Canterbury University College in 1873. These were prosperous years for Canterbury, and Rolleston became a very popular superintendent. 
Rolleston's major chance at the parliamentary level came in 1879, when he assumed the deputy leadership in John Hall's ministry and served as minister of lands and native affairs. Rolleston is reputed to have exclaimed, on seeing how effectively a handful of owners had locked up Canterbury land, 'Lord lay not this sin to my charge'. He subsequently surprised many by trying to introduce a radical perpetual lease in 1882. The legislative council rendered this initiative ineffective by adding a right of purchase clause. Even so, Rolleston won popularity for his administration of the important lands portfolio. His shorter term as minister of native affairs proved less successful: he actually approved the invasion of the Maori pacifist stronghold of Parihaka, but left the execution of this barbarous act to John Bryce in 1881. 
Rolleston had a chequered parliamentary career after 1882. He made little impact in opposition to the ministry of Robert Stout and Julius Vogel and lost his seat to W. P. Reeves in 1887. He returned to the house in 1891 as leader of the rather demoralized and divided opposition, but could not compete with either the level-headed John Ballance or, later, the combative Richard Seddon. He faced a special problem in that he found himself approving the attempts of John McKenzie and the Liberals to promote closer settlement, and confined himself to carping about details. This performance lacked both inspiration and conviction, and the Liberals routed Rolleston and many other long-serving opposition members in the 1893 election. Rolleston returned for a final term in 1896 but failed to halt the Liberal onslaught before being defeated once more in 1899, a man seemingly out of tune with the new populist and democratic tenor of New Zealand politics. He often appeared to be on the wrong side because he was very much a 'new Liberal' in supporting state intervention and universal education. Unlike most of New Zealand's so-called conservatives, he did not adhere to 'laissez-faire' philosophies but rather believed that government should be actively involved in sorting out the social problems of the day, especially by promoting closer settlement of the land. His upbringing, classical education, and long association with the old landed Canterbury order, however, made it impossible for him to join the self-made men of the New Zealand Liberal Party, who spurned the classics and equated good family with monopoly and privilege. 
Rolleston retired to his 1600 acre farm at Kapunatiki at the mouth of the Rangitata River. By now a rather lonely and isolated figure, he consoled himself by planting trees and reading the classics. He visited England before his death at his home on 8 February 1903; he left a widow, five sons, two of whom served in the New Zealand parliament, and four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 54130


Abernethy family (per. c.1260-c.1465), landowners, is of obscure origins, but was certainly a native Scottish family rather than of Norman descent. Orm of Abernethy was a grandson of Gillemichael, earl of Fife in the early twelfth century, and in the 1170s he received confirmation from William the Lion of the lay abbacy of the Culdee monastery of Abernethy in south-east Perthshire, although Orm's son, Laurence, was the last to use the abbatial title. 


@@@@@


doc= 54131


Hugh of Abernethy (d. 1291), Laurence's son, came to prominence as a loyal supporter of the Comyns, whose patronage helped him to secure the office of sheriff of Roxburgh by 1264, and he appears as a regular witness to royal documents throughout the 1260s and 1270s. However, following the death of Alexander III in 1286 the precarious political stability was further threatened by the murder outside Brechin in September 1289 of Duncan, earl of Fife, by his own kinsmen Patrick and William of Abernethy, who, according to Fordun, acted with the advice and consent of Hugh of Abernethy. No explanation is offered in contemporary records, although the Lanercost chronicle ventures the conventional charges of excessive greed and cruelty on the part of the earl. The perpetrators were dealt with, and Hugh died, possibly in prison, in 1291. He was succeeded by his son, 


@@@@@


doc= 54132


Laurence Abernethy (c.1400-1463) was created a lord of parliament as Laurence, Lord Saltoun of Abernethy, on 28 June 1445. His elevation at this date suggests he was regarded as a supporter of the Douglases, who were then dominant in government. But he appears as a frequent royal charter witness in April and May 1452, offering support to the king in the crucial period following the murder of William, eighth earl of Douglas. As justiciar, he held a justice court at Lochmaben in 1454, where some of his judgments may have antagonized the already beleaguered Douglases, for his lands were harried and burnt by the ninth earl of Douglas in 1455. He was dead before 7 December 1463, when his son William appears as a royal charter witness as Lord Abernethy; confirmation of his title was given on 28 January 1464. The importance of the family as substantial landowners at that time is demonstrated by the enumeration of its possessions, which included Saltoun in Haddingtonshire, Rothiemay in Banffshire, Redie in Angus, Dalgety in Fife, Glencorse in Edinburghshire, and other lands in Lauderdale and Roxburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 54133


Bertram, Walter (d. 1495/6), merchant and provost of Edinburgh, is first recorded in 1464. He received payments for expensive cloth sold to James III in 1473 and by 1477 was clearly wealthy, as he bought the lands of Normangills in Lanarkshire from David Lindsay, earl of Crawford. His links with the royal household as a prominent merchant led to royal favour in the late 1470s, and he was confirmed in his lands and appointed to the important roles of custumar, bailie, and chamberlain of Berwick, regained from England in 1461. 
Bertram frequently attended parliament as a burgh commissioner representing Edinburgh from 1478 and he was elected to the influential committee of the articles on three occasions in the crisis of 1482-3. On 4 August 1482, before the dukes of Albany (James III's brother, who was seeking to control the government) and Gloucester -- and with 20,000 English soldiers outside his city -- Bertram, as provost of Edinburgh, promised that, if requested, the city would repay all the dowry payments made by Edward IV to James III as part of the marriage alliance of 1474. It was the price of an English withdrawal. On 29 September Bertram took part with Albany in the 'siege' of Edinburgh Castle, by which the king ended the two-month confinement imposed on him by rebellious nobles. Subsequent events, however, suggest Bertram was not a supporter of Albany, for he had been replaced as provost by 16 November and was omitted from a list of burgesses in a grant of Leith's customs to Edinburgh. On 29 January 1483, as the king began to regain his power after Albany's retirement to Dunbar, James III granted Bertram and his wife an annuity of $40 Scots for his services, particularly in the king's release from captivity. This was renewed in 1489, when it was specifically stated to be compensation for damage perpetrated by Albany. 
Bertram married Elizabeth Cant (died after 1498) before 4 November 1477. He died between 27 August 1495 and 3 August 1496 following a career in which he had been one of the very few members of the Scottish burgess estate to make an important mark on the political stage. He was succeeded by Andrew Bertram. 


@@@@@


doc= 54134


Biggar, Walter (d. 1376/7), administrator, is of unknown origins, and his early career is very obscure. When David II was released from English captivity in October 1357, he immediately appointed Biggar clerk of the wardrobe. Biggar's introduction to David's court may have been through an association with the family of one of the king's most loyal and trusted retainers, Malcolm Fleming, earl of Wigtown -- in June 1358 Biggar appears in papal records as rector of Biggar, a benefice in the gift of the Fleming lords of Biggar (although this is the only example of his using this designation). A predecessor as rector of Biggar, Henry, had been described in the 1320s and 1330s as Fleming's clerk and had served as clerk of liverance, the officer responsible for the purchase of provisions for the royal household, in the court of David II's father, Robert I. 
Biggar was clerk of the wardrobe until autumn 1358, when he became deputy chamberlain to Thomas, earl of Mar. In April 1359 Biggar replaced Earl Thomas as chamberlain, and at about the same time was made rector of Errol, a benefice in the gift of the monastery of Coupar Angus. His term as chamberlain, the chief financial officer of the Scottish crown in the fourteenth century, was dominated by the need to produce ransom payments of 10,000 merks per annum to the English crown under the terms of the treaty of Berwick of October 1357. The treaty had secured David II's release from an imprisonment in England which began with the king's defeat and capture at the battle of Nevilles Cross in October 1346. Biggar exercised the chamberlainship without interruption until April 1363, when he was removed from the post in favour of Sir Robert Erskine. Biggar's demission of office may have been connected to the baronial rebellion against David II which broke out in March 1363. One of the complaints of the rebels concentrated on the misuse of money levied for the king's ransom, and Biggar, as David's chief financial officer, may have been the target of particular resentment. Alternatively, the king may have felt that at a time of political confrontation royal financial resources were best supervised by one of his close political allies, Erskine, rather than a career civil servant. Certainly there was no noticeable opposition to Biggar's reappointment to the office on 14 December 1364; he continued to serve as David II's chamberlain until the king's death in February 1371, his tenure being marked, then as earlier, by the regularity of exchequer audits and the general efficiency of the crown's financial administration. Biggar was retained as chamberlain by the new king, Robert II, until his own death on a date between 14 March 1376 and 28 January 1377. 


@@@@@


doc= 54135


Borthwick family (per. c.1400-c.1515), landowners and administrators, provided some significant servants to the Scottish crown, especially in the second half of the fifteenth century. There are problems in constructing this family's genealogy, as between 'c'.1370 and 1544 all the heads of the family bore the Christian name William and before 1500 it is difficult to distinguish between them. The successful petition to the lord Lyon king of arms in the case of John Henry Stuart Borthwick of that ilk to succeed as Lord Borthwick, conducted in 1984-6, altered the previously accepted enumeration of the lords Borthwick by amalgamating the putative first and second lords. 



@@@@@


doc= 54137


Thomas Joseph Haslam (1825-1917). Born in Mountmellick, Queen's county, he had been educated at the Quaker provincial school in that town. In 1840 he became an apprentice teacher at the Friends' School, Lisburn. He became interested in the issue of women's suffrage from reading the works of Herbert Spencer. The couple returned to Ireland and married in Cork in 1854. They then moved to Dublin, where Thomas was employed as a clerk, but in 1866 his health broke down and Anna was left to support them both. This she did by opening a 'stationer's and fancy goods repository' at their home in Rathmines, Dublin; the business survived until 1906, when the assistance of friends made the enterprise unnecessary. The nature of Thomas's illness remains a mystery, and he continued to be an active scholar, a member of the Rathmines Public Library Committee, and a 'great figure' at the Dublin Friends Institute, where he regularly read papers. The marriage appears to have been a particularly happy one; there were no children. The suffragist Margaret Cousins, who met the Haslams in 1906, described them as 'a remarkable old pair, devoted to one another and dedicated to the cause of the advancement and enfranchisement of women... she a dynamo of energy, small and sturdy; he intellectual, tall, rather like a university don, a good speaker, very refined and kindly' (Cousins and Cousins, 129). 


@@@@@


doc= 54138


Sir William Borthwick of that ilk (c.1385-c.1449) was the son of another Sir William Borthwick (died 1429), who, through his particular service to Archibald, fourth earl of Douglas, had brought the family into contact with the royal court. The name of the father's spouse is not recorded. Before the return of King James I from captivity in England in 1424 the younger William was briefly captain of Edinburgh Castle (whose keeper was the earl of Douglas). The accounts of the custumars of Edinburgh show that for some years up to 1420 Borthwick (and others) were abusing their power to seize moneys due to be paid to the crown, and were exporting goods without paying custom. The death of his mentor seems to have resulted in Borthwick's seeking crown patronage instead. He was knighted 'c'.1424 and in June 1425 was (with nine others) appointed as ambassador from Scotland to Rome. (The purpose of the embassy may have been to discuss the export of money by Scottish clerics to purchase benefices from the papacy.) While he was in Rome, his father was in England as one of the hostages for the ransom demanded for the king's release. In June 1430 the younger Sir William obtained from James I a licence to build at the mote of Locherworth what became Borthwick Castle, Edinburghshire, which is certainly a building of that period. In 1436-7 Sir David Hay of Yester, whose family had property rights at Locherworth, recorded protests about Borthwick's possession of the mote, but a settlement must have been reached. Sir William, who died about 1449, is stated to have married 'c'.1411 Beatrice, possibly daughter of Henry Sinclair, first earl of Orkney. They had at least one son and one daughter. 
Their son 


@@@@@


doc= 54139


William Borthwick, third Lord Borthwick (c.1460-1513?). Like his father, he was frequently a lord auditor and lord of council, but was not a witness of crown charters. He was apparently killed at the battle of Flodden, on 9 September 1513. He had married Margaret, daughter of John Hay, Lord Hay of Yester, about 1491. They had at least one son, William Borthwick, who succeeded to his father's title. Although the family was not represented constantly at court, from 1450 its heads undertook frequent duties at parliament and council as auditors of causes, and were also often ambassadors. 


@@@@@


doc= 54140


William Borthwick, first Lord Borthwick (c.1412-1483), was knighted at the baptism of the infant James II in October 1430. He was created Lord Borthwick in June 1452, a time when James II was anxious to ensure that he had sufficient allies immediately after the stabbing to death of William, eighth earl of Douglas, at whom the king himself had struck the first blow. Borthwick occasionally witnessed crown charters in the next few years and was ambassador during truce negotiations with England. He was regularly present at parliament, however, where he acted as a lord auditor of causes (legal disputes); and he performed in a similar capacity as a lord of the king's council. From mid-1482 he was a frequent witness of crown charters until his death in December 1483. Although he may have married twice, no spouse's name is known. (The peerage petition of 1984-6 was inaccurate in stating that his second wife was Marion Hoppringle.) He had five sons and one daughter, but it is not clear who was the mother of any of the children. His eldest son (who had been knighted by 1468), 


@@@@@


doc= 54141


Boyd family (per. c.1300-c.1480), landowners and administrators, rose to prominence from a landed base in Ayrshire. The first member of the family to achieve national eminence was 


@@@@@


doc= 54142


Sir Robert Boyd (d. 1333) under Robert I, even though he played an uncertain role in the early stages of the wars of independence. Certainly following the general submission of 1304 he entered English service as coroner of Ayr and Lanark, and he was still associated with English agents in early 1305. But he was part of Robert Bruce's entourage later in that year and rebelled with Bruce in early 1306, taking Rothesay, besieging Inverkip, and attacking the earl of Strathearn. After the battle of Methven he escorted the Scottish queen to Kildrummy, although the account of his capture there is unlikely to be true, as he was not executed. According to chronicle sources, he was with Bruce, now Robert I, on Rathlin in the winter of 1306-7, and accompanied Edward Bruce in an attack on Galloway in 1308. Thereafter he was prominent in all Robert I's campaigns, and attended that king's first parliament in 1309. It is very likely he fought at Bannockburn, following which he received the barony of Kilmarnock, forfeited by the former King John (John de Balliol), and the lands of Noddsdale in May 1315. Between 1309 and 1329 he witnessed a significant number of royal charters, although he was not constantly with the king. He is last recorded in the Scottish army at Halidon Hill on 19 July 1333 -- it is said that he was captured there and died soon afterwards. 
Subsequent Boyds were less important for several generations. Sir Robert's great-grandson, Thomas Boyd (died 1432), was briefly a hostage for James I's release from imprisonment in England in 1424. Thomas's son, Sir Thomas Boyd, was briefly imprisoned on 13 May 1424 as part of James I's attacks on the Albany Stewarts. In 1438 he killed Alan Stewart of Darnley, and was himself killed in revenge on 7 August 1439 by Alexander Stewart, in a feud over ambitions in the Lennox. He was succeeded by his son 


@@@@@


doc= 54143


Bruce, Sir Robert, lord of Liddesdale (c.1293-1332), royal bastard, was the eldest son, albeit illegitimate, of Robert Bruce, earl of Carrick (1274-1329), later Robert I. The identity of his mother is unknown, though she perhaps resided on or near the Bruces' Scottish estates, given that all her son's activities took place in Scotland. A French chronicler asserted that a royal bastard, surely this Robert, was one of those knighted by the king before Bannockburn; since the minimum age for knighthood was supposedly twenty-one, this suggests that he was born about 1293, when his father was a very young man. On the other hand, his sudden appearance in government records in 1321 may indicate that he reached his majority in that year, having been born 'c'.1300. But the latter point is entirely hypothetical, and in any case does not preclude his having fought at Bannockburn. 
In 1321 Bruce was granted Sprouston in Roxburghshire, forfeited by the English heirs of the Vescy family. In that or the following year he received the important border lordship of Liddesdale, recently forfeited by William Soulis for his part in the conspiracy of 1320 against King Robert. Liddesdale had as its caput the impressive castle of Hermitage, which dominated the western border between England and Scotland, and was thus a grant of some responsibility. Bruce was also given lands in Angus. He played a part in royal government, albeit sporadically, witnessing eight of his father's acts between 1323 and 1328, where he was usually acknowledged by the king as 'our son'. In 1328 Robert I bestowed on him a gift of 500 merks. Most importantly, the younger Robert was involved in the rebuilding of the church of St Fillan; having successfully invoked the help of that saint before Bannockburn, the king had intended to found a daughter house of Inchaffray Abbey (to which St Fillan's Church and sanctuary were now attached) in Glendochart, Perthshire. Responsibility for the task passed to his son after his death. 
On 6 August 1332 Bruce was one of the leaders of the force which unsuccessfully resisted English troops landing at Kinghorn in support of Edward Balliol's claim to the throne. On 11 August his career was cut short at the battle of Dupplin Moor, Perthshire. At the outset of the battle Bruce engaged in a violent quarrel with the guardian of Scotland, Donald, earl of Mar, whom he accused of pro-Balliol and pro-English sympathies. The result was a furious competition as to who could most clearly demonstrate his patriotism by reaching the enemy lines first, which had the effect of disrupting the Scottish attack and did much to ensure the loss of the battle. Both men were killed. Bruce does not appear to have married, and the lands of Liddesdale were later taken over by Sir Archibald Douglas. 


@@@@@


doc= 54144


Buchan, Isabel, countess of Buchan (b. c.1270, d. after 1313), noblewoman, was the daughter of Earl Colban of Fife and Countess Anna, who was perhaps a daughter of Alan Durward (died 1275) ['see under 'Macduff family, earls of Fife]. She was probably born about 1270 and in due time married John Comyn, earl of Buchan (d. 1308). She is first recorded in October 1297, when she was said to be managing her husband's estates in England. Buchan, captured after the Scottish defeat at Dunbar in 1296, had recently been set free and had returned to Scotland. Isabel's life then continued unremarkably until 1306, when she achieved fame (or infamy) by placing the coronet on Bruce's head at his enthronement on 25 March. The earls of Fife had long performed this important function, which some said was essential for the validity of the ceremony; the current earl, Isabel's nephew Duncan, was a teenager who adhered completely to Edward I and therefore had no inclination to attend. Although one chronicler asserts that the countess left her husband dishonestly, it seems more likely that he was in England and Isabel, who could have stayed at her own house at Balmullo in Fife before the ceremony, might thus have been able to travel to Scone with comparative ease. None the less, she never saw her husband again: his close relationship to John Comyn of Badenoch, whom the new king had murdered as recently as 10 February, rendered her actions unforgivable. Rumours that she was or wanted to be Bruce's mistress were almost 'de rigueur' in the circumstances. 
The countess remained with the new royal family during the following difficult months, staying initially at Kildrummy Castle in Mar and then moving north with the queen and other royal women when that proved unsafe. However, they were captured at St Duthac's shrine at Tain in Ross-shire by William, earl of Ross, in September 1306. Isabel's role at Robert I's enthronement ensured her harsh treatment: she and Mary Bruce were incarcerated in wooden cages within the walls of the castles of Berwick and Roxburgh respectively. Although the women were provided with a privy, the degradation and humiliation of this punishment, which may have been Italian in inspiration, testified to both the seriousness of their offences and the frustration felt by King Edward at this new rebellion. Sir Robert Keith and Sir John Mowbray made an attempt to secure the countess's release in the next few years through the offices of Duncan of Fife, but this came to nothing. Isabel was finally removed from her cage in June 1310 to the comparative luxury of the Carmelite friary in Berwick. Three years later she was handed over to the safe keeping of Sir Henry de Beaumont (died 1340), husband of Buchan's niece and coheir, Alice, and lived the rest of her life in obscurity. It is not known when she died. 


@@@@@


doc= 54145


Bullock, William (d. 1342/3), administrator, is of unknown origins, and his early career is equally obscure. He is simply described in the sources as 'capellanus' or 'presbyterus' ('chaplain' or 'priest'), but his abilities seem to have been administrative and military. He first appears, probably at the end of 1333, as chamberlain to Edward Balliol, claimant to the Scottish throne. At this point Balliol, with English support, was trying to set up the basis of an administration, in which the chamberlain was, in Scottish practice, the principal financial official. Bullock, however, was also given charge of the royal castle of Cupar in Fife -- as keeper he received wages from the English exchequer at latest from early 1336 -- and custody of the castle of St Andrews, which belonged to the bishopric, then vacant. In 1337 he successfully defended Cupar Castle against Sir Andrew Murray, the guardian for the young David II, though Murray was able to recover St Andrews Castle. 
Scottish resistance to Balliol was growing and by 1339 his prospects must have looked slim. Probably in the summer of that year Bullock was approached by William Douglas, later known as Douglas of Liddesdale, who had come back from France to strengthen the siege of Perth, one of the few places remaining in the hands of an English or pro-English garrison. Douglas persuaded Bullock to transfer his allegiance and Cupar Castle to David II, in return, it is said, for 'a large reward in lands and possessions' (Bower, 7.141). From then on Bullock seems to have been an adherent of this William Douglas. The English government apparently did not discover Bullock's desertion for some time, since an advance payment on his wages for the next year was still being recorded in December 1339. At the siege of Perth he is said to have 'offered useful advice and brought appropriate help to the besiegers' ('Johannis de Fordun Chronica', 364), particularly in suggesting moving their protective shelters closer to the walls to cover them from attack by crossbowmen. In 1341 he is credited with assisting in the cunningly executed seizure of Edinburgh Castle. 
Bullock appears as chamberlain to David II from 22 May 1341, just before the king's return from France. His predecessor's account, covering the period 1334-8, showed an accumulated deficit of almost $2600. Bullock's first account, which he presented in 1342, struck an exact balance, after a number of complex allowances. This was mainly the result of a resumption of regular and efficient government, which points to Bullock's ability as a civil servant. He was clearly expert in balancing accounts. The fourteenth-century chronicler John Fordun describes him as 'outstanding among his contemporaries in prudence and in eloquence in his native tongue... and famous for his experienced and penetrating counsel' ('Johannis de Fordun Chronica', 364). But however much the turncoat's skill and advice were used, he was evidently not trusted. His wealth was envied, and apparently about the summer of 1342 he was accused of treason, though no details of the charges or names of the accusers are known. It is possible that his downfall was caused by a struggle for border lordship and engineered in retaliation for William Douglas's recent killing of Alexander Ramsay of Dalhousie. Bullock was arrested and imprisoned in a place called 'Malimoram', believed to be Mamore in Lochaber; he died 'of hunger and cold' soon after (Bower, 7.157). 


@@@@@


doc= 54146


Magnus, earl of Caithness and earl of Orkney (c.1290-1320/21), magnate, is called Magnus 'the fifth' in the fifteenth-century genealogy of the earls, which also tells us that he was the son of the previous earl, John. Very little is known of the line of Angus earls who inherited the northern earldoms in the 1230s, but four of them bore the name Magnus, after their revered ancestor Magnus Erlendsson, martyred about 1115. One of the few certain facts about Magnus is that he had a long minority. Thanks to the efficient government of Edward I there is record that in 1303 the wardship of 'Munes', son and heir of the earl of Caithness, was granted to Weland of Stiklaw. A careerist in the Scottish administration, Weland had left Scotland when Edward invaded in 1296, moving to Norway in the following of Isabel Bruce, who married Erik Magnusson, king of Norway ('r'. 1286-99). He came to Edward's peace when he was granted the wardship of Magnus for the earldom of Caithness, no doubt because he already controlled Orkney for the Norwegian royal administration. The earldom of Caithness was still in ward in 1309, but Magnus must have come of age before 1312. 
Virtually the only evidence surviving about Earl Magnus's career relates to his involvement in high-level diplomatic negotiations. Being an earl in the kingdoms of both Scotland and Norway, his position was not an easy one. There was rivalry between the two in the maritime zones around the north and west of the Scottish mainland. However, the treaty of Perth of 1266 was renewed at Inverness in 1312, when Magnus gave his oath on behalf of the king of Scots as earl of Caithness, but sealed the Norwegian part of the indenture as earl of Caithness and Orkney. In the following spring it was in his Orkney earldom, as earl of Caithness and acting, along with the bishop of Caithness and the chancellor of Moray, on behalf of the king of Scots, that he paid over the 'annual' 100 merks for that year and for the preceding five years to the commissioners of the king of Norway. Seven years later, in 1320, as earl of Caithness and Orkney he was listed seventh of the earls who addressed the declaration of Arbroath to the pope. Only once can we see Magnus acting as earl within his home territory of Orkney on matters concerning his earldom. In a report probably dating from the spring of 1320 and presented to Archbishop Eilif of Nidaros by Kormack, archdeacon of the Sudreys, and Grim, prebendary of Nidaros, it was said that Bishop William of Orkney had promised 'before Lord Magnus, earl of Orkney and Caithness, and Lady Catherine his wife, the chapter and many other worthies' (Lange and Unger, 9, no. 85) to amend the defects of his administration and to assign a certain portion of his rents to each church. 
It is thought that Magnus died soon after sealing the declaration of Arbroath in April 1320 since in August 1321 King Robert addressed a letter to the bailies of the king of Norway in Orkney complaining about rebels being received there, which he is unlikely to have done had the earl been alive and active. In 1329 Countess Catherine was making purchases of land in Orkney, and was obviously acting on her own behalf as a widow. It is not clear whether Magnus left any heirs. The genealogy of the earls mentions none, but neither does it say that he left no heirs, as is noted of another earl. His children would certainly have been under age in 1320-21 if he himself came of age only between 1309 and 1312. The absence of other claimants until 1330 suggests that there may have been a minor who did not reach maturity. In that year, however, the two earldoms passed to Malise, earl of Strathearn (died 'c'.1350), whose claim stemmed from his great-great-grandmother. The Scottish element of the joint earldoms was thereafter dominant. 


@@@@@


doc= 54147


Campbell family (per. c.1300-1453), nobility, was important in the history of the western highlands, and especially Argyll, in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Recorded from about the middle of the thirteenth century, the family first came to prominence in the person of 


@@@@@


doc= 54148


Sir Neil Campbell (d. 1315?), who was noted for his active military and political support for the cause of King Robert I in the period after February 1306. He was later identified by John Barbour as one of the small band which accompanied Robert during his desperate flight from English and Scottish foes in the winter of 1306-7, and contemporary evidence seems to confirm that he was in the king's personal entourage at this time, in particular the band into which he entered about 1308, along with Thomas Hay and Alexander Seton, to defend to the death their king and the liberty of the realm. In 1309 and 1314, moreover, he represented Robert in negotiations with the English crown. Sir Neil's loyal service resulted in a number of gains for his family and kinsmen at the expense of King Robert's enemies in the west, most notably the Macdougall lords of Argyll. 
The most striking confirmation of the closeness of the links between Campbell and the king came in the form of Sir Neil's prestigious marriage with Robert's sister Mary Bruce, which took place either just before Mary was captured by the English in 1306 or, more probably, following her release in 1312. Shortly after Bannockburn (24 June 1314) Sir Neil, his spouse, and their son John received a grant of the earldom and other lands which had belonged to David Strathbogie, tenth earl of Atholl. Then, on 10 February 1315, Colin Campbell, who was filially Sir Neil's eldest son, was granted his father's lands of Lochawe and Ardskeodnish in free barony. Sir Neil was probably still alive when the charter was issued, but seems to have died shortly afterwards; since Colin may have been technically illegitimate, the Lochawe charter was probably intended to ensure his succession to the lands and Campbell chieftainship. The name of Colin's mother is unknown. His father was, however, apparently married to Alice, one of the two daughters and coheirs of Sir Reginald Crawford, about 1302-3, after he and his brother Donald had allegedly abducted Alice and her sister. If the marriage took place it cannot be shown to have produced any children, and had in any case ended no later than 1312-14, when Sir Neil married Mary Bruce. 
Their son 


@@@@@


doc= 54149


John Campbell, earl of Atholl (d. 1333), shared King Robert's favour with his parents. Besides the earldom of Atholl he also received a third of the annual rents due to the crown from the burgh of Dundee and from the royal barony of Inverbervie. He adopted the title of earl of Atholl some time after 1323, but his career was cut short by his death at the battle of Halidon Hill on 19 July 1333. There were no children of his marriage to Joanna Menteith, daughter of Sir John Menteith of Rursky and widow of Malise, seventh earl of Strathearn, and consequently the main line of the Campbells of Lochawe continued through his nephews, Dougall and 


@@@@@


doc= 54150


Gill-Easbuig Campbell (d. 1385x7), the sons of John's half-brother Colin, who probably died about 1323. Colin's early death seems to have resulted in a redistribution of his estates among his kinsmen, with the lordship of Ardskeodnish passing to another branch of the family rather than descending to Dougall and Gill-Easbuig. By 4 July 1342 Dougall was dead and his lands, which had been forfeited to the crown, probably for supporting Edward Balliol, were granted by David II to his younger brother. In a long career, Gill-Easbuig presided over a dramatic expansion of Campbell lordship, especially in mid-Argyll, Cowal, and the Firth of Clyde. By 1369 he had acquired the lordships of Craignish, Melfort, and Strachur, as well as extensive estates in Cowal and Arran. Many of these territorial advances resulted from his close political relationship with the overlord of Cowal, Robert the Steward, who became king as Robert II in 1371. 
On 24 May 1382 the growing influence of the Campbell chief and his family in Argyll was confirmed when Robert II granted Gill-Easbuig Campbell and his son and heir a heritable royal lieutenancy in mid-Argyll which effectively covered the territory between the lordships of Lorn and Knapdale. Gill-Easbuig was apparently still alive on 1 June 1385, but seems to have died within two years. His only known wife was Isabella Lamont, the mother of his son and successor, 


@@@@@


doc= 54151


Colin Campbell (d. 1412/13). Perhaps the most significant aspect of the latter's chieftainship was his marriage to Mariota Campbell, the daughter and heir of John Campbell, lord of Ardskeodnish, under a dispensation granted on 16 January 1366. Through this match the lordships of the Ardskeodnish Campbells, including Ardskeodnish and Glenorchy, were united to those of the Lochawe family. By 1395 Colin was confident enough of his regional power to use the style 'lord of Argyll', a long-established title which had connotations of provincial overlordship. 
Colin Campbell died between 18 June 1412 and 19 January 1413. He left a number of children from his marriage to Mariota (although only Duncan ['see below'], his son and successor, can be positively identified as a product of this match) and also had a number of sons from other relationships. 


@@@@@


doc= 54152


Duncan Campbell, first Lord Campbell (d. 1453), had succeeded his father as lord of Lochawe by 19 January 1413. His career was initially enhanced by his marriage (probably in the 1390s) to Marjory Stewart, daughter of Robert, duke of Albany. In 1424-5, however, the Albany Stewarts and their allies came under political attack from King James I. Duncan Campbell had been one of the men chosen in 1423 to go to England as surety for the payment of the king's ransom, and he was still in England in May 1425 when his brother-in-law Murdoch, duke of Albany, his cousins, Murdoch's sons, and his uncle Duncan, earl of Lennox, were all executed. After his return to Scotland, Campbell worked hard to win back the favour of the king and was noted for his service to James at the siege of Roxburgh Castle in 1436-7. After the king's assassination in February 1437 Campbell identified himself with the interests of the king's widow, Queen Joan Beaufort and her infant son, James II. A rich man -- in 1423 his annual revenue was estimated at 1500 merks -- in Argyll he presided over a substantial building programme which resulted in the construction of a major centre for the exercise of secular lordship at Inveraray on Loch Fyne, and the endowment (4 August 1442) of a new ecclesiastical and religious focus for the family in the form of a secular college at Kilmun in Cowal. 
Duncan Campbell was knighted before 1430, and by 10 August 1440 (and perhaps as early as 1437) he had been granted, or had simply adopted, the parliamentary peerage title Lord Campbell. He was still alive in February 1453, but seems to have died shortly afterwards. He was buried in the collegiate kirk of Kilmun. He was twice married. His marriage to Marjory Stewart probably produced two sons. The elder was Gillespic, who seems to have died 'c'.1432 (and certainly before March 1440). Gillespic's son Colin Campbell eventually succeeded his grandfather as chief of clan Campbell, lord of Lochawe and Lord Campbell, and went on to become first earl of Argyll. The second son born to Duncan and Marjory was Colin, first of Glenorchy and progenitor of the Breadalbane family, although some accounts claim that Colin was a son of Duncan's second wife. The latter was Margaret Stewart, daughter of Sir John Stewart of Ardgowan, an illegitimate son of King Robert III. The marriage produced a number of children, including at least three sons, Neil, Duncan, and Gillespic, who founded important cadet branches. 


@@@@@


doc= 54153


Carlyle, John, first Lord Carlyle (d. 1501), administrator, came from a family of Annandale gentry. His father, William, acquired the Dumfriesshire barony of Torthorwald through marriage, but John was the first of his line to gain real prominence. First recorded in 1433, he received formal ownership of Torthorwald in 1449 (although tenancy did not follow until his father's death in 1463), was knighted in 1449 or 1450, and enjoyed royal favour from the late 1450s. His early career was probably the result of Douglas patronage, but following their collapse in 1452-5 he emerged as an important royal agent in the south-west. He was keeper of Threave Castle in 1458, captain of Lochmaben Castle in 1460-64, and justiciar in Annandale for the duke of Albany in 1465, while he also maintained his position at court, becoming master of the queen's stable in 1460-61. 
Carlyle was one of James III's closest supporters in the 1470s. He was created Lord Carlyle between October 1473 and July 1474, probably close to 3 December 1473, when Torthorwald was erected into a free burgh of barony. On 31 October 1477 the king granted him Drumcoll, Dumfriesshire, in one of his few major grants of patronage in that decade. This was in reward for Carlyle's services, particularly in France in 1473-4 at the time of the Anglo-Scottish peace. In the period 1476-81 he was very active in central and local crown administration as a regular witness to charters under the great seal, an auditor of exchequer, a member of the lords of council, a parliamentarian, and a custumar of Kirkcudbright and Wigtown. Importantly, he was involved in receiving Edward IV's dowry payments to James III for the proposed marriage and alliance negotiated in 1474, which suggests sympathy for this controversial policy. Following the crisis of 1482, however, he was less prominent in the 1480s, though he returned to court in 1487 and was probably in James III's army at Sauchieburn in 1488. His loyalty to the defeated monarch may explain his apparent absence from public affairs in the next reign. Carlyle died between 12 January and 3 March 1501, probably at Torthorwald. He was married three times: first to Elizabeth Kirkpatrick (marriage contract of 1433); second to Janet, of unknown family, from before 1476 to 'c'.1484; and third to Margaret Douglas (died after 22 Dec 1509), widow of Herbert Maxwell, from before February 1493. He had six children and was succeeded by his grandson, William. 


@@@@@


doc= 54154


Carrick, John (d. 1380/81), chancellor of Scotland, is of unknown origins, but his surname and strong links throughout his career with the diocese of Glasgow may suggest descent from the kindred of the ancient earls of Carrick. He is described as 'skilled in decrees' in a papal grace of 10 April 1374 (Rome, Vatican City, Archivio Segreto Vaticano, registra Avinionensia, vol. 193, fol. 345'v'), and therefore presumably studied canon law at a European university; although sometimes styled 'master' in contemporary sources, it does not appear that he was in fact a graduate. Probably before 1360 he had become chancellor in the diocese of Glasgow under Bishop William Raa, but it is not clear how long he held this office. In 1362 he acted as proctor for the Glasgow chapter in a dispute with Bishop Raa, an appointment which hints at the forensic skills of the canon lawyer; these may also have been exercised when he was one of the arbiters in a dispute between Sempringham and Paisley abbeys in April 1373. Carrick acquired the prebend of Moffat, Dumfriesshire, and at some time before 1374 also came to hold the church of Bothwell in Lanarkshire, both charges being in the diocese of Glasgow. 
By 1361 Carrick was a papal sub-collector in Scotland under William Grenlaw and had also entered royal service as clerk of the wardrobe, perhaps helped by the patronage of Archibald Douglas, later third earl of Douglas (died 1400), himself prominent in the king's service. During the 1360s he was successively audit clerk of the king's household and king's secretary or keeper of the privy seal. Carrick resigned the latter to become royal chancellor in March or April 1370, being in charge of the king's writing office or chapel and the great seal. He held this post until February or March 1377, and it is noteworthy that, although appointed by David II, he continued in office when Robert II succeeded as king in 1371. His period in charge of the royal seals was one of significant development in their use. 
Carrick was a regular envoy to England under David II, an exchequer auditor every year from 1364 to 1377 except 1365, and a participant in the general and judicial business of parliament during the same period. He was the king's choice to fill the bishopric of Dunkeld when it fell vacant in 1369, but failed to secure the appointment at the papal court. Apart from his links with Archibald Douglas and the diocese of Glasgow, Carrick's later career seems to have been almost entirely confined to the service of the king. He was the recipient of many payments from royal revenues, and after his retirement from the chancellorship he continued to draw a pension from the burgh ferme of Lanark. It was reported to the exchequer audit of February 1379/80 that he had collected this pension, but in March 1380/81 it was said to have been paid to his executors. His death therefore took place between these dates. Carrick's career is an excellent example of how in the later middle ages clerics possessed of legal, financial, and administrative skills could come to play an important role at the highest levels of lay administration and government. 


@@@@@


doc= 54155


Cathcart, Alan, of that ilk, first Lord Cathcart (c.1430-1496), landowner and courtier, was the eldest son of Alan Cathcart of that ilk; his mother's name is not known. Alan senior was a hostage in England for the ransom of James I from 1432 until exchanged for Alan junior in 1446, and is thought to have died shortly after his return to Scotland. The Cathcart genealogy in the middle ages is uncertain, as for 400 years from the early fourteenth century all the heads of the family except one were christened Alan, and references to the family before 'c'.1450 are few. The younger Alan was the first of his family to be raised to the peerage, in June 1452, when James II needed reliable allies in the tense aftermath of his killing of William Douglas, eighth earl of Douglas. That Cathcart's main estates lay in Renfrewshire, a region of Stewart lordship from the twelfth century, would have made him a member of the king's affinity, and so a man James could count on. These estates were now united into the barony of Cathcart; he also possessed lands in Ayrshire and Linlithgowshire. 
Cathcart was seldom at court before 1469, but after that he attended parliament regularly, though he rarely witnessed crown charters. He obtained the minor office of mair of fee of Kyle-Regis, Ayrshire, in 1478, was appointed warden of the west marches against England in 1481, and by 1483 had become master of the king's artillery, suggesting that he had proved to be a valuable servant of James III, after whose death in battle in 1488 Cathcart disappeared from court. His health may have been poor, as there are references to his tutor or curator in 1489 and 1495. He married Janet Maxwell, perhaps of the Caldorwood or Pollok line, who was still alive in January 1503. She is presumed to have been the mother of his four sons and three daughters. Cathcart's eldest son, Alan (the name of whose spouse is not known), predeceased him about 1490 and the latter's son John succeeded him on his death in late 1496. He is said to have been buried in the Dominican convent in Ayr. 


@@@@@


doc= 54156


Charteris, Sir Thomas (d. 1346), administrator, was perhaps distantly related to the Thomas Charteris, archdeacon of Lothian (of an Annandale family), who was chancellor from 1285 until the overlordship of Edward I was recognized on 11 June 1291, or to Sir Thomas Chartres (died 1302) of Roxburghshire. He remained a layman, but served as clerk of audit in the administration of Robert I ('r'. 1306-29), who gave him an annual rent of 10 merks in the Mearns (Kincardineshire), in 1324. At the end of the reign he was busy abroad making purchases for the marriage of David, the king's son, commissioning the king's tomb, and paying for the peace negotiated with England in 1328. In March 1331 he was given land at Kinfauns, Perthshire, by the crown (through Sir Andrew Murray, guardian of Scotland), possibly to reimburse his expenses in connection with the forthcoming coronation of David II. 
From the renewal of Anglo-Scottish hostilities in 1332 no chancellor is known until April 1340, when an exchequer account claims, somewhat obscurely, that Charteris had been chancellor for the previous quinquennium, perhaps since John Randolph, earl of Moray, was made guardian in 1334. Yet from the period between 1334 and the king's return in 1341 there survive the texts of only three royal acts issued in Scotland, all of 1340-41. For three years (and maybe more) before 1340 there was a keeper of the great seal, unnamed, though evidently not Charteris. The keeper, it seems, had the seal while it was out of use. Charteris may have held office then purely as a means of assuring him the chancellor's fee to remain active in the administration, but he was paid just 100 merks for five years in office because of the attenuated royal rents -- at the usual rate he was owed $500. He was probably knighted after the king's return in 1341 and certainly between 1340 and 1342. He continued in office, and eighty-three texts of royal acts survive, issued from the chancery he directed in the years up to his death. He also sat on the exchequer audit in 1342 and 1343, the only years for which accounts are extant. Charteris accompanied David II on his invasion of England and was killed at the battle of Nevilles Cross, co. Durham, on 17 October 1346. He was probably buried that month in co. Durham. 
The name of Charteris's wife is not known, unless she was Marjory Charteris who held a terce in Clackmannanshire in 1357-8; a William Charteris, heir of Thomas (not Sir), came of age as crown tenant in the same period and sheriffdom, and has usually been seen as Sir Thomas's son and heir. Sir Thomas, whose distinction is as a lay administrator in difficult times, was the first layman to rise to the chancellorship, apparently a few years before the same thing happened in England in 1340. 


@@@@@


doc= 54157


Crab, John (c.1280-c.1352), pirate and merchant, was probably born in Muiden in Flanders. Active as a pirate from at least 1306, he was the most notorious of the Flemish privateers who preyed on English shipping during the Scottish War of Independence. His nephew Crabbekyn served with him at sea. Crab's attacks on English shipping led to frequent complaints by Edward II to the count of Flanders. But the count usually turned a blind eye, even pardoning him for murder and, in 1315, encouraging his piracy to obtain food during a famine. After 1310 Crab apparently settled in Aberdeen; Scottish and Flemish allies sold his plunder in Flanders. When Scotland recovered Berwick in 1318, Crab moved there with his family. He organized its defences and also supplied provisions for the Scottish crown, which considered him valuable enough to compensate victims of his piracy. In 1331 he served as constable of Berwick. 
On the invasion of Scotland by Edward Balliol (died 1363) in 1332, Crab took ten ships to besiege him at Perth, but the fleet was burnt and Crab fled on foot, to be captured shortly afterwards. Although the English parliament demanded his punishment, Edward III saw his potential usefulness and paid his ransom in return for his service. In 1333 Crab helped to direct the English siege of Berwick, where his expert knowledge of the defences ensured English success. The Berwick townspeople killed his son; this action, and Crab's anger that the Scots had not ransomed him, led him to give his allegiance to Edward III. As a burgess of Berwick, he was granted valuable lands there by the king in 1334, but he sold them when he was made constable of Somerton Castle in Lincolnshire for life. He continued to help English forces in Scotland, providing ships, soldiers, and siege engines, and refortifying Berwick, while in 1339 he helped protect English wool ships going to the Low Countries. His last active military service was probably at the battle of Sluys in 1340. In his final years he worked in England on Edward's castles and war engines, and he carried out various missions for the king until his death 'c'.1352. Crab is a good representative of those medieval merchants who drew little distinction between trade and privateering, and his career also shows how medieval rulers used such men for their own ends. 
Another 
Crab was prominent among those medieval burgesses who invested in both rural and urban property. Outside Aberdeen his estates included Murtle, Denburn, Kincorth, and Findon; within the town he represented a new breed of rentiers who bought town property for profit. Nevertheless he was a pious man, who from the 1350s onwards gave the rents from a number of his urban holdings to the Aberdeen Carmelites. He arranged masses for himself and his late wife, Elizabeth (died before 1382), in Arbroath Abbey, Angus, in 1384 and died shortly afterwards. The Crabstone in Aberdeen is thought to have been named from him or his family. 


@@@@@


doc= 54158


Crichton, William, of that ilk, first Lord Crichton (d. 1453), administrator and courtier, was the eldest son of Sir John Crichton of that ilk and his spouse, thought to have been Christian Grimslaw (who survived her husband). The family's principal seat was at Crichton in Edinburghshire, and there were important estates in Dumfriesshire, as well as in Peeblesshire and Roxburghshire. William Crichton was knighted at the coronation of James I, in May 1424. In May 1426, described as a gentleman of the king's bedchamber, he was sent with two others to treat with Erik, king of Norway and Denmark, concerning the annual payment owed to Norway since 1266 for the Scottish Western Isles. Thereafter Crichton clearly profited from the favour of James I, who in the 1430s relied mainly on barons from Lothian to act as his daily council. In 1429 Crichton began to witness crown charters and by March 1432 he had been created master of the king's household, an office he retained until at least June 1437. He was also appointed sheriff of Edinburgh and captain of Edinburgh Castle (for which he received a sizeable annual pension) about 1433, holding both posts until his death. The influence of Archibald, fifth earl of Douglas, cannot be discounted as a factor behind Crichton's promotion, but the earl was seldom at court, which allowed Crichton to strengthen his position there. 
After the murder of James I in 1437 Crichton was increasingly prominent in the administration which ruled Scotland in the name of the young James II, especially after the earl of Douglas, who was lieutenant-general, died in June 1439. In May of that year Crichton had become chancellor, and the seal tags of many engrossed charters bear his signature, suggesting that he carefully controlled the use of the great seal. In his capacity as chancellor he was the means whereby the king's council blocked the claim of Sir Robert Erskine to the earldom of Mar, a substantial prize which in 1457 was to be denied to Erskine's son Thomas by a verdict in the crown's favour. Crichton's main rival was an unlikely one, Sir Alexander Livingston of Callendar, who had not been a court regular, but who now benefited from having control of the young king, after imprisoning the queen mother in Stirling Castle in August 1439. However hostile to each other they may have been, Crichton and Livingston came to terms, and may have co-operated in the judicial murder of the sixth earl of Douglas on 24 November 1440. The seventh and eighth earls of Douglas were antipathetic to Crichton, but sympathetic to Livingston. About 1444 Crichton was forced from office, and indeed in June 1445 he was besieged in Edinburgh Castle by forces nominally led by the king himself, though in actuality controlled by Douglas, after a year in which both sides had ravaged the other's lands. 
An accommodation was reached: Crichton returned to court and assumed (at the same time as the heads of various other major Scottish landed families) a peerage title, making the small but significant change from the style lord of Crichton, which he had used before, to that of Lord Crichton. But he held no office, as the Livingstons and their supporters were now dominant. However, following the death in 1447 of Bishop James Bruce, who had succeeded him as chancellor, Crichton resumed his former post, before November in the same year. In 1448 he travelled to Burgundy, one of the king's ambassadors sent to arrange James II's marriage to Mary, daughter of Arnold, duke of Gueldres. On his return to Scotland, after negotiations were concluded in the spring of 1449, Crichton founded a collegiate church at Crichton. It is also thought that he transformed the tower-house of Crichton Castle into an impressive courtyard castle. 
In September 1449 the Livingstons were dramatically ousted. Their power had been based on office holding, and Crichton now sought similar rewards for his own family. He had never been slow to attend to their interests. In the late 1430s he seems to have encouraged Sir Alexander Seton of Tullibody, later first earl of Huntly, to marry his daughter Elizabeth Crichton, after Seton divorced his first wife; Crichton cannot have been displeased when Seton then entailed his lands on his and Elizabeth's first son, excluding from the succession the son of his first marriage, greatly to the latter's chagrin. An important beneficiary of Crichton's patronage in the 1450s was his cousin George Crichton of Cairns, earl of Caithness (d. 1454). The elder son of Stephen Crichton of Cairns, Edinburghshire, and an unknown mother, George had before his father's death in 1434 built up an estate mostly (but not entirely) in south-west Scotland and Lothian; his territorial designation was sometimes 'of Blackness', Linlithgowshire, later his main estate, rather than Cairns. Knighted by 1438, George witnessed a few crown charters during William Crichton's first tenure of office as chancellor, and was ambassador to Brittany in 1441, to negotiate the marriage of James II's sister Elizabeth. By then he was admiral of Scotland (an office he held until his death) and had succeeded his father as sheriff of Linlithgow. 
George Crichton was involved in the troubles affecting his cousin William in 1444-5, and his activities are rarely recorded thereafter until 1450. But from February in that year he was a frequent witness of crown charters and was also present on the king's council in judicial matters and in parliament as an auditor of causes. Shortly after the fall of the Livingstons he became sheriff of Stirling and keeper of Stirling Castle, and by late 1452 he was justiciar south of Forth. In June that year he was created earl of Caithness. Particularly after his elevation to the peerage (and probably at the king's instigation) he began to entail his estates, to the effect that his son and heir, James Crichton, would not succeed to either title or lands after George's death. James resented this, and incarcerated his father in Blackness Castle, which the king had to besiege in person in order to relieve the earl. A settlement was reached whereby James received the Cairns estate and (from the king) some crown lands in Perthshire, but the rest of the earl's property, along with his title, fell to the crown on George's death, which took place at Edinburgh in August 1454. George married twice. James, who was often present in parliament under James III, was the son of George's first marriage, about 1425, to a daughter (name unknown) of Sir William Douglas of Strathbrock. About 1450 George married Janet, daughter of Sir William Borthwick of that ilk, widow of Sir James Douglas of Dalkeith and former wife of Sir Colin Campbell of Glenorchy; they had a daughter, Janet, who married Robert, Lord Maxwell. 
The records of the exchequer show sundry other minor Crichtons obtaining fees or pensions while William Crichton was dominant in government. But the fountain dried up in 1453-4, when William, his son and heir, James, and his cousin George all died. William witnessed his last crown charter on 16 September 1453 and probably died shortly afterwards. His wife, Agnes (surname unknown), is presumed to have been the mother of all his known children, a son, James, and two daughters: Elizabeth married Sir Alexander Seton, while Agnes married Alexander, second Lord Glamis. James Crichton of that ilk, earl of Moray and second Lord Crichton (d. 1454), was knighted in October 1430, on the occasion of the baptism of James II. Another beneficiary of his father's patronage, he was appointed chamberlain by March 1451, though he does not appear to have been active in that post. He was also captain of Kildrummy Castle from late 1450 until 1452 and in 1453-4 keeper of Dunbar Castle. By 1445 he had married Janet, elder daughter and coheir of James Dunbar, fourth earl of Moray. Her sister Elizabeth married Archibald Douglas, third son of James Douglas, seventh earl of Douglas, who assumed the title earl of Moray until his forfeiture about 1452, while Crichton was styled Lord Frendraught by right of his spouse until he was created earl of Moray in the parliament of June 1452. While there has been doubt about the status of this grant, he is clearly styled earl on a number of occasions, though he certainly did not transmit his title to his son. Crichton died at Dunbar in August 1454. His spouse survived him and by 1459 married John Sutherland. Active in the land market until her death about 1500, she is unusual in being a medieval Scotswoman who demonstrated the ability to sign her name. 
The eldest of James and Janet Crichton's three sons, William Crichton of that ilk, third Lord Crichton (d. 1493), succeeded to the lordship in 1454. He witnessed a few charters of James III in 1469-70 and 1476, and was normally present in parliament between 1467 and 1479; he was sheriff of Edinburgh in 1469-71, and perhaps for a longer period. However, he became a follower of Alexander Stewart, duke of Albany, in the latter's intrigues against his brother, James III, and supported the coup of July 1482 against the king. Accordingly he suffered the consequences once King James regained control of government in the following spring. Under an indenture of 19 March 1483 between the king and Albany, Crichton was banished from Scotland for three years; then, as Albany continued to plot with England, Crichton and others were forfeited in the parliament of February 1484 (the sentence was given in his absence, as he may have been in sanctuary in Tain). James III may have had personal grounds for disliking Crichton. The sixteenth-century historian George Buchanan tells of the king seducing Crichton's wife, Janet Dunbar (actually his mother), though there is no contemporary evidence for this. But there seems to be no doubt that Crichton formed a relationship with James's younger sister, Margaret, which resulted in the birth of a daughter. 
Crichton may have fled Scotland after his forfeiture. Nevertheless he was among the rebel forces which held Dumbarton and Duchal castles against James IV in the summer of 1489. In September 1489 he obtained a safe conduct from Henry VII to pass to England and elsewhere, but he was certainly in Scotland in September 1492. He had died by October 1493, possibly in Inverness, where he may have been buried. Before 1478 he married Marion, daughter of James, Lord Livingston, a union presumably intended to settle the previous rivalry between the families. They appear to have had one son, James. Crichton's forfeiture meant that the peerage title became extinct; and following a resignation of property in his favour in November 1493 by his grandmother, Janet Dunbar, James Crichton assumed the designation 'of Frendraught', which became the family style. 


@@@@@


doc= 54159


Crichton, William, of that ilk, first Lord Crichton (d. 1453), administrator and courtier, was the eldest son of Sir John Crichton of that ilk and his spouse, thought to have been Christian Grimslaw (who survived her husband). The family's principal seat was at Crichton in Edinburghshire, and there were important estates in Dumfriesshire, as well as in Peeblesshire and Roxburghshire. William Crichton was knighted at the coronation of James I, in May 1424. In May 1426, described as a gentleman of the king's bedchamber, he was sent with two others to treat with Erik, king of Norway and Denmark, concerning the annual payment owed to Norway since 1266 for the Scottish Western Isles. Thereafter Crichton clearly profited from the favour of James I, who in the 1430s relied mainly on barons from Lothian to act as his daily council. In 1429 Crichton began to witness crown charters and by March 1432 he had been created master of the king's household, an office he retained until at least June 1437. He was also appointed sheriff of Edinburgh and captain of Edinburgh Castle (for which he received a sizeable annual pension) about 1433, holding both posts until his death. The influence of Archibald, fifth earl of Douglas, cannot be discounted as a factor behind Crichton's promotion, but the earl was seldom at court, which allowed Crichton to strengthen his position there. 
After the murder of James I in 1437 Crichton was increasingly prominent in the administration which ruled Scotland in the name of the young James II, especially after the earl of Douglas, who was lieutenant-general, died in June 1439. In May of that year Crichton had become chancellor, and the seal tags of many engrossed charters bear his signature, suggesting that he carefully controlled the use of the great seal. In his capacity as chancellor he was the means whereby the king's council blocked the claim of Sir Robert Erskine to the earldom of Mar, a substantial prize which in 1457 was to be denied to Erskine's son Thomas by a verdict in the crown's favour. Crichton's main rival was an unlikely one, Sir Alexander Livingston of Callendar, who had not been a court regular, but who now benefited from having control of the young king, after imprisoning the queen mother in Stirling Castle in August 1439. However hostile to each other they may have been, Crichton and Livingston came to terms, and may have co-operated in the judicial murder of the sixth earl of Douglas on 24 November 1440. The seventh and eighth earls of Douglas were antipathetic to Crichton, but sympathetic to Livingston. About 1444 Crichton was forced from office, and indeed in June 1445 he was besieged in Edinburgh Castle by forces nominally led by the king himself, though in actuality controlled by Douglas, after a year in which both sides had ravaged the other's lands. 
An accommodation was reached: Crichton returned to court and assumed (at the same time as the heads of various other major Scottish landed families) a peerage title, making the small but significant change from the style lord of Crichton, which he had used before, to that of Lord Crichton. But he held no office, as the Livingstons and their supporters were now dominant. However, following the death in 1447 of Bishop James Bruce, who had succeeded him as chancellor, Crichton resumed his former post, before November in the same year. In 1448 he travelled to Burgundy, one of the king's ambassadors sent to arrange James II's marriage to Mary, daughter of Arnold, duke of Gueldres. On his return to Scotland, after negotiations were concluded in the spring of 1449, Crichton founded a collegiate church at Crichton. It is also thought that he transformed the tower-house of Crichton Castle into an impressive courtyard castle. 
In September 1449 the Livingstons were dramatically ousted. Their power had been based on office holding, and Crichton now sought similar rewards for his own family. He had never been slow to attend to their interests. In the late 1430s he seems to have encouraged Sir Alexander Seton of Tullibody, later first earl of Huntly, to marry his daughter Elizabeth Crichton, after Seton divorced his first wife; Crichton cannot have been displeased when Seton then entailed his lands on his and Elizabeth's first son, excluding from the succession the son of his first marriage, greatly to the latter's chagrin. An important beneficiary of Crichton's patronage in the 1450s was his cousin George Crichton of Cairns, earl of Caithness (d. 1454). The elder son of Stephen Crichton of Cairns, Edinburghshire, and an unknown mother, George had before his father's death in 1434 built up an estate mostly (but not entirely) in south-west Scotland and Lothian; his territorial designation was sometimes 'of Blackness', Linlithgowshire, later his main estate, rather than Cairns. Knighted by 1438, George witnessed a few crown charters during William Crichton's first tenure of office as chancellor, and was ambassador to Brittany in 1441, to negotiate the marriage of James II's sister Elizabeth. By then he was admiral of Scotland (an office he held until his death) and had succeeded his father as sheriff of Linlithgow. 
George Crichton was involved in the troubles affecting his cousin William in 1444-5, and his activities are rarely recorded thereafter until 1450. But from February in that year he was a frequent witness of crown charters and was also present on the king's council in judicial matters and in parliament as an auditor of causes. Shortly after the fall of the Livingstons he became sheriff of Stirling and keeper of Stirling Castle, and by late 1452 he was justiciar south of Forth. In June that year he was created earl of Caithness. Particularly after his elevation to the peerage (and probably at the king's instigation) he began to entail his estates, to the effect that his son and heir, James Crichton, would not succeed to either title or lands after George's death. James resented this, and incarcerated his father in Blackness Castle, which the king had to besiege in person in order to relieve the earl. A settlement was reached whereby James received the Cairns estate and (from the king) some crown lands in Perthshire, but the rest of the earl's property, along with his title, fell to the crown on George's death, which took place at Edinburgh in August 1454. George married twice. James, who was often present in parliament under James III, was the son of George's first marriage, about 1425, to a daughter (name unknown) of Sir William Douglas of Strathbrock. About 1450 George married Janet, daughter of Sir William Borthwick of that ilk, widow of Sir James Douglas of Dalkeith and former wife of Sir Colin Campbell of Glenorchy; they had a daughter, Janet, who married Robert, Lord Maxwell. 
The records of the exchequer show sundry other minor Crichtons obtaining fees or pensions while William Crichton was dominant in government. But the fountain dried up in 1453-4, when William, his son and heir, James, and his cousin George all died. William witnessed his last crown charter on 16 September 1453 and probably died shortly afterwards. His wife, Agnes (surname unknown), is presumed to have been the mother of all his known children, a son, James, and two daughters: Elizabeth married Sir Alexander Seton, while Agnes married Alexander, second Lord Glamis. James Crichton of that ilk, earl of Moray and second Lord Crichton (d. 1454), was knighted in October 1430, on the occasion of the baptism of James II. Another beneficiary of his father's patronage, he was appointed chamberlain by March 1451, though he does not appear to have been active in that post. He was also captain of Kildrummy Castle from late 1450 until 1452 and in 1453-4 keeper of Dunbar Castle. By 1445 he had married Janet, elder daughter and coheir of James Dunbar, fourth earl of Moray. Her sister Elizabeth married Archibald Douglas, third son of James Douglas, seventh earl of Douglas, who assumed the title earl of Moray until his forfeiture about 1452, while Crichton was styled Lord Frendraught by right of his spouse until he was created earl of Moray in the parliament of June 1452. While there has been doubt about the status of this grant, he is clearly styled earl on a number of occasions, though he certainly did not transmit his title to his son. Crichton died at Dunbar in August 1454. His spouse survived him and by 1459 married John Sutherland. Active in the land market until her death about 1500, she is unusual in being a medieval Scotswoman who demonstrated the ability to sign her name. 
The eldest of James and Janet Crichton's three sons, William Crichton of that ilk, third Lord Crichton (d. 1493), succeeded to the lordship in 1454. He witnessed a few charters of James III in 1469-70 and 1476, and was normally present in parliament between 1467 and 1479; he was sheriff of Edinburgh in 1469-71, and perhaps for a longer period. However, he became a follower of Alexander Stewart, duke of Albany, in the latter's intrigues against his brother, James III, and supported the coup of July 1482 against the king. Accordingly he suffered the consequences once King James regained control of government in the following spring. Under an indenture of 19 March 1483 between the king and Albany, Crichton was banished from Scotland for three years; then, as Albany continued to plot with England, Crichton and others were forfeited in the parliament of February 1484 (the sentence was given in his absence, as he may have been in sanctuary in Tain). James III may have had personal grounds for disliking Crichton. The sixteenth-century historian George Buchanan tells of the king seducing Crichton's wife, Janet Dunbar (actually his mother), though there is no contemporary evidence for this. But there seems to be no doubt that Crichton formed a relationship with James's younger sister, Margaret, which resulted in the birth of a daughter. 
Crichton may have fled Scotland after his forfeiture. Nevertheless he was among the rebel forces which held Dumbarton and Duchal castles against James IV in the summer of 1489. In September 1489 he obtained a safe conduct from Henry VII to pass to England and elsewhere, but he was certainly in Scotland in September 1492. He had died by October 1493, possibly in Inverness, where he may have been buried. Before 1478 he married Marion, daughter of James, Lord Livingston, a union presumably intended to settle the previous rivalry between the families. They appear to have had one son, James. Crichton's forfeiture meant that the peerage title became extinct; and following a resignation of property in his favour in November 1493 by his grandmother, Janet Dunbar, James Crichton assumed the designation 'of Frendraught', which became the family style. 


@@@@@


doc= 54160


Crichton, William, of that ilk, first Lord Crichton (d. 1453), administrator and courtier, was the eldest son of Sir John Crichton of that ilk and his spouse, thought to have been Christian Grimslaw (who survived her husband). The family's principal seat was at Crichton in Edinburghshire, and there were important estates in Dumfriesshire, as well as in Peeblesshire and Roxburghshire. William Crichton was knighted at the coronation of James I, in May 1424. In May 1426, described as a gentleman of the king's bedchamber, he was sent with two others to treat with Erik, king of Norway and Denmark, concerning the annual payment owed to Norway since 1266 for the Scottish Western Isles. Thereafter Crichton clearly profited from the favour of James I, who in the 1430s relied mainly on barons from Lothian to act as his daily council. In 1429 Crichton began to witness crown charters and by March 1432 he had been created master of the king's household, an office he retained until at least June 1437. He was also appointed sheriff of Edinburgh and captain of Edinburgh Castle (for which he received a sizeable annual pension) about 1433, holding both posts until his death. The influence of Archibald, fifth earl of Douglas, cannot be discounted as a factor behind Crichton's promotion, but the earl was seldom at court, which allowed Crichton to strengthen his position there. 
After the murder of James I in 1437 Crichton was increasingly prominent in the administration which ruled Scotland in the name of the young James II, especially after the earl of Douglas, who was lieutenant-general, died in June 1439. In May of that year Crichton had become chancellor, and the seal tags of many engrossed charters bear his signature, suggesting that he carefully controlled the use of the great seal. In his capacity as chancellor he was the means whereby the king's council blocked the claim of Sir Robert Erskine to the earldom of Mar, a substantial prize which in 1457 was to be denied to Erskine's son Thomas by a verdict in the crown's favour. Crichton's main rival was an unlikely one, Sir Alexander Livingston of Callendar, who had not been a court regular, but who now benefited from having control of the young king, after imprisoning the queen mother in Stirling Castle in August 1439. However hostile to each other they may have been, Crichton and Livingston came to terms, and may have co-operated in the judicial murder of the sixth earl of Douglas on 24 November 1440. The seventh and eighth earls of Douglas were antipathetic to Crichton, but sympathetic to Livingston. About 1444 Crichton was forced from office, and indeed in June 1445 he was besieged in Edinburgh Castle by forces nominally led by the king himself, though in actuality controlled by Douglas, after a year in which both sides had ravaged the other's lands. 
An accommodation was reached: Crichton returned to court and assumed (at the same time as the heads of various other major Scottish landed families) a peerage title, making the small but significant change from the style lord of Crichton, which he had used before, to that of Lord Crichton. But he held no office, as the Livingstons and their supporters were now dominant. However, following the death in 1447 of Bishop James Bruce, who had succeeded him as chancellor, Crichton resumed his former post, before November in the same year. In 1448 he travelled to Burgundy, one of the king's ambassadors sent to arrange James II's marriage to Mary, daughter of Arnold, duke of Gueldres. On his return to Scotland, after negotiations were concluded in the spring of 1449, Crichton founded a collegiate church at Crichton. It is also thought that he transformed the tower-house of Crichton Castle into an impressive courtyard castle. 
In September 1449 the Livingstons were dramatically ousted. Their power had been based on office holding, and Crichton now sought similar rewards for his own family. He had never been slow to attend to their interests. In the late 1430s he seems to have encouraged Sir Alexander Seton of Tullibody, later first earl of Huntly, to marry his daughter Elizabeth Crichton, after Seton divorced his first wife; Crichton cannot have been displeased when Seton then entailed his lands on his and Elizabeth's first son, excluding from the succession the son of his first marriage, greatly to the latter's chagrin. An important beneficiary of Crichton's patronage in the 1450s was his cousin George Crichton of Cairns, earl of Caithness (d. 1454). The elder son of Stephen Crichton of Cairns, Edinburghshire, and an unknown mother, George had before his father's death in 1434 built up an estate mostly (but not entirely) in south-west Scotland and Lothian; his territorial designation was sometimes 'of Blackness', Linlithgowshire, later his main estate, rather than Cairns. Knighted by 1438, George witnessed a few crown charters during William Crichton's first tenure of office as chancellor, and was ambassador to Brittany in 1441, to negotiate the marriage of James II's sister Elizabeth. By then he was admiral of Scotland (an office he held until his death) and had succeeded his father as sheriff of Linlithgow. 
George Crichton was involved in the troubles affecting his cousin William in 1444-5, and his activities are rarely recorded thereafter until 1450. But from February in that year he was a frequent witness of crown charters and was also present on the king's council in judicial matters and in parliament as an auditor of causes. Shortly after the fall of the Livingstons he became sheriff of Stirling and keeper of Stirling Castle, and by late 1452 he was justiciar south of Forth. In June that year he was created earl of Caithness. Particularly after his elevation to the peerage (and probably at the king's instigation) he began to entail his estates, to the effect that his son and heir, James Crichton, would not succeed to either title or lands after George's death. James resented this, and incarcerated his father in Blackness Castle, which the king had to besiege in person in order to relieve the earl. A settlement was reached whereby James received the Cairns estate and (from the king) some crown lands in Perthshire, but the rest of the earl's property, along with his title, fell to the crown on George's death, which took place at Edinburgh in August 1454. George married twice. James, who was often present in parliament under James III, was the son of George's first marriage, about 1425, to a daughter (name unknown) of Sir William Douglas of Strathbrock. About 1450 George married Janet, daughter of Sir William Borthwick of that ilk, widow of Sir James Douglas of Dalkeith and former wife of Sir Colin Campbell of Glenorchy; they had a daughter, Janet, who married Robert, Lord Maxwell. 
The records of the exchequer show sundry other minor Crichtons obtaining fees or pensions while William Crichton was dominant in government. But the fountain dried up in 1453-4, when William, his son and heir, James, and his cousin George all died. William witnessed his last crown charter on 16 September 1453 and probably died shortly afterwards. His wife, Agnes (surname unknown), is presumed to have been the mother of all his known children, a son, James, and two daughters: Elizabeth married Sir Alexander Seton, while Agnes married Alexander, second Lord Glamis. James Crichton of that ilk, earl of Moray and second Lord Crichton (d. 1454), was knighted in October 1430, on the occasion of the baptism of James II. Another beneficiary of his father's patronage, he was appointed chamberlain by March 1451, though he does not appear to have been active in that post. He was also captain of Kildrummy Castle from late 1450 until 1452 and in 1453-4 keeper of Dunbar Castle. By 1445 he had married Janet, elder daughter and coheir of James Dunbar, fourth earl of Moray. Her sister Elizabeth married Archibald Douglas, third son of James Douglas, seventh earl of Douglas, who assumed the title earl of Moray until his forfeiture about 1452, while Crichton was styled Lord Frendraught by right of his spouse until he was created earl of Moray in the parliament of June 1452. While there has been doubt about the status of this grant, he is clearly styled earl on a number of occasions, though he certainly did not transmit his title to his son. Crichton died at Dunbar in August 1454. His spouse survived him and by 1459 married John Sutherland. Active in the land market until her death about 1500, she is unusual in being a medieval Scotswoman who demonstrated the ability to sign her name. 
The eldest of James and Janet Crichton's three sons, William Crichton of that ilk, third Lord Crichton (d. 1493), succeeded to the lordship in 1454. He witnessed a few charters of James III in 1469-70 and 1476, and was normally present in parliament between 1467 and 1479; he was sheriff of Edinburgh in 1469-71, and perhaps for a longer period. However, he became a follower of Alexander Stewart, duke of Albany, in the latter's intrigues against his brother, James III, and supported the coup of July 1482 against the king. Accordingly he suffered the consequences once King James regained control of government in the following spring. Under an indenture of 19 March 1483 between the king and Albany, Crichton was banished from Scotland for three years; then, as Albany continued to plot with England, Crichton and others were forfeited in the parliament of February 1484 (the sentence was given in his absence, as he may have been in sanctuary in Tain). James III may have had personal grounds for disliking Crichton. The sixteenth-century historian George Buchanan tells of the king seducing Crichton's wife, Janet Dunbar (actually his mother), though there is no contemporary evidence for this. But there seems to be no doubt that Crichton formed a relationship with James's younger sister, Margaret, which resulted in the birth of a daughter. 
Crichton may have fled Scotland after his forfeiture. Nevertheless he was among the rebel forces which held Dumbarton and Duchal castles against James IV in the summer of 1489. In September 1489 he obtained a safe conduct from Henry VII to pass to England and elsewhere, but he was certainly in Scotland in September 1492. He had died by October 1493, possibly in Inverness, where he may have been buried. Before 1478 he married Marion, daughter of James, Lord Livingston, a union presumably intended to settle the previous rivalry between the families. They appear to have had one son, James. Crichton's forfeiture meant that the peerage title became extinct; and following a resignation of property in his favour in November 1493 by his grandmother, Janet Dunbar, James Crichton assumed the designation 'of Frendraught', which became the family style. 


@@@@@


doc= 54161


Cunningham family (per. c.1340-1631), nobility, was probably descended from vassals of the Moreville family, which in the twelfth century held extensive estates in Cunningham in north Ayrshire. Cunningham became a Stewart lordship under King Robert I. The first prominent member of the Cunningham family was 


@@@@@


doc= 54162


Sir William Cunningham (d. 1396x9), whose father was a cousin of Robert I (the precise relationship is not clear), and who was himself twice addressed by David II in charters as 'consanguineus'. Sir William's earliest recorded appearance is on a list of cautioners appointed in parliament in 1344 to ensure that the kindred of the late Alexander Ramsay would not harm his killer, Sir William Douglas of Liddesdale. In 1351 Cunningham was sheriff of Lanark, and his eldest son, Robert (who predeceased him), became a hostage for the ransom of David II in 1357. About 1361, possibly as compensation for this, or in recognition of some obscure hereditary claim, or as a counterbalance to Stewart power in the south-west, Sir William received a royal grant of the lands of the earldom of Carrick. Subsequently he was known as lord, rather than earl, of Carrick, and held the lands until 1368, when the earldom was granted to the king's nephew John Stewart (later King Robert III), on his marriage to Annabella Drummond. Sir William's principal estate was Kilmaurs, north-west of Kilmarnock, in Cunningham, and he also held the nearby lands of Lambroughton, Kilbride, and Skelmorlie, as well as Ranfurly in mid-Renfrewshire and Polquhairn in Kyle. He was also sheriff of Ayr, and the family was thus well placed to take advantage of the power vacuum left when the Stewarts ascended the throne of Scotland in 1371. All that is known of his wife, Margaret, is her forename. 
On Sir William's death he was succeeded by his second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 54163


Sir William Cunningham of Kilmaurs (d. 1413x15). He too was sheriff of Ayr. In 1384 (by which time he had been knighted) he and his retinue helped to defeat an English force which had landed at South Queensferry, on the southern shore of the Forth. Through his marriage to Margaret, one of the coheirs of the Renfrewshire family of Danielston of that ilk, the younger Sir William acquired further lands in Cunningham and elsewhere in Scotland, notably in Glencairn in western Dumfriesshire, from which the family was later to take its peerage title as earls of Glencairn. Sir William may also have been married later to Mary Stewart, daughter of Robert III and widow of James Kennedy of Dunure in Carrick. 
Sir William died between August 1413 and December 1415, and was succeeded by his eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 54164


Sir Robert Cunningham of Kilmaurs (d. 1430/31), who was one of the Scottish lords who met King James I at Durham as hostage for his deliverance from English captivity in 1424. Robert was knighted at the king's coronation later that year, and was a member of the assize which convicted Murdoch Stewart, duke of Albany, and others of his family of treason at Stirling in May 1425. He was also one of four lords subsequently commissioned to lead a force to crush a rebellion led by James Stewart, a younger son of Duke Murdoch. Another leader was Sir John Montgomery of Eaglesham, whose daughter, Anne, Robert Cunningham contracted to marry on 6 June 1425. With his brother-in-law, Sir Alexander Montgomery of Ardrossan ['see under 'Montgomery family], Sir Robert was in 1430 appointed joint keeper of Kintyre and Knapdale in Argyll, with custody of castles Sween and Skipness, as part of a campaign to assert royal control over the territories of the lordship of the Isles. But he seems to have been dead by 4 February 1431, and was succeeded by his son 


@@@@@


doc= 54166


Douglas, James, third earl of Angus (c.1415-1446), magnate, was the eldest son of William Douglas, second earl of Angus (c.1398-1437), and his wife, Margaret ('fl'. 1410-1484), daughter of Sir William Hay of Yester. Earl William had performed distinguished service to the crown in the reign of James I and would probably have been a significant figure in the minority administration of James II had he not died in late 1437. James seems to have lacked the experience to assume his father's mantle, although he did hold the wardenship of the east march against England, a well-nigh hereditary office. He is little heard of during the political intrigues of the minority, when such men as William Crichton, the chancellor, the Livingstons, and the earls of Douglas were jockeying for power. Angus's most public role was to mediate in the early 1440s in the dispute involving David Hume of Wedderburn, his nephew Alexander Hume of that ilk, and Coldingham Priory, a cell of Durham Priory, principally over the office of bailie on Coldingham's extensive lands. 
Nevertheless, Angus was singled out for an important distinction, namely marriage to Princess Joanna, third daughter of James I. A contract was drawn up in October 1440, when the intended bride would have been about twelve years old, but it is thought that the marriage did not take place, and in 1445 the princess was sent to France. The earl was by then in serious trouble. The king's exchequer rolls show that the annual pensions he lifted from the burghs of Haddington and North Berwick were being seized from, rather than willingly released by, the burghs. Angus appears to have allied himself with the group surrounding the queen mother, Joan Beaufort (probably explaining in part the proposed marriage alliance), but this group was increasingly removed from authority. The earl was charged with treason in parliament in June 1445, although the cause is unknown, and was consequently forfeited. It seems that the forfeiture was lifted before his death, which had occurred by September 1446. As he had no children, he was succeeded by his brother, George Douglas (c.1417-1463), who was able to enter into his landed patrimony without dispute. Earl James held estates in Fife, Perthshire, Haddingtonshire, Angus, Berwickshire, Selkirkshire, and Roxburghshire, and was apparently buried in the ancestral graveyard at the collegiate church of St Bride, Abernethy, Perthshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 54167


Douglas, James, first earl of Morton (d. 1493), magnate, was the only child of James Douglas (died before 11 Oct 1457), lord of Dalkeith, and Elizabeth, daughter of James Gifford of Sheriffhall. Formal ownership of the extensive Dalkeith regality was transferred to him in July 1456, and the full inheritance came by 11 October 1457, when he was still legally a minor, following his father's death. Shortly afterwards, on 14 March 1458, James II created him earl of Morton. This reflected partly his estates and partly his opposition to the last two earls of Douglas, which had been provoked by their support for his uncle Henry Douglas of Borg in the take-over of the Dalkeith lands from his simple-minded father during the 1440s. Royal favour may further have resulted from the earl's agreement to marry Joanna ('b'. 'c'.1428, died after 16 Oct 1486), the king's deaf and mute sister and the third daughter of James I. They were married by 15 May 1459 and had a son, John. 
There was a problem over the title of Morton, however. The barony of Morton, Nithsdale, had previously been alienated, as part of her jointure, to Janet Borthwick, second wife of the earl's grandfather, and she protested in parliament about the title on behalf of her son William Douglas. The chancellor replied that the earldom was called after Morton in Calderclere, in the sheriffdom of Edinburgh, not Morton in Nithsdale. But Earl James clearly wanted the barony back, and on 30 June 1466 he made an indenture with Patrick Graham (died 1478), bishop of St Andrews and a close associate of the ruling Kennedy faction, that his heir should marry the bishop's niece, essentially in return for Graham's aid in recovering Morton and his other alienated lands. Morton's flirtation with the politically influential lasted just nine days, until 9 July, when the Kennedys were replaced by the Boyds in a 'coup d'etat' and as a result the marriage did not take place. The earl eventually forced William Douglas to resign Morton to him in 1474, and the same year saw him make his cousin Henry, the son of Henry Douglas of Borg, renounce any claim to the Dalkeith estates. Apart from the 1466 indenture and witnessing the parliamentary forfeiture of the Boyd family in November 1469, Morton remained remote from political affairs, and he may well have seen the recovery of these estates as his main achievement. In so doing he was acting very much in a family tradition. 
Although his son was involved in the treasonable actions of the duke of Albany in 1482-3, Morton stayed loyal to James III in the 1480s. In May 1488 he made one of his rare appearances at court, indicating continued support of the king in the developing crisis. It is not known if he followed his sovereign to the battle of Sauchieburn on 11 June. In the reign of James IV he attended parliament frequently, but otherwise still took no part in affairs of state. He died between 22 June and 22 October 1493 and was probably buried in Dalkeith church. He was succeeded by his son, John. 


@@@@@


doc= 54168


Douglas, Sir James, of Dalkeith (d. 1420), magnate, was the eldest son of Sir John Douglas and his wife, Agnes. His father came from a minor branch of the Douglas kindred, whose importance was raised in the 1330s and 1340s through the activities of James's uncle, William Douglas of Lothian. John Douglas was killed in 1349, and by 1351 James was named as William's heir-male for his lands of Aberdour in Fife and Dalkeith. In return James served as a hostage for his uncle's release from English captivity and returned to Scotland only after William was killed in 1353. His killer, William, first earl of Douglas, proceeded to occupy many of his victim's estates, including Liddesdale and Dalkeith. 
Through the 1350s James Douglas was powerless to recover his uncle's lands. His principal connections during this period were with his five brothers and his more distant kinsman, Archibald Douglas, known as the Grim, another associate of William Douglas. It was probably through Archibald that James obtained access to David II's favour. In the early 1360s the king confirmed James's right to Aberdour and other lands of William and granted him holdings in Annandale -- minor patronage, but a sign of growing royal support. In 1367 James claimed the lands of Mary, daughter of William Douglas, who had died in childbirth along with her child. Her husband, Robert Erskine, claimed the estates in right of the dead infant, James, as Mary's heir. A judicial duel between the claimants was planned over the lands, and, before this, James was knighted by Archibald Douglas. The king ultimately decided the dispute in James's favour. In late 1369 and early 1370 David II granted James lands near Kinghorn, Fife, and confirmed his rights to Dalkeith and to lands at Buittle in Galloway. These latter rewards reflected David's animosity towards Earl William, who lost these estates, but they were also royal compensation. James had been betrothed to Agnes Dunbar, David's mistress and intended third wife. 
Sir James Douglas of Dalkeith was linked to the king's southern allies, Archibald Douglas and George Dunbar, earl of March. On David's death in 1371, James strengthened these bonds. He married Agnes Dunbar and received the lands of Morton in Dumfriesshire, Mordington in Berwickshire, and Whittingham in Haddingtonshire from her sister March. In 1372 he accompanied Archibald on an embassy to France. Tensions with Earl William were eased by James's agreement to become the earl's retainer in 1372, while following the death of Agnes, James's marriage to Egidia (died before 1406), the widowed sister of Robert II, secured his acceptance in 1378 by the new king, who gave his brother-in-law a series of rights and privileges, including the erection of Dalkeith and other lands into a regality. However, when the earl of Douglas was killed in 1388, James Douglas exploited the crisis. It was his horse that kicked the lieutenant, John, earl of Carrick, precipitating a change of regime; but more directly, James renewed his claims to Liddesdale, and to lands in Eskdale, as heir to William Douglas of Lothian. James occupied these lands and gained limited acceptance of his rights. The next decade saw James seeking to defend these gains both on the royal council and locally, against pressure which may have encouraged James to produce detailed wills in 1390 and 1392. In 1397 a series of attacks led by George Douglas, son of Earl William, devastated James's Lothian estates in an attempt to force him to surrender Liddesdale. In a negotiated settlement, James relinquished Liddesdale but retained his Eskdale lands. 
After 1400 Sir James Douglas continued his association with the Black Douglases. When the new earl was captured at Homildon Hill in 1402, Douglas of Dalkeith sent his son and grandson to act as hostages for him and was associated with the earl's servants in border negotiations. He was rewarded by the erection of his lands at Buittle in Galloway into a regality. By the early fifteenth century he was recognized as a major Scottish magnate and was one of a small group who received a letter from James I in 1415. When he died in 1420, in his eighties, of a disease called 'le Quhew', James Douglas had assembled a major collection of southern Scottish estates later valued at 1500 merks, a figure which placed the Douglases of Dalkeith among the richest Scottish barons. 
This picture of Dalkeith's wealth is supported by the exceptional survival of Sir James Douglas's records, especially his wills and a rental of his lands. These give a unique picture of the activities, concerns, and tastes of a late fourteenth century Scottish nobleman. The wills of 1390 and 1392, in particular, demonstrate that, far from being backward and uneducated, a Scottish magnate could possess objects of value and learning. For example, Douglas possessed a small library. He owned books of grammar, dialectic, statutes of the realm, and romances. His 'best book' was red and embroidered and clasped with fetterlocks. An entry thoughtfully instructing his executors to return those volumes which James had borrowed to their owners, suggests he was a reader and not simply an owner of books. Armour for jousting and war, golden circlets, collars, rings and belts, jewels and fur robes, at least one of which came from Flanders, and relics of the true cross and St Mary Magdalene indicate that James possessed many objects of opulence and luxury. Among the beneficiaries of the will were his immediate family and magnate friends like the earls of Douglas and March. Remembered too were a number of his servants, who received money and gifts. James instructed that all his household servants should be paid their fees up to the day of his death. Religious institutions were also prominent among the beneficiaries. Newbattle Abbey in Edinburghshire, where James wished to be buried alongside his first wife, received money for the repair of the buildings, while the chapel of St Nicholas in Dalkeith was bequeathed a missal, vestments, and money by Douglas. James's patronage of the chapel culminated in 1406 with its erection into a collegiate church. By founding the college James was following a growing trend among Scottish lords. 
The rental, drawn up in 1376-7, is one of only two such documents from this period. It does not include all of James Douglas's estates, only those in Peeblesshire, Dumfriesshire, and Fife, while an extent detailing the lands of Liddesdale, Westerkirk, and Staplegordon in Dumfriesshire was added in the decade after 1388, when these estates were in James's possession. The rental provides unique evidence of local landholding. It records eighty-eight holdings each held by one or more tenants, the vast majority of whom held their lands under twelve-month leases. Such short leases seem to have been a standard feature of Scottish landholding. The value of the lands included in the rental was $483. 
Sir James Douglas was succeeded in his estates by his namesake, another 


@@@@@


doc= 54169


Sir James Douglas of Dalkeith (d. 1441), the eldest son of his father's marriage to Agnes Dunbar. In 1378 James was betrothed to Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of John, earl of Carrick (later Robert III), and the marriage took place before 1387. Knighted between 1390 and 1392, in 1402 he was captured with the fourth earl of Douglas at the battle of Homildon Hill, and after his own release acted as a hostage for the earl's temporary parole. His second marriage, to Janet, daughter of William Borthwick, some time before 1439, linked James to an Edinburghshire neighbour who was a councillor of the Douglas earl before 1424. However, after his succession to his father's lands, James's links to the Black Douglases diminished. His eldest son, William, died as a hostage for James I's ransom, and his second son, James, was later declared unfit to hold the family's lands. Towards the end of his life James himself may have been under the influence of his ambitious neighbours, the Crichtons. In 1440 he granted William Crichton lands in Dumfriesshire, while within weeks of James's death in early 1441 Janet Borthwick married George Crichton, later earl of Caithness, who laid claim to her lands. She died some time after 1460. Subsequent years would see conflict over the Dalkeith estates between the Crichtons and James's third son, Henry. 


@@@@@


doc= 54170


Drummond family (per. 1363-1518), nobility, was a Perthshire family of purely local importance until the mid-fourteenth century. Their rise began when Margaret (nee Drummond), widow of John Logie, became the second consort of King David II in 1363. Thereafter David promoted the interests of his new wife's relatives, including her nephew 


@@@@@


doc= 54171


Sir Malcolm Drummond (d. 1402?), who benefited from a series of grants of Perthshire lands. The Drummond family's growing importance at David's court undoubtedly explains the marriage of Malcolm's sister Annabella, between 13 March 1366 and 31 May 1367, to the king's likely successor, John Stewart of Kyle, the future earl of Carrick and King Robert III. The exact date of Drummond's own prestigious marriage to Isabella (died 1408), daughter of William Douglas, first earl of Douglas, is unknown, but may also have dated from the period of Queen Margaret's influence at the heart of royal government. The political ascendancy of the Drummond family was threatened first by David's decision to divorce Queen Margaret (who had failed to produce an heir in the late 1360s), and then by the king's own early death on 22 February 1371. Despite these setbacks, Drummond retained a number of powerful political allies after 1371, and in particular he enjoyed a close relationship with his two brothers-in-law, John Stewart, earl of Carrick, and James Douglas, second earl of Douglas. In the 1380s, by now a knight, Sir Malcolm was an active participant in the border raids and Anglo-Scottish warfare promoted by Carrick and Douglas. In 1385 he received 400 livres tournais from a French war subsidy designed to encourage and reward Scottish noblemen involved in that year's joint Franco-Scottish assault on northern England. In August 1388 Drummond was a member of a raiding force led by the earl of Douglas which encountered and defeated a northern English army at Otterburn, and was said to have played a leading role in the battle. 
The death of the second earl of Douglas at Otterburn had a profound effect on Sir Malcolm Drummond's career. Earl James died childless and Drummond, as the husband of James's sister, had a powerful claim to control the extensive estates, titles, and offices of the Douglas earls by right of his wife. Moreover, his claims were supported by Carrick, at that stage guardian of the kingdom on behalf of the incapacitated Robert II. Despite this powerful backing, Drummond lost out in the struggle for possession of the Douglas lordships to Archibald Douglas, lord of Galloway, who became third earl of Douglas in April 1389 on the basis of an earlier entail of the Douglas estates. Drummond stayed away from the council meeting which ruled against him, claiming to fear for his life, and may even have hoped to recover his losses with English support -- a possibility ruled out by an Anglo-Scottish truce shortly afterwards. He was more successful in upholding his wife's claim to estates in the earldom of Mar, and by October 1393 at the latest he was accorded the courtesy title lord of Mar. 
In the 1390s Drummond offered consistent support to the political ambitions of his nephew David Stewart, earl of Carrick (later duke of Rothesay), the eldest son and heir of Robert III. In 1399 he and his sister Queen Annabella acquiesced in a coup which saw Rothesay established as lieutenant and guardian of the kingdom at the expense of Robert III. Late in 1401, however, having alienated many of the most powerful magnates in the kingdom, Rothesay was arrested on the orders of his uncle the duke of Albany, and imprisoned in Falkland Castle, where he died in March 1402. Drummond may well have been arrested at about the same time as his nephew, as part of a campaign to neutralize Rothesay's supporters. The chronicler Wyntoun records that Sir Malcolm was surprised and captured (by unspecified persons) and kept in close confinement under conditions which eventually caused his death. The exact date of his demise is unknown, but he was certainly dead by 8 November 1402. 
There were no children of Drummond's marriage to Isabella Douglas, who in 1404 married Alexander Stewart, son of the earl of Buchan and a nephew of Robert III. Consequently the main line of the family descended through Malcolm's brother John Drummond of Cargill (died 1424). John, his son Sir Walter (died 1455), and his grandson Sir Malcolm (died 1470), were once again of only local consequence. But the second Sir Malcolm's son 


@@@@@


doc= 54172


Dunbar, George, ninth earl of Dunbar or of March (c.1336-1416x23), magnate and soldier, was the son of Sir Patrick Dunbar (died 1357) and his wife, Isabel Randolph. On 25 July 1368 he became earl of Dunbar or March by grant from David II, to whom George's paternal great-uncle Patrick, the eighth earl, had resigned what was a single earldom, its titles increasingly interchangeable from the late thirteenth century. George's paternal inheritance included extensive lands in the Scottish east march, while from his mother, the coheir of the Randolph earls of Moray, he inherited territories elsewhere, including the lordship of Annandale, which made him a significant figure on the western borders too. Moreover he inherited a claim to the Isle of Man which he took seriously, making a grant of lands there 'c'.1372. March's regional influence was initially hampered by English control of large areas of southern Scotland, notably in Berwickshire and Annandale, and it is in his efforts to gain full possession of his inheritance that his military abilities, the hallmark of his career, can first be perceived. He was greatly successful in re-establishing Scottish control in Berwickshire; outside Berwick itself and a small area around it, this had been achieved by the early 1370s. The conquest of Annandale took longer and was completed only with the seizure of the castle of Lochmaben on 4 or 5 February 1384. These military activities of the 1370s and 1380s entailed much more than the reoccupation of disputed border lands. March was engaged in broader, national endeavours as well as personal ones. The Anglo-French war which began again in 1369 went generally badly for the English and was accompanied by sometimes bloody crises in English government and society for over twenty years. These were circumstances ripe for exploitation by the Scots led by March and other belligerent Scottish nobles. 
The government of Robert II (1371-90) supported attacks on England, first under the cover of an official Anglo-Scottish truce and then, from 1384, as acts of open war. March was the most effective tool of this new and aggressive Scottish approach. He was responsible for burning English-controlled Roxburgh in 1377 and took part in subsequent heavy raiding which led to his capture of Sir Thomas Musgrave, the keeper of Berwick, in the same year. He also terrorized northern English communities into making blackmail payments to him -- in 1379/80 the townsmen of Berwick claimed to be paying tribute to him in money, wine, and victuals. The culmination of Scottish attacks in what was still a time of truce came in 1380, when March defeated and captured Ralph, Baron Greystoke, and most of his force on the eastern border while another Scottish force raided deep into the English west march. March was the main figure in establishing a local Scottish military ascendancy unparalleled since the reign of Robert I. When the Scottish government chose to make open war upon England in 1384, 1385, and 1388-9, March was again heavily involved. An indication of his perceived military value is the 4000 livres tournois he received when a French expeditionary force, complete with treasure chest, arrived in Scotland in 1385. Only the king's eldest son, John, earl of Carrick, and James and Archibald Douglas were given more. In 1388 March was in the Scottish raiding force which encountered Henry Percy (Hotspur) at the battle of Otterburn. James, second earl of Douglas, was killed in the battle, and much credit for the final Scottish victory went to March, who, in English chronicle accounts, also saved the captive Hotspur from death at the hands of enraged retainers of the dead earl of Douglas. 
Despite an extremely active career in border warfare and diplomacy, March often kept a low profile on the domestic political scene. In the later years of David II's reign he and his brother John Dunbar ['see under 'Dunbar family, earls of Moray (per. c.1370-1430)] were high in royal favour, a position they owed at least in part to the fact that no later than 1369 their sister Agnes had become the king's mistress. On the accession of Robert II in 1371 March does not seem to have suffered for his association with the previous regime; indeed, he and John Dunbar were prominent in supporting the new king against the obscure Douglas 'demonstration' which preceded his coronation. Thereafter March's links with the royal court appear to have been distant, but not hostile. In the longer term the earl was on good terms with Robert II's second son, Robert Stewart, who later became duke of Albany and guardian of Scotland. In the 1370s and 1380s he also co-operated happily, especially in the military field, with the other great magnates of the south. In the 1390s, however, he was to assume a more prominent place in national politics. His higher profile came with the relationship, from 1395 at the latest, between his daughter, Elizabeth, and the heir to the throne, David Stewart, earl of Carrick. There was political opposition to this match: Robert III, whose relations with March had probably long been cool, is reported to have besieged Dunbar Castle, the earl's chief seat, probably in autumn 1396, in a bid to oppose his son's connection with Elizabeth Dunbar. The couple may have been forced to separate, but Earl George clearly still expected the union to go ahead. His reaction was furious when David Stewart, now duke of Rothesay, rejected Elizabeth in 1400 in favour of Mary Douglas, a daughter of the aged Archibald the Grim, third earl of Douglas, and sister of Archibald, master of Douglas. The younger Archibald became fourth earl in 1402 and was March's great political and military rival for several years. March responded to his family's dishonour by appealing to the new king of England, Henry IV. Accounts of the earl's subsequent defection to English allegiance stress power politics and the quest for increased authority within Scotland. There was no doubt an element of this, but from March's point of view the issue of outraged honour evident in the contemporary sources needs to be considered as well. A man previously content to take care of his regional interests and play little part in central politics felt driven to take drastic action which was hardly a coldly calculated political move; indeed, its results were disastrous for his family. 
The repercussions of March's defection were important; and just as his actions impacted on great events he remained an important player in them. In Scotland his switch of allegiance ushered in an extremely turbulent period which resulted in the (highly probable) murder of Rothesay in 1402 and the long-lasting political dominance of the duke of Albany. In regional terms it helped bring about an unprecedented dominance of southern Scotland by the Douglas family, not least because March was deserted by a number of his leading tenants and retainers, including his nephew Robert Maitland, the keeper of Dunbar Castle. In an international context March had a role in spurring Henry IV to mount an ineffective invasion of Scotland in 1400, which in turn inspired continued Scottish belligerence in the following years. One factor that now worked against Anglo-Scottish rapprochement was the ferocious personal feud between March and the fourth earl of Douglas. In the former's absence Douglas took over his lands in Annandale and the east march. Warfare in the borders increasingly came to be driven by local rivalries and regional concerns. Military success continued to accompany March. He defeated a major Scottish raiding force at Nisbet on 22 June 1402 and was with the English host on 14 September following when a full-scale Scottish army met disaster at the battle of Homildon Hill. Although overall command lay with the earl of Northumberland and Henry Percy, the tactics that brought victory were March's. The earl of Douglas was taken captive, as was Murdoch Stewart, Albany's son; much of the higher nobility of Scotland was captured or killed. 
Homildon Hill had important consequences: it decisively ended a thirty-year period in which the Scots felt they could pursue ambitious political objectives through military means. They were never so confident nor consistently belligerent again. In a real sense the battle ended (in stalemate) the century-long Scottish wars of independence. It also acted as a spur (for various reasons) for the Percy family to rise against Henry IV in 1403. March remained true to his royal master and his advice helped bring about the defeat at Shrewsbury of the greatest challenge to Henry IV's rule. For a second time March defeated both Hotspur (who was killed) and Douglas (who was captured again). His military career was outstanding, as his contemporaries noticed. In the words of Walter Bower, 'He was accounted most fortunate in every fighting encounter, for his side always prevailed' (Bower, 8.117). For his efforts on King Henry's behalf he and his family were given lands and annuities, while by a more symbolic reward he was permitted to style his herald Shrewsbury. Yet March was unable to retain a power-base in Scotland and the impecunious Henry could hardly endow him in a manner commensurate with his previous lofty standing. The Dunbar family seem to have been in desperate financial straits in England, as their recurrent appeals for money show. Finally in 1408 a return to Scotland was arranged and a truncated earldom of March was regained in 1409. He was now an old man, aged over seventy, but March's military expertise apparently continued to be appreciated, since in the following year he was one of a small group of nobles consulted by Albany as to how to counter the growing threat from the lord of the Isles. But such services did nothing to win back his lordship of Annandale, and the fortunes of his family never recovered. 
That March was able to switch allegiance to the English crown while maintaining at least a measure of support in south-east Scotland says much about aristocratic mentalities and the bonds of loyalty that powerful magnates could inspire. Before 1400 he seems to have been an implacable, militant enemy of England. Yet this perception obscures another strand in the earl's career, his long-standing links of friendship and co-operation across the border. In the 1380s and 1390s he consistently attempted to maintain the traditional attachment of Coldingham Priory in Berwickshire to Durham Cathedral priory in spite of attempts to introduce Scottish monks there. His efforts were recognized when he and his wife, Christiana (probably 'nee' Seton), were admitted to the confraternity of Durham in 1418. Affection for Durham perhaps indicates an attachment to the cross-border cult of St Cuthbert, and more certainly a recognizably east march sensibility. March also had amicable contacts with the gentry and aristocracy of Northumberland and trading links with Newcastle and further afield. This aristocratic internationalism reached further than Northumberland. A major exporter of wool, the earl had direct trading links in the Low Countries and fiscal connections in the Baltic. Yet despite foreign ties and membership of the brotherhood of the international aristocracy it was the misfortune of March to defect to England at a time when national sentiments were gaining increasing power, so that his lands in Scotland were swiftly taken over by those who could claim to represent an undiluted animosity to the traditional enemy. The Dunbar family, meanwhile, clearly encountered hostility in northern England, especially after Henry Percy's death at Shrewsbury. And indeed the earl's own followers, despite his apparently smooth transition from Scottish marcher lord to English agent, show that the power of national sentiment was on the increase. Fully seven years after his defection, in 1407, some eighty of his followers occupied the village of Navenby in Lincolnshire. They held it to ransom, terrorized the inhabitants, and defied resistance, shouting at the 'tailed English dogs' who hesitated to confront them. 
The ninth earl of March was in a British context the foremost warrior of his time and he had a lofty conception of his own status to match this prominence. A now lost tomb inscription gives vivid testimony of local and familial pride. It speaks of a man who ruled in his own sphere, the eastern borders of Scotland, for some fifty years and whose family prestige and kinship ties with three royal houses put him on a par with monarchy. His historical standing, however, has not been overly prominent, no doubt partly because he was a turncoat to both the Scottish and the English crowns. In view of this relative obscurity it is somehow fitting that there is no certain dating for March's death, contradictory evidence suggesting dates ranging between 1416 and 1423. He was buried in Dunbar collegiate church. 
The ninth earl of March had six recorded sons and a daughter from his marriage ('c'.1360) to Christiana (died after 1418) and also an illegitimate son, Nicholas. He was succeeded as earl by his eldest son, another 
Among George's younger brothers was 


@@@@@


doc= 54173


George Dunbar (c.1370-1455x7), who gave firm support to James I at the beginning of his reign and was made warden of the east march by him, probably in 1424. But his hopes of further recovering his family's position were disappointed. His Douglas rivals were now too firmly entrenched in south-east Scotland, and in 1430 March was replaced as warden of the east march by William Douglas, second earl of Angus. In 1432 a quarrel with Angus led to royal intervention, and James may have decided that March's loyalty could not be trusted, for in 1434 he had the earl arrested and forfeited him a year later. A grant of the earldom of Buchan was little compensation and may not have become effective, not least because Dunbar withdrew to England in search of support there. He retained the barony of Kilconquhar, Fife, held from the bishop of St Andrews, and eventually retired there, supported by a pension of 400 merks from the revenues of his former earldom, but neither he nor any of his descendants held comital rank again. He may have married twice. His wife, Beatrice (surname unknown), with whom he had three sons and two daughters, had died by 1421, when he had licence to marry Alice Hay of Yester, but the marriage may not have taken place. He died between 1455 and 1457. 


@@@@@


doc= 54174


Dunbar family, earls of Moray (per. c.1370-1430), was important in the conduct of Anglo-Scottish warfare in the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries. 


@@@@@


doc= 54175


John Dunbar, first earl of Moray (d. 1391/2), and his elder brother George Dunbar, later ninth earl of Dunbar, were the sons of Sir Patrick Dunbar and his wife, Isabel Randolph. They first came to prominence as royal favourites late in the reign of David II when their sister Agnes became the king's mistress. In 1370 John made a prestigious marriage with Marjory Stewart (died after 1403), the daughter of David's nephew and heir apparent, Robert the Steward (the future Robert II). Later chroniclers suggest that the Steward was less than happy with his daughter's marriage, which may have been arranged by David II, no doubt influenced by his mistress. In autumn 1370 the king granted John the lordship of the earldom of Fife, a territory that the Steward and his family had long coveted. After David II's death on 22 February 1371 and the accession of Robert II, however, Dunbar found his hold on Fife challenged by the new king's son (and Dunbar's brother-in-law) Robert Stewart, earl of Menteith and later duke of Albany. The dispute between Dunbar and Earl Robert was ended about 9 March 1372, when the former gave up his claims to Fife, receiving in compensation a grant of the earldom of Moray, to which he had a claim through his mother. Moray's hold on the northern earldom was made problematic by the conditions of the 1372 grant. Strategic lordships such as Lochaber, Badenoch, and the castle and barony of Urquhart, which had been part of the earldom created for Thomas Randolph in 1312, were specifically excepted from the grant because they had been seized by or gifted to other powerful lords in the years after the death of the third and last Randolph earl in 1346. The truncated earldom proved difficult to defend, and Moray soon found himself embroiled in a series of territorial and jurisdictional clashes with forceful neighbours, including Alexander Stewart, another son of Robert II who was lord of Badenoch and later earl of Buchan, and Alexander Bur, bishop of Moray. Earl John was prepared to invest in his new lordship and he seems to have been responsible for the building of a new hall at Darnaway Castle (now known, mistakenly, as Randolph's Hall) in the years shortly before his death. Overall, however, the evidence suggests that the Dunbar earls lacked the local network of kin and allies to maintain a firm hold on the upland zones surrounding the Moray coastal plain. 
Moreover, despite his acquisition of an important northern earldom, Moray also retained an active role in Anglo-Scottish warfare and diplomacy. He was involved in the escalation of pressure on English-occupied lands in the south of Scotland in the years after the death of Edward III in 1377 and took a leading role in the major Franco-Scottish campaign against targets in the north of England during 1385, when he received a large payment (1000 livres tournois) from the French war-chest for his services and was regarded by the chronicler Froissart as one of the principal Scottish leaders. He also played a prominent part, alongside his brother, George, and James, second earl of Douglas, in the Scottish campaign in the north of England which culminated in the battle of Otterburn on 5 August 1388. Moray's role in the engagement is commemorated in Thomas Barry's contemporary Latin poem and in Walter Bower's 'Scotichronicon', where the earl is said to have fought bareheaded after a surprise English attack on the Scottish force. 
Moray's interest in warfare and the display of martial prowess was not blunted by the conclusion of an Anglo-Scottish truce in 1389. In the next two years he received several safe conducts to allow his participation in jousts and tournaments in England and he was a prominent figure at a tournament held at Smithfield in the summer of 1390 by Richard II. The exact date and circumstances surrounding his death are difficult to determine. Later English chronicles contain garbled accounts suggesting that he died at York of injuries sustained in a joust with Thomas Mowbray, earl of Nottingham. There were indeed plans for a duel between the two men in May 1390, but either the combat did not take place then or Moray survived it, for he was still alive on 13 June 1391, when he applied for a further English safe conduct. He died between the latter date and 15 February 1392; his demise may have occurred in England as a result of wounds received in a tournament, but there is no conclusive evidence. 
Moray's marriage to Marjory Stewart produced at least four children, Thomas, Alexander, James, and Euphemia. He was succeeded as earl of Moray by their eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 54176


Thomas Dunbar, second earl of Moray (d. in or before 1422), who was using the comital style by 15 February 1392. Thomas also inherited the strategic problems of the Moray earldom. Even before he became earl he had been made aware of the difficulties of protecting lowland Moray from neighbouring lordships, when in 1390 he replaced Alexander Stewart as sheriff of Inverness and entered into an agreement to protect the bishop of Moray's lands and estates from the exactions of Stewart's followers. In response Stewart's men burnt the bishop's houses and property in Elgin and Forres in May and June, with Moray apparently unable to intervene, and in August Robert III supported Bishop Bur when he asserted that the agreement with Moray was no longer binding because he had failed to protect the bishop's property. The weakness of the Dunbar earls and the vulnerability of Moray was further emphasized in Thomas's agreement of September 1394 with Alastair MacDomhnaill, lord of Lochaber, whereby the latter was to receive an annual payment from the earl in return for preventing his men from raiding or living off lands inside the earldom. The problem of disorder in the highland zones around Moray resurfaced in 1396, when Thomas played a leading part in arranging the famous 'Clan Fight' on the north inch of Perth, a formal conflict designed to bring an end to a long-running and violent feud between two highland kindreds. Thereafter references to him are few. He was among the many Scots captured by the English at the battle of Hamildon Hill on 14 September 1402 and remained a prisoner in England until July 1405. He was apparently still alive in June 1415, but had died before August 1422. The identity of his wife is unknown; they had a son and heir, also Thomas, who succeeded to the earldom before 9 August 1422. 
Most aspects of the short career of the younger 


@@@@@


doc= 54177


Thomas Dunbar, third earl of Moray (d. in or after 1425), remain obscure. In June 1415, before he became earl, it was evidently intended that he should marry Euphemia Leslie, countess of Ross, and a papal dispensation for the marriage was obtained. However, the match was never finalized and instead Euphemia resigned her lands and earldom in favour of John Stewart, earl of Buchan. Moray was one of the Scottish lords named as a surety for the payment of James I's ransom when the king was released from English captivity in 1424, and was consequently warded in England from March 1424 until July 1425. He died shortly afterwards, to be succeeded by his cousin 


@@@@@


doc= 54178


James Dunbar, fourth earl of Moray (d. 1430), the son of Alexander Dunbar and Matilda Fraser and grandson of the first earl. The exact date of James's accession to the earldom is unknown, but he seems to have been acting as earl before he died. Like his cousin, James was one of the hostages for James I's release and between 1425 and November 1427 he was held in England. He died on or about 10 August 1430, leaving two daughters from his marriage to Margaret Seton: Janet, who married James, second Lord Crichton between 1442 and 1446, and Elizabeth, who before 26 April 1442 married Archibald Douglas, the third son of James, seventh earl of Douglas. His widow married Alexander Stewart, twelfth earl of Mar. The Moray title went with Elizabeth, and by 3 July 1445 Archibald Douglas was styling himself earl of Moray. The line of Dunbar earls thus ended, although James had an illegitimate son, Alexander, who founded the Dunbar of Westfield line which retained a local influence inside Moray. 


@@@@@


doc= 54179


Eglinton, Sir Hugh (d. 1376), courtier and poet, came from Ayrshire. Little is known of his early life and career, but he was probably one of five men knighted by David II in 1342, before an ill-fated raid into England, where all five were captured. He was certainly back in Scotland by 1348, when he received the relief of Meldrum, Aberdeenshire, from Robert Stewart (died 1390). Despite the political rivalry which existed between King David and his heir presumptive, Eglinton appears to have prospered under both men. He was justiciar of Lothian in 1361 and six years later was named in an indenture as one of the commissioners appointed to keep order in the marches. Between 1358 and 1369 he received seven safe conducts to travel to England; he accompanied Sir Archibald Douglas (died 1400) to Canterbury in 1359, presumably on a pilgrimage there. Eglinton was made bailie of Cunningham, Ayrshire, by Robert Stewart in 1367 and, following Stewart's succession as Robert II in 1371, he became a close counsellor of the king; from 1372 to 1375 he also served as an auditor of the accounts, a position which brought him into contact with John Barbour (died 1395), author of 'The Bruce'. He remained in regular receipt of fees and payments, some of them very substantial, until his death in 1376. 
Eglinton was probably married twice, first to Agnes More, sister of William More of Abercorn, Linlithgowshire, and the likely mother of his daughter, Elizabeth, who married John Montgomery of Eaglesham ['see under 'Montgomery family]. His second marriage, to Egidia Stewart, half-sister of Robert II, occurred about 1365, when he was recorded as receiving one-third of his wife's annuity in respect of her former husband, James (or David) Lindsay. 
Eglinton's literary reputation stems from the reference to 'The Gude Syr Hew of Eglintoun' found in William Dunbar's 'Lament for the Makaris' (1505x8). The fact that Eglinton is the first in Dunbar's basically chronological list of Scottish vernacular poets, before the unknown 'Heryot' and Andrew Wyntoun ('c'.1350- 'c'.1422), lends credence to the suggestion that the two are identical. Much less convincing are the attempts to link Eglinton with the mysterious Hucheon of the Awyle Ryale mentioned in Wyntoun's 'Original Chronicle', for the works which the chronicler attributes to Hucheon (two Arthurian gestes and a tale from the 'Old Testament' 'Apocrypha') have been most plausibly identified as being of English provenance. Moreover it is unlikely that Wyntoun would have mentioned Eglinton elsewhere (as he does) without making the connection explicit. If, however, Dunbar's estimation of Eglinton's literary worth can be accepted, it offers important evidence for the cultural life of fourteenth-century Scotland. Chronicle tradition credits David II with a passion for chivalry, and it is tempting to speculate that Eglinton's compositions contributed to the chivalric ethos of his court. Whatever his subject matter, Eglinton was probably the first significant lay poet of the Scottish language. 


@@@@@


doc= 54180


Elizabeth (d. 1327), queen of Scots, consort of Robert I, was the second daughter and one of ten children of Richard de Burgh, earl of Ulster (died 1326), and his wife, Margaret (died 1304), who may also have been a de Burgh. Elizabeth was probably born in Down or Antrim. In 1302, in an alliance which conformed to a pattern of family behaviour going back at least to the later twelfth century -- the earls of Carrick held lands in Ulster -- she became the second wife of Robert Bruce, earl of Carrick and future king of Scots (1274-1329) ['see 'Robert I]. From 1298 to 1300 he had been one of the guardians of Scotland for the exiled King John, but at the beginning of 1302 he had come into Edward I's peace and allegiance. 
Within four years of her marriage Elizabeth de Burgh became queen of Scots when her husband led a revolt against the English occupation of Scotland and was inaugurated as king at Scone on 25 March 1306. Three months later the new king and queen were fugitives, hunted through the hills of Perthshire and Aberdeenshire. It was decided to send the queen and other women in the party to Kildrummy Castle in Strathdon, in the charge of John, earl of Atholl. Pursued there by an English force under Aymer de Valence (died 1324), the royal party was sent on northward, perhaps with the intention of reaching Orkney. They had got only as far as St Duthac's sanctuary at Tain, Ross-shire, when they were seized by the pro-English earl of Ross, who sent them to Edward I. King Robert's sister Mary and Isabel, countess of Buchan (who had crowned Bruce), received harsh punishment, being confined for several years in cages, but Queen Elizabeth, daughter of one of the English king's principal barons, was ordered to be confined in the manor house at Burstwick in Holderness, attended by two elderly maidservants of sober temperament. From Burstwick the queen, styling herself simply Elizabeth Bruce, sent an undated letter to Edward I or II, telling him that her warders allowed her only three changes of clothing a year, no headgear, and nothing for her bed, while her attendants had only one robe a year each, and begging him to order an improvement in her circumstances or to make her a money allowance. At various later dates she was transferred to other places, including the Tower of London and the nunnery at Shaftesbury in Dorset. It was said that she had increased her chances of leniency when at their enthronement she had jested to her husband that he might be a summer king but would never be a winter one. Fascinating as is this relatively early reference to the widespread children's custom of choosing summer kings and queens, the authenticity of the report must be regarded as doubtful. By March 1312 Elizabeth was in the Tower of London, where her situation had improved greatly: she was allowed two damsels, two esquires, and two yeomen, and 40's'. a week to pay for them. 
King Robert's great victory at Bannockburn in June 1314 allowed the royal prisoners still in English hands to be restored to Scotland. Queen Elizabeth and her stepdaughter Marjorie Bruce, along with Mary Bruce, the king's sister, were freed in exchange for the earl of Hereford. The daughters of Robert and Elizabeth must have been born after their mother's release from captivity. The king's only surviving brother, Edward, was declared heir presumptive to the Scottish throne in 1315 because the situation in which the realm found itself remained perilous. After Edward, however, the king's next heir was unquestionably his eldest daughter, Marjorie, whose mother, Isabel of Mar, had died young. In March 1316 Marjorie gave birth to a son, Robert Stewart, who became presumptive heir when Edward Bruce was killed at Dundalk in 1318. But at Dunfermline Abbey on 5 March 1324, a decade after her release from imprisonment, Queen Elizabeth bore a son, named David ['see 'David II], presumably in honour of David I (died 1153), and he at once became the heir apparent, formally recognized as such in the parliament of 1326. 
Elizabeth died at the royal residence of Cullen on the Banffshire coast on 26 October 1327 and was buried in the choir of Dunfermline Abbey, resting place of Scottish kings and queens since 1093. A chaplainry was established in the church of St Mary the Virgin at Cullen to celebrate masses for the queen's soul. 


@@@@@


doc= 54181


Erskine family (per. c.1350-c.1450), administrators and noblemen, became important in the court politics and government of Scotland in the second half of the fourteenth century. Established in Renfrewshire by the thirteenth century, the Erskines were followers of the Stewarts, and it was after the capture of David II at the battle of Nevilles Cross in 1346, when the king's nephew Robert the Steward (the future Robert II) was governor of Scotland, that 


@@@@@


doc= 54182


Sir Robert Erskine (d. 1385) assumed a leading role in administration. Already a knight in 1343, by 15 May 1350 he was acting as chamberlain, the crown's chief financial officer, in the name of the absent king. He was involved in the negotiations leading to David's release from captivity in 1357. Although David replaced him as chamberlain with Thomas, earl of Mar, in 1358, Erskine continued to serve as a royal envoy to the English, French, and papal courts, and in 1359 he cited David's unwillingness to release him from his service in justification of a bid to obtain discharge from crusading vows. No later than 12 May 1363, when David II faced a major baronial rebellion sparked partly by his alleged misuse of sums raised to pay for his English ransom, Erskine was reappointed to the chamberlainship, perhaps as a man trusted by both the king and his opponents to control the royal finances. He retained the office until late the following year, and thereafter remained an important royal envoy and administrator, being particularly active in David's negotiations with the English crown during the 1360s. Besides his ambassadorial duties, Erskine also acted as justiciar of Lothian and as custodian at various times of the royal castles of Stirling and Dumbarton. His rewards included Alloa and other lands in the sheriffdom of Clackmannan, granted in regality in 1364, and the barony of Dun, Forfarshire, probably given in 1368 when the grant of Alloa was confirmed. 
Towards the end of David's reign Erskine's influence increased because of his association with the king's new mistress, Agnes Dunbar. She was in Erskine's care in 1369, as a result of which more royal patronage was diverted to him and his family. Most notably, in April 1370 he received a lifetime grant of the keepership of Stirling Castle. His place in government was threatened by the unexpected death of David II on 22 February 1371, and he played a significant though rather enigmatic part in the events which occurred between David's death and the accession of Robert II, when William, earl of Douglas, led an armed demonstration at Linlithgow. Douglas's aim has been variously interpreted as either to contest the Steward's claim to the throne or to challenge Erskine's hold on royal offices and his influence in government. Erskine and his allies John and George Dunbar, the brothers of Agnes, were said by Wyntoun to have ended Douglas's demonstration by assembling their own forces and confronting the earl at Linlithgow. Erskine remained as a regular witness to the new king's great seal charters, but in the two years after 1371 he and his son Thomas lost most of their prestigious offices to the earl of Douglas (who became justiciar south of the Forth) and the sons of Robert II (who became custodians of Edinburgh and Stirling castles). Nevertheless Robert received substantial financial compensation for these losses in the form of large one-off payments and annuities from the royal customs, and he continued to witness great seal charters until his death between 21 May and 11 November 1385. 
Erskine married twice. His first wife was Beatrice, widow of Sir Archibald Douglas (died 1333) and daughter of Alexander Lindsay of Crawford. She had died by about 1352, when he married Christian Keith 
('nee' Menteith; died 'c'.1387)
, widow of Sir Edward Keith of Sinton, allegedly as a means of settling a quarrel between himself and the Menteiths. A number of grants and confirmations were made jointly to Erskine and his second wife. His heir, however, was 


@@@@@


doc= 54183


Sir Thomas Erskine (d. 1403/4), the eldest son of his first marriage. Thomas too had been high in the favour of David II, receiving the lucrative ward of the heiress to the lordship of Brechin and also perhaps the keepership of Edinburgh Castle during 1370. Both the wardship and the constableship were handed over to sons of Robert II after 1371. Despite these setbacks Sir Thomas (he was knighted some time between 1365 and 1370) remained a regular witness to the new king's great seal charters. Like many of the men associated with David II, he found his way into the service of Robert II's eldest son and heir, John Stewart, earl of Carrick (later Robert III); he was paid an 80 merk pension for his service to Carrick and the king throughout the 1380s. Erskine was notably active in the Anglo-Scottish warfare promoted by Carrick in the 1380s and was one of three Scottish knights responsible for the distribution of a French war subsidy in 1385. On 5 August 1388 he was severely wounded at the battle of Otterburn, in which James, second earl of Douglas and eleventh earl of Mar, was killed. Douglas died childless, and his earldom of Mar passed to his sister Isabella and her husband, Malcolm Drummond, who, however, also had no children. Erskine had an interest in Mar through his second wife, Janet Barclay 
('nee' Keith; died 'c'.1413)
, apparently a great-granddaughter of Gartnait, earl of Mar (died before 1305), and a claim to be considered as one of the heirs to the earldom should Malcolm and Isabella Drummond remain childless. In 1391 and 1393 he sought and received assurances from the crown that there would be no royal confirmation of any deals made by Countess Isabella that would adversely affect the rights of his own wife in Mar. 
Erskine remained active in public life, and on 14 September 1402 he and his son Sir Robert (a knight by 1400) were among the many Scottish lords captured by the English at the battle of Homildon Hill. It is not known whether he had been released before his death between 11 November 1403 and 18 May 1404. His first wife, Mary Douglas, died in childbirth in or before 1370, and his heir, 


@@@@@


doc= 54184


Robert Erskine, first Lord Erskine (d. 1451/2), was the son of his marriage to Janet Barclay. Robert's career was dominated by his ultimately unsuccessful efforts to obtain title to the earldom of Mar. His claim was badly affected in August 1404, when the recently widowed Isabella, countess of Mar, married Alexander Stewart, the illegitimate son of Alexander Stewart, earl of Buchan. The couple attempted to arrange for Isabella's earldom to pass to Alexander and his male descendants in heritage. Kinsmen and allies of the Erskines, including Robert Stewart, duke of Albany, then guardian of the kingdom, intervened to ensure that royal approval for this scheme was withheld, and eventually Alexander Stewart had to settle for the right to hold the earldom for his own lifetime. However, in 1426 James I regranted the earldom to Alexander with a descent to Alexander's illegitimate son Thomas and his male heirs. In the event Thomas Stewart predeceased his father and produced no heirs, so that the issue of the succession to Mar was revived again when Earl Alexander eventually died in 1435. Meanwhile Robert Erskine continued his family's tradition of royal service. He was one of the hostages for the release of James I from English captivity in 1424, spending three years in England before attaining his own freedom in 1427, and after his release he served as a royal envoy to England and as custodian of Dumbarton Castle, as well as holding a number of other minor offices. The death of Alexander Stewart, earl of Mar, on 1 August 1435 reopened the debate over the possession of Mar. Erskine attempted to build up local support for his claims to the earldom, but James I took it into his own hands on the grounds that the 1426 grant had stipulated that it should revert to the crown if Earl Alexander's male line failed. But after James's death in 1437 Erskine succeeded in having himself served as the legal heir to Mar in 1438, and from that year onwards he employed the title earl of Mar and Garioch. 
Erskine's claims to Mar were not acknowledged by the leaders of James II's minority regime, although about the time he assumed the comital title his standing was acknowledged by his being created a peer of parliament as Lord Erskine. In the 1440s he came to a series of agreements with James II's administration over possession of Kildrummy Castle and the revenues of the earldom. None of these agreements proved binding, and by 1449 it was clear that royal officers had effective control of the earldom. Complaints about the crown's unjust detention of Erskine's rightful inheritance were delivered to meetings of the three estates in April 1449 and January 1450 by his son Thomas, and the dispute was still in progress when Robert died some time between 7 September 1451 and 6 November 1452. The identity of his wife is uncertain, although arrangements were made in 1400 for his marriage to an unnamed daughter of David Lindsay, first earl of Crawford. Robert was succeeded as Lord Erskine by his eldest son, Thomas, whose great-great-grandson John finally became earl of Mar in 1565. 


@@@@@


doc= 54185


Fleming, Malcolm, first earl of Wigtown (d. in or before 1363), magnate, was the elder son of Robert Fleming of Cumbernauld. He married, probably before 'c'.1310, Marjorie (died in or before 1361), a lady of unknown family. They had three known children: an unnamed son, for whose marriage in 1329 Fleming had a gift of money from the king and who died before 1351, leaving a son, Thomas ['see below']; Marjorie, who married William Fawside; and Evota, who married John Ramsay. 
Fleming rose in the service of the Bruce kings. Before 1321 he received Kirkintilloch from Robert I and properties in the Lennox, Ayrshire, and Wigtownshire, while before February 1327 he was appointed sheriff of Dumbarton and keeper of Dumbarton Castle. He was bailie of Carrick from at least February 1327 and steward of the royal household from August 1328 until June 1329. In 1324 his wife became nurse to the future David II, from whom, after 1341, she had various substantial grants of property in her own right. 
One of the few important Scots to survive the battle of Halidon Hill on 19 July 1333, Fleming escaped to Dumbarton, which he held thereafter for the Bruce cause. He welcomed David II and his queen there and in May 1334 arranged their passage to France. Following David's return in May 1341 Fleming joined the king's inner circle of councillors and was a regular charter witness. On 9 November 1341 his loyalty was rewarded by the grant of the lands of the sheriffdom of Wigtown and his creation as earl of Wigtown, with rights of regality and special judicial powers that were designed to enable him to re-establish Bruce control over this strongly pro-Balliol territory, a role for which his long-standing links with Carrick suited him. 
In autumn 1346 Fleming took part in David's invasion of northern England, but on 17 October he was one of several leading Scots captured with the king at Nevilles Cross. Early in 1347, however, having escaped from the custody of Sir Robert Bertram, he was again at liberty. His escape was arranged by one of his captors, Robert Vale, whom Fleming repaid with properties in Lanarkshire and the Lennox. Apart from his attendance at the Dundee parliament of 1350, there is little evidence of further political activity until in 1357 he served as a commissioner in the negotiations leading to the treaty of Berwick that year. He then appears to have retired from political life -- he had been replaced as sheriff of Dumbarton by 1359 -- and was dead before March 1363; he was probably buried in the Franciscan friary at Ayr, of which he had been a generous benefactor. 
Malcolm Fleming was succeeded in his hereditary property and titles by his grandson, Thomas Fleming (d. in or after 1382). Thomas was named heir to the earldom as early as September 1351, when he was a hostage during David II's visit on parole to Scotland. Again a hostage under the treaty of Berwick from 1357, he suffered a prolonged captivity following David's suspension of ransom payments in 1360. The financial problems which dogged him thereafter probably stemmed from the expense of securing his release. In January 1367, by which time Fleming was free, he had a regrant of Wigtown, but was deprived of his rights of regality. Money difficulties and disputes with local lords, perhaps exacerbated by his own extended absences from the region, led him in February 1372 to sell the earldom lands to Archibald Douglas, lord of Galloway, and further finance was obtained through the grant of extended tacks or wadsets on other properties. Family possession of the residue of his estates was secured in November 1372, when his cousin Malcolm Fleming of Biggar received assignation of a wadset on the lands of Lenzie. On 20 September 1382 this Malcolm was given charters confirming the grant of Lenzie, which Thomas had resigned to the crown. There is no indication that Thomas Fleming ever married. The date of his death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 54186


Fleming, Sir David (d. 1406), landowner and courtier, was the son of Malcolm Fleming (died 'c'.1390), lord of Biggar and Cumbernauld, and his wife, Christian. A middle-ranking baron, he rose to prominence in the service of David II and Robert III. His father had been a follower of David II, holding the office of sheriff of Dumbarton. David also entered royal service; he was termed 'our dear and faithful bachelor' by David II in 1362 (Thomson, no. 175) and married Jean, daughter of the king's adherent David Barclay of Brechin. After the death of the king in 1371 the Flemings may have given their support to John Stewart, earl of Carrick. According to the 'Liber pluscardensis', Fleming was the man responsible for arresting Robert II; if that is correct, the act probably occurred in 1384 when Carrick seized power from his father. By 1400 Fleming was 'luvit wel' by Carrick, now Robert III, and had established himself as an influential councillor of both the king and his younger brother, Robert Stewart, duke of Albany and earl of Fife (died 1420). 
Fleming's rise to a position of personal power came in 1404. The battle of Homildon Hill in 1402 had removed the major figures of southern Scotland into English captivity. Fleming himself had been captured in this clash, but he secured a quick release, and by early 1404 was employed in a major role in Anglo-Scottish diplomacy. His status in the kingdom is suggested by his place as first-named baron in the general council of April 1404. Along with his political allies, Henry Wardlaw, bishop of St Andrews (died 1440), who was the guardian of the young heir to the throne, Prince James, and Henry Sinclair, earl of Orkney (died 1418), Fleming sought to establish himself in the south. In 1405 they backed the rebellion in England of Henry Percy, earl of Northumberland, and after its collapse Fleming aided Percy's escape from Scotland before he could be exchanged for the captive Archibald Douglas, fourth earl of Douglas (died 1424). This act, combined with Fleming's ambitions in the south, antagonized the Black Douglases, while his efforts to obtain control of the office of sheriff of Roxburgh from the heirs of George Douglas, first earl of Angus (died 1403), brought the hostility of the Red Douglases. In an attempt to pressurize the Red Douglases, Fleming entered Haddingtonshire with Orkney, Prince James, and an armed following in early 1406. He overestimated his strength. Orkney and the prince escaped, but Fleming was killed on 14 February on Long Hermiston Moor, Edinburghshire, after a running fight by a force of Black Douglas adherents led by James Douglas of Balvenie (died 1443), Archibald Douglas's brother. Faced by major magnates, the resources of a royal favourite such as Fleming proved to be insufficient for regional power. 






@@@@@


doc= 54187


Sir Malcolm Fleming (d. 1440), the son of David Fleming and his second wife, Isabel of Monycabock, also based his career on the backing of powerful patrons and suffered a similar fate to his father. Although he was worth 600 marks in 1424, he sought eminence by serving greater magnates. His marriage, before 1413, to Elizabeth, daughter of the duke of Albany, signalled his close association with the governor, and Fleming acted as his father-in-law's councillor and received of his patronage. The link with the Albany Stewarts continued into the 1420s, when Malcolm adhered to Albany's grandson Walter Stewart of Lennox. In 1424 he may have negotiated between Stewart and the newly returned king, James I, but his efforts only earned him James's mistrust. When Stewart was arrested at Edinburgh in May 1424, Fleming was also detained. Unlike Stewart, who was executed in 1425, Fleming was spared further punishment. Although in 1431 he exploited the fall of another of the king's victims, John Kennedy, to claim the lands of Lenzie, Fleming did not return to prominence until after the king's death. Again his importance was as the councillor of a great magnate, William, sixth earl of Douglas. The connection may have won both men the suspicion of James Douglas. On 24 November 1440 Earl William and Fleming were arrested in Edinburgh Castle at the so-called Black Dinner; William was executed that day, Fleming on the 25th. 


@@@@@


doc= 54188


Robert Fleming, first Lord Fleming (d. 1491), the son of Malcolm and Elizabeth, acted vigorously to reverse the sentence of forfeiture passed on his father. In 1442 he was restored as part of a settlement with James Douglas, now seventh earl of Douglas, whose daughter, Janet, Robert married (in or before 1451). In the 1440s Robert adhered to his in-laws, witnessing Douglas family documents, attending court with William, eighth earl of Douglas, in 1444, and leading an attack on their enemies in 1445. Unlike his father, however, when magnate kinsmen clashed with the crown, Robert took the king's side. In June 1452 he attended the parliament which exonerated James II for his murder of Douglas earlier that year, and was created a lord of parliament. By 1454 he was master of the king's household and an occasional councillor of James II. Lord Fleming retained links of service with magnates, acting as carver to William Sinclair, earl of Orkney (died 1480), himself a royal councillor. His bond with Gilbert, Lord Kennedy (died 1479), and Alexander Boyd in 1466 shows him dealing with two men of similar baronial rank, who were at that time heading the principal faction in James III's minority government. Though Fleming held no comparable influence, the fall of the great magnate houses nevertheless enabled him to act as an independent player in Scottish politics. After the death of his first wife in or before 1480 he married Margaret Lindsay. He died in 1491. 


@@@@@


doc= 54189


Guinness, Henry Grattan (1835-1910), evangelist and trainer of missionaries, was born on 11 August 1835 at Montpelier House, near Kingstown, Ireland, the eldest son in the family of one daughter and three sons of John Grattan Guinness (1783-1850), captain in the army, who saw service in India; his mother was Jane Lucretia, daughter of William Cramer (an accomplished violinist and composer, and son of Johann Baptist Cramer, musical composer), and also the widow of Captain J. N. D'Esterre, who was killed by Daniel O'Connell in a duel in February 1815. Henry's grandfather, Arthur Guinness (1768-1855) of Beaumont, co. Dublin, established the first Sunday school in Ireland, in Dublin in 1786. During their father's lifetime the family lived variously at Dublin, Liverpool, Clifton, and Cheltenham. After education at private schools at Clevedon and Exeter, Guinness at the age of seventeen went to sea, and travelled to Mexico and the West Indies. 
After returning to England in March 1854 Guinness experienced an evangelical conversion. In January 1856 he entered New College, St John's Wood, London, to train for the Congregational ministry; he did not complete his course. While at New College he supplied the pulpit for three months at Moorfields Tabernacle, with such success that he was invited to become the pastor. Guinness declined, but was instead 'ordained' at the tabernacle on 29 July 1857 to the work of an itinerant interdenominational evangelist. To this work Guinness now devoted his life at home and abroad, and there followed preaching tours on the continent in January 1858, in Ireland in 1858 and 1859, and in America from November 1859 to May 1860. 
On 2 October 1860, at the Friends' meeting-house in Princes Street, Bath, Guinness married Fanny Emma [Fanny Emma Guinness (1831-1898)], third child of Major Edward Marlborough Fitzgerald and Mabel Stopford, daughter of Admiral Sir Robert Stopford (1768-1847). Since the age of eight Fanny Fitzgerald had been brought up by a pious Quaker couple, Arthur and Mary West, who were members of the Tottenham meeting of the Society of Friends. The Wests, along with other members of the Tottenham meeting, became associated with the early Christian (Plymouth) Brethren movement, and as a result Fanny acquired strong links with the Brethren, though remaining formally affiliated to the Society of Friends at the time of her marriage. Through her Brethren acquaintances Henry Grattan Guinness was introduced to the Brethren movement, and he acquired from the Brethren a fascination with the topic of biblical prophecy which remained with him for the rest of his life. The Guinnesses moved widely in Brethren circles throughout their marriage, though Guinness never wholly severed his connections with the Congregationalists and in his final years worshipped regularly in the Church of England. 
After their marriage the Guinnesses travelled continuously for twelve years. They visited Canada in 1861 and Egypt and Palestine in 1862. Guinness then held a short pastorate at Liverpool, and afterwards worked in Ireland. Towards the close of 1865 he took a house at 31 Baggot Street, Dublin, with a view to forming a training home for evangelists and missionaries. In 1866 he also conducted in Dublin the Merrion Hall Mission, and there he had an important influence on the young Thomas John Barnardo (1845-1905). In 1867 the Guinnesses left Dublin for Bath. Work in France occupied much of their time from 1868 to 1872. In 1873 Guinness founded the East London Institute for Home and Foreign Missions, for the training of young men and women for home and foreign missionary work. He directed the institute until his death, and his wife Fanny served as secretary, and was responsible for the budget. The institute was first located at 29 Stepney Green, and subsequently at Harley House, Bow. Barnardo was a co-director. In its first year there were thirty-two students, and after three years other branches were formed in London, and one was installed at Cliff College, Curbar, Derbyshire. Accommodation was provided for 100 men and women; over 1400 men and women were trained in the period up to 1914, when the institute closed. 
With the opening up of the Congo and the publication of H. M. Stanley's letters at the end of 1877, Guinness and his wife resolved to concentrate on foreign missions. A monthly magazine, 'The Regions Beyond', edited by Fanny Guinness, was started in 1878. Through the initiative of Alfred Tilly of Cardiff, the Livingstone Inland Mission was formed in the Congo in 1878, and in 1880 it became a branch of the institute, with the Guinnesses as director and secretary. It was transferred to the control of the American Baptist Missionary Union in 1884. A new mission to the interior of Africa, the Congo Balolo Mission, was founded in 1889, and others followed in South America -- in Peru in 1897, and Argentina in 1899. The organizations were combined in 1899 to form the Regions Beyond Missionary Union, an interdenominational body whose activities were further extended to India by the formation of the Bihar mission in the Bengal presidency in 1901. 
Although Guinness did not himself visit central Africa, he travelled in the interest of his missions to Algeria in 1879, to America in 1889 (where he inspired the creation in Boston and Minneapolis of training institutions similar to his own), to India and Burma in November 1896, and to China and Japan in 1897. A visit to Egypt in 1899-1900 led indirectly to the formation in 1904 of the Sudan United Mission, as a result of the marriage in Cairo in February 1900 of the Guinnesses' second daughter, Lucy Evangeline (1865-1906), to the German missionary pioneer Karl Kumm (1874-1930). The Guinnesses had five daughters, of whom three died in infancy, and two sons. All the surviving children engaged in their parents' missionary efforts. The elder son, Dr Harry Grattan Guinness (1861-1915), also became a director of the mission at Harley House, and took a prominent part in the agitation against the Belgian rubber atrocities in the Congo. The eldest daughter, Mary Geraldine (1862-1949), later became celebrated with her husband, Dr Howard Taylor, as the biographer of James Hudson Taylor (1832-1905), founder of the China Inland Mission. Lucy edited 'The Regions Beyond' for several years after her mother's death in 1898; she also published books on South America and India, and was a writer of religious verse. Her father published a memoir of her in 1907. The younger son, Gershom Whitfield (1869-1927), became a missionary doctor in Henan with the China Inland Mission. 
Henry and Fanny Guinness jointly published several works on biblical prophecy. The most important, 'The Approaching End of the Age in the Light of History, Prophecy, and Science', first published in 1878, went through fourteen editions by 1918. Both also published works as individual authors, of which the best known were Fanny Guinness's 'The First Christian Mission on the Congo', which appeared about 1880, and 'The New World of Central Africa' (1890). For the last seven years of her life Fanny Guinness was paralysed; she died at Cliff College, Curbar, Derbyshire, on 3 November 1898, and was buried in Baslow churchyard. 
On 7 July 1903, Henry Grattan Guinness married Grace Alexandra, hospital nurse, youngest of the seven children of Charles Russell Hurditch, a leading figure among the Christian Brethren. She was forty years his junior. After their wedding Guinness took his young bride on a five-year world tour, which included visits to Switzerland (1903), America and Canada (1904), Japan and China (1905), and Australia and New Zealand (1906). He concluded the tour with a visit to South Africa, where he preached to racially mixed congregations. It was 1908 before they returned to England. They had two sons, John Christopher and Paul Grattan. 
Henry Grattan Guinness received an honorary DD degree from Brown University, Providence, USA, in 1889. He was also elected a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in recognition of his astronomical work, which was sparked off by his interest in prophecy. He spent his last two years in Bath, where he died at his home, Lynton Lodge, Oldfield Park, of pleurisy and pericarditis on 21 June 1910. He was buried in the cemetery at Bath Abbey, survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 54190


John Armstrong (1706-1758), military engineer and author, was born on 2 February 1706 in Ballycumber, King's county, the fourth son of Andrew Armstrong (1669-1717) of Ballycumber, and his wife, Lucy (died 1733), widow of William Mason and elder daughter of George Charnock. He was cousin to Major-General Armstrong to whom he was indebted for his entree to, and subsequent progress in the service of, the Board of Ordnance, as well as for his commission in the Royal regiment of Ireland (18th foot). Armstrong reached the rank of engineer-in-ordinary and saw service in England and New York. Falling foul of the duke of Argyll while serving at Portsmouth in 1738 Armstrong was removed from his post and left without any ordnance appointment, a situation that obtained until after Argyll was replaced as master-general in 1740. During the period 1738-42 Armstrong saw service with his regiment at Minorca, where he recorded his observations on the island's history, customs, religion, and people. These notes he later arranged for publication, the first London edition of 'The History of the Island of Minorca' appearing in 1752. A second edition appeared in 1756 and was followed by a Dublin edition. Armstrong's book was the first history of Minorca in any language and translations into French (1769) and Spanish (1781) followed. Various works in German drew on his studies, the earliest in 1754 and others in 1771 and 1781. Armstrong died in impecunious circumstances at the Swan tavern, Chelsea, on 27 March 1758 and was buried on 31 March 1758 at Chelsea Old Church. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 54191


Okey, Thomas (1852-1935), basket-maker and Italian scholar, was born on 30 September 1852 at 16 Quaker Street, Spitalfields, London, one of eight children of Thomas Okey, a basket-maker, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Biggs. After elementary school in Bethnal Green, he too was apprenticed at thirteen as a basket-maker, a trade he followed for over thirty years. A passionate reader, he was largely self-taught, studying French, German, and Italian over breakfast before going to work at 6 a.m., and attending evening classes afterwards. He later attended classes at Toynbee Hall, and from 1888 onwards, on his own initiative, organized educational trips to Italy for East End adult learners. In 1896 he ceased basket-making and became a full-time adult education teacher, principally at Toynbee Hall (from 1892 to 1901). On 8 June 1901 he married Amy Louisa Rye of Chiswick, a widow a year older than him; she was the daughter of Joseph Haslam, a silk mercer. There were no children from the marriage. 
Okey's initial publications were translations: Mazzini's 'Essays' (1894), a clear hint of his convictions, and in the same year 'The Little Flowers of St Francis of Assisi', which eventually ran to over a dozen editions. A translation of Dante's 'Purgatorio' for Temple Classics (1899) was followed by an English edition of the same author's 'Vita nuova' and lyric poetry (1906). His first major original work, 'Italy Today' (1901 and 1909), was written in collaboration with the influential Risorgimento historian Bolton King. Benedetto Croce later chose it as the first work to be translated and published by the new Laterza publishing house, and in Italy it is still quoted in political debate about the southern question. Further collaboration with Bolton King appeared in volume 12 of the 'Cambridge Modern History' (1910). Sole-authored books on Venice, 'Venice and its Story' (1903), 'The Story of Venice' (1905), 'The Old Venetian Palaces and Old Venetian Folk' (1907), alternated with books of French interest, 'Paris and its Story' (1904), 'The Story of Paris' (1906), and 'The Story of Avignon' (1911). Basket-making was not abandoned, however, for in 1912 Okey wrote 'An Introduction to the Art of Basket-Making', which is still in print and recommended by enthusiasts, even over the internet. He also compiled the entry on the craft for the eleventh edition of 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. During the First World War Okey was employed at the Foreign Office, where his knowledge of French and Italian was useful. 
At sixty-seven, and recently widowed, Okey was surprised to be called to the Serena chair of Italian at Cambridge in 1919, as the first incumbent, despite his complete lack of formal qualifications. He fitted in easily, however, helped by welcoming and sympathetic colleagues. Elected a fellow of Gonville and Caius College in 1920, he acquired a reputation as a fine lecturer, placing a special, almost reverent, emphasis in his teaching on the works of Dante. In 1922, the same year as the march on Rome, he represented Cambridge University at the anniversary of the founding of the University of Padua, and there received an honorary doctorate, the only academic accolade to accompany his recognition as an honorary freeman in the Worshipful Company of Basket-Makers. His Mazzinian convictions, however, made him increasingly uneasy at the rise of fascism. He retired from the Serena chair in 1928 for reasons of advanced age and failing health (after a stroke he complained eloquently in a private letter of 'aphasia in five languages'), and returned once more to basket-making, publishing his short autobiography, 'A Basketful of Memories', in 1930. In the year before he died he made a final pair of waste-paper baskets for friends at Jesus College, comparing them cruelly with handiwork much earlier in his career (a pre-war basket had constituted a special illustration for the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'). Along with a photograph of an octogenarian Okey engaged in his craft, one of these late baskets passed in 1981 into the hands of a subsequent chair-holder, Professor Patrick Boyde, almost as the insignia of office. Okey died on 4 May 1935 at his home, Barnwood, Brasted, Sevenoaks, Kent, of a cerebral thrombosis. His reputation today rests largely on his work as a timely popularizer of Italian culture and his main significance lies in his belonging to that transitional generation which, from an insecure academic base, saw to the establishment of Italian studies as a coherent discipline in British universities. 


@@@@@


doc= 54196


Fairfield, (Josephine) Letitia Denny (1885-1978), public health physician and campaigner for social reform, was born on 10 March 1885 at 26 Acland Street, St Kilda, Melbourne, Australia, the eldest of three daughters of Charles Fairfield ('c'.1842-1906), journalist, and his wife, Isabella Campbell Mackenzie ('c'.1853-1921), daughter of Alexander Mackenzie and his wife, Jessie Watson Campbell. Her father was of Irish descent and her mother's parents both came from Edinburgh families, but they married in Australia where Charles Fairfield worked as a journalist on the Melbourne 'Argus'. Letitia Fairfield's family moved to Britain when she was about three years old, living first in Glasgow and then, later, in various parts, including in and around London. In 1892 her younger sister, Cicily Isabel (1892-1983), was born: the sister who was to become well known as the journalist and novelist Rebecca West ['see 'Andrews, Dame Cicily Isabel]. 
Faced with deteriorating financial circumstances related to Charles Fairfield's frequent changes of job, the family then moved to Richmond, Surrey, where from 1896 Letitia Fairfield attended Richmond High School for Girls. When her father left permanently in 1901, her mother took her three daughters to live in Edinburgh. After a year at George Watson's Ladies' College she entered the Edinburgh Medical College for Women, then an extramural school for the University of Edinburgh; this was a step made possible only by the award of one of the first Carnegie scholarships and the gift of $100 from an aunt. 
Fairfield graduated MB ChB from the University of Edinburgh in 1907, with honours in all subjects and with several medals. Over the next four years she gained clinical experience through a series of temporary hospital posts as house officer or equivalent, including seven months at Birmingham City Asylum and, in 1908, nine months at the Manchester Victoria Memorial Jewish Hospital, where she learned enough Yiddish to talk to her patients. Fairfield was awarded her MD degree from the University of Edinburgh in 1911. In that year she returned to London with her mother and her two sisters, and took a house in Hampstead Garden Suburb. 
Fairfield now began her work in public health for the London county council (LCC) which was to continue, apart from wartime interruptions, until 1948. After several part-time posts in the LCC's newly reorganized school medical service, she was appointed, in 1912, as a full-time medical assistant in the public health department, the same year that she passed her diploma in public health from the University of London. She was to become the first woman senior medical officer at the LCC. Before the First World War, her main responsibilities there were concerned with the health and welfare of schoolchildren, including the inspection of schools for those with physical or mental handicaps and of teacher training colleges. She retained a particular involvement with the care and education of children with epilepsy throughout her career. 
At the outbreak of war in 1914 Fairfield was one of a group of women doctors who offered their services to the War Office, only to be told that the war could be won without them. However, in 1917 she became a medical officer to the new Women's Army Auxiliary Corps, serving as medical controller for southern command. She was then appointed, in June 1918, as chief medical officer to the new Women's Royal Air Force with responsibility for the medical care of 8000 women in military quarters and a further 22,000 living at home. Fairfield was active in the internal battle that medical women in the armed services waged, with only limited success, with the War Office to be appointed on comparable terms to men, including full rather than honorary commissions. In 1919 she was created CBE in recognition of her war service. 
In 1920 Fairfield returned to the LCC. Although involved in a broad range of public health activities, her work in relation to children and women's health was to be particularly important. When, following the 1929 'Local Government Act', the LCC took responsibility for London's poor-law board hospitals, improving them especially in relation to maternity and obstetric care was one of her major concerns. Medico-legal matters were another professional interest, Fairfield having been called to the bar at the Middle Temple, London, in 1923. She was co-editor of the 'Medico-Legal and Criminological Review' for some years, and president of the Medico-Legal Society in 1957 and 1958. In 1940 her administrative expertise was again sought by the War Office, where she became the senior woman doctor (with the now fully commissioned rank of lieutenant-colonel) and assistant director-general for medical services. In 1942, having reached the compulsory retirement age for the army, she returned to the LCC, where she continued to work until the inception of the National Health Service in July 1948. She published a number of professional articles on public health matters, and short books, including one on epilepsy in 1954. 
Before, during, and after her distinguished career as a medical administrator, Fairfield was actively involved in many contemporary social controversies. As a medical student and young doctor she threw herself wholeheartedly into the campaign for women's suffrage, including addressing many public meetings. Her blonde good looks caught the attention of her audiences and, with her confident voice, she could dominate the roughest open-air meetings. She joined the militant suffragette Women's Social and Political Union for a time but soon became critical of Christabel Pankhurst's authoritarianism. After moving to London she joined the Fabian Society, and spoke in public and wrote regularly on women's and health issues. She also developed a strong commitment to the cause of Irish independence. In 1922 Fairfield became a Roman Catholic. During the 1920s she was a prominent opponent of birth control, though she later modified her views following a visit to Malta, where problems ensuing from a high birth-rate and poverty were all too apparent. For many years she was a regular contributor to the Catholic press on matters such as medical evidence for miracle cures, the supernatural, and exorcism. In later life she became an expert on witchcraft. In 1965 she was awarded the papal medal, 'Pro ecclesia et pontifice'. Before and during the Second World War she helped many refugees from the Nazi regime in Germany settle in Britain. 
'A delightful, vigorous, dogmatic, and at times infuriating companion' ('BMJ', 873), Fairfield was much loved by colleagues and family. Her interest in children was not just professional and she spent much time entertaining her nieces and nephews. As eldest sister and with respect to appearance, she was the model for the character of Cordelia in Rebecca West's loosely autobiographical, best-selling novel 'The Fountain Overflows' (1957), but the unsympathetic personality portrayed there was fictional. The relationship between the two sisters, however, was sometimes strained, particularly in later life. 
Fairfield died on 1 February 1978 at St Mary Abbots Hospital, London, having been ill for fifteen months following a stroke. 


@@@@@


doc= 54197


Mullins, Claud William (1887-1968), lawyer and writer, was born on 6 September 1887 at 17 Southampton Street, London, the eldest of the four children (three sons and a daughter) of Edwin Roscoe Mullins (1848-1907), sculptor, and his wife, Alice (1856- 'c'.1936), daughter of John Pelton JP, a successful Croydon grocer. His father's illness precipitated the young Mullins's withdrawal from Mill Hill School and, after a period travelling in Europe, he became a London county council clerk in 1907. 
Dissatisfied with the limited intellectual stimulus afforded by his administrative duties, Mullins read for the bar and, having been awarded a certificate of honour in the bar finals, was called by Gray's Inn in 1913. His career was interrupted by war service, and thereafter he did not find it easy to build up a practice. He used his enforced leisure to express in books (notably 'In Quest of Justice', 1931) and articles a dissatisfaction, in part founded on his studies of foreign systems, with English law and procedure. 
Mullins made no secret of his readiness to accept judicial office and was appointed a Metropolitan Police magistrate on 29 June 1931. He quickly formed strong views about the fact that disputes between husbands and wives under the 'Summary Jurisdiction (Separation and Maintenance) Act' of 1925 were treated in the same way as prosecutions, heard before crowds of prurient onlookers, and fully reported in the local press. Mullins thought it wrong to regard matrimonial disputes solely as matters of law, and he believed magistrates ought to be trained in the causes of marital disharmony and thus enabled to dispense social help to those who came before them. 
In an attempt to promote the radical changes he thought necessary, Mullins drafted the 'Summary Jurisdiction (Domestic Procedure) Bill' which was introduced into the House of Lords in 1934 by the young Lord Listowel. Although the bill's more radical provisions (for example, giving magistrates' courts powers to hear 'conciliation summonses' and to advise the spouses on matters detrimental to their happiness) were unacceptable to lawyers and administrators, the bill generated sufficient support to persuade the government that the magistrates' domestic jurisdiction ought to be investigated by the committee on social services in magistrates' courts (chaired by S. W. Harris). The resulting 'Summary Procedure (Domestic Proceedings) Act' of 1937 gave effect to recommendations intended to humanize magistrates' domestic hearings, not least by separating them from the processing of criminal prosecutions. 
Mullins was also largely instrumental in drawing public attention to the excessive use of imprisonment for debt and thus in influencing the decision to appoint the (Fischer Williams) departmental committee on imprisonment by courts of summary jurisdiction (1934). That committee's recommendations formed the basis of the 'Money Payments (Justices' Procedure) Act' of 1935. This provided that those failing to pay fines, affiliation orders, or rates should not be sent to prison without inquiry into the reasons for failure to pay. 
Mullins was justifiably proud of his part in bringing about these reforms, but his success was only partial. Indeed, the Harris committee specifically rejected his fundamental belief that 'conciliation' in family disputes was a matter for the courts themselves. The clear distinction between adjudication on the one hand and social work on the other, drawn by the committee and subsequently consistently followed by orthodox opinion, was the antithesis of Mullins's beliefs. Mullins's attempts to secure for the magistrates an enhanced role in the reformed divorce law brought about by A. P. Herbert's 'Matrimonial Causes Act' of 1937 were also unsuccessful. 
From the outset Mullins's relationship with his magisterial brethren was uneasy and in 1936 the metropolitan magistrates, evidently vexed by what they believed to be Mullins' proclivity for self-advertisement, unanimously censured his conduct. The Home Office concluded that Mullins had done nothing prejudicial to the impartial administration of justice, but complaints (about ill-considered remarks about birth control, among other things) were made not only in private correspondence but on the floor of the House of Commons. In 1942 Herbert Morrison, less tolerant of Mullins's eccentricities than his predecessor, Sir John Simon, publicly rebuked Mullins. 
In 1947 Mullins retired from the bench on grounds of ill health, and devoted the rest of his life to writing, lecturing, and voluntary work. 
Mullins had married (Elizabeth) Gwendolen (1904-1997), a craftswoman, younger daughter of Augustus Philip Brandt, banker, on 28 May 1925. They had one son (Edwin Brandt Mullins, a writer on artistic and other subjects) and two daughters (Ann Dally, psychiatrist and medical historian, and Barbara Mullins, craftswoman). Mullins died, aged eighty-one, on 23 October 1968 at the Royal West Sussex Hospital, Chichester, Sussex. He was cremated and, after a funeral service at Graffham church, his ashes were scattered in the woods where he used to walk. 
Mullins deserves to be remembered for his pioneering role in seeking to civilize the legal consequences of family breakdown and in helping to create a climate of opinion favourable to conciliation as a preferred alternative to litigation in such matters. As Sir Alexander Maxwell, the permanent under-secretary at the Home Office, put it to the home secretary on Mullins's retirement, 'with his egoism and assertiveness, [Mullins] has combined a very genuine zeal for improving the work of the Courts and for helping the numerous classes of unfortunate people with whom the Summary courts come into contact' (Maxwell to Chuter Ede, 3 Feb 1947, Home Office MSS, TNA: PRO, HO45/21034). 


@@@@@


doc= 54198


Rees, John Rawlings (1890-1969), psychiatrist, was born on 25 June 1890 at 9 The Crescent, King Street, Leicester, the fourth of seven children of Robert Montgomery Rees, a Wesleyan Methodist minister, and his wife, Catherine Millar Tait. A secure childhood in a religious household led Rees to consider becoming a missionary but instead he trained in medicine. Rees was educated at Leeds and Bradford grammar schools, King's College, Cambridge, and the London Hospital, qualifying LRCP, MRCS, in 1914, and MB BChir in 1915. At the outset of war he joined the Friends' Ambulance Unit and saw immediate service in France for which he was awarded the 1914 medal. He transferred to the Royal Army Medical Corps and served at the Somme where he saw soldiers executed for desertion having, in his opinion, suffered nervous breakdown. Later he served in Mesopotamia and India and wrote that he grew up emotionally through his military experience which had also prepared him for his career in army psychiatry in the Second World War, when he saw to it that psychiatric casualties were appropriately diagnosed and properly treated. 
Though attracted to public health (he was awarded the DPH by the University of Cambridge in 1920), chance brought Rees to psychological medicine by meeting Hugh Crichton-Miller, a pioneer psychotherapist, founder of Bowden House, a clinic for the early treatment of psychiatric disorder, and later the founder of the Tavistock Clinic. At Bowden House he met Dr Mary (Molly) Isabel (1887-1954), daughter of Charles Robert Hemmingway, a railway contractor. They married on 15 December 1921, and later had one daughter. 
In 1932 Crichton-Miller abruptly resigned from the Tavistock Clinic, hurt by criticism of his methods and was succeeded by Rees as director. Under Rees's directorship much energy was liberated; he recruited talented therapists and by 1939 the Tavistock was the major centre of psychodynamic psychiatry in the United Kingdom. Training in psychiatric social work and child guidance work was pioneered there. Rees's own analysis was with Maurice Nicoll but he did not join the British Psychoanalytic Society. 
Rees, in contrast to Crichton-Miller, who was an aristocrat in temperament, was a much more natural democrat. Though he shared with Crichton-Miller the background of being a son of the manse and possessing strong Christian values (the Tavistock was derisively termed 'the parson's clinic' by Professor Edward Maypother of its rival, the Maudsley Hospital), Rees did not share his zeal for discovering bodily causes of mental illness such as focal sepsis or endocrine disorders: 'If Crichton-Miller was a Don Quixote with a very high aim, J. R. Rees was the necessary complement as his Sancho Panza, mundane, much more down-to-earth, practical organising and executive person who actually made the Tavistock Clinic function as a living institution. (Dicks, 59)' Rees had an almost missionary zeal to promote not only the Tavistock Clinic, but the spread of knowledge of and the techniques of psychotherapy and mental health into wider fields. This he achieved in British army psychiatry and then found his apogee in the World Federation of Mental Health. What he achieved for the Tavistock was one phase of the career of someone who was described as 'this natural unself-conscious leader and originator' (Dicks, 296). 
To his surprise, Rees was invited in 1939 to take command of British army psychiatry at home, where he initially found that he was the only psychiatrist available. He quickly assembled a team, mostly from colleagues at the Tavistock Clinic, several of whom had also served in the First World War. Their collective experience gained psychiatrists respect from serving officers and opened the way for them to be both acceptable and influential throughout the war. By 1945 there were 300 trained psychiatrists in the army and significant work was done in personnel selection, the study of morale breakdown and maintenance, and the psychiatric rehabilitation of neurotic soldiers and of returning prisoners of war. Under his direction army psychiatry became efficient and humane. The education and training of mentally handicapped soldiers was a major innovation which led the way in post-war developments. He finished the war with the rank of brigadier. 
After succeeding Crichton-Miller, Rees had greatly fostered the growth of the Tavistock Clinic but the position altered greatly after the Second World War. The Tavistock itself was a changed place: a younger generation had experienced power and influence in the armed forces and were enthusiastic to acquire and use psychoanalytic knowledge. Rees, however, was not in tune with this enthusiasm. He felt pressured by the power of the younger generation to give up his position as director, which he did in 1947. So began the third phase of his career. Rees became a leading figure in the movement to maintain and develop wartime co-operation among psychiatrists, to build on what had been learned and his mission became to research and to treat mental illness in its social roots. After organizing the first Mental Health Congress in London in 1948, he was highly influential in the formation soon afterwards of the World Federation for Mental Health, of which he was president for one year, subsequently director for many years. Indefatigable, diplomatic, his activities widely recognized, he became honorary president after retirement. The federation brought modern psychiatry to developing countries, trained their personnel, and stimulated research. His modest apartment at 116 Bickenhall Mansions, Baker Street, London, was at the heart of this new movement, a welcoming place for colleagues worldwide. At one point when the treasurer of the World Federation for Mental Health had to declare the treasury empty he produced a shilling from his pocket to secure its future. 
Rees was able to acknowledge that he was not in the top rank of psychiatrists or psychotherapists. His influence derived from his dedication, and his ability to assemble, to work with teams, and to encourage individual development. His tolerant, genial personality and democratic style of leadership was significant in the great expansion of the Tavistock Clinic in the 1930s, to army psychiatry in the Second World War, and in the World Federation of Mental Health. The great influence of the Tavistock Clinic in the professionalization of work in the field of mental health and illness has been analysed by Nikolas Rose in 'The Psychological Complex' (1985) and 'Governing the Soul' (1990). 
Among Rees's writings the most personal is 'Reflections' (1966) published at his retirement by the United States committee of the World Federation for Mental Health. His wartime experience is described in 'The Shaping of Psychiatry by War' (1945) and in 'The Case of Rudolph Hess' (1947). He became a member of the Royal College of Physicians in 1936, a fellow in 1944, and was made CBE in 1946. Rees died on 11 April 1969 at his home, 116 Bickenhall Mansions, Baker Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 54200


Turnor, Philip (1750/51-1799/1800), land surveyor and map maker, came from Laleham, Middlesex, and was originally engaged in farming. He first comes to notice in the records of the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) for 1778. By this date the HBC committee in London had a tradition of developing strategies and issuing instructions for its operations more than 3000 miles away in Rupert's Land. It had recognized the need to compete effectively in the interior with the more aggressive Montreal-based Canadian fur traders; in particular to build posts far up the rivers from the company's established bay-side forts. But it lacked reliable maps with which to plan. In 1775, of its sixty or so manuscript maps and plans, very few were of the interior. Recognizing the need to produce new and reliable ones, the committee sought the advice of the astronomer William Wales FRS. Wales recommended Philip Turnor's appointment as the first of the company's inland surveyors. 
Turnor's first contract with the company, of 6 May 1778, engaged him for 'Three Years' at 'Fifty Pounds per Year' (HBC records, A32/3, fol. 27). He was competent in mathematics and surveying and from the beginning his status was fairly high among HBC employees. With a salary more than five times that of a labourer on first contract, he ate at the captain's table on his first voyage to York Fort (now in Manitoba) and with the chief factor on arrival. Wales was paid 5 guineas for having recommended him. 
Turnor served four three-year contracts in Rupert's Land, from August 1778 to September 1787 and August 1789 to September 1792. His first duty on reaching York Fort was to survey it, examine the fabric of its buildings, and send a report back to the London committee. Drawn in the month of his arrival, the large-scale plan was the first of at least nine maps and numerous plans he was to make for the company (HBC records, G1/109). Within a few days of completing it he was sent to Cumberland House (now in Saskatchewan). Thereafter he spent most of his time in the interior: in 1778-9 on the Saskatchewan River, in 1779-87 to the south of James Bay, and in 1789-92 at and beyond Cumberland House. He adapted quickly to travel and subsistence in the lichen woodlands and coniferous forests of which he had no previous experience, snaring birds and hunting small mammals within weeks of arrival and walking, snow-shoeing, and canoeing more than 4000 miles during his first two years. Apart from occasional snow blindness and a winter with rheumatism, he was healthy and strong. 
In 1782 Turnor was appointed master at Brunswick House, at the confluence of the Opasatika and Missinaibi rivers. Between then and 1787 he mixed trading for marten, muskrat, and other pelts with occasional surveying and map making. As a master, he implemented instructions, managed the post, supervised employees, traded with Indians, and maintained correspondence, but it was as astronomer, mathematician, surveyor, cartographer, and teacher of these skills that the committee most valued him. 
Between 1778 and 1782 Turnor 'prepared three original maps and several copies. He observed and calculated the astronomical locations of all the HBC's factories and posts, of the significant junctions of the interior waterways, and of important geographical features along the sea coasts, all of which he had visited. (Ruggles, 49)' From 1782 to 1787 Turnor devoted less time to such activities but surveyed several of the rivers draining into James Bay, usually doing so on return -- downstream -- journeys. Between 1789 and 1792 he led an exploring and mapping expedition into the beaver- and marten-rich Athabasca country, in which Canadians had been trading with Indians for nearly a decade but about which the HBC knew almost nothing. His observation of the latitude and longitude of Fort Chipewyan (now in Alberta), when compared with those made on the Pacific coast by Captain James Cook gave Alexander Mackenzie some real comprehension of the extent of the country through which he was to pass in 1793 in the first crossing of the continent by a European. 
Turnor returned to England for the last time in October 1792 but soon afterwards the committee decided to pay him 'one guinea per week until further orders' (HBC records, A1/47, fol. 4). Between then and early 1795 he compiled several manuscript maps, of which the last is now considered one of Canada's greatest cartographic treasures. 'To the Honourable Governor... This Map of Hudson's Bay and the Rivers and Lakes Between the Atlantick and Pacifick Oceans' (HBC records, G2/32) is very large (193 cm x 259 cm). It has an exquisite cartouche attributed to Edward Dayes, the London topographical watercolourist (Turner, 8.584), and at least some of the calligraphy was by one of two artist-engraver brothers Charles and Peltro William Tomkins (ibid., 31.137). The map is a composite of information available in 1794 from Turnor's own calculations, sketches, and previously completed maps as well as those of others, fitted onto a graticule 'he himself had done so much to perfect' (Ruggles, 54). In 1795 the committee paid him $100 for the map and presented him with the HBC watch he had carried for many years (HBC records, A1/47, fol. 47). Though the map was never published, the committee gave Aaron Arrowsmith almost immediate access to it and it formed the basis of his 'Map exhibiting all the new discoveries in the interior parts of North America' (1795). 
Little is known of Turnor's later life. In or about 1794 his address was Prospect Row, Dock Head, Rotherhithe, London, where he taught navigation. John Turnor, captain of an HBC sloop, is said to have been a brother (Rich, 'Hudson's Bay Company', 88-9, 98), though whether he was the John Turner who captained company trans-Atlantic supply ships between 1790 and 1816 is less clear (Cooke and Holland, 439). Philip Turnor last wrote to the company on 4 December 1799. On 26 March 1800 the London committee read a petition from his widow, Elizabeth, praying for pecuniary assistance. He had presumably married either during his furlough in 1787-9 or after his return to England in 1792. 
Turnor's influence on the mapping of Rupert's Land continued after his death as a result of his surprising choice of assistant surveyor for the Athabasca expedition. In 1790, having rejected three men trained in astronomical observation, he selected 


@@@@@


doc= 54201


Peter Fidler (1769-1822), surveyor and cartographer, from Bolsover, Derbyshire. Fidler, born on 16 August 1769, was the son of James and Mary Fidler, and had joined the company as a general labourer in the previous year. Reasonably well educated he had sufficient mathematical training to pick up practical astronomy quickly. He was also physically strong, keen to learn, and ambitious. Turnor trained him in surveying, field sketching, and cartography, and encouraged him to live, travel, and communicate with Indians. His wife, Mary (died 1826), with whom he had fourteen children, was a Swampy Cree Indian. (Their long-standing union was solemnized on 14 August 1821.) Fidler succeeded Turnor as the company's chief surveyor and between 1790 and 1820 made eighty separate maps and 373 segmented sketch maps, more than any other company cartographer. Although his methods were those of Turnor he developed a distinctive map making procedure that had hitherto been used by company employees only very occasionally. He regularly asked Indians and company colleagues for descriptions and sketches of areas and routes known to them and in this way produced forty-four maps. He retired from the HBC in 1821, but stayed in Rupert's Land and died at Fort Dauphin (Dauphin, Manitoba) on 17 December 1822. 


@@@@@


doc= 54202


Forbes family (per. c.1400-c.1490), nobility, took its name from Forbes in Aberdeenshire. It had been long established there by the end of the fourteenth century, when it was represented by Sir John Forbes, who married Margaret Kennedy of Dunure. Sir John died in 1405 and was succeeded by his eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 54203


Forrester family (per. c.1360-c.1450), administrators, illustrates the growing importance of burgess families in Scottish politics during the late fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. 


@@@@@


doc= 54204


Walter Forrester (b. c.1355, d. before 1426), bishop of Brechin, son of Marion Forrester ('b'. before 1353, died before 1391) and brother of Patrick Forrester (died after 1406), burgess of Dundee, was probably kin to Adam Forrester. The link cannot be established conclusively, but the two men moved in similar circles, and Walter witnessed documents of family interest to the Forresters of Corstorphine, and also served on peace commissions with Adam's eldest son, John. Walter's career embraced both Scottish royal service and university life in Paris. He studied at the University of Paris in the 1370s, graduating BA in 1375. In 1379 he returned to Scotland and by 1384 he was a canon of Aberdeen. He was royal wardrobe clerk (1380-93), and also served as keeper of the privy seal, king's clerk, and auditor of the exchequer. In August 1390 he helped to arrange Robert II's funeral and Robert III's coronation, and in the same year he resigned his lands of Inverdovet in Fife to his brother Patrick. About 1393 he went back to Paris to graduate MA, and became involved in university affairs; he supported the withdrawal of obedience from the Avignon pope Benedict XIII ('r'. 1394-1417) in 1398. 
After returning to Scotland Forrester served on the duke of Rothesay's governing council, and acted as exchequer auditor (1399-1404), king's secretary (1402-5), and clerk of the rolls ('c'.1403-25). He was rewarded for his service to Robert II and Robert III, and for his future service to Prince James, with a life annuity from 1406. In 1405 he went to France, possibly to arrange for Prince James's proposed stay. He remained abroad, and in 1407 was made bishop of Brechin by Benedict XIII, to whose allegiance he had returned. His royal service in Scotland resumed under the duke of Albany after 1408. He participated in embassies to discuss James I's release from captivity in England, and was also influential in Scottish policy towards the papal schism. Forrester was abroad again from 1422 to 1424, and during this period visited the curia in Rome, presenting a petition there. He died before April 1426. 
Sir Adam Forrester's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 54205


Sir John Forrester (d. 1448x50), had been knighted by 1406. He was deputy chamberlain (1406-22), master of the king's household, custodian of the great seal, auditor of the rolls, and custumar of Edinburgh (1405-31). He helped to negotiate James I's release from England, and became his trusted servant; he was appointed chamberlain in 1424 and was on the king's council in 1437. In 1425 Corstorphine and adjacent lands were erected into a barony. After James I's murder in 1437 the earl of Douglas became Forrester's patron. Chancellor William Crichton (died 1454) burnt his Corstorphine lands in 1445 because the family had aided Douglas in an attack on the Crichtons at Barnton, Edinburghshire. Forrester last served as chamberlain in 1448; whether he retired owing to waning Douglas influence or to infirmity is unclear. In 1448 the pope allowed Forrester and his wife, Marion, 'old and stricken in years', a private confessor. Forrester was patron to St Giles's, where he founded an altar 'c'.1425, and St Machar's. He and his mother endowed two more chaplains in St John's Chapel at Corstorphine in 1429; he obtained papal recognition of it as a collegiate church in 1444, and it became the family's burial place. 
Forrester married first Margaret (died 'c'.1408); second Jean St Clair (died before 1422), daughter of the earl of Orkney; and third, 'c'.1422, Marion Stewart ('c'.1380- 'c'.1448) of Dalswinton, Dumfriesshire, widow of Sir John Stewart of Garlies, Kirkcudbrightshire. From either his first or second marriage he had four children: Elizabeth (died after 1408), who married Sir Alexander Lauder of Halton; John, his heir ('b'. before 1425, died 'c'.1456), who married into the Edinburgh family of Wigmer; Henry ('b'. before 1425, died 'c'.1473), who married Helen, daughter of John Farnlie of Braid; and Jonet (died 'c'.1488), who married Robert, Lord Maxwell (died 1485). John Forrester (died 'c'.1437), who held Kirkmahoe benefice in Dumfriesshire, was probably an illegitimate son. Forrester died between 20 September 1448 and 20 September 1450; he was buried in St John's Church, Corstorphine. A tomb near the altar is assumed to be that of Sir John and one of his wives. The Forresters were among the most successful of those fourteenth-century mercantile families who used their financial talents in royal service to rise into the gentry. 


@@@@@


doc= 54206


Fraser family (per. c.1300-c.1500), nobility, was of Anglo-Norman origin, probably arriving in Scotland during the reign of William the Lion. They were a baronial family of second rank whose branches acquired land in Tweeddale, Haddingtonshire, and Stirlingshire, Sir Gilbert Fraser holding the sheriffdom of Traquair, Peebles, by 1233. By the end of the thirteenth century the family had divided, the senior branches being the Frasers of Touch-Fraser (Stirling), from whom were descended the Frasers of Philorth (Buchan), and the Frasers of Oliver Castle (Tweeddale). The latter achieved political prominence in the 1260s and 1270s as part of Alexander III's promotion of 'new men', and they supported the Comyn-Balliol party in the Great Cause of 1291-2; but the execution of Sir Simon Fraser of Oliver Castle in 1306 brought that line of the family to an end. 
Fraser descent continued in the senior line, that of Touch-Fraser, through Sir Richard Fraser, a cousin of Sir Simon, who was succeeded by 


@@@@@


doc= 54207


Hugh Fraser, first Lord Lovat (d. 1501), was a minor when he succeeded, and was placed in the ward of the earl of Moray, Elizabeth, countess of Moray, having his keepership in 1455. After Moray's death Fraser became a ward of the crown, which had administered his estates since 1450, although in 1456 his ward and marriage were granted to John Lyon, third Lord Glamis, whose daughter Violet he married before 1464. The forfeiture of the earldom of Moray in the final ruin of the Black Douglases in 1455 left Fraser, with his family's tradition of service and standing in the Inverness area, together with his links by marriage to the Lyons, another family with a demonstrable pedigree of royal service, as a prime candidate for elevation to a parliamentary peerage, and this he had duly received, under the title Lord Fraser of Lovat, by 1464. In the same year, he made an agreement with the head of the other main branch of the Fraser family, Alexander Fraser of Philorth, that each would be heir to the other, failing male heirs of their own. Such a measure demonstrates Lovat's concern to safeguard the prestige and position of his family in the face of the vagaries of inheritance, but it proved unnecessary. When Hugh Fraser died, before 14 October 1501, his son Thomas succeeded him as second Lord Lovat. 


