@@@@@


doc= 55992


Walker, Horace (1910-1994), Church of Scotland minister and administrator, was born on 16 August 1910 in Aberdeen, the youngest of five children of William Telfer Walker ('c'.1865- 'c'.1937), a sales representative, and his wife, Sarah Jackson ('c'.1867-1949). From Aberdeen grammar school he went, in 1928, to Aberdeen University, and graduated with honours in English (MA, 1932) before studying divinity (BD, 1935). He worked for three years as Scottish travelling organizer of the Student Christian Movement (SCM), which then encompassed both liberal and evangelical theology. The appointment was a joint arrangement between the SCM and the home board of the Church of Scotland, whose Aberdeen presbytery ordained Walker in December 1935. 
In 1938-9 Walker was assistant minister at St Mary's, Dundee, and when the Second World War broke out was in the process of induction (completed 27 September 1939) into his first parish charge at West Port, Hawick. He remained there for most of the war, apart from secondment to Orkney with the Church of Scotland huts and canteens serving the forces. Hawick introduced him to a Scottish regional culture as distinctive as Aberdeen's and to his future wife, Annie Wyles Duncan ('b'. 1918), a nurse whom he married on 28 April 1945, shortly after he had moved back to Aberdeen. They had two daughters. From 1944 to 1948 he was minister of the church extension parish of High Hilton, an Aberdeen area developed between the wars. 
Walker left the parish ministry to become secretary-depute of the Church of Scotland's home board in 1948 and from 1 November 1957 to August 1977 was its secretary, a managing co-ordinator, and executive director as far as Presbyterian structures allowed. He was bureaucrat and diplomat, even entrepreneur, involved in creating nearly fifty new parishes and in 150 building projects at a time when urban redevelopment, new town projects, Glasgow overspill, and suburban expansion changed the face of Scotland. 
Walker's ministry extended beyond planning and administering these changes. He sought to extend as well as organize concepts of ministry and to integrate parish based church life with initiatives of a different kind. These tried to respond to social and intellectual trends as well as population changes. His commitment to traditional church extension which had sustained and often revived the Church of Scotland in inter-war and post-war years went with enthusiasm for industrial and hospital chaplaincy and church involvement with science, technology, and the arts, as well as conference and lay training centres. There were initiatives for groups from immigrants to weekend skiers, as well as a sustained 'Tell Scotland' movement. 
These endeavours flourished in an age when church membership in Scotland was still around its peak (a decline set in from the early 1960s) and residual attachment and respect remained strong among those with no formal connection. This approach recognized that many congregational activities had become less relevant to life patterns among a more mobile population, though it depended for long-term viability on the ability of traditional parishes to pay their own way and sustain central funds. 
Most of the initiatives remained vigorous when Walker retired, though further expansion and experiment were limited by straitened circumstances in the church and a less universally friendly perception of it. Hospital chaplaincy thrived but industrial chaplaincy, originally linked to Scottish heavy industry, found that it was not only parish life that had to cope with social and economic change. One fresh success was a chaplaincy to the North Sea oil industry. Some other initiatives wilted or were scaled down, but Walker's concepts continued to influence the Church of Scotland's perception of its history, theology, and mission, most spectacularly demonstrated in its ownership of a theatre and arts centre through the wall from the building accepted by tradition as John Knox's house. 
In demeanour Horace Walker could show a reserve which only briefly concealed a warm heart. Literally and metaphorically he walked upright, visible from afar by a shining head of white hair unthinned with age. He was a receptive listener, generally shrewd in judgement, and strong willed but fair-minded. Some of those working with him called him prophetic. He was not most notable as visionary of the distant scene, but as team leader, planner, and negotiator with a liberal evangelical faith. He could share visions and work out practical steps to give them substance. He also achieved considerable success in harmonizing parish efforts of different trends in the church, notably the Iona Community emphasis on social gospel and the growth of a self-conscious conservative evangelicalism. 
After retirement in 1977 Walker was chairman of the ecumenical Scottish Churches Council for four years before ill health weakened him. He died in Edinburgh after years of increasing infirmity on 5 December 1994 and was cremated on 8 December at Warriston crematorium. He was survived by his wife. Aberdeen University conferred a DD on him in 1967. He was made OBE in 1978. 


@@@@@


doc= 55997


Lees, Andrew John (1949-1994/5), conservationist and environmental campaigner, was born on 8 June 1949 at Sandown Nursing Home, 14 Sandown Road, Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, the eldest among the four boys of Edward Andrew Lees ('b'. 1923), hotelier and Great Yarmouth borough councillor, and his wife, Beryl, 'nee' Whiteley (1927-1993). Andrew Lees was a son of Norfolk with a passion for its big skies, low-lying landscape, and traditional village culture. Most of all he loved its myriad of rivers and streams, dykes, marshes, and fens, and its rich diversity of wildlife. 
In 1967 (after education at St George's School, Harpenden) Lees enrolled at the University of Wales in Cardiff to study zoology, botany, and philosophy. After graduating with honours in 1971 he worked as a field scientist with the Nature Conservancy Council (NCC). The NCC had a statutory responsibility to protect the best of Britain's natural environment by designating certain areas as 'sites of special scientific interest' (SSSIs). Lees's uncompromising commitment to nature conservation first emerged in 1978 when surveying Crymlyn bog in Wales. Having determined that this unique habitat was a potential candidate for special protection he organized the local community and the media to stop it being turned into a rubbish tip. In 1981, working with Friends of the Earth (FOE), he obtained leave for judicial review of NCC's failure to notify part of the bog as a SSSI. The NCC backed down and the site was given SSSI protection. This was Lees's first environmental campaign success. His adherence to scientific discipline and knowledge of environmental laws, combined with his ability to attract media attention and generate local support, provided the winning formula that defined his future environmental campaign strategies. 
Disillusioned with the NCC, Lees left Wales in late 1981 and returned to his native Norfolk. The broads were under serious threat from proposals to build deep drainage and barrier systems that would turn the wetlands into vast prairies of cereal production. In 1982 Lees helped to set up Broadlands Friends of the Earth and was appointed as its chairman. He lobbied the media, exposed the environmental contradictions in the government's agricultural policies, and succeeded in galvanizing local and national opinion against the drainage scheme. In 1986, after much campaigning, large tracts of marshlands were designated an environmentally sensitive area (ESA). Two years later, under intense public pressure, the government passed the 'Norfolk and Suffolk Broads Act'. The broads were protected: a success due in large measure to Lees's tenacious campaigning and commitment. 
In 1985 Lees was appointed FOE national campaign officer for the countryside and pesticides, and in 1986 as water pollution and toxics campaigner. Pollution in any form was unacceptable to him: agricultural pesticides, sewage discharges, leachate from landfill sites, and traffic pollution. Any activity that threatened human health or the environment would be challenged. He continued to apply his winning campaign formula with vigour and determination. He organized the 'dirty dozen' campaign to expose a group of highly toxic chemicals, many of which were later banned. He pioneered the use of judicial review of government legislation. He used formal complaints procedures to ensure proper implementation by the British government of European Community environmental laws, becoming a well-known figure to officials in Brussels. He was extremely wary of the government's plans in 1987 to privatize the water industry, which he felt would undermine water quality in the United Kingdom. He exposed the poorly regulated and weak standards of sewage treatment and showed that concentrations of pesticides in many drinking water supplies breached legal standards. The 'Water Resources Act', which was implemented in 1991, included much higher environmental standards and tighter regulatory controls for the protection of water quality than had previously been expected. This was one of Lees's greatest achievements. 
Lees's environmental concerns extended beyond the UK. In 1988 he and a fellow FOE campaigner, Charles Secrett, went to Nigeria and exposed the illegal dumping of 8000 tons of mainly Italian toxic waste at Koko on the Niger delta. Lees was incensed that a so-called developed country could show such scant regard for the health and well-being of local people in a developing country. Not content simply to expose those responsible, he continued to track the waste on the 'Karin B' cargo ship. With nowhere for the ship to go the 'Karin B' saga became an international scandal and a major embarrassment to the European Union, which later introduced new regulations restricting the shipment of hazardous waste to developing countries. 
In 1990 Lees became FOE's national campaigns director. His enthusiastic and combative campaigning style never abated. He would work day and night to get results, and he expected the same level of commitment from his colleagues. He was demanding and motivating in equal measure. His single-minded and often uncompromising approach would sometimes infuriate his colleagues. But he was also empowering and supportive, always encouraging others to realize their aspirations, hopes, and dreams. 
Lees's intense love of life and nature extended beyond environmental campaigning. He had a lively interest in philosophy, politics, and art that shaped his own unconventional perspective on life. But it was his partner from 1984, Christine Orengo ('b'. 1955), a theoretical biologist, who provided balance in his often over-stressed life. They were a devoted couple. She described him as a wonderful listener, the most caring and loving of partners, completely supportive, and a great strength in times of crisis. 
In 1994 Lees turned his attention to Madagascar, the world's fourth largest island and home to some of the most remarkable flora and fauna on earth. QIT, a mining company owned by Rio Tinto Zinc, was proposing to mine parts of the island for titanium dioxide. The mining operation threatened to produce 2 billion tons of titanium dioxide over forty years, and destroy huge swathes of unique littoral forest and sand dunes, along with the livelihood of thousands of local farmers and fishermen. This was a 'cause celebre' of international proportions. Lees went to Madagascar with a photographer, Paul Hellyer, just before Christmas 1994, with the intention of making a film documentary to support his campaign. Sadly, he never completed the project. On new year's eve, despite suffering from chronic diarrhoea, he decided to go into Petriky Forest alone to shoot one last piece of film. Hours later, when he failed to rendezvous with his taxi, there was panic. Eventually his body was found in a small clearing in Petriky Forest on 7 January. There was no indication of foul play. His camera equipment was intact. The autopsy later indicated that he had died of heat exhaustion. He was buried in Norfolk. 
Lees was a scientist with principles: a professional campaigner who won international acclaim and respect for his work on the environment. His abrupt and tragic death sent shock waves around the world. Tributes poured in from friends and adversaries alike. The media variously described him as 'a secular saint', 'a man of deep principles', and 'an environmental campaigner of a kind we will not see again', the man who 'effected more positive environmental change than any Secretary of State in the government'. A former European commissioner, Lord Clinton-Davis, commented on Lees's remarkable ability to influence an audience by his unassailable evidence and penetrating logic. Following his death the Andrew Lees Memorial Trust Fund was set up to help the people of Madagascar, and the Libanona Ecology Centre was dedicated to his memory. Perhaps the most poignant of memorials erected in his honour is the one at Pant-y-sais fen, the northern limb of the Crymlyn bog, where Lees's remarkable campaigning career began. The memorial carries a quotation from him: 'At some point I had to stand up and be counted. Who speaks for the butterflies?' 


@@@@@


doc= 56000


MacDonald, Malcolm John (1901-1981), politician and diplomatist, was born on 17 August 1901 at Lossiemouth, Scotland, the second of the three sons (among six children) of (James) Ramsay MacDonald (1866-1937), journalist, politician, and later prime minister, and his wife, Margaret Ethel Gladstone MacDonald (1870-1911), daughter of John Hall Gladstone FRS, a distinguished scientist, and an active social and religious worker. 
Throughout their marriage Ramsay and Margaret MacDonald worked closely together on political and social issues, and from his earliest years Malcolm got to know early socialist pioneers such as Keir Hardie from among the stream of visitors who came to their crowded flat in Lincoln's Inn Fields which doubled as an office-cum-workplace as well as a family home. Margaret died in September 1911 at forty-one, just eighteen months after the death of her third and youngest son, David. Thereafter Malcolm, his elder brother, Alister, and his three sisters were drawn even closer to their widowed father. Malcolm's career in particular was crucially affected by that of his father right up to the latter's retirement as prime minister in June 1935. 
Malcolm MacDonald was at Bedales School, near Petersfield in Hampshire, for eight years from 1912 to 1920, the same school that Alister attended. Both brothers later testified to the tolerance and friendships they enjoyed there, despite the public reviling and criticism their father suffered during the First World War for his conspicuous role as a Labour leader and conscientious objector to military service. At that time Bedales was best-known for being the only co-educational boarding-school for teenagers in England. Malcolm, especially in his final two or three years, was much influenced by the remarkable founding headmaster of Bedales, John Haden Badley. By his last year he had achieved what he later termed, somewhat laconically in his unpublished autobiography, 'a certain eminence' (MacDonald papers). He captained the soccer team and was vice-captain of the cricket eleven; he was a school record-breaking swimmer and athlete, captain of the fire brigade, and head prefect. He was a leading actor and producer in school plays. He seemed to shine at everything except scholarship, where his performances were adequate but undistinguished, though he did win a minor history exhibition to Queen's College, Oxford. 
MacDonald's four years at Oxford from 1920 to 1924 set him on course for a career in politics, and for his lifetime interest in travel and in international affairs. After a slow and rather quiet start in his first two years, he gradually became a relatively frequent and increasingly skilful debater at the Oxford Union, and in 1924 he was runner-up in the contest for presidency of the union to Gerald Gardiner, forty years later lord chancellor in Harold Wilson's Labour government. In that year his father became Britain's first Labour prime minister and he was able to invite some of his Oxford friends to visit the prime minister's country residence at Chequers. He was president for one term during his last year of the prestigious Ralegh Club, was active with several of his Canadian friends in Oxford at the 'Oh Canada! Club', and was a founder member of the Queen's-based informal Paragon Club. He obtained a second-class degree in modern history in 1923. He stayed on for a further postgraduate year, reading for a diploma in economics (in substance mostly economic history) and politics, and gained a distinction in 1924 which later encouraged him to comment rather wryly about economic expertise. 
From August 1924 until June 1925 MacDonald enjoyed, as one of a three-man debating team from Oxford, an extensive -- and busily social -- tour of the United States, Canada, Hawaii, Fiji, New Zealand, and Australia. Then he visited Hawaii and Kyoto in 1927 and 1929 respectively as secretary to the British delegation to conferences of the Institute of Pacific Relations. Although unsure whether he wished to pursue a lifetime career in politics he served as a member of the London county council from 1927 to 1930; and in 1929, at his third attempt (having been defeated in 1923 and 1924), MacDonald was elected to the House of Commons as Labour member for the Bassetlaw division of Nottinghamshire. 
In August 1931 the formation of the National Government split the Labour Party and MacDonald followed his father as one of a small group of National Labour MPs. He was immediately appointed parliamentary under-secretary in the dominion office and in this capacity moved the third reading of the 'Statute of Westminster'. Between 1935 and 1940 he was a cabinet minister holding one or both of the offices of secretary of state for dominion affairs and secretary of state for the colonies. In Whitehall and Westminster circles in the 1930s, Malcolm MacDonald had to prove to himself and to others that he owed successive ministerial offices to merit rather than merely to his father, although he was unashamedly a close confidant and supporter of his father, especially in Ramsay's last years. 
MacDonald played as well as worked hard. Throughout the 1930s his long active days (of 12-14 hours) were mostly devoted to Whitehall. Yet he often spent the evening and small hours consorting with an extensive company of actor and actress friends in or around London's theatreland. These included Ivor Novello, Noel Coward, Laurence Olivier, Beatrice Lillie, and, above all, Dorothy Dickson. Ministerially he was intimately involved in the controversies in these years over Eire, Palestine, the West Indies, and the promotion of colonial development and welfare policy, becoming the first active ministerial advocate of Commonwealth as a desirable outcome of empire. As dominions secretary from 1935 to 1939 he negotiated the end of the British-Irish trade war and settled the annuity and 'treaty ports' disputes in 1938. He was well nigh unique among British ministers in gaining the trust and perhaps the friendship of Eamon de Valera, partly because of a shared interest in ornithology. During 1940-41, with Winston Churchill's reluctant concurrence, he visited de Valera in Dublin three times to discuss Ireland's role in the war, albeit not productively. 
Although MacDonald lost his parliamentary seat at the general election of 1935, he was re-elected to the House of Commons at a by-election in 1936 for Ross and Cromarty; and he remained its MP, even through his war years in Canada, until 1945. In Churchill's government of 1940 he was minister of health, a post which involved him in such matters as food rationing, hospitals, and air-raid shelters during the blitz; this last responsibility involved him in inspecting London's war damage, occasionally in the company of the king and queen. 
In 1941 MacDonald was appointed Britain's high commissioner to Canada, and his youngest sister, Sheila ['see below'], accompanied him as his hostess. During his five years there he played a significant and characteristically unpublicized role in smoothing relations between the prickly bachelor Canadian prime minister, W. L. Mackenzie King, through a time when Canada's contribution to the war effort and to post-war planning was of the utmost importance. The fact that King virtually regarded MacDonald as an adopted son was a considerable asset to Britain. MacDonald was present at the Quebec conferences between Churchill and Roosevelt, nominally attended by King too. It was indicative of the regard and confidence King reposed in him that when the activities of the Soviet spy Igor Gouzenko were being investigated by Canadian intelligence, MacDonald was told of this earlier and was given details that King did not reveal to all his cabinet colleagues. 
King and many of his cabinet colleagues attended Malcolm MacDonald's wedding in Ottawa in December 1946. This was to a young Canadian war widow, Audrey Marjorie Rowley, daughter of a civil servant, Kenyon Fellowes. They met on a ski slope north of Ottawa, not long before his high commissionership came to an end. His wife had a son and a daughter from her first marriage. The couple also had a daughter, Fiona, born in 1949. Because of her father's itinerant life, and because her mother lived in Ottawa much of the time to look after her aged mother, Fiona wrote rather wistfully in the late 1990s: 'I thought of him more as a statesman than a father' (private information). 
On his return from Ottawa, having ceased to be an MP in 1945, MacDonald was appointed governor-general of the Malay States and Singapore in 1946, refusing Attlee's offer of office in his government or some other prestigious post. Thus began what turned out to be more than eight years of being based in south-east Asia. During that time MacDonald worked hard for inter-communal co-operation, for civil government, and for an eventual federalizing of Britain's Malayan possessions. In late 1946 British Borneo had been added to his responsibilities. In 1948 his direct responsibilities over the myriad territories later joined together in Malaya were superseded by the more general and undoubtedly ambiguous role of being in charge of overseeing and helping to co-ordinate Britain's relationships with the former Indo-China, as UK commissioner-general for south-east Asia. This was no easy task, with the Foreign Office, the Colonial Office, and the War Office being just three of the most prominent Whitehall interests actively involved in Malaya throughout the counter-insurgency war, euphemistically known in official British parlance as 'the Emergency' (1948-60). MacDonald's commission was, however, reconfirmed several times by Conservative as well as Labour governments. In a remarkable tribute to his interest and high standing among Borneo peoples, he was adopted as a 'son' of the Iban paramount chief Temonggong Koh. 
MacDonald was Britain's high commissioner to India from 1955 to 1960, years that saw a considerable increase in both Soviet and American interest, as rivals, in the subcontinent and some consequent diminution of British interest in military and economic matters. The years 1954 to 1958 also marked a high point in official Sino-Indian cordialities before border disputes and other matters led to a swift decline and then war in 1962. During MacDonald's five years in New Delhi the British diplomatic presence in India was extensive, with large offices in Bombay, Madras, and Calcutta as well as the main mission in the capital city. MacDonald toured extensively around India (occasionally meeting elderly Indians who purported to remember the visit of his parents much earlier in the century), entertained an extensive retinue of visitors, and extended his ornithological interests by writing (with the help of his Singapore-Chinese friend Christina Lohe) a book entitled 'Birds in my Indian Garden' (published in 1961), in addition to lengthy dispatches ruminating on aspects of Indian life. 
First and foremost, however, the second half of MacDonald's high commissionership was notable for his efforts, largely successful, to repair official Indo-British relations after the Suez misadventure in late 1956. This fence-mending was helped by Nehru's knowledge that MacDonald had criticized Eden's Suez Canal policy from the start. Once the canal zone had been invaded MacDonald drafted a letter resigning his high commissionership; but the swift passage of events and Eden's illness and resignation as prime minister made this unnecessary. 
It was a mark of Malcolm MacDonald's unique standing and experience that he was soon called out of his subsequent semi-retirement in England to be co-chairman and leader of the British delegation at the international conference on Laos held in Geneva in 1961-2. Here his tact, patience, and diplomatic skills were fully stretched: he played an important role involving China constructively with the enterprise, a process aided by his friendship with China's foreign minister, the sagacious Zhou Enlai. 
In 1963 at the urging of Duncan Sandys, the colonial secretary, MacDonald agreed to become Britain's last governor and commander-in-chief in Kenya in the period leading to independence, a process he came to believe should be hastened, especially as the project for an East African Federation foundered and was abandoned by Britain. He was governor-general for the two critical years of transition (1963-4). Then, as a clear testimony to the trust and standing he enjoyed with Jomo Kenyatta, MacDonald returned as Britain's second high commissioner (1964-5) to independent Kenya, succeeding Sir Geoffrey de Freitas, who was disappointed and disillusioned by the failure of the East African Federation scheme. MacDonald's friendship with Kenyatta, Tom Mboya, and a few other key Kenyans undoubtedly smoothed what could otherwise have been very strained UK-Kenyan relations. 
For three more years, from 1967 to 1969, MacDonald served as a roving ambassador in Africa for Harold Wilson's Labour government. His many contacts and his open and friendly sympathy for post-colonial leaders, peoples, and societies helped to diminish suspicion and opposition to British policies in Africa -- especially stemming from Rhodesia and Ian Smith's illegal regime, and Nigeria's civil war. However, despite being a loyal servant of the crown he was privately somewhat uncertain of the bona fides of the Wilson administration, and found his position trying and uncomfortable. As he wrote in a letter to his wife on 22 August 1967: 'It is quite a job trying to cope with the affairs of a dozen different countries in different parts of eventful Africa' (MacDonald papers). 
Early in his adult life Malcolm MacDonald became an enthusiast for the Commonwealth, and throughout his life he helped to sharpen the contrast between empire and Commonwealth in practical terms and without gratuitously disavowing Britain's imperial past. In this he used to say that he was helped by being Scottish not English -- though indubitably he was always British, as well as a self-styled citizen of the world. No linguist -- at best he knew a little French -- his character and broad interests and sympathies nevertheless brought him friends in many countries. His hobbies (especially bird-watching and collecting books, porcelain, and pictures) intermingled, sometimes creatively, with his official life. 
MacDonald had been sworn of the privy council in 1935 but he was markedly reluctant to accept 'social' honours and discouraged several overtures regarding a knighthood or a peerage. The notable exception came in 1969 when he accepted the Order of Merit. He received, however, many academic and some civic honours, and was made freeman of the city of Singapore in 1955 and of the burgh of Lossiemouth in 1969. His continuing devotion to young people and to education was shown in many ways: as a Rhodes trustee from 1948 to 1957, chancellor of the University of Malaya from 1949 to 1961, visitor for the University College of Kenya, a senior research fellow at the University of Sussex (1971-3), and chancellor of the University of Durham. 
MacDonald was small, wiry, and remarkably friendly, with something of a reputation as a ladies' man. He wore spectacles from youth to middle age and then, following an accidental breakage during the Second World War, he found that he was able to do without them. In later life he ate one main meal a day, though his diary sometimes registered two or three 'tea-times' in a single afternoon, usually at the Royal Commonwealth Society. In fact he always ate sparingly, turning his plate over at public mealtimes to indicate that he was forgoing a particular course. He required no more than a few hours' sleep each night. His painstaking application often kept him working late into the night, but he was usually up at dawn to renew his passionate interest in ornithology, which led him to produce books on the birds of Ottawa, Delhi, and Kenya. His other published writings were either reminiscences and pen portraits of people he had known or travelogues; they included 'People and Places' (1969) and 'Titans and Others' (1972). 
In early manhood there was a certain bespectacled gawky toothiness about MacDonald's appearance, and in the Whitehall of the 1930s his dress generally conformed with the formal wear of senior civil servants and ministers. From middle age he matured into a more distinguished-looking silver-haired statesman, albeit one who generally dressed casually in old age, dispensing with a necktie and the more formal clothes of earlier life. For years he listed his recreations in 'Who's Who' as 'ornithology, collecting, skiing'; the first two undoubtedly occupied much more of his time than the third -- his collection of Chinese porcelain is now at Durham University. MacDonald died at his home, Raspit Hill, Ivy Hatch, near Sevenoaks in Kent, on 11 January 1981. He had gone outside late on a frosty night to ensure that his greenhouses were properly closed, and suffered a heart attack. 
A nondenominational service of thanksgiving for Malcolm MacDonald's life and work was held in Westminster Abbey on 3 March 1981. In the commemorative address Sir Shridath Ramphal, the Commonwealth secretary-general, summed up his richly varied life by saying that he was a quintessential Commonwealth man. He stressed how MacDonald had brought to his extensive representational work the highest diplomatic qualities: he was 'the supreme interlocutor'. 
MacDonald's youngest sister, Sheila Ramsay Lochhead (1910-1994), prison visitor, was born on 7 December 1910 in London. Her mother died less than a year after her birth, and she was for a time looked after by family friends. She grew up immersed in Labour Party politics. She attended North London Collegiate School, where she became head girl, and Somerville College, Oxford, where she won a hockey blue and narrowly missed a first in philosophy, politics, and economics. She hoped to enter politics and in the 1931 election, her father wrote, 'made a fine beginning on the political platform' (Marquand, 780), but her father's decision to form the National Government effectively ended her political career. When her eldest sister, Ishbel MacDonald, married she became her father's political hostess, while also working as a classifying officer at Wormwood Scrubs prison. She accompanied her father on several visits overseas, and was with him in November 1937 on the voyage to South America on which he died. She then lived with her brother Malcolm in London -- where during the war she helped establish a primary school for unevacuated children -- and in Canada. In 1948 she married Andrew Van Slyke Lochhead ('b'. 1911), a lecturer in social administration; they had three children. They lived in Swansea, where he worked at the University College. She continued prison visiting and from 1962 was also a magistrate. She advocated penal reform and was active in the National Association of Prison Visitors, of which she was national chairwoman for three years. In Swansea she established a hostel for former prisoners and a shelter for homeless persons. In 1993 she published 'Outside in', a history of prison visiting. In 1993 a major stroke paralysed her down one side. She died on 22 July 1994 at her home, 43 Langland Road, Swansea, and was survived by her husband and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 56001


Pugh, (Lewis) Griffith Cresswell Evans (1909-1994), physiologist and mountaineer, was born on 29 October 1909 at Coton Manor, Berwick Road, Shrewsbury, the son of Lewis Pugh Evans Pugh (1865-1940), a Calcutta barrister, and his wife, Adah Emily Sophia, daughter of Thomas Chaplin, medical practitioner. He had four sisters. He was educated at Harrow School (1924-7), where he won a trophy for marksmanship, and at New College, Oxford (1927-30), where he achieved third-class honours in law in 1930 and took his BA in 1931. He returned to Oxford to study natural sciences during 1931-3, and medicine until 1938, when he received his BM along with an MA. As a student he climbed in the Alps and became an expert skier. He competed in the world downhill championships and was selected for the 1936 winter Olympic team as a cross-country skier, but an injury kept him off the slopes. He qualified as a doctor at St Thomas's Hospital in 1938. On 5 September 1939 at the parish church in Lilly, near Hitchin, he married Josephine Helen Cassel ('b'. 1916/17), daughter of Sir Felix Cassel, first baronet (1869-1953), barrister. They had three sons and one daughter. 
In 1939 Pugh entered the army as a medical officer in the Bedfordshire yeomanry, and he later joined the 26th General Field Hospital at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford. He served in Greece, Palestine, Crete, Egypt, Iraq, Iran, and the Lebanon. In 1942 W. J. Riddell, a Harrow classmate, recruited him for the 'Cedars School', the mountain warfare training centre in the Lebanon, which trained troops in ski-mountaineering and mountain warfare at 2100 metres. Pugh was allowed to study every aspect of the school, from tests to select trainees to tests on diet, fitness, clothing, and equipment, and he analysed his results in papers for the army. In 1944 he was briefly medical officer to the 44th Royal Tank regiment in Sicily, before being posted to Whitehall to write training manuals on snow and mountain warfare, based on his earlier research. This research also was the basis for his appointment after the war as a scientist at the medical school at Hammersmith Hospital, where he worked for five years and published papers on rheumatism. In 1950 he joined the Medical Research Council's department of human physiology, founded after the outbreak of the Korean War, and spent the rest of his career in their laboratory at Holly Hill, Hampstead. 
In 1951 the organizers of a Mount Everest reconnaissance approached Pugh for advice on high-altitude physiology, and his research was important to the ascent of Everest. In 1952 Eric Shipton invited him to join a training expedition in Nepal to climb Cho Oyu (8153 metres). Though the climbers failed to reach their objective, Pugh's research was productive. With a grant from the Royal Society he camped at Nangaon (4720 metres) and Menlung La (6100 metres) to study acclimatization, respiration, haemoglobin, nutrition, and thermal properties of clothing. Pugh recommended doubling the flow of oxygen to counter the effects of hypoxia -- the reduced pressure of oxygen at higher elevations that leads to extreme fatigue -- and increasing the consumption of fluids and carbohydrates to prevent dehydration and weight loss. Pugh also criticized Shipton's leadership of the expedition. After Colonel John Hunt was appointed Everest leader, he adopted many of Pugh's suggestions and included him on the team. The film 'The Conquest of Everest' (1953) shows Pugh before the trip testing himself in a pressure chamber. As a result of Pugh's advice and Hunt's planning, Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay had the supplies of oxygen, food, and fluid that enabled them to make the first ascent of Everest (8848 metres). When the Everest expedition returned to Katmandu, Pugh was still wearing his pyjamas as part of an eccentric experiment. His research appeared in many articles and a film, 'Physiology on Mount Everest' (1954). 
In 1956-7 Pugh joined a research team at Scott Base affiliated with Hillary's transantarctic expedition. He researched solar radiation, carbon monoxide poisoning, and human tolerance to cold. While in Antarctica he and Hillary hatched a plan to spend the winter in the Himalayas carrying out research. In 1960-61 Hillary and Pugh led the 'silver hut' expedition to Nepal. Funded by an American encyclopaedia, the expedition combined mountaineering and a search for the yeti with physiological research on hypoxia in a prefabricated hut. Observations on exercise, pulmonary functions, metabolic rates, and electrocardiograms were made at base camp on the Mingbo glacier (4650 metres) and in the hut just below the Ama Dablam col (5800 metres). Pugh stayed at the hut while other researchers measured oxygen consumption as high as 7830 metres during an attempt on Makalu (8481 metres). The ascent was abandoned below the summit after Peter Mulgrew and Edmund Hillary became severely ill. 
Pugh later studied the role of body fat in preventing hypothermia among cross-channel swimmers. After Kurt Hahn asked him to investigate deaths from 'exposure' during outdoor sports in 1964, he published a series of articles on hypothermia that led to improvements in outdoor clothing, increased awareness of risks, and a reduction in the incidence of hypothermia among outdoor enthusiasts. At the 1968 Olympics in Mexico City, Pugh examined the influence of the altitude (2300 metres) on athletic performance. Colleagues said he worked best on his own or with a small team. Pugh's many professional publications were listed in a collection of essays dedicated to him in 1993 ('Hypoxia and Molecular Medicine', 175-7). His work on high-altitude physiology contributed to the ascent of the world's highest peaks, and his research on hypothermia probably saved lives. 
Pugh was tall, with angular features and red hair. His absent-mindedness was legendary. When he forgot, as he frequently did, where he had parked his car in London, he would take the train home, report the car stolen to the police, and wait for them to recover it. The story that he once did this with his children in the car is considered apocryphal. He enjoyed sailing and was a ferocious driver. A series of automobile accidents later in life left him crippled with arthritis. He died of a heart attack and dementia on 22 December 1994 at his home, Hatching Green House, Harpenden, Hertfordshire. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 56002


Sweeting, Marjorie Mary (1920-1994), geomorphologist, was born on 28 February 1920, at 24 Radipole Road, Fulham, the only child of George Scotland Sweeting, geology lecturer at Imperial College, London, and Ellen Louisa Liddiard. She attended Mayfield School, Putney, London, before taking a first in geography at Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1941. She was awarded the degree of PhD in 1948 by the University of Cambridge for a thesis entitled 'The landforms of the Carboniferous limestone of the Ingleborough district, N. W. Yorkshire'. Between 1948 and 1951 she was a research fellow at Newnham, and in 1951 she moved to the University of Oxford bringing her expertise and enthusiasm for karst (Carboniferous limestone) studies. She remained at St Hugh's College where she was from 1951 a fellow and tutor, later dean and senior tutor, and was concurrently university lecturer in the school of geography (appointed 1953), reader (appointed 1977), and acting head of department (1983-4). She retired in 1987. 
During her research career in Oxford, Marjorie Sweeting supervised over thirty graduate students including a significant number who became the major figures in karst research. The research fields and locations of her students reflected her broad interest in limestone studies around the world: Jamaica, Puerto Rico, Canada, Belize, Australia, China, Tibet, and Borneo. These areas were, however, but a few of the karst regions of the world that she visited. Perhaps the only major limestone areas which she did not visit were those of the Arab world. 
The characteristic which Marjorie Sweeting showed in her research career was one of utilizing technical advances made in other sciences. Never shy of adapting to the current trend, she fashioned her approach to karst studies upon a variation of field location, laboratory innovations, and funded research topics for her students. Consequently her publications, over seventy in all, spanning 1943-95, including two major books ('Karst Landforms', 1972, and 'Karst in China: its Geomorphology and Environment', 1995), represented a broad church of limestone enquiry. 
In keeping with the academic environment of the time, Sweeting's early works concentrated upon the shape of karst landforms, upon the geological control (following the influence and co-research of her geologist father, G. S. Sweeting), and, in the early 1960s, upon landscape denudation rates. This later interest in rates of process led her to experimental studies and laboratory measurement, activities which were innovative for the scientific climate of the time. Working with rather simple equipment she succeeded in noting the importance of mineralogy in controlling weathering rates. This work brought together the field study and analysis of her research students, particularly those working in Jamaica and Puerto Rico. This early research led her to publish her most important book, 'Karst Landforms', in 1972. The book was the synthesis of her extensive travels, her own and her research students' work, and of her collaboration and discussion with most if not all of the major researchers in the field of limestone studies. The influence of French and German ideologies in her book is obvious as is her discussion with Slavonic geomorphologists. The book is a benchmark of its time, classic and informative of the prevailing morphological (as opposed to process) orientation of karst studies in the 1950s and 1960s. The lack of speleological research in the book is surprising given her interest and influence with the British Cave Research Association, with whom she caved; on the basis of those experiences she often identified cave science as a necessary facet of limestone research. Nevertheless 'Karst Landforms' remains a formative text and an essential primer for any serious student of karst studies. 
After the publication of 'Karst Landforms' China opened up as an accessible region for research. Present on the first cultural visit of British scientists to China in 1975, Sweeting formed close links with the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing and with the Karst Institute in Guilin where she returned more than fifteen times over the next twenty years or so. 
The Chinese limestone regions were little visited by foreign scientists but Sweeting managed to visit all of the important regions from Guilin in the south to Hubei, Outer Mongolia in the north; from Shanghai in the east to Chengdu in the west. Eventually she studied high-mountain karst in Tibet but although she retained her desire to travel, by the 1990s she inevitably took a more passive role in field research. 
Armed with undoubtedly the greatest experience and field knowledge of Chinese limestone regions of any researcher, Sweeting set about her last major task, a book on the karst of China. In final manuscript form, edited by her, shortly before her death, the book was published in 1995, entitled 'Karst in China: its Geomorphology and Environment'. The book documents a vast range of features in the most important limestone region of the world. She recognizes in the book the importance of understanding and managing limestone regions in one of the most densely populated areas of the world. 
Ever the diplomat, Sweeting preferred to review rather too kindly idiosyncratic views held by differing scientific communities within China. As a result, the book fails to provide the incisive commentary that only she could have brought to bear, and which she was happy to acknowledge in discussion but not prepared to publish. Notwithstanding this, the book remains the benchmark description of Chinese karst studies during the twentieth century. 
Throughout her Chinese research, Sweeting maintained an interest in new lines of enquiry; research, by this date generally undertaken through her research students, broadened her interests into biogeomorphology (which she had highlighted as potentially important in 'Karst Landforms' as early as 1972) and dating techniques. 
Sweeting enjoyed watching sport of all kinds (and her students noted what great physical demands she made of herself in the field), opera, and entertaining, but she most enjoyed the travel and conviviality which fieldwork and conference-going brought. 
Awarded honours from the Royal Geographical Society (notably the Busk medal in 1980) and from many foreign speleological and geomorphological societies, Sweeting was acknowledged as one of the twentieth century's most important figures in karst studies. She died on 31 December 1994 at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, after a protracted fight against cancer. She was buried at Enstone, Oxfordshire, the village where she lived, on 6 January 1995. Her estate, divided equally among St Hugh's College, Oxford, Newnham College, Cambridge, and the Royal Geographical Society, significantly increased funds available to assist travel for research purposes at each of these institutions and reveals her love of travel, her dedication to research and, in the absence of family, her loyalty to the institutions where she felt at home. 


@@@@@


doc= 56005


Minnitt, Robert James (1889-1974), anaesthetist and general practitioner, was born in Preston on 25 October 1889, the son of Robert Minnitt (1852-1918), Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Isabella, 'nee' Cookson (1853-1922). He was educated privately, and went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1908 intending to read for the church; his father and grandfather were both in holy orders. He left after a year to study medicine at Liverpool, qualifying in 1915. On 1 September 1916 he married Eileen Dooley (1897-1975). 
Minnitt is chiefly remembered for the development of a machine for self-administration of nitrous oxide ('gas') and air to relieve pain in childbirth. Helped by Charles King, an engineer with a special interest in anaesthetic equipment, he modified an existing machine which started trials at the Liverpool Maternity Hospital in October 1933. By 1936, with his research assistant Dr Hilda Garry, he was able to demonstrate to the Royal Society of Medicine that the technique provided satisfactory pain relief in over 90 per cent of cases with no ill effects. Concurrently a report co-ordinated by the British College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists confirmed these findings. Both these studies received funding from the National Birthday Trust Fund, one of whose members, Lucy Baldwin, the prime minister's wife, had a particular interest in analgesia in childbirth. 
In 1936 the Central Midwives' Board accepted the machine for use by unsupervised midwives, who then managed 60 per cent of deliveries, subject to strict conditions. Minnitt devised a portable model which could fit in the carrier of a bicycle, thus extending the technique to the domiciliary setting where 80 per cent of deliveries took place. Gas and air remained the only form of pain relief available to millions of women until the early 1960s. Then defects were found in some Minnitt machines; nitrous oxide and oxygen (Entonox) from a single cylinder was developed and was recognized by the Royal College of Midwives. 
Minnitt received many honours, including fellowships from the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (1950) and the Faculty of Anaesthetists (1953). The Royal Society of Medicine awarded him the Hickman medal (1950) for original work of outstanding merit. A commemorative plaque was mounted outside the labour ward at the Liverpool Maternity Hospital. 
Minnitt's many other pioneering achievements should not be overshadowed. He obtained an MD degree in 1925, and in 1930 was a founder member of the Liverpool Society of Anaesthetists, the first provincial society of its kind in England. He acted as secretary for twenty years before becoming president. The university appointed him the first lecturer in anaesthesia (1933), and he was the first anaesthetist to sit on the board of the faculty of medicine. He thus strongly influenced the establishment of a full-time department of anaesthesia (1947). This was highlighted in the citation for his honorary MSc (1967). His publications included 'Gas and Air Analgesia' and (with John Gillies) a re-editing of Ross and Fairlie's 'Handbook of Anaesthesia'. 
In 1948 Minnitt found himself unable to accept a contract in the National Health Service and spent the rest of his life in private general practice, probably at some financial cost. Nevertheless his reputation remained and he was still in demand as a lecturer. He was president of the section of general practice at the Royal Society of Medicine (1954-5) and was an honorary fellow on the foundation of the Royal College of General Practitioners. Locally he was president of the Liverpool Medical Institution (1957) and continued to attend meetings of the Liverpool Society of Anaesthetists. Minnitt is recalled as an inspiring teacher and a man of infinite courtesy whose devotion to his patients was legendary. It was said that he never took a holiday. He died on 21 February 1974 at Broadgreen Hospital, Broadgreen, Liverpool, and was buried that month at Christchurch, Healey, Rochdale. He was survived by his wife, son, and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 56007


Boyle, Henry Edmund Gaskin (1875-1941), anaesthetist, was born on 2 April 1875 in Christ Church, Barbados, the only child of Henry Eudolphus Boyle, manager of the Hope and Bannatyne estates in Christ Church, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Benjamin Law Gaskin, a member of the Barbados house of assembly. Boyle attended the local schools of Codrington and Harrison before leaving Barbados for England in 1894 and enrolling at St Bartholomew's Hospital medical school, London. He qualified MRCS LRCP in 1901. An intensely loyal 'Barts man', Boyle was a keen sportsman and played both rugby and cricket for the hospital. 
Boyle's first post, in August 1901, was as casualty officer at Bristol Royal Infirmary. He returned to Barts as junior resident anaesthetist in April 1902 and was appointed senior resident administrator of anaesthetics in 1905 at a salary of $350 per annum. Later that year he became non-resident assistant administrator of the department of anaesthetics. During this time he wrote a popular textbook entitled 'Practical Anaesthetics' (1907), which went through two further editions. On 1 October 1925 he became anaesthetist to St Bartholomew's Hospital; he resigned on health grounds in February 1939, and the following July he was elected to the honorary position of consulting anaesthetist to the hospital, a position he filled until his death. 
In his initial researches, with Somnoform, Boyle developed an apparatus for its administration; however, the drug never became popular. He then worked with intratracheal insufflation techniques before developing what was to become his most famous contribution to anaesthesia: a continuous-flow oxygen, nitrous oxide, and ether apparatus. In 1912 Boyle met the New York anaesthetist James T. Gwathmey, who had designed a continuous-flow anaesthetic apparatus that included a water-sight flow-meter for oxygen and nitrous oxide. He persuaded Boyle to obtain one of these devices, and having used it Boyle then asked Coxeters to manufacture a similar apparatus that would have a gas tight fitting for English cylinders (a problem with the Gwathmey machine). Known as Boyle's nitrous oxide-oxygen-ether outfit, it was first used at Barts in September 1917 and a short report describing its use in more than 3600 cases appeared in 1919. Over the next two decades Boyle constantly modified this apparatus. Further refinements took place after his death, and although the name of 'Boyle's machine' was dropped it remained essentially as he had designed it throughout the rest of the century. Boyle had been made a captain in the Royal Army Medical Corps in September 1914, and he was appointed OBE in 1920 because of his work in caring for wounded soldiers in London during the war. He made other important contributions to anaesthesia, developing a special laryngotomy tube and then the Boyle-Davis gag that was used for decades in tonsil surgery. He also introduced one of the first Sorensen electrical suction apparatuses ever used in Britain. 
Boyle married a widow, Mildred Ethel Green, daughter of John William Wildy, of Coutts Bank, on 3 September 1910. He had one stepdaughter. Affectionately known as Cocky, he was a man of great personal charm, a social person renowned for his rotund frame, hearty laugh, and fund of amusing stories. He entertained lavishly and this might have accounted for his considerable financial difficulties later in life. He received no financial gain from any of his inventions. Boyle was a founder member of the editorial board of the 'British Journal of Anaesthesia', an original member of the Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland, and one of the first two examiners for the diploma in anaesthesia. He was a member of the Society of Anaesthetists that evolved into the anaesthetic section of the Royal Society of Medicine. He was a staunch supporter of this latter group and was elected president for 1923. He was created FRCS in 1935. 
Boyle died in London on 15 October 1941 at the Royal Cancer Hospital, Chelsea. He was cremated two days later at Golders Green, and was survived by his wife. In January 2000, the department of anaesthesia at St Bartholomew's Hospital was renamed the Boyle department of anaesthesia. 


@@@@@


doc= 56008


Pask, Edgar Alexander (1912-1966), anaesthetist, was born on 4 September 1912 at 188 Kedleston Road, Derby, the second son of Percy Pask (1880-1957), fruit importer, and his wife, Mary (1885-1952), daughter of Alexander Speedie of St Marks, Isle of Man, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' McCutcheon. He won an open scholarship from Rydal School to Downing College, Cambridge, and in 1934 he obtained first-class honours in the natural sciences tripos. In 1937, after study at the Royal London Hospital, he graduated MB BCh and was admitted MRCS, and LRCP. After house appointments at the London, where he became interested in anaesthesia, he was appointed house anaesthetist at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford. In February 1940 he became junior assistant to Professor MacIntosh of Oxford. He also obtained the diploma in anaesthetics in 1940. 
In May 1941 Pask volunteered for service with the RAF. At the physiological laboratory at Farnborough (which became the Institution of Aviation Medicine) he undertook research which frequently necessitated dangerous experiments on the human subject. He studied the efficiency of methods of artificial respiration and, because anaesthetized subjects had to be used, Pask himself was deeply anaesthetized many times. To discover whether RAF crew could survive if they bailed out of an aircraft at altitude, Pask also carried out experiments which involved his exposure to low oxygen levels, equivalent to those which exist at increasing heights. He then related the effects, especially on his level of consciousness, to actual descents. He showed that 35,000 feet was the greatest height from which escape by parachute could be made without oxygen with any chance of survival. He risked his life on each of many occasions. 
Of Pask's work at Farnborough the best-known relates to the design of flotation jackets. It was discovered that the Mae West would not support an unconscious subject with his head out of the water, and instead often turned the individual face-down. The only way to test improved prototypes was on unconscious volunteers, and Pask was anaesthetized many times wearing different jackets and then immersed in the pool at Farnborough, while the results were recorded on film. With MacIntosh he designed a new breathing system which allowed him to float in an unrestricted fashion while MacIntosh and the anaesthetic machine remained on the poolside. This (coaxial) breathing system was ahead of its time, and many years later a similar device was 'invented' and used in clinical practice. Pask's thesis for his MD was based on the life-jacket work. To test clothing for aircrew who might have to survive exposure, Pask parachuted into freezing seas off Shetland. He maintained that only in this way could he be sure that a particular idea would come up to expectation. His bravery was recognized by appointment as an OBE (military division) in 1944. 
After the war Pask was appointed reader in anaesthetics to the Newcastle division of the University of Durham, with the appointment delayed so that he could first spend time in the USA and Canada. He took up his post in May 1947, and was awarded a personal chair on 8 February 1949, thus becoming only the second professor of anaesthetics in the country. His research produced innovations in lung ventilator design, and an established chair was created on 26 October 1959. He married on 13 October 1954 Muriel Mary O'Brien (1913-1997), a nurse; a daughter, Susan, was born in 1955. 
Pask was a founder member of the Faculty of Anaesthetists and eventually vice-dean; he was also a member of council of the Association of Anaesthetists. He delivered several prestigious lectures and wrote many papers, and was the third recipient of the Association of Anaesthetists' John Snow medal. In 1965 he served as president of the section of anaesthesia of the Royal Society of Medicine. 
Pask had a charismatic personality and was truly a leader, being able to inspire all who worked with him and instil into them the same principles of utter dedication and care which were his own hallmarks. This influence ensured that several of his staff later attained great distinction. He was meticulous and gained a reputation for challenging questioning combined with requests for evidence to support any statement made. His incisive mind allowed him to make great contributions, and he was much sought-after as a member of committees. 
Although he insisted on the highest standards Pask was a kind and most considerate man, and closer acquaintance revealed an acute sense of humour. He was surprisingly small and of slender build with a craggy face and, usually, an enigmatic expression. His sudden and unexpected death after a heart attack at his home in Mitchell Avenue, Jesmond, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 30 May 1966 followed a spell of deteriorating health. He was buried at West Road cemetery, Newcastle. 


@@@@@


doc= 56010


Jessop, Ann (bap. 1782, d. 1864), cabinet-maker, was baptized at the church of St Peter and St Paul, Sheffield, on 9 May 1782, the daughter of Adam Wilde and his wife, Elizabeth. Nothing is known of her early life except that she was twice married: first at Sheffield on 21 June 1805 to Charles Turner; second at Rotherham parish church on 8 November 1818 to a widower, Edward Bardwell, an auctioneer and appraiser. Both marriage certificates were witnessed with a cross, indicating that she lacked education. 
Around 1814 Edward Bardwell established a cabinet-making business in the centre of Sheffield at 92 Fargate. He was listed in trade directories of 1817 as an auctioneer and furniture broker, together with John Bardwell jun. (presumably a son or brother), auctioneer and appraiser, and Bardwell & Son, auctioneers and appraisers, in nearby Marketplace. By 1821 Edward had died and despite the presence of several male relatives, Ann Bardwell was listed as trading alone as a cabinet-maker, upholsterer, and furniture broker from slightly smaller premises at 95 Fargate. The business continued in her name until 14 May 1828 when she married her third husband, James Jessop, another widower. Both signed the register with their names, Ann presumably having acquired literacy and numeracy while helping her second husband run his business. Between 1828 and 1832 the firm was known as James Jessop, cabinet-maker, but the 1833 Sheffield trade directory listed Mrs Ann Jessop, cabinet-maker, upholsterer, china, glass, and earthenware dealer, as trading from 95 Fargate alone. 
In the same year Ann Jessop was one of nine local cabinet-makers approached by the Company of Cutlers in Hallamshire to tender designs and prices for the manufacture of 250 mahogany dining chairs and three large mahogany dining tables. Although she was unsuccessful in this commission, the fact that she was invited to tender for it indicates that she was one of the foremost cabinet-makers in the town. By 1839 the firm had moved to larger, rented premises at 26 Fargate, consisting of a house, shop, and warehouse. A surviving yew wood Windsor chair sold from there still bears a printed label inscribed, 'From A. Jessop's cabinet, picture frame, and looking glass manufactory'. In the 1851 census Ann Jessop was listed as a widow aged sixty-eight. She was described as upholsterer, cabinet-maker, carver, and gilder, employing a total of eighteen men. 
The firm continued under the name of Mrs Jessop until 1854 when, in her seventy-first year and after thirty-four years in business, she announced her retirement in favour of her nephew, F. J. Mercer, who had managed the firm for fourteen years. Ann Jessop retired with her niece to Springfield Place, 323 Glossop Road, then part of the affluent western suburbs of Sheffield. Unfortunately, the business ceased trading around 1870 and three years later F. J. Mercer committed suicide. 
Ann Jessop died from gastroenteritis on 23 September 1864 aged eighty-two at her home, 264 Western Bank, Sheffield. She had the distinction, despite losing three husbands, of successfully running one of the leading cabinet-making, upholstery, carving, and gilding businesses in Sheffield in the mid-nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 56011


Malchair, John (bap. 1730, d. 1812), folksong collector, was baptized as Johann Baptist Malscher on 15 January 1730 at Cologne, the son of a watchmaker. He was a chorister at Cologne Cathedral from 1744, moved to Nancy in 1750, and in 1754 came to England, where he was known as John Malchair. In London he played the violin at public-house concerts and taught music to mechanics and others. A gifted artist, he also obtained a post as drawing master at a ladies' school. He lived for some time in Hereford and Bristol, and from 1759 led the second violins at the Three Choirs festival; a peal of bells still rung at Gloucester Cathedral some 250 years later was his composition. 
In 1760 Malchair married Elizabeth Jenner, and in the same year won the post of leader of the Oxford Music Room (later the Holywell Music Room) Band over a more prepossessing rival candidate: 'Poor Malchair, tho' a fine figure, was ugly' (Crotch's Malchair, MSS, Bodl. Oxf., MS mus. sch. D. 32), according to a friend, the Christ Church organist William Crotch (1775-1847). Malchair led the band until 1792, when an orange thrown at the orchestra during an undergraduate disturbance broke his Cremona violin. His sight was failing and he never led the band again. When Malchair became blind, Crotch wrote down his violin tunes and provided piano accompaniments for them. Malchair's melodies owe much to the folk tradition; he was a pioneer collector of popular airs, and in Oxford noted several melodies from singers and musicians heard in the streets. These include early notations of the country dance tunes 'Astley's Ride' and 'Davy, Davy Knick-Knack', and of the melody of 'Early one morning', which he obtained in May 1784 from the singing of a poor woman and two children. Malchair's own compositions include several pieces whimsically written for a violin with three strings, after an occasion when he took his violin from its case and discovered one string to be broken. 
Both Malchair and Crotch were talented watercolour painters, and through Crotch, Malchair influenced later English landscape painters, including John Constable. Malchair died in Oxford on 12 December 1812. 


@@@@@


doc= 56012


Mearns, Andrew (1837-1925), Congregational minister and author, son of John Mearns and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Hyslop, was born on 4 July 1837 in Burnside, New Cumnock, Ayrshire, and educated at the Glasgow normal school and Glasgow University. After an early career as a pupil teacher at the Glasgow normal school and an assistant master, first at the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne, and then at a school in Maidenhead, Mearns entered the Theological Hall of the United Presbyterian church in Edinburgh in 1860. On completing his training there in 1863, he accepted the co-pastorate of the Congregational church in Great Marlow. From 1866 to 1879 he served as pastor of the new Congregational church in Markham Square, Chelsea. 
In 1876 Mearns was elected secretary of the London Congregational Union, Congregationalism's overseeing and co-ordinating body for the capital, and three years later he gave up active ministry (although in 1884 he served as pastor of the Bishopsgate church) to become the union's full-time 'secretary without pastoral care', a post he held for over a quarter of a century. It was in that capacity that he initiated an inquiry into the physical and moral condition of the London slums that resulted in the reform tract 'The Bitter Cry of Outcast London. An Inquiry into the Condition of the Abject Poor' (October 1883), a twenty-page penny pamphlet that has been called 'perhaps the most influential single piece of writing about the poor that England has ever seen' (Gilbert, 67). The pamphlet, with its dramatic emphasis upon the physical and moral consequences of overcrowding (including incest), created a furore. The Congregational and other churches responded by immediately establishing missions in the East End, and the government responded by appointing the royal commission on the housing of the working classes (1884-5). The pamphlet inspired the settlement house movement and encouraged a widespread, fresh examination of the social consequences of urbanization and unregulated capitalism, and what the Congregational assembly in 1885 termed 'the inequalities which unjust laws and customs produce' ('Congregational Year Book', 1886, 17). 

'The Bitter Cry', issued by the London Congregational Union, was anonymous, and soon after its appearance Congregational minister, W. C. Preston, in a series of letters to the 'Daily News', claimed authorship. Mearns hotly disputed the claim in the same newspaper and in the pages of the 'Contemporary Review', and when he was called as a witness before the royal commission on the housing of the working classes, Mearns laid claim to being the 'responsible author' ('Royal commission', 30.175, 180). When Mearns offered to bring forward the co-workers on 'The Bitter Cry' as witnesses on his behalf, Preston did not press his claim. It would appear that the initial conception of the inquiry came from Mearns, and that he gathered the information and compiled the social and economic statistics, and, although he handed over his materials and drafts to be written up by Preston, Mearns wrote much of the text, keeping a firm editorial grip on the whole, and revised the final draft. 'The Congregationalist' argued, 'It is but common justice to say the credit of this entire work belongs to Mr Mearns' (12, 1883, 908). In 1906 Mearns, who had lived in Chelsea, Bishopsgate, Brixton, and Upper Norwood, retired as secretary of the London Congregational Union and left London to live at 35 The Esplanade, Burnham-on-Sea, near Weston-super-Mare, Somerset, where, vigorous to the end, he died on 25 August 1925. 


@@@@@


doc= 56013


Boutmy, Emile Gaston (1835-1906), political scientist and commentator on British life and institutions, was born on 13 April 1835 in Paris. He was the son of Laurent-Joseph Boutmy, a journalist and businessman who died in financial ruin in 1848. Educated at the Lycee Louis-le-Grand in Paris, Boutmy became active in liberal journalism in the 1860s, and lectured at the Ecole Centrale d'Architecture in Paris, but he made his name as founder and first director of the independent Ecole Libre des Sciences Politiques (Sciences Po), which opened in Paris in 1872. The school, which set out to counteract the defects of French political culture, became the chief route of entry into the higher civil service, and an immensely important influence on French public life. Its success testified both to the power of its founder's vision, and to his practical genius in translating that vision into reality. He was instrumental in communicating his vision to influential friends and in securing financial backing. Boutmy himself taught constitutional law, and his chief publications ranged over the comparative study of constitutions, political institutions and political cultures: 'Etudes de droit constitutionnel' (1885), 'Le developpement de la constitution et de la societe politique en Angleterre' (1887), 'Essai d'une psychologie politique du peuple anglais au XIXe siecle' (1901), 'Elements d'une psychologie politique du peuple americain' (1902). Boutmy, who was almost blind, married the daughter of an eminent protestant pastor, Eugene Bersier, in 1882. He died in Paris on 25 January 1906. 
The approach at Sciences Po to the study of the social sciences was empirical and historical rather than abstract and theoretical; it was also comparative, and was orientated towards comparisons with 'Anglo-Saxon' political systems. This was the setting in which Boutmy wrote his own works on English history, constitutional law, and political psychology. A strong Anglophile, he (like his friend H. A. Taine) wrote on England without thinking it necessary to spend much time there. He visited the country only four or five times, and for short periods. His most notable work, the 'Psychologie politique du peuple anglais', was composed at a time when collective psychology was a fashionable intellectual pursuit, and it was as a contribution to that genre that it was enthusiastically reviewed in France, by such authorities as the philosopher Gaston Richard and the Durkheimian sociologist Celestin Bougle. In England, where Boutmy's constitutional writings had been praised by such authorities as Dicey, his venture into collective psychology was less highly regarded: reviewers in 'The Athenaeum' and in 'Blackwood's Magazine' were unimpressed, though his work was used by the pioneering social psychologist William McDougall. 
Boutmy's emphasis was on the formation of national character through the interaction of the primitive characteristics of the race with its physical and human environment. The English were an active people, not given to abstraction or generalization; an energetic people endowed with foresight and self-control. They were also unsociable: the vigorous associative life of the English, prized by previous French observers such as Taine, was valued by Boutmy too, but he saw it as indicative not of a tendency to sociability, but rather of the individualism and self-reliance of the English. Hence 'the English, though profoundly individual, are nevertheless peculiarly qualified for collective operations; they have a superior power of coalition and ability to work collectively which is unknown among races who are less active and more absurdly vain' (E. G. Boutmy, ed., 'The English People: a Study of their Political Psychology', 1904, 116-7). Like F. Le Play, but unlike Taine, Boutmy emphasized the survival of the patriarchal family in England. He also differed from Taine in playing down the importance of Anglicanism, which he thought merely 'a combination of statesmen' (ibid., 52). It was the dissenters, he thought, who represented 'the heart of the nation' (ibid., 52). 


@@@@@


doc= 56014


Halevy, Elie (1870-1937), historian and philosopher, was born on 6 September 1870 at Etretat, Normandy, in France. He was the elder son of Ludovic Halevy (1834-1908), writer and librettist, and his wife, Louise, 'nee' Breguet (1847-1930), heir to the industrialist and scientist Louis Breguet. His younger brother was the critic and contemporary historian Daniel Halevy. Halevy's father was Jewish and his mother protestant; the children were raised as protestants. Brought up in Paris, Halevy was educated at the Lycee Condorcet and at the Ecole Normale Superieure. He passed the 'agregation' in 1892, but instead of proceeding to an academic career within the state system he accepted Emile Boutmy's offer of a post at the Ecole Libre des Sciences Politiques in Paris. He held a chair there from 1898 until his death, and his teaching was interrupted only by a period of wartime medical service. 
Boutmy, himself a distinguished student of British history and institutions, initially invited him to teach the history of British political ideas, and from 1902 Halevy offered this alternately with a course on the history of socialism. These were to remain his chief interests in a remarkably focused career. His private income spared him the quest for academic preferment and enabled him to devote himself to his scholarly writing. He was no recluse: like his brother, he was active in rallying intellectuals to the cause of Dreyfus in 1898, and after the First World War he was offered, but declined, a post in the secretariat of the League of Nations. But he was unwavering in his commitment to his scholarly vocation. On 17 October 1901 Halevy married Florence Noufflard ('c'.1880-1957), daughter of the musicologist Georges Noufflard and his Italian wife, Emilia Landrini. There were no children of the marriage. Florence accompanied him on many of his research trips to Britain, and shared in his scholarly activities to the full. 
Halevy was by training a philosopher rather than a historian: his first book was 'La theorie platonicienne des sciences' (1896), and together with his former classmates Xavier Leon and Leon Brunschvicg he founded and co-edited the 'Revue de Metaphysique et de Morale'. He also assisted in the foundation of the Societe Francaise de Philosophie. Halevy's involvement in both institutions was lifelong. His closest friends were 'normalien' philosophers such as Emile Chartier (Alain) and Celestin Bougle, as well as Brunschvicg and Leon. Yet Halevy made his name not as a philosopher but as a historian of nineteenth-century Britain. He seems to have been launched on this intellectual itinerary by a distaste for philosophies that lacked practical bite, and this led him to the study of Bentham, a philosopher not of the front rank, but who fascinated Halevy as 'le type du philosophe 'reformateur'' ('Correspondance', 179). This interest yielded a remarkable and enduring work of intellectual history, 'La formation du radicalisme philosophique' (3 vols., 1901-4), part of which he submitted as his doctoral thesis in 1901; it then led him into mainstream political and general history of Britain in his multi-volume 'Histoire du peuple anglais au XIXe siecle'. This work, Halevy's 'magnum opus', remained incomplete: volumes 1-3 (1912-23) dealt with the period 1815-41, and in 1926 and 1932 he published a two-volume epilogue treating the period 1895-1914. He never completed his treatment of the high Victorian period. Nevertheless he made a major and lasting impact upon the study of modern British history. The popularity of the English translations, which first appeared between 1924 and 1934, was confirmed by their publication in paperback by Penguin Books. 
Halevy's study of the philosophic radicals was a pioneering work in the history of ideas, and in analytical depth it greatly surpassed Sir Leslie Stephen's contemporaneous work on 'The English Utilitarians'. It has never been bettered as a study of Benthamism, although more recent work has suggested a more modest estimate of the Benthamite influence on the nineteenth-century mind. Halevy's interpretation -- which was characteristic of his historical method -- was structured about a pivotal distinction between two ultimately contradictory strands in Benthamism: the principle of the artificial identification of interests, which underpinned the philosophic radicals' political and legal theory; and the principle of the natural identity of interests, which underlay their economic doctrine. Halevy hinted at the collectivist potential in utilitarianism, and the implications of his work were thus subtly different from those of Dicey's lectures on the shift from individualism to collectivism in public policy. 
In his volume 'L'Angleterre en 1815' -- Halevy's acknowledged masterpiece, which was rejected by the first publisher he approached -- he expounded the 'Halevy thesis' that nineteenth-century Britain was saved from revolution by the influence of nonconformist religion, and especially Methodism. His work displayed great historical sensitivity and command of the sources; it also revealed, typically, a deep philosophical purpose. Like Max Weber just a few years before, Halevy was keen to deploy historical investigation as a tool with which to refute historical materialism. The Marxist thesis would suggest that Britain was ripe for revolution in the aftermath of the Napoleonic wars. Britain's avoidance of that fate could hardly be explained by the strength of its political institutions, for the student of Bentham depicted the unreformed British state as a ramshackle chaos. It was ideas -- not abstract ideas, but ideas as they acted on the public mind and were altered thereby -- that provided the only credible explanation for Britain's political stability in the early phase of the industrial revolution. 
The volumes Halevy's fellow countrymen most admired dealt with the period 1895-1914. Here he expounded a remarkably controlled thesis that both predated and surpassed George Dangerfield's more famous interpretation in 'The Strange Death of Liberal England' (1936). But these volumes on the pre-war crisis were somewhat detached from the overall conception of Halevy's 'History'; they were distinctly more pessimistic, as he traced the erosion of the vigorous liberal consensus of the high Victorian decades. They had more affinity with his inter-war reflections on problems in the interpretation of contemporary history. War and its impact now preoccupied him, and he served on the commission for the publication of French diplomatic documents on the origins of the First World War. He expounded an original thesis on this question in 'The World Crisis of 1914-1918: an Interpretation' (1930); and in a paper, 'L'ere des tyrannies', which he delivered to the Societe Francaise de Philosophie in 1936, he considered the relations between socialism and fascism, and traced their convergence to the impact of the war. These works, acute and powerful as they are, show his sympathetic interest in socialism hardening into the hostility of the liberal critic of generic totalitarianism. 
Halevy moved easily between French and British intellectual circles, perhaps more easily than any other twentieth-century French academic of the first rank. He spent a good portion of each year in Britain, usually working in the British Museum, and he reviewed for British periodicals. He also had an impressively wide range of British friends, who included H. A. L. Fisher, Graham Wallas, the Webbs, and Bertrand Russell; this circle of friends, mostly to the left of Halevy in politics, reflected his lifelong interest in British political ideas and in the history of socialism. He was awarded the honorary degree of DLitt by the University of Oxford in 1926, and delivered the Rhodes memorial lectures in the same university in 1929. He died suddenly of a heart attack on 21 August 1937, at his home, La Maison Blanche, Sucy-en-Brie (Seine-et-Marne), to the south-east of Paris. 
In his lifetime, and for decades afterwards, Halevy and his works were better known in Britain than in France. Later, however, French interest in Halevy revived with the rediscovery of that lost tradition of French liberalism stretching from Constant and Guizot through Tocqueville to Halevy's protege Raymond Aron. Halevy's work came to be celebrated by the allies of Francois Furet. The philosopher who turned via the history of ideas to British political history at last became, through his historical work on Britain, an important presence in the intellectual history of France. 


@@@@@


doc= 56015


Kingsmill, Joseph (1805/6-1865), penologist and prison chaplain, was born in co. Kilkenny, Ireland, the son of Thomas Kingsmill. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1826, was prizeman in classics and divinity, and proceeded to his BA in 1831 and MA in 1836. He was ordained deacon in 1831 by the bishop of Dromore and presented by the bishop of Chester in 1832. His historical significance is in his role as chaplain to Pentonville prison. 
Pentonville 'model prison' received its first intake on 21 December 1842 and was feted as the most important breakthrough in penal discipline of the age. Constructed in tiered lines of cells radiating from a central block it aimed to ensure the perfect operation of the separate system. In this system prisoners were isolated in individual cells, even attending chapel in separate cubicles, and were subjected to a battery of reforming influences in cell education, catechization, admonition, trade training, and so forth. The theory was that, with psychological defences broken down and mutual corruption ended by cellular isolation, prisoners would emerge from Pentonville at least reformed and at best converted to a sense of personal redemption and relationship with Christ. Pentonville was set up as the model for others to admire and emulate. It held a daily average of 500 men all sentenced to transportation and sent to Australasia on completion of the first eighteen months (subsequently reduced to nine) in Pentonville. In the late 1850s this nine months' separation formed the initial phase of penal servitude, which replaced transportation, and the prisoners went on to associated labour in Portland thereafter. 
Kingsmill was appointed assistant chaplain to the Revd J. Ralph when the prison opened, but a year later was promoted to chaplain, with his assistant between 1844 and 1855 another noted protagonist of separation, John Burt. Kingsmill served in this office until 1859 and his governor throughout was Robert Hosking. The prison was at first superintended by a committee including designers of the Victorian cellular prison, Joshua Jebb, William Crawford, and Whitworth Russell, and subsequently became one of the convict prisons supervised by Jebb, now chairman of the directors of convict prisons and a staunch supporter of Kingsmill. Initially in Kingsmill's department were the assistant chaplain, principal schoolmaster, and his three assistant schoolmasters. He was responsible for ensuring three Sunday services, each with sermon, visiting all prisoners in their cells or hospital to instruct, persuade, and comfort them, supervising the library, and advising as to the reformatory impact of the prison on individuals and collectively. Between 1845 and 1855 he carried out over 100,000 cell visits and spent between ten and twelve hours daily at the prison. 
Kingsmill was a significant figure in the spread of the separate system throughout the country, for Pentonville, alongside Reading, was lauded as a demonstration of the system. He ardently publicized his work and views in annual reports published by parliament and in books and pamphlets, of which 'Chapters on Prisons and Prisoners' (three editions after 1849) was best known. He also gave evidence to the 1847 House of Lords committee on criminal law, transportation, and reformatories for juvenile offenders. Kingsmill theorized that recidivist criminality was progressive and thrived in overcrowded, miserable homes with criminal or vicious parents and in criminogenic neighbourhoods with numerous temptations to vice, such as dance-halls, taverns, and concert rooms, with individuals descending into street or lodging-house dwelling, sexual licence, generalized addiction to drink, and ultimately recidivism. However his distinctive contribution was the notion that the first link in the progressive chain was a choice made by the individual to reject Christ. This first step was the necessary precursor of the rest. 
The aim of Kingsmill's approach was therefore at best to reconcile the prisoner with God through Christ, or at least to achieve moral change. Arguing that technical education merely made a thief a better-educated thief, he insisted on a moral and spiritual base for all parts of the regime. He wanted basic education in prison to ensure understanding of Christian and moral truths and competence in the workplace outside, and distrusted more advanced education of prisoners as harmful diversion. He insisted that congregate prison discipline, no matter how regulated, resulted in corruption, and that only separation could make possible inner reformation. He was well aware that prison conversions could be feigned or short-lived, but was sure that Christian prison officers, the reverse of the stereotype of the earlier dissolute, foul-mouthed turnkeys, had huge potential for influence in the separate system. Indeed his 'Address to Officers in Charge of Prisoners' (1853) was distributed by the directors of convict prisons to every officer in the service. He opposed reduction of the separation part of the transportation or penal servitude sentence from eighteen to nine months, and did battle with those who argued that separation caused insanity. He also strongly supported the new reformatories for juvenile offenders. 
Towards the end of his ministry Kingsmill realized that the potential of separation for conversion had been exaggerated, but he continued to extol it on grounds of its general moral, penal, and deterrent value. In addition, with some reservations, he welcomed the end of transportation in favour of penal servitude, for he distrusted the former disposal as tending to undo the moral gains made in separation. In addition he was one of that group of prison chaplains who, like John Clay of Preston, established a body of empirical criminological knowledge. Kingsmill surveyed cohorts of prisoners in order to measure their education, knowledge, and recidivism using case description and quantitative analysis. 
Kingsmill retired from Pentonville in 1860 and was replaced by his assistant Ambrose Sherwin, who had recently succeeded John Burt, who had taken a full prison chaplaincy in Birmingham. In that year also retired his governor, Hosking. Kingsmill had suffered considerable ill health. Almost at once the stalled cubicles in the chapel at Pentonville were demolished, for the era of severe moralistic evangelicalism in prisons, of which Kingsmill was an important representative, was passing in favour of a much more pessimistic approach to prison discipline. 
Kingsmill feared the expansion of the Roman Catholic church (see his 'On the Idolatry of the Church of Rome', 1836) and resisted attempts to establish Catholic ministry to prisons, although he facilitated access to a Roman Catholic priest if a Catholic prisoner specifically pressed for this (see his 'Roman Catholic Chaplains to Gaols', 1854). He also advocated strong protestant missionary activity, and his 'British Rule and British Christianity in India' (1859), 'Missions and Missionaries Historically Viewed' (1853), and 'Ojibura Indians... of British America' (1855) reflected this. In conventional evangelical style he vigorously demanded the keeping of the sabbath in 'The Sabbath: the Working Man's True Charter' (1856). Kingsmill's wife was named as Margaret Thomas Kingsmill at the swearing of his probate: it is not known when they married. He held no living after his retirement, and died aged fifty-nine of 'bronchitis, after a long illness' on 25 December 1865 at his home, 142 Marina, St Leonards, Sussex ('GM'). As his widow was his universal legatee, it seems likely that they had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 56016


Devon, James (1866-1939), prison medical officer and criminologist, was born on 25 October 1866 at 18 James Street, Calton, Glasgow, the son of John Devon, a journeyman iron-moulder, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Arthur. His family was poor working class -- his mother signed his birth certificate with a cross -- and he left school aged eleven. Devon was ambitious to be a doctor and studied part time at Anderson's and St Mungo's colleges, Glasgow. In 1893, aged twenty-seven, he obtained the Scottish triple qualification in medicine. Initially Devon had worked as a clinical clerk in Glasgow Eye Infirmary and as demonstrator and assistant to the pathologist at Glasgow Royal Infirmary. Thereafter he was appointed resident house surgeon and assistant to the professor of clinical surgery in Glasgow Royal Infirmary and resident assistant medical officer at Glasgow poorhouse and Town's Hospital in Glasgow. On 1 April 1895 he was appointed medical officer at Glasgow prison (Duke Street), where he remained until appointed medical commissioner to the Scottish Prison Commission on 10 April 1913. In 1902 he had been nominated a medico-legal examiner for the crown in criminal cases. Throughout his period as Scottish prison commissioner his chairman was Lord Polwarth, and Devon retired on 31 March 1929. 
Glasgow's Duke Street prison had been a showcase house of correction for Scotland when it opened in 1823. However, by the end of the nineteenth century it was an overcrowded, under-funded, down-at-heel, poor-quality prison for short sentence and remand prisoners. In 1900 there was a total of 20,000 admissions, with a daily average of around 140 men and 260 women. In 1912 Devon described an unstimulating, dismal regime of plank beds, prohibition on speaking, exercise by prisoners walking a ring, and drab corduroy or moleskin uniform. He was concerned that reforms advocated for England by the 1895 Gladstone committee on prisons were not being implemented in the sixteen penal institutions overseen by the Scottish Prison Commission. Indeed he gave evidence to the 1900 departmental committee on Scottish prisons that at Duke Street there lacked adequate nursing provision and infirmary care. At this time Devon was instituting nurse training for prison staff while urging that this, albeit an improvement, was not a proper substitute for fully qualified professional nurses. Not until very recently had an assistant medical officer been appointed at Duke Street, and Devon's evidence to this committee was cited several times in its final report. 
Devon was responsible for advising the Scottish Prison Commission on all health matters from 1913 to 1929. He oversaw the force-feeding of imprisoned suffragettes in Scotland in 1913, and was attacked with a dog whip on one occasion in this connection. He also oversaw the implementation of the so-called 'Cat and Mouse Act', under which hunger-striking suffragettes were released and later reimprisoned when their health was restored. Between 1916 and 1918 the prison system was faced with conscientious objectors, some of whom were Marxist revolutionaries, such as the 'Red Clydesiders' John Maclean, James Maxton, and William Gallacher -- all sentenced for sedition under the 'Defence of the Realm Act'. The issue of force-feeding conscientious objectors who went on hunger strike was testing and controversial for the medical commissioner. Also, prisons in the 1920s were greatly influenced by the work of Alexander Paterson of the English Prison Commission regarding reform of the Borstal system for young prisoners. New training systems for these required careful medical supervision with frequent calls upon the medical commissioner. 
Devon wrote 'The Criminal in the Community' (1912) and 'Some Causes of Crime' (1908). His work was also described or published in medical journals such as the 'British Medical Journal' and in more general ones such as the 'Hibbert Journal'. By his death he was well known as a writer, criminologist, lecturer, and radio broadcaster. He repudiated the Lombrosian positivistic criminology, which held that heredity determines the bulk of criminality, and argued for careful understanding of the social context of the individual. However, he rejected one-dimensional explanations of crime as oversimplified and was, for example, well aware that policing and sentencing could act in a biased and discriminatory manner. Notwithstanding, Devon believed that crime flourished in overcrowded, neglected neighbourhoods which politicians ignored and profiteers exploited, and he argued that real concern for, and interest in, such neighbourhoods would restore bonds of social obligation and charity throughout the whole of society. 
Although not an abolitionist Devon was highly critical of both capital and corporal punishment and of the regimes generally in Scottish prisons. He wanted drab and demoralizing routines of punishment for, in the main, trivial offenders to be replaced by individualized sympathy, guidance, and commitment. He strongly believed in the personal interest represented by the Probation Service and wanted young and first-time offenders diverted from custody. For many prisoners, he was convinced that prison was merely a warehouse, returning them to society with their lives and capacities severely disrupted: the former prisoner was therefore less fitted for self-maintenance than prior to sentence, with other criminals often their only recourse. None the less, Devon was suspicious of a tendency in the 1930s among some penal reformers to ascribe all criminality to environment and he insisted that deterrence was essential to criminal disposal. Thus Devon, initially a humanitarian prison reformer in an age of penal severity, found himself at odds with the later fashionable notion of the prison as essentially a moral reformatory. 
Devon was twice married and was survived by his second wife and two daughters, one of whom entered the medical profession. He died on 25 February 1939, having lived his retirement at 67 Great King Street, Edinburgh; he was survived by his second wife, Jane Shiel, formerly Buchan. He was a member of the Scottish Liberal and Scottish Arts clubs until his death, and in his later years was in much demand as a speaker at Burns festivals. 


@@@@@


doc= 56017


Morrison, William Douglas (1852-1943), criminologist and prison chaplain, was born at Kirriemuir, Forfarshire, on 15 May 1852, the son of Robert Southmuir Morrison, a merchant, and Ann Donald-William. Educated at nearby Trinity College, Glenalmond, he was ordained deacon in 1877 and priest in 1878 by the bishop of Ripon. From 1877 to 1883 he was a curate: first at Sandal Magna, then at St John's, Wakefield. He was appointed assistant chaplain at Wakefield prison in 1883, moving in 1887 to Wandsworth prison. Marrying this practical experience with voracious reading, he turned himself into one of the foremost authorities on crime and prisons in the country. 
In 1889 Morrison published 'The Jews under the Roman Empire'. This was followed by a spate of criminological works. His books 'Crime and its Causes' (1891) and 'Juvenile Offenders' (1896) were widely read. Morrison was attracted by the Italian positivist school, particularly by its renunciation of repressive punishment and by the principle that sentences needed to be individualized according to the characteristics of offenders. But he was never a true convert. He accepted that criminals were a 'degenerate class' produced by the 'anomalous biological and social conditions' of urban life, but rejected the pessimistic view that criminality was innate and associated with distinctive physiological or mental characteristics, believing rather that the 'prison look' was 'prison made'. Furthermore, he came to appreciate the injustices to which indeterminate sentences could lead. Morrison edited the first criminological series to be published in England, including translations of Enrico Ferri's 'Criminal Sociology' (1895) and Cesare Lombroso and William Ferrero's 'The Female Offender' (1895), and published at least fourteen articles in a wide range of learned and more popular periodicals. In 1898 the University of St Andrews conferred on him an honorary LLD. 
Although undoubtedly learned, Morrison was more a controversialist than a social scientist and was accused, sometimes justifiably, of drawing inferences to suit his argument. A tall, distinguished looking man of great determination, he was a Christian socialist and progressive Liberal. A member of the Reform Club, he was also active in Henry Salt's Humanitarian League. In January 1894 the 'Daily Chronicle' published a series of damning articles on the prison system, 'Our dark places'. The articles were almost certainly written by the assistant editor Henry Massingham, but Morrison undoubtedly provided much of the fuel. In April 1894 he savagely attacked Sir Edmund Du Cane's stewardship of the prison system in the 'Fortnightly Review'. His article, 'Are our prisons a failure?', claimed that the system created recidivism by its inhumane insistence on relentless discipline, uniformly applied. Contrary to some accounts, Du Cane did not sack him. A departmental committee on prisons (chaired by Herbert Gladstone) was set up to which Morrison gave extensive critical evidence. When its progressive report was published in 1895 both R. B. Haldane, a member of the committee, and Massingham in the 'Daily Chronicle' paid tribute to Morrison for being 'the real instrument' of the changes and as one of 'the great prison reformers'. Yet, disappointed at the slow progress of reform, he continued to be a thorn in the flesh of the administration. He was regarded as 'a dangerous man' not only by Du Cane but also by his more progressive successor, Sir Evelyn Ruggles-Brise. Morrison drew attention to the plight of Oscar Wilde, and played a part in getting him transferred from Wandsworth to better conditions at Reading gaol. 
In 1898 Morrison left the prison service. Over the next ten years he was a member of staff first of the 'Daily Chronicle' and then of 'The Nation'. He edited four religious works but still continued to write on criminological themes, publishing his last article in the 'Sociological Review' in 1908. In that year he obtained the crown living of St Marylebone, a post which he held until 1941. He was knocked down by a motorcycle on 13 December 1943, and died the same day at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington East, London, aged ninety-one, his criminological fame forgotten by his obituarists. He was survived by his wife, Alice, 'nee' Butler, and by their son and their daughter, who was the wife of Sir Albert Dykes Spicer, second baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 56023


Leakey, Mary Douglas (1913-1996), archaeologist and palaeoanthropologist, was born on 6 February 1913 at Trevor Square, Knightsbridge, London, the only child of Erskine Edward Nicol (died 1926), landscape artist, and his wife, Cecilia Marion Frere (died 1946), an amateur painter. After spending the First World War years in London, the Nicol family travelled regularly to south-west France, where Mary experienced her first encounters with archaeology. Father and daughter visited cave-art sites and collected artefacts from excavators' spoil heaps, an acceptable practice at the time, which she recalled in her autobiography, 'Disclosing the Past' (1984), as 'powerfully and magically exciting' (p. 25). At about ten years old, she began drawing without any formal instruction, taking to it 'naturally and with pleasure on my own initiative' (p. 14). When she was thirteen her father died in France after a short illness. She and her mother returned to London, where she was expelled from two Roman Catholic convent schools in quick succession, on the second occasion for deliberately causing an explosion in a chemistry class. Thereafter the rebellious young lady was educated by private tutors and took up gliding as a hobby. 
Mary Nicol decided to pursue a career in archaeology, but as her lack of formal education precluded admission to university, she attended lectures in geology at University College, London University, and in archaeology given by Mortimer Wheeler at the London Museum, and wrote to archaeologists offering her services at their excavations. Her first published drawings of stone tools from Dorothy Liddell's excavations at Hembury Fort in Devon brought her to the notice of the archaeologist Gertrude Caton-Thompson. In 1933 Caton-Thompson introduced her to the archaeologist and palaeoanthropologist Louis Seymour Bazett Leakey (1903-1972), who asked Mary to illustrate his book 'Adam's Ancestors' (1934). He was ten years older than Mary and at the time married to Henrietta Wilfrida (Frida) Leakey (1902-1993), who was expecting their second child. Shortly after his son Colin was born on 13 December 1933, to the intense disapproval of both his and Mary's families and colleagues, Louis left Frida, whom he later divorced to marry Mary in the register office at Ware on 24 December 1936. A successful personal and professional partnership of some thirty years followed, until Mary experienced the anguish of Louis's physical and mental decline in the years preceding his death in 1972. 
Louis and Mary Leakey settled in Kenya, and three sons were born, all of whom have had notable careers: Jonathan Harry Erskine ('b'. 1940), Richard Erskine ('b'. 1944), and Philip ('b'. 1949). A daughter, Deborah, was born in 1943 and died from dysentery at the age of three months. On the birth of her first child, Mary wrote that 'I quite liked having a baby -- I think I won't put it more strongly than that -- but I had no intention of allowing motherhood to disrupt my work as an archaeologist' ('Disclosing the Past', 79-80). In 1952 the Leakeys built a permanent home at Langata, an outer suburb of Nairobi. In the 1950s Louis's involvement in Kenyan politics against the Mau Mau movement for Kenyan independence brought fears for the family's safety. An attempt was made to sabotage Mary's car and she wore a pistol on her belt at night. 
Mary Leakey quickly established a reputation as a competent excavator of Stone Age sites. In 1951 she recorded some 1600 Stone Age rock paintings in the Kondoa-Irangi region of central Tanzania, a task she regarded as one of the highlights of her life and work, which were published many years later in 'Africa's Vanishing Art: the Rock Paintings of Tanzania' (1983). On 6 October 1948, on Rusinga Island near the west coast of Lake Victoria, Mary discovered part of a skull of 'Proconsul africanus', an 18 million-year-old Miocene ape, in which there was tremendous public interest. Some of her favourite finds -- a collection of Miocene fossil insects, fruits, and seeds which she and Louis stumbled upon during a cigarette break -- were also made at Rusinga Island. 
The site that will always be associated with Mary Leakey is Olduvai Gorge, a canyon in northern Tanzania containing rich collections of fossils and artefacts spanning about the last 2 million years. This became her second home, where she enjoyed fieldwork and research, accompanied by her pack of beloved dalmatian dogs, of which she was a well-known breeder. At Olduvai on 17 July 1959 she made one of the most famous fossil discoveries of all time, the skull of a 1.8 million-year-old early human relative whom Louis named 'Zinjanthropus' (now 'Australopithecus' or 'Paranthropus') 'boisei'. Television coverage of the find made the Leakeys household names all over the world and brought them desperately needed funding from the National Geographic Society. Mary laboured under the hot sun, meticulously recording scatters of early stone tools and fossil bones, setting new standards for archaeological fieldwork, while Louis concentrated on fund-raising and lecturing. The technical details of her work are published in volumes 3 (1971) and 5 (1994) of the 'Olduvai Gorge' series of Cambridge University Press and a popular account is given in 'Olduvai Gorge: my Search for Early Man' (1979). 
Perhaps the crowning triumph of Mary Leakey's remarkable career was the discovery and excavation at her dig at Laetoli in northern Tanzania during 1978-1979 of 3.7 million-year-old trails of early hominid footprints, which proved that hominids walked on two legs more than a million years before the earliest known stone tools. 
Mary Leakey was a hard-working, modest, retiring person who disliked the limelight, deferring publicity to her husband. Her son Richard however noted that 'Her commitment to detail and perfection made my father's career. He would not have been famous without her. She was much more organized and structured and much more of a technician. He was much more excitable, a magician' (Holloway, 1994). She was known for her short answers, toughness, and for insisting on correct behaviour, as well as for her fondness for cigars and whisky. Although she famously refused to theorize about human evolution, arguing that 'I never felt interpretation was my job. What I came to do was to dig things up and take them out as well as I could' (Holloway, 1994), she did not escape controversies with colleagues. 
Mary's awards include the gold Hubbard medal of the National Geographic Society (jointly with Louis, 1962), honorary doctorates from the universities of the Witwatersrand (1968), Yale (1976), Western Michigan (1980), Chicago (1981), Oxford (1981), Cambridge (1987), Emory (1988), Massachusetts (1988), Brown (1990), and Columbia (1991), the Linnaeus medal of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (1978), and the gold medal of the Society of Women Geographers (Washington, 1978). She was elected a fellow of the British Academy (1973), a foreign honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1979) and a foreign associate of the United States National Academy of Sciences (1987). 
Despite blindness in her left eye caused by a thrombosis in 1982, Mary Leakey spent the last years of her life lecturing and fund raising and died peacefully in Nairobi on 9 December 1996, 'one of the last of a remarkable array of scholars who first exposed humanity's African past to the light of research' (Tobias). In accordance with her wishes, her ashes were scattered over Lake Natron in Tanzania. 


@@@@@


doc= 56026


Fletcher, William (b. 1773, d. in or after 1841), valet, was the son of John Fletcher ('c'.1750-1808), a farmer, and his wife, Mary ('c'.1750-1800). He was already a manservant at Burgage Manor, Southwell, Nottinghamshire, when Catherine Byron and her son arrived there in July 1803. On 23 July 1804 he married Sarah Bye (1783-1812), Mrs Byron's maid. She was his second wife, Susannah Mellers, a serving woman, whom he had married on 25 March 1794, having died childless. Fletcher and Sarah had two sons: William ('b'. 1805), and George ('b'. 1806), to whom Byron stood godfather. Fletcher was promoted to valet in October 1808, when his predecessor, Francis Boyce, was transported for theft. Accompanying Byron and Hobhouse abroad in July 1809 Fletcher was the 'staunch yeoman' of 'Childe Harold's Goodnight'. Having undergone many adventures in Portugal, Malta, Greece, Albania, and Turkey, including near shipwreck off Paxos, Fletcher re-entered England early in 1811, carrying important legal bonds. After re-employment on Byron's return in July, he informed the poet at Newport Pagnell of his mother's death on 1 August. Sarah Fletcher died in 1812, and on 12 January 1816 at St James's, Piccadilly, Fletcher married as his third wife Anne Rood, maid to Lady Byron. In July 1814 a relationship with another maidservant, Martha Willis, had produced an illegitimate son, also called William. 
William and Anne Fletcher both sided firmly with Lord Byron in his 1816 separation crisis. On 25 April that year Fletcher again accompanied Byron abroad, abandoning his family to share his master's exile. Fletcher, like Byron, adapted well to Italian life, acquiring the language and taking a Venetian mistress called Tiretta. In July 1823 he returned to Greece, where he wrote his well-known letter to Augusta Leigh, dated 20 April 1824, describing Byron's death the previous day. Fletcher then supervised the return of Byron's body to England, attending his funeral at Hucknall Torkard, Nottinghamshire, on 12 July. Unfortunately Fletcher was not remembered in what was taken for Byron's final will. Although a promised $70 p.a. from Augusta Leigh was not forthcoming, he had sufficient savings to open a 'Macaroni Manufactory' near Brunswick Square, in partnership with Lega Zambelli, Byron's Italian secretary. This enterprise failed when the government lifted the duty on imported pasta, ruining Fletcher. By 1835, the year Anne Fletcher died, he was reliant on the charity of John Murray, J. C. Hobhouse, and others, who organized a subscription for his support. Despite their assistance in 1837 he was admitted to White Cross Street workhouse, where he proved unable to fulfil the required schedules. 
The last record of Fletcher alive dates from March 1841, when Lady Byron wrote to Ada Lovelace that he had 'at last got a place'. Harold Nicolson appears to have been mistaken in imagining Fletcher living in the 1870s, probably confusing him with a son. Fletcher is often mentioned in Byron's letters and journals, sometimes ironically as 'the Learned Fletcher' (Lovelace MSS). Despite frequent quarrels, which led to Fletcher's being sacked and reinstated on three occasions, theirs was a remarkable master-servant relationship. Genuine grief, discretion, and honour always prevented Fletcher from revealing the myriad secrets of 'My late lamented lord and master', to the exasperation of Byron's biographer Thomas Moore. 


@@@@@


doc= 56033


Cust, Aleen Isabel (1868-1937), veterinary surgeon, was born on 7 February 1868 at Cordangan Manor, co. Tipperary, Ireland, the fourth of six children of Sir Leopold Cust, baronet (1832-1878), land agent, and his wife, Charlotte Sobieske Isabel (1835-1914), daughter of Vice-Admiral Charles Orlando Bridgeman. Aleen was the granddaughter of Sir Edward Cust (1794-1878). On the death of her father in 1878, her mother and Major Shallcross Fitzherbert Widdrington of Newton Hall, Northumberland, became her joint guardians. Aleen became a close friend of the Widdringtons, who recognized her independent spirit and gave her the moral support that she did not receive from her family. After a private education Aleen began training as a nurse at the London Hospital, but she gave it up and decided to become a veterinary surgeon. Her family disapproved, but she had a modest private income and in 1894, at the age of twenty-six, she proceeded to Edinburgh, adopted the surname Custance to avoid further embarrassment to her family, and for the next five years had a frugal existence as a student. Having spent the first year in gaining qualifications for entry, she was admitted to the New Veterinary College, Edinburgh (the school founded by William Williams in 1873, not to be confused with the New Edinburgh Veterinary College which John Gamgee founded in 1858 or the Edinburgh Veterinary College founded by William Dick in 1823). She eventually went on to qualify as Britain's first woman veterinary surgeon. 
Aleen was a distinguished student, first in her classes and a gold medal winner in her first year. In May 1897 she was due to sit the first of her professional examinations but on receiving an application from Miss Custance the examinations committee of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons decided they did not have the power to admit women to their examinations. The council of the college was divided on the matter and when the minutes of the meeting were published in the 'Veterinary Record' of 24 April 1897 the profession at large took up the debate. The college took counsel's opinion; they were advised not to admit the lady and to invite her to issue a writ of 'mandamus'. Aleen wanted the proceedings to be held in Scotland but the college refused and she took it no further. She completed her training in 1900, and although she could not call herself a veterinary surgeon Professor Williams gave her a testimonial and recommended her for a post as an assistant to William Augustine Byrne (1865-1910), who was in practice in co. Roscommon, Ireland. Byrne had qualified the previous year at the Royal Veterinary College, London, and on inheriting Castlestrange, a castle in Athleague, he set up in practice there. He was an engaging personality, handsome, witty, and popular both socially and professionally. The arrival of Miss Cust as his assistant caused consternation and scandalized the priesthood, but her competence and poise won her respect. There is reason to believe that they lived as man and wife and that she had two daughters, born in Scotland, who were later adopted. Aleen never married, though in 1904 she was engaged to Bertram Widdrington, son of her guardian. 
As Aleen's reputation grew she became more widely accepted by the profession, but in 1905 she was again in conflict with the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons. She had been appointed by Galway county council to the part-time, official post of veterinary inspector under the 'Diseases of Animals Act'. The college opposed the appointment because she was not a member, and the Irish department of agriculture would not approve it. The post had to be re-advertised, but when the county council again appointed Miss Cust the department agreed to a provisional arrangement whereby she was designated an 'inspector', but not a 'veterinary inspector'. At that time she was living in Ballygar, several miles from Athleague, presumably in practice on her own account. When Byrne died in 1910 she took over his practice, which she ran from Fort Lyster, a house in Athleague. She made her visits riding side-saddle on an Arab stallion, or driving one of her several horses in a gig. When the day's work was done she would dress formally for dinner, and be waited on by her servants. 
In 1915 Aleen left Ireland to offer her services during the First World War. She drove her own car to Abbeville in France and attached herself to an establishment of the Young Men's Christian Association. The probable reason for her going there was because it was close to the headquarters of the army veterinary and remount services. The hard-pressed veterinary corps was handling tens of thousands of horses in transit to and from the front, and it may be surmised that Aleen was keen to volunteer her considerable veterinary experience with horses, albeit unofficially. The records of her war service are sparse but there is one reference to Miss Cust in the war diary of Brigadier-General Garrat and another in the diary of Major-General Sir John Moore, the director of veterinary services in France. War Office records show that she was in the Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps from 14 January 1918 to 10 November 1918. 
With the passing of the 'Sex Disqualification (Removal) Act' of 1919, which forbade the exclusion of women from the professions, the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons could no longer refuse to consider Aleen Cust for membership. On receiving her application the examinations committee had the courtesy to require that she attend only the oral part of the final examination. She was awarded her diploma of membership on 21 December 1922, twenty-two years after completing her training in Edinburgh. Aleen had returned to Athleague after the war but was no longer welcomed in what became the Irish Free State, and in 1924 she retired to Plaitford in the New Forest. In the autumn of 1936, when her health was failing, she planned to spend the winter with friends in Jamaica. She arrived on 5 January 1937 but died on Kingston Island, probably of a heart attack, on the 29th, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 56034


Gamgee, John (1831-1894), veterinary surgeon and inventor, was born in the via de Pizzacotti, Florence, Italy, the fourth of the eight children of Joseph Gamgee (1801-1894) and his wife, Mary Ann, daughter of John and Sarah West of Honiton, Devon. His elder brother, Joseph Sampson Gamgee (1828-1886), achieved fame as a surgeon in Birmingham; his younger brother, Arthur Gamgee (1841-1909), was an eminent biochemist; and his nephew, D'Arcy Wentworth Thompson (1860-1948), was the celebrated scholar and naturalist. His father had built up a flourishing veterinary practice in Florence and was able to provide the best education for his children. After private tuition and schools in Florence, John and his elder brother were sent to Switzerland and Germany to complete their education and to become fluent in French and German as well as Italian. 
In 1849 John Gamgee was entered for medical school in Italy when he heard that his brother Sampson, as he now chose to call himself, who had qualified as a veterinary surgeon, was about to enter University College, London, to train as a medical surgeon. Thereupon Gamgee changed his plans and decided to become a veterinary surgeon. He qualified from the Royal Veterinary College, London, in 1852, and then spent two years touring the continental veterinary schools and making a study of contagious diseases. On his return to London in 1854 he gave a series of extramural lectures and at some time after that was in practice for a brief period in Thirsk, Yorkshire. In 1856 he went to Edinburgh as an assistant to William Dick, who had founded the veterinary school there in 1823. Dick was sixty-three years of age and set in his ways. He was well regarded for his practical, clinical acumen but he was in no sense a scientist. By comparison Gamgee was aged twenty-five, a determined, cultured, well-travelled man who had firm ideas about the need for science in the training of veterinary students. They were incompatible and the appointment lasted for only one year. 
Within a few months of his arriving in Edinburgh, Gamgee married, on 5 December 1856, Adeline ('b'. 1830/31), an actress and the daughter of Thomas Hartley, lieutenant in the Royal Welch Fusiliers, and his wife, Belinda Payne. Following his marriage Gamgee began to establish himself in the cultural and scientific life of the city. On leaving Dick's college he decided to set up a veterinary school of his own. He had no funds, but his enthusiasm to promote a scientific veterinary training won him influential support and he opened the Edinburgh New Veterinary College on 4 November 1857 in Drummond Street. William Dick was outraged and was further antagonized when he heard that Gamgee had applied for his school to be recognized by the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons. The college was the governing body of the profession and was nominally responsible for the examinations of the students of the London and Edinburgh schools. Dick had spurned that arrangement and although he himself wanted nothing to do with the governing body he was determined that the Gamgee school should not be recognized. It took Gamgee two attempts before the New Veterinary College was granted the royal sign manual on 31 March 1859. 
Gamgee had a passionate interest in matters of public health and contagious disease. In 1862 he was appointed by the privy council to conduct an inquiry on cattle diseases. He urged the government to reform the cattle trade and to create an effective system of veterinary inspection. Looking for professional support he convened the first international veterinary congress, which was held at Hanover in July 1863. By now he was convinced that the uncontrolled importation of cattle would lead to disaster, and in two prophetic letters to 'The Times' in November 1863 he warned that if cattle were imported from a Baltic port then Britain could expect rinderpest, a highly contagious, virulent disease of cattle. Eighteen months later the great cattle plague of 1865 broke out in the London dairies; it had been imported from the Baltic port of Revel. The plague was not recognized as rinderpest until Gamgee came down to London on 29 July, one month after the outbreak had started. The government had no effective statutory powers to control it and the royal commission that was set up in October failed to provide a solution. It was the 'Cattle Diseases Prevention Act' of February 1866 that led to the eventual control of the epidemic by means that were essentially those advocated by Gamgee. 
At the time of the cattle plague Gamgee was transferring his school to London, where it was known as the Albert Veterinary College. Unfortunately it failed in 1868, probably owing to Gamgee's not giving it the attention it required -- in that year he was in the United States investigating Texas fever. On his return to Britain he severed his connections with veterinary science and turned to thermodynamics. His interest in refrigeration led to his building ice-skating rinks in London and Southport and, for seven years from 1878, to consultancy work in the United States on the cooling of mines and offices and the building of refrigerator ships. Another of his projects was the 'zeromotor', a device for powering the ships of the United States navy from the thermal energy in sea water. It aroused much interest and even President Garfield inspected a model of it, but it was bound to fail because it violated the second law of thermodynamics, which Gamgee never could accept. The rest of his life was spent in promoting the zeromotor, which brought him nothing but disappointment and financial anxiety. He died at his home, 13 Springfield Road, Wimbledon, Surrey, on 19 December 1894, from heart failure, and was buried in Wimbledon cemetery. He was survived by his wife; there were no children. 
Gamgee's erratic change of career was a great loss to the veterinary profession. He had made a distinguished contribution as an author of several books and numerous articles. He had founded the 'Edinburgh Veterinary Review', which set a new standard for a scientific periodical and foreshadowed the duty of a state veterinary service by publishing national disease statistics. Had he persisted he would surely have reached the pinnacle of his profession. 


@@@@@


doc= 56035


Dick, William (1793-1866), veterinary surgeon and founder of the Edinburgh Veterinary College, was born on 6 May 1793 at Whitehorse Close, Canongate, Edinburgh, the second of three children who survived beyond infancy of John Dick ('c'.1769-1844), and his wife, Jane (Jean) Anderson ('c'.1765-1837). His parents had moved to Edinburgh some six years before. At the time of the birth his father, a blacksmith and farrier, had his forge and residence at Whitehorse Close at the lower end of the Royal Mile, which runs from Edinburgh Castle to Holyrood Palace. William Dick himself said that he was born 'at the Court end of the Canongate'. 
Dick attended two local private schools and afterwards worked with his father in the forge, where he learned about the treatment of diseases of animals that was provided in those days by the farriers. Dick soon formed an ambition to improve the standard of this treatment and to institute some formal training for those offering it. He was 'much inclined to get information on literary matters' and took every opportunity he could to hear lectures by a number of university professors. He attended lectures in comparative anatomy by John Barclay (1758-1826), one of Scotland's leading anatomists, and Dick admitted after hearing Barclay that 'he had the impudence to think that it was possible that he himself might one day deliver a lecture on veterinary science' ('The Veterinarian', 403). He contributed much to the discussions which Barclay held following his lectures and in these put to shame some of the young men attending the classes who were preparing to take their medical degrees. It is reported that Barclay, upon being asked who this young man was, admitted that he did not know; when told that he was a 'common working blacksmith' he replied 'Well, well, all I can say is that, whether he be blacksmith or whitesmith, he's the cleverest chap among you' (Pringle, iv). 
There was then no veterinary education in Scotland but in the autumn of 1817 Dick enrolled at the London Veterinary College, founded in 1791. He took up residence in the capital at 27 Middlesex Street, Somer's Town, from where he kept up a correspondence with his father, describing in detail the cases which he saw in the course of his studies and discussing and criticizing the treatments used. He did not stay long in London because, as he said in later years: 'finding that it was possible to derive as much knowledge in Edinburgh as would lay the foundation for the successful working out of the scheme which I intently cherished in my mind, I considered it was not necessary to remain longer in the English metropolis. After three months' study there, I had the confidence to apply for a diploma, the time of residence not being then defined, and I obtained it. ('The Veterinarian', 403)' After his return to Edinburgh, Dick began to look at how to further his 'scheme' for veterinary education in Scotland. Helped by John Barclay, Dick became involved in providing lectures to the public on veterinary matters. He attracted disappointingly small numbers at first but persevered and made arrangements at his own expense to hold classes in the Calton convening rooms in Edinburgh. Barclay continued to help in the furtherance of Dick's ideas and, following discussions with the university senate, had pursued the suggestion that a veterinary college in Edinburgh might be brought about in conjunction with the Highland Society at Edinburgh (later the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland) of which he was a director. As a result of this the society agreed that a lecturer to give instruction in veterinary surgery be appointed under its patronage and that Dick should be that lecturer. It was agreed also that the society would provide a sum of $50 to support this, and arrangements were made for Dick to use his father's forge (which was now situated in Clyde Street in Edinburgh) for practical instruction. For several years Dick continued to lecture in the Calton convening rooms, following the first lecture under the auspices of the Highland Society on 24 November 1823. 
Dick built up the college in Clyde Street, and, although it was known as the Highland Society's veterinary school and the society provided a small annual sum in support of the establishment, the buildings and facilities were provided entirely at his own expense. For nearly thirty years he was the sole teacher until in 1840 the first clinical assistant was appointed. By 1847 the number of staff had risen to five, but it remained at that level up to the time of Dick's death. 
In 1833 Dick joined the editorial team of 'The Veterinarian', on which he served until 1845. In 1844 he was closely involved in the petition seeking the granting of the royal charter of incorporation which established the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons on 8 March 1844. In his busy life Dick still found time to be involved in other than veterinary matters in the community. He was a member of the Royal Physical Society of Edinburgh, the oldest scientific society in Scotland, and served as honorary treasurer to that body for fifteen years. As a farrier he belonged to his trade guild and served as deacon of the Hammermen and also, in the period 1835-7, as deacon-convener of trades, in which position he had a seat on the city council. Later, in 1843 and 1844, he was dean of guild and 'ex officio' a member of the city council. Dick also owned property in Burntisland in Fife and at one time was a member of the town council there. He was a justice of the peace in the city of Edinburgh and did one term of office as moderator of the high constables of the city of Edinburgh. He worked for the development of Heriot's Hospital (now George Heriot's School), establishing education for the children of 'decayed freemen', and was involved in the charitable purposes of the Morningside Lunatic Asylum. 
William Dick was a sturdily built man, 5 feet 7 inches in height, with a habit of running his fingers through his hair as he lectured. He was a strict disciplinarian, showing no mercy to the idle, but bestowing praise and encouragement wherever it was deserved. He was held in high esteem in the profession. His students often sought his advice after they had qualified and he himself followed their progress closely. He was a man of opinions strongly held and defended. 'In political and ecclesiastical matters his views were somewhat extreme, and always expressed with no reserve and some roughness.' He was usually attentive to the opinions of those who differed from him and put forward a 'bold and uncompromising advocacy of the people's rights' (Bradley, 54-5). 
William Dick never married. He died from heart disease on 4 April 1866 in his seventy-third year at his home at 15 Clyde Street and was buried on the 11th in the new Calton cemetery within sight of Whitehorse Close, where he was born. He bequeathed his college in trust to the lord provost, magistrates, and council of the city of Edinburgh, and it later formed the faculty of veterinary medicine of the University of Edinburgh. A collection of Dick's writings, entitled 'Occasional Papers on Veterinary Subjects', was published in 1869. Following the incorporation of the veterinary college into the University of Edinburgh in 1951, the university court instituted three new chairs in 1953, named respectively the William Dick chair of veterinary surgery, the William Dick chair of veterinary medicine, and the William Dick chair of veterinary hygiene and preventive medicine. 


@@@@@


doc= 56036


Hartley, William (1857-1924), showman and medicine vendor, was born on 8 August 1857 at Marsh Southowram, near Halifax, Yorkshire, the son of Alfred Hartley, described as a flag facer, and his wife, Sarah Ann ('nee' Peel) (1832/3-1910). Of his early life nothing is known. Hartley came to public notice in 1887 as the promoter of, and chief actor in, a travelling 'American medicine-show', which started in Portsmouth in September 1887, and which is next recorded in 1888 in Brighton and then in Dublin. His professional title was Sequah, and he was also known as William Henry Hartley. 
The American medicine-show was an American adaptation of an older European way of selling medicines through 'commedia dell'arte' shows and the telling of traveller's tales. The protagonist of the American version would entertain crowds with fictitious accounts of his travels in the Wild West, display his knowledge of secret Native American medicinal lore, draw teeth on stage with incredible speed, and effect apparently miraculous cures by rubbing the limbs of lame or rheumatic patients with supposed Indian botanic remedies. The whole performance would be heightened by brass bands, circus acts, and the presence of people supposed to be Native Americans ('Redskins'), dressed in full tribal war-dress, and would culminate in the sale of medicines to the public from a stage or wagon. 
Hartley had probably had experience of such operations in America before 1887, when he formed a partnership in London with two opticians from Chicago (Alfred Danziger and Leon Kokocinski) to import the American medicine-show format unchanged into England under the name Sequah. This name was derived partly from the name of the Cherokee leader Sequoyah, and partly from a design to confuse customers of a rival American medicine troupe, the Kickapoo Indian Medicine Firm, active in the USA, which sold a medicine called Sagwa. At his crowded meetings in the great industrial cities of Britain in 1888-90 Hartley, alias Sequah, met with sensational success, selling vast quantities of two main medicinal preparations -- Sequah's Prairie Flower, for internal use, and Sequah's Indian Oil, for external application, as well as various other branded products such as a Sequah dentifrice. The internal medicine was alleged by competitors to be made of fish oil flavoured with marjoram and alcohol, with the external one made from aloes, capsicum, and carbonate of potash. 
In 1889 the three members turned their partnership into a small joint-stock company, Sequah Ltd, which was floated on the London stock exchange in 1890. Hartley was the managing director and the dominating figure in the company, and he was the main beneficiary of the flotation, which brought him about $100,000 in cash. Hartley's enrichment from a 'quack medicine' company may have contributed to the theme of H. G. Wells's novel 'Tono Bungay' (published in 1909 but set in the 1890s). Soon after the flotation no fewer than twenty-three teams, each headed by its own Sequah, were operating simultaneously in Great Britain, with gilded wagons, German brass bands, and troops of Redskin Indians. In September 1890 the company started to expand overseas, to India, Venezuela, the West Indies, Spain, the Netherlands, and elsewhere. A Sequah was even sent to North America to compete with the original American medicine-show companies on their own ground. Hartley provided the commercial flair and the entrepreneurial spirit of the company. One of the Sequahs who worked for him at this time represents him (in a private letter) as a callous and ruthless swindler. 
Sequah Ltd could not maintain its initial success, for several reasons. Since the beneficiaries of the flotation were the founding partners (Hartley, Danziger, and Kokocinski) rather than the company, the latter had no capital with which to finance its operations. The British government disliked the civil disturbance caused by the company's mass gatherings in market places, commons, and waste grounds, objected to the non-payment of stamp duty on its medicines, and passed an act (53 Vict. c. 8) requiring sales of medicines to take place only from a set of premises, not from a vehicle or a stage. There were objections to the company's price-fixing policy, and its many charitable donations did not pacify those who disliked its use of extreme commercial methods in an ethically sensitive market. European governments took action against Sequah's unorthodox interventions in their traditional controlled markets for pharmaceuticals, and in North America public interest in the (by then) old-fashioned routine of the American medicine-show had begun to fade. In 1895 Sequah Ltd went into liquidation. The numerous Sequahs went back to their original occupations -- herbalist, dentist, music-hall artist, and so on -- but how Hartley himself spent the rest of his life is not known; it was possibly in yacht broking. He died at his home, 7 Sherwood Street in Soho, London (later the site of the Piccadilly Theatre), on 16 January 1924, leaving $734. 


@@@@@


doc= 56037


Mapp, Sarah (bap. 1706, d. 1737), bone-setter, was baptized on 26 March 1706 at Hinton, near Chicklade, Wiltshire, the daughter of John Wallin and his wife, Jenny. She had a younger brother, Richard, and a sister who later acted the part of Polly Peachum in 'The Beggar's Opera'. John Wallin, also a bone-setter, trained Sarah but instilled in her only the barest knowledge of anatomy. After a family quarrel she 'wander'd up and down the Country in a very miserable Manner' ('London Magazine', 5.458), and scarcely made a living. Already eccentric in her ways, she dubbed herself Crazy Sally. 
About 1735 Sarah found herself in Epsom, Surrey, a watering place with royal connections and a centre of fashionable society; the horse-racing there produced a useful crop of mangled bones. Still a young woman, she was beefy and endowed with unusual strength, which she used to gain an immediate reputation for righting dislocations and for setting fractures, even those of patients who had suffered for decades. Despite her slovenly appearance she was neat in her work, even down to the rolling of bandages. Treating each day a plentiful assortment of the injured, whom with great dispatch she sent on their way rejoicing, she was soon earning nearly 20 guineas a day; the well-to-do also lavished many presents on her. When a rumour spread that her services were to be poached elsewhere, some townspeople clubbed together and offered her 100 guineas to remain for another year. 
Having acquired a four-horse chariot, in mid-1736 Sarah began to travel to London once a week. There, at the Grecian Coffee House near the Temple -- much frequented by lawyers -- she performed some noteworthy feats in the presence of Sir Hans Sloane, the physician. She straightened out the crooked back of Sloane's niece, and of a man from Wardour Street, who for nine years had gone about with his backbone projecting 2 inches out of true. There was even a man who, after an accident, had one leg 6 inches shorter than the other, which she restored to its correct length by manipulating his hip. When some disbelieving doctors tried to hoodwink her with a sound patient who pretended to have a damaged wrist, she angrily dislocated it and bade him go back and have it set by the fools who had sent him. 
The 'haut ton' of the capital, wild for amazing new cures to surpass those of earlier publicity-seeking quacks, took Sarah Wallin to its collective heart and, metaphorically, put out of joint the nose of the former idol Josiah Ward. Having taken a London residence, in August 1736 at All Hallows, London Wall, Sarah married Hill Mapp ('b'. 1708), from Hopesay, Shropshire, who was a footman to Ebenezer Ibbetson, a mercer of Salisbury Court in London's Fleet Street. Given Sarah's unprepossessing appearance, Mapp was assumed to have married for money; sure enough, within two weeks he had decamped, robbing her of more than 100 guineas. A month later the 'Grub-Street Journal', pursuing its relentless crusade against medical impostors of all kinds, began to ridicule her. It gleefully noted that she had given a plate worth 10 guineas to a race at Epsom, which had been won by a mare named Mrs Mapp, while a still disabled ex-patient indignantly rebuffed claims that he had been cured by her. These reports did not prevent her from being graciously received by Queen Caroline at Kensington. 
In October, Sarah Mapp was brazen enough to appear with the itinerant oculist John Taylor (1703-1772) at the Playhouse Theatre, Lincoln's Inn Fields, to see a topical comedy entitled 'The Husband's Relief, with the Female Bone-Setter and Worm Doctor'. A packed house cheered an ironic finale, sung from the stage, on her exploits. Sarah Mapp's conduct now became more and more indecorous. In December 1736, when passing through the Old Kent Road in her chariot, she was waylaid by a crowd who mistook her, in her 'robe-de-chambre', for one of George II's detested German mistresses. 'Damn your bloods,' she expostulated, 'don't you know me?' Bawling her name she drove off to loud huzzas. 
Although Sarah showed up the poor grasp of bone manipulation among medical men of the day, she was very widely dismissed as a figure of no great consequence, and the general public soon tired of her. It was William Hogarth who gave a push to her downward spiral by featuring her in his print of March 1737, 'The Company of Undertakers'. Above a group of twelve physicians were John Taylor, Josiah Ward, and Sarah Mapp. She was depicted as bun-faced, distinctly boss-eyed and double-chinned, and holding a bone. Her mannishness was emphasized by a hat at a rakish angle and being referred to as 'he', her substantial bulk being covered by a harlequin costume. After this savage satire her name disappeared from the press, and she became a heavy drinker, hardly ever sobering up. Sarah Mapp died on 10 December 1737 in her lodgings at Seven Dials, London, 'miserably poor' ('London Magazine', 6.705), so that she had to be buried at the parish's expense. Too unselfconscious, rumbustious, and disorganized to strive for the highest ranks of charlatanism, she fell victim to the fickleness of those who raised her up to fame and riches and as abruptly dropped her for fresh wonders and sensations. 


@@@@@


doc= 56038


Ward, Winifred Mary Kingdon- (1884-1979), speech therapist, was born at 30 Victoria Road, Old Charlton, Kent, on 12 October 1884, the daughter of Harry Marshall Ward (1854-1906), botanist, and his wife, Selina Mary, 'nee' Kingdon (died 1922), daughter of Francis Kingdon, of Exeter. Her younger brother, Francis (Frank) Kingdon-Ward, became a renowned plant collector and author. Winifred studied speech and singing, and during the First World War was involved in working with wounded soldiers returning from the front. Many had suffered head injuries which led to disorders of speech and language, while others presented with stammering related to shell-shock. She was one of the first British speech therapists appointed to work with patients in a hospital setting and held posts at the West End Hospital for Nervous Diseases, Maida Vale Hospital, the West London Hospital, and Pembury Hospital in Kent. 
After the war Kingdon-Ward saw the need for an academically and medically orientated form of training and began to offer aspiring speech therapists at the West End Hospital opportunities for observation and guidance. The West End Hospital school was founded under her direction in 1929. She also played a major part in the development of the British Society of Speech Therapists, which was formed in 1934. She left the West End Hospital school in 1935 in order to spend time in South Africa. When she returned to London shortly before the outbreak of the Second World War she was unable to resume her old post and took steps to set up a second course in conjunction with a former student, Amy Swallow. The London Hospitals School of Speech Therapy was founded in 1942 in Cavendish Square. The previous year she had published 'Stammering: Problems and Theories'. This represented the first major text on the subject in the British literature and was one of the earliest works on any topic in the field. She was one of the first authorities to recognize that there are different types and causes of stammering and she maintained that therapists should adapt their approach accordingly. The German, French, and American authorities tended to talk of a single cause. 
Kingdon-Ward retired from her post as principal of the London Hospitals School in 1948, and it was renamed the Kingdon-Ward School of Speech Therapy. She continued to work in the National Health Service for many years after normal retirement age. In 1954 she published 'A Book of Rhymes and Jingles for Children' for the use of speech therapists. She had already produced a volume of poetry, 'The Flaming Fountains', published in 1927. 
Kingdon-Ward was an enthusiastic and gifted therapist, and though somewhat shy had such a strong presence that a patient with whom she was working would hardly be aware of the group of students who were observing the session. She always insisted that students should develop their powers of observation. She had considerable foresight and strength of character, and always warmly supported the drive of the profession towards greater academic rigour. She died in the St Charles Hospital, Kensington, London, on 26 January 1979. 


@@@@@


doc= 56041


Stein, Leopold Siegfried (1894-1969), psychiatrist and speech therapist, was born on 2 December 1894 in Vienna, Austria. His family were Austrian Jews. Stein was educated in Vienna and attended the university, where he studied philosophy and philology. It was during this time that his interest in semantics and speech first developed. He then studied medicine and graduated MD in 1923. Following his graduation, Stein furthered his interest in abnormalities of language and speech. He became assistant at the Viennese Ambulatorium for speech disorders and was appointed director of the clinic for speech disorders in the paediatric department of the Kaiser Franz Josef Hospital in his home city. There he specialized in ear, nose, and throat surgery. 
Between 1928 and 1938 Stein worked in the speech department of the Allgemeine Poliklinik in Vienna and, during this time, developed his own system of treatment for stammer. He also studied dynamic psychology under Alfred Adler. In 1933-4 he lectured in speech disorders at the Municipal Pedagogical Institute in Vienna. Following the union of Austria with Germany in the spring of 1938, Stein was dismissed from the Poliklinik. The harsh treatment of Jews as a result of the Anschluss forced Stein to flee Austria. He emigrated to Britain in July 1938. This remained his home for the rest of his life; he was given British nationality in 1947. 
The Viennese School of Speech Therapy enjoyed international prominence and, by the time he came to England, Stein had been an eminent and active member for over twenty years. As a result of the considerable reputation that he had established in the field of speech disorders, the Tavistock Clinic in London immediately invited him to practise as an honorary speech therapist; for the next twenty years he dealt there with speech disorders of a psychological origin or those arising from disorders of the nervous system. He also introduced his treatment for stammering. Stein did not, however, simply want to graft ideas developed in Vienna onto those he found in Britain; instead he hoped to establish a new basis on which diagnostic and therapeutic techniques could be consolidated. 
The Second World War demonstrated the indispensability of speech therapy for those disabled through head injury and, in 1944, Stein was appointed as civilian professional adviser in speech therapy to the War Office. This allowed him to further his interest in speech disorders occurring as a result of war. In 1948 his position at the Tavistock Clinic was converted to a full psychiatric appointment, and he remained there until his retirement in 1959. 
Stein practised as a speech therapist in England during a period of considerable change. Initially only a few pioneers, such as Winifred Kingdon-Ward, took any interest in the subject, but by the 1950s there was widespread research undertaken by students of speech therapy and a growing interest among the medical and educational professions as well as in the general public. The work undertaken by Stein and others played an essential part in this development. 
Stein belonged to a number of learned societies. He was a member and one-time chairman of the Society of Analytical Psychology and a fellow and president of the International Association of Phoniatrics and Logopaedics. When the College of Speech Therapists was founded in 1945, Stein became a fellow enrolled on foundation, and he was later to become its chairman. In addition to his memberships of medico-psychological bodies, Stein was also a fellow of the Royal Anthropological Society and a member of the Philological Society. 
Stein was a natural linguist. After his arrival in Britain in 1938, he was quick to master English and he wrote some twenty papers and three books in his new tongue. Many of the papers were on psychological topics and two of the books considered aspects of speech disorders: 'Speech and Voice' (1942) and 'The Infancy of Speech and the Speech of Infancy' (1949). His best-known work was 'Loathsome Women: a Study of Modern Witches' (1959); written from his experiences as a psychiatrist, it was well received both in Britain and in the United States. 
Throughout his life, Stein had a passion for beautiful things. Among these were, in later life, cars and, in his youth, horses. While in Vienna, he was a keen rider in the tradition of the Spanish school; he considered it a simple feat to teach a horse to count. 
Stein was married twice, firstly to Ella (Ellen), and secondly to Mary Williams, who, like Stein, was a distinguished Jungian and a staff member of the Tavistock Clinic; he was survived by both. Stein died at his home, 1 Hermitage Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, on 24 May 1969. 


@@@@@


doc= 56042


Craig, Edward Thomas (1804-1894), communitarian and journalist, the son of Joseph Craig and his wife, Elizabeth, was born in Manchester on 4 August 1804 and was baptized at the Gravel Lane Wesleyan Methodist chapel, Salford, on 7 October that year. Following the death of his father, Craig, then aged four, was sent to live with his paternal grandparents at Lancaster. One of his earliest memories was of Luddite prisoners being delivered to Lancaster Castle. The death of his grandmother meant that in 1815 he returned to Manchester, to live at Hanover Square with his mother's family, who were strict Calvinists. He was present at the Peterloo massacre in 1819. Craig recalled that: 'My maternal grandparents were rigid Puritans, and looked upon scientific books as the instruments of Satan for the ruin of souls, so that I had to read them in secret and during the night... The result of reading this class of books was a spirit of scepticism and inquiry into everything pertaining to human nature, and the relations of capital and labour, and made me dissatisfied with both. (Craig, 'The First Example', 18-19)' Craig joined the Manchester Mechanics' Institution in 1825 and was 'an eager reader of works bearing on the human mind and on political economy' (Craig, 'The First Example', 18). By now he was working in the fustian trade, and in 1828 founded a Fustian Manufacturing Society based upon profit-sharing principles. He then organized a co-operative society (the Utility Society) in Salford and began to promote co-operation throughout the industrial towns of Lancashire. The Utility Society met in rooms belonging to his future father-in-law (who has not been identified), whose daughter he married in July 1833; they had at least one son, Francis. As a result of the Utility Society's discussions the Salford Sunday School and Social Institute was formed. Influenced by William King's 'Co-Operator' (1828-30) and William Thompson's 'Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth most Conducive to Human Happiness' (1824), Craig became secretary of a co-operative society in Manchester and helped to organize the first Co-operative Congress in Manchester on 26 and 27 May 1831. He later became editor of one of the early northern co-operative journals, the 'Lancashire Co-Operator' (later the 'Lancashire and Yorkshire Co-Operator'). 
Craig's most important involvement with co-operation came when he was invited by John Scott Vandaleur to run his estate at Ralahine near Limerick on co-operative principles, Vandaleur seeing this as the way of ending the outbreaks of peasant violence that had troubled the estate. By November 1831 Craig had formulated his plans for Ralahine, which he set out in 'The First Example of Profit Sharing and Home Rule' (n.d.). There was no single governor, master, or steward, and the estate was to be managed by a committee elected by members of the community. Education was to be available to all (in a school run by Mrs Craig); all profits were to belong to the members, and labour notes were to be introduced. The aims of Ralahine were: 'the acquisition of common capital... the mutual assurance of members against the evils of poverty... the attainment of the greater share of the comforts of life than the working classes now possess... the mental and moral improvement of its adult members, and the education of their children. (p. 23)' Craig's early time in Ireland was uncomfortable: 'A stranger myself, and moreover a 'sassenach', I was on one occasion struck with a stone, and had an ominous letter, with a coffin crudely drawn on it, laid in my way' (ibid., 11). Nevertheless, the community had two successful years before its sudden collapse, after Vandaleur had gambled away the estate and disappeared. Craig published his account of his experience in 'The Irish Land & Labour Question, Illustrated in the History of Ralahine and Co-operative Farming' (1882). 
On leaving Ralahine, Craig was invited by Lady Noel Byron to organize an industrial school at Ealing Grove, Middlesex, 'where labour in the garden or workshop should alternate with intellectual culture' ('Phrenological Magazine', 58). He remained there until the end of 1835. Craig next became assistant editor of the 'Star in the East', and at the same time ran, together with his wife, a successful infants' school. From 1840 until 1856 Craig lectured on co-operation, psychology, and phrenology, in which he had become interested after hearing J. G. Spurzheim lecture in 1827. Craig was also interested in animal magnetism and thought-reading. He occasionally conducted his own experiments and described them in his journal the 'Annals of Mesmerism'. According to his own account, in 1843 he was earning $25-$30 a week from lecturing. But ill health forced him to give this up, and after a spell working in the Post Office in 1853 he became principal of the Rotherham and Mexborough Mechanics' Institute. 
Craig spent most of his later life as a journalist and by 1878 had been editor of six newspapers including the 'Brighton Times', the 'Leamington Advertiser', and the 'Oxford University Herald'. He was also something of an inventor and in 1873 won a silver medal at the Cambridge Exhibition of Arts, Industry, and Manufactures for the greatest number of inventions in the catalogue (twenty-seven). An advocate of fresh air, abstinence, and vegetarianism, he also published 'The Science of Life' (n.d.) in which he extolled the benefits of massage. Craig's health began to fail in his later years, though this did not stop him from contributing papers to the 'American Socialist', or from being one of the nine members who in June 1884 inaugurated the Hammersmith branch of the Democratic Federation (afterwards the Social Democratic Federation). In February 1885 he published a reminiscence of Peterloo in 'The Commonweal'. It appears that he suffered a stroke early that year, but, though frail, he was able to attend the 1893 Co-operative Congress in Bristol. Craig died at his home, Ralahine, 10 Andover Road, Hammersmith, London, on 15 December 1894. His son, Francis, was in attendance, and he was also survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 56049


Walker, Alexander (1779-1852), writer on anatomy and physiology, was born at Edinburgh on 20 December 1779. He studied at the Edinburgh medical school, but there is no evidence that he completed a degree in either anatomy or surgery. He received instruction in anatomy from John Barclay at Edinburgh, but when he was twenty years old he left Scotland for London to pursue his interest in anatomy under the direction of John Abernethy at St Bartholomew's medical school. Walker was a middle-class radical, a polemicist, and an eccentric, and his intellectual formation was of the late Scottish Enlightenment with its commitment to the development of a science of 'man'. He attracted attention at Abernethy's school for the precise, mathematical nature of his anatomical instruction, but he was forced to leave for pointing out a dissecting error made by Abernethy during one of his lectures. John Struthers, a friend and colleague, explained: 'What position he had occupied at St Bart's, or in Abernethy's class, I am unaware, but the incident of the nerve being tied instead of the artery (on the dead subject), and Mr Walker's giving offence and having to leave there, in consequence of pointing it out, I have on good authority' (Struthers, 77). 
After retiring to Edinburgh for a short period of time, Walker returned to London in 1808 and was listed as a lecturer in the 'Extra-Academical School of Medicine and Surgery'. There he delivered medical lectures at the Lyceum and lectures 'on general and particular science' at the assembly rooms. His subsequent career was mainly literary, though he described himself as a 'lecturer in anatomy and physiology' committed to the popularization of science. Besides contributions to newspapers, reviews, and magazines (notably a series of articles on science and art for the 'Literary Gazette' and 'Archives of Universal Science'), he published fourteen books, including two scientific works on the nervous system in 1834 and 1839, and a popular trilogy, 'Woman', in 1836, 1838, and 1839, which was reprinted in several editions in England and the United States during the nineteenth century. As early as 1809 Walker suggested that the roots of the spinal nerves had different functions -- that the anterior root determined the sensory function whereas the dorsal root determined the motor function -- but the subsequent experiments of Francois Magendie and Charles Bell proved that though correct in his initial assertion, he had attributed the wrong functions to the wrong roots. In separate studies, Magendie and Bell demonstrated that the anterior root determined the motor function and the dorsal root determined the sensory one. Throughout his life Walker persisted in his belief that Magendie and Bell had 'borrowed and inverted' his great discovery, stealing the credit and misinterpreting the facts (Walker, iii). He defended his position in two works, 'The Nervous System' (1834) and 'Documents and Dates of Modern Discoveries in the Nervous System' (1839), and it is ironic that the latter work actually makes Bell's own claim to priority over Magendie (in 'The Idea of a New Anatomy of the Brain', 1811) available to the public for the first time. Walker's work on physiognomy was published as 'Physiognomy, Founded on Physiology' (1834). 
Walker's most successful work was 'Beauty' (1836), the first volume of his trilogy on 'Woman' -- which also included 'Intermarriage' (1838) and 'Woman' (1839) -- in which he applied the scientific disciplines of anatomy and physiology to the female form. Drawing on the work of such notable theoreticians of beauty as Leonardo da Vinci, Johann Joachim Winckelmann, Joseph Hume, William Hogarth, and Edmund Burke, 'Beauty' foreshadowed Walter Pater's work 'The Renaissance' (1870). Yet according to Walker, accounts of the 'mystical and delusive' character of female beauty should be replaced by the division of the human figure into a hierarchical structure with three major sections: the feet and legs (the locomotive organs); the trunk (the nutritive or vital organs); and the head (the mental organs). Two further works on the same theme -- 'Female Beauty' (1837) and 'Exercises for Ladies' (1837) -- were published under the authorship of Mrs A. Walker and Donald Walker respectively, but (though it is known that Walker was married at some point) it is generally thought that he wrote these works himself. He returned to Edinburgh in 1842 in failing health and died on 6 December 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 56050


Roth, Mathias (1818-1891), homoeopath and exercise therapist, was born in Kaschau (Kosice), in the Habsburg empire, the posthumous and fourth surviving child of Matyas Roth (died 1818), a merchant, and his wife, Anna Schwarz (died 1877), who ran a kosher restaurant. Educated in his home town and in Vienna, Roth obtained a medical degree by examination in Pavia in 1839. From 1840 he practised as a homoeopath and hydropath in Kaschau. As a supporter of the unsuccessful Hungarian revolt against the Habsburgs he had to flee the country, and he arrived in London in October 1849. He became friends with homoeopaths R. E. Dudgeon and M. J. Chapman, and in 1850 he was one of the founding members of the short-lived Hahnemann Hospital and Hahnemann Medical Society. 
In 1851 Roth established a private practice in London at 16A Old Cavendish Street; he later moved to 48 Wimpole Street. In 1852 he married Anna Maria (died 1907), daughter of a civil servant, William Collins. Roth was Jewish but not religious, and the wedding took place in the Marylebone register office, both witnesses being fellow Hungarian refugees. Seven sons and two daughters were born to the couple. Four became medical doctors themselves, and the oldest, Bernard Roth FRCS (1852-1915), eventually took over his father's practice. 
Swedish gymnastics, originally developed by P. H. Ling, became Roth's principal curative method. In his Institution for the Cure of Disease by Swedish Gymnastics, to which he also added the Institute for Russian Baths, he treated various physical deformities, paralytic afflictions, and some chronic diseases with therapeutic exercise. Roth later opened another institution at 21 Gloucester Place in Brighton and employed assistants who held exercise classes for the healthy and able-bodied as well. For many years he divided his time between London and Brighton, commuting every other day. 
Roth regarded the promotion of Swedish gymnastics as part of the sanitary movement. In 1851 he published 'The Prevention and Cure of many Chronic Diseases by Movements', a 302-page treatise on the philosophical, physiological, and medical foundations of Swedish gymnastics. This book also included a detailed, illustrated description of exercises for use in schools. The latter part was reprinted several times. Roth also published many journal articles on educational and therapeutic exercise and gave free lectures to housewives, teachers, college students, and army officers. Roth exhibited models of gymnastic positions at the 1862 International Exhibition in London 'for educational, sanitary, and military purposes as well as for the development of the blind, deaf, and dumb' ('Illustrated Catalogue of the Industrial Department, British Division', 2.68-9). These were shown again at the 1867 Universal Exhibition in Paris; and also in 1884 at the International Health Exhibition in London, with additional aids such as adjustable school benches, improved clothes for infants, rational and irrational fashionable boots, and digitized socks. 
Roth developed the concept of scientific physical education, advocating the teaching of physiology, hygiene, and Swedish educational gymnastics. He campaigned tirelessly for the introduction of scientific physical education into the school curriculum. To this end he published three pamphlets: 'A letter to the Rt. Hon. the earl of Granville... on the importance of rational gymnastics as a branch of national education' (1854); 'A plea for the compulsory teaching of the elements of physical education in our national elementary schools' (1870); and 'On the neglect of physical education & hygiene by parliament & the educational department...' (1879). Partial success came in 1878 when the London school board appointed a Swedish woman gymnast to train physical education teachers for girls' schools. 
Roth considered that ill health and high infant mortality were due mainly to ignorance and to lack of exercise. For this he blamed the negligence of the authorities who did not listen to his admonishments. To help improve the health of the nation, in 1856 he suggested the establishment of the Ladies' Sanitary Association. This society, supported by the wives of several high-ranking statesmen, was effective in popularizing contemporary ideas on, for example, hygiene, infant management, and nutrition. In 1880 Roth established the Society for the Prevention of Blindness, and in 1886 he was asked to give evidence to the royal commission on the blind, the deaf, and the dumb. 
Roth's medical qualifications enabled him to be registered in 1859 as a medical practitioner, yet as a naturalized foreigner and homoeopath he did not become part of the medical establishment. His aggressive style and constant reference to European medical authorities were not welcome, especially when he visited workhouses and ragged schools and reported on their poor sanitary conditions. However, Roth was well regarded in homoeopathic circles. He became a fellow of the British Homoeopathic Society in 1884 and its president for 1886-7. He published widely in homoeopathic journals on a variety of topics. He was critical of what he considered unscientific methods of homoeopathy but kept an open mind towards newly promoted remedies such as electricity and hypnosis. He never failed to send scientific reports about the spas he visited during his holidays abroad. Roth was always an active participant at the congresses of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science and at national and international congresses on homoeopathy, and on hygiene. 
Financial success enabled Roth to acquire a villa in Divonne-les-Bains, France. He retired there in 1888, though he returned to London for the 1891 International Congress on Hygiene and Demography. In October 1891 Roth fatally scalded himself while taking a vapour bath in the local hydropathic institution; on 20 October he died at his home, Villa Beaujeu, in Divonne-les-Bains. In his will he bequeathed his left arm, thought to be ankylosed owing to excessive bleeding and leeching early in his life, to the pathological museum of University College, London, for the use of medical students. He wished to be cremated for hygienic reasons, and without any religious ceremony. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 56051


Powle, Sir Stephen (c.1553-1630), administrator, was born at Cranbrook, Essex, the youngest son of the chancery clerk Thomas Powle (1514-1601) of St Anne's, Aldersgate, London, and Jane Tate (1521-1577) of Wraxham, Norfolk. About 1564 Stephen went to Broadgates Hall, Oxford, where he was admitted BA (March 1569) and MA (December 1572). In November 1574 he entered the Middle Temple, lodging for some time with the young Walter Ralegh. Despite success in his legal studies, Powle left London in 1579 for Geneva, where he attended Beza's lectures, thus demonstrating his Calvinist leanings. He then spent six months at Basel University before enrolling as a student at Strasbourg in early 1581. After study at Strasbourg, and excursions to Speyer and Heidelberg, he went to Paris in late 1581, and was back in England by March 1582. 
Powle now entered the service of the lord treasurer, Burghley, but by April 1583 he had gone north to Scotland, where he spent six months studying under Andrew Melville at New College, St Andrews. In early 1585 he returned to Heidelberg as Burghley's agent at the court of Duke Casimir, where he passed his time at the university until in March 1586 Casimir entrusted him with letters for England. As his next assignment, in March 1587 Powle was dispatched by secretary Walsingham as an agent to Venice, from where he sent regular newsletters, reporting on papal plots against Elizabeth. Within a year, however, he was recalled from Venice and once more languished in London, living with his father in Maiden Lane. Eager for employment, in early 1589 he sought Burghley's permission to return to Switzerland, while Walsingham suggested service with the duke of Brandenburg; a rumour that he was to be sent as ambassador to Scotland came to nothing. 
At last Powle decided to remain in England. In March 1590 he married Elizabeth Hobart (1556-1590) of Wraxham, Norfolk, but she died on Christmas eve the same year, following childbirth. In late 1593 he married an Essex widow, Margaret Smyth ('nee' Turner), and settled with her at Smyth Hall, Blackmore, Essex, where he lived the life of a country gentleman and served as a JP. He became a friend of the Essex poet Nicholas Breton, who dedicated 'The Court and Country' (1618) to him. Following concerns about his elderly father's neglect of his chancery duties, in April 1596 Stephen was appointed deputy clerk of the crown in chancery, and in 1601 Thomas surrendered his six clerkships to his son. On 8 July 1604 Stephen Powle was knighted by James I at Theobalds. In March 1609 he enrolled as an 'adventurer' in the Virginia Company and subsequently served on its London council; he also invested in an expedition to Guiana. 
Powle divided his time between Blackmore and his houses in Chancery Lane and at Mile End, Middlesex, until April 1621, when his wife, Margaret, died and Smyth Hall passed to her heirs. In May 1623 he married Ann (died 1631), widow of Sir Richard Wigmore, and they settled in her house in King Street, Westminster, where Powle passed his declining years. He died intestate, and was buried at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 26 May 1630. Powle's papers, including several commonplace books and travel journals, are preserved in the Tanner manuscripts in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 56054


Villiers, Mary, duchess of Lennox and Richmond (1622-1685), courtier, was born at Wallingford House, London, in March 1622, and baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 30 March, the eldest child and only daughter of George Villiers, marquess (later duke) of Buckingham (1592-1628), and his wife, Lady Katherine (1603?-1649) ['see 'MacDonnell, Katherine], daughter of Francis Manners, sixth earl of Rutland. In her childhood Mall (as she was then commonly known) moved in favoured court circles. James I, who was her godfather, allowed her free access to the privy quarters, frequently cuddled her, and called her his 'little grandchild' (Lockyer, 152). Her father's privileged status led to early plans for an arranged marriage. A projected alliance with the heir of the elector palatine having failed, in 1626, as part of Buckingham's political reconciliation with William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, she was betrothed to Pembroke's nephew Charles Herbert, Lord Herbert of Shurland (1619-1636), eldest surviving son of Philip Herbert (1584-1650) (who succeeded his brother to the earldom in 1630) and his first wife, Lady Susan de Vere. On 27 August 1627 her father obtained a patent granting his daughter the dukedom of Buckingham should he die without sons, but the subsequent birth of her two younger brothers voided this. After Buckingham was murdered in 1628, her mother declared herself a Catholic, and Lady Mary's guardianship was entrusted to the Herbert family. 
Lady Mary continued to spend much of her time at court, and she participated in masques from 1630. On one occasion she was carried to an unsuspecting Charles I in a hamper, gaining in consequence the nickname Butterfly or Papillon. She married Lord Herbert on 8 January 1635 in the royal closet at Whitehall, an event celebrated in verse by William Davenant and marked by a drama from Henry Killigrew, published in 1638 as 'The Conspiracy'. Herbert soon left with his younger brother Philip to travel abroad, and in January 1636 died of smallpox in Florence, evoking from Philip Massinger the elegy 'Sero, sed serio'. On 3 August 1637, bringing with her a dowry of $20,000, Lady Mary was married by Archbishop William Laud at Lambeth to the king's cousin James Stuart, fourth duke of Lennox (1612-1655) (from 1641 first duke of Richmond), son of Esme Stuart, third duke of Lennox, and Katherine Clifton, Baroness Clifton. The couple had a house at Cobham Hall, Kent, but also remained prominent at court, where the duchess's beauty was celebrated in verse and prose; numerous portraits include several by Anthony Van Dyck. 
After the outbreak of the civil war Duchess Mary joined the queen in Holland, returning early in 1643. Gossip that she 'had used beating up of quarters... too frequently with Prince Rupert' (P. Morrah, 'Prince Rupert of the Rhine', 1976) points to a romance between the two that year. At a late stage of the war, in April 1646, she obtained a pass to visit London to consult the physician Theodore Mayerne. In July 1648 her brother Lord Francis Villiers was killed in a skirmish, and elegies on his death by Andrew Marvell and others coupled her name with his. On the morning of Charles I's execution, in January 1649, the king found his father's watch which Lady Mary had played with as an infant, and as his last bequest had it sent to her. 
Duchess Mary had two children, a son, Esme, born in London on 2 November 1649, and a daughter, Mary, born in July 1651. On the death of her husband on 30 March 1655 she found herself in debt and set out for France, where she became involved in royalist intrigues. Her son died in Paris on 10 August 1660, and was buried on 4 September in Westminster Abbey. It was probably at this point that the duchess returned to England. In December de Bartet, a French agent in England, wrote to Cardinal Mazarin, following a visit to her house, that she was the most 'rejouissante' (amusing) woman in the world (TNA: PRO, PRO 31/3/108, fols. 124-5). Although going then to court de Bartet gave Charles II the news that he had just been instrumental in securing Duchess Mary's conversion to Catholicism, the king had responded positively to the agent's request that she be repaid $40,000 jacobus owed her by the crown and had proposed the three meet privately to discuss potential royal brides. In March 1662 she was appointed a lady of the bedchamber to the queen dowager, Henrietta Maria, and on 30 April a privy seal was issued for $20,000 in full repayment of the debts owing to her and to her husband by Charles I, but the following year she was still in financial difficulties. Before 26 November 1664 she married Colonel Thomas Howard (died 1678), known as Northern Tom Howard, who was lieutenant of the yeomen of the guard and younger brother of Charles Howard, first earl of Carlisle. It seems that she remained in England when Henrietta Maria returned to France in June 1665, and was in London in the spring of 1667 to plead for a pardon for her brother the second duke of Buckingham, then in hiding after political dissidence. She finally departed for France that October. Once there she apparently played a part in the intrigue surrounding negotiations between Charles II and his sister Henriette Anne, duchess of Orleans: French diplomatic correspondence reported in March 1669 that Duchess Mary had told Buckingham (now rehabilitated) of Henrietta Anne's distrust of him in a letter whose diction was 'very confused' and 'corresponded to the spirit of the lady' (TNA: PRO, PRO 31/3/121, fols. 70-72). She was still a member of the queen dowager's entourage when the latter died at Colombes in August. 
By 1674 Duchess Mary had been granted a pension of $1000 a year for life. Her daughter Mary, who had married Lord Richard Butler (1639-1686), later first earl of Arran, had died in July 1668; Thomas Howard died in the summer of 1678. Little is known of her last years, although she has recently been advanced as one of several possible identifications of 'Ephelia', whose verse circulated between 1679 and 1682. The duchess of Richmond, as she continued to be known, died in November 1685 and was buried on 28 November in the Richmond tomb in Westminster Abbey, with her second and third husbands and her son, and near to her father. 


@@@@@


doc= 56057


Fawcett, Marion (1877-1957), actress and theatre director, was born on 25 November 1877 at 39 Twiss Street, Toxteth Park, Liverpool, the daughter of Peter Campbell, marine engineer, and his wife Catherine, 'nee' Rodger. She was educated at the Convent of the Faithful Companions, Sefton Park, Liverpool. Her first stage appearance was in 1899 at the Court Theatre, Liverpool, when she had a walking-on part in Henry Irving's company in 'Robespierre'. She appeared in a sketch at the London Pavilion in 1903. Adopting the stage name Marion Fawcett, by which she was always known, she gained experience in provincial repertory theatre with Armitage's and Leigh's company. 
In 1918 she formed her own repertory players and opened at the Empire Theatre, Wakefield, on 10 June with 'The Old Country' by Gerald Du Maurier, moving on to Wakefield Theatre Royal and Opera House on 5 August for a further ten weeks. The plays she produced were regarded as providing 'clean, healthy and educational amusement' ('Wakefield Express', 8 June 1918, p. 5). She continued the repertory management, with seasons in several northern towns, until 1921. Subsequently she moved to London and assisted with Lena Ashwell's Once-a-week Players. She produced also for the Jewish Drama League and the Repertory Players. In 1925 she produced 'East Lynne' at Southampton and the Borough Theatre, Stratford, London, and 'The Boy Next Door' at Woking. 
In the summers of 1926 and 1927 Fawcett was the producer for short and ambitious seasons of 'international masterpieces' at the Theatre Royal, Huddersfield, with plays by Chekhov, Ibsen, and Pirandello among others that 'made no concession to popular taste' (Chadwick, 31). Pierre Fresnay, formerly of the Comedie Francaise, appeared in Pirandello's 'The Game as he Played it' in August 1927 and Robert Donat was recruited as the young lover in 'The Witch', a play adapted by John Masefield from the work of Hans Wiers-Jenssen, for that year's final week. As always, Fawcett herself took only small parts but 'her rendering of the snuff-taking, vodka-drinking, love-sick Masha in 'The Seagull'' was described as 'unforgettable' (Isaac, 56). 
Between 1926 and 1928 Fawcett was associated with Jack de Leon's management at the Q Theatre, Kew Bridge, London, where her activities were 'multifarious'. She revised scripts -- sometimes, as with 'Contraband' (1928), radically (it had originated with a blacksmith named Warren but was promoted as a play by Noel Doone and Warren Fawcett, that is, Jack de Leon and Marion Fawcett). She also directed, served as business manager, stood in for sick actresses, wrote short stories for the 'Q Theatre Gazette', and played numerous minor parts, 'extracting laughs by... the shape of her figure and the stolidness of her walk' (Barrow, 50). At some point she 'lost' nine years from her age (and revised her place of birth): the entry in the 1947 edition of 'Who's Who in the Theatre' quotes her birth as in Aberdeen in 1886. Jack de Leon remarked that when he first met her in 1926 she was 'just over forty' but seemed 'an ancient unshakeable monument' with 'a vast store of repertory and professional experience in every aspect of theatre' (Barrow, 49). She was proud not only of the Scottish ancestry of both sides of her family, but also of being, as she saw it, among pioneer women entering a man's world. 
Fawcett appeared in minor roles at some of the principal London theatres on Sundays and sometimes Mondays in 1927 and 1928, in one-off productions by the Venturers' Society and the Sunday Play Society, rarely qualifying for even a mention in reviews. By then her career had peaked. In 1931 she spent a brief period producing at the Opera House, Malta, and had occasional modest parts in plays in London for the next twenty years, rarely attracting critics' attention. Her last stage appearance, as Mabel in 'Separate Tables' at St James's Theatre, London, in September 1954, was again unremarked. 
Fawcett was married to Dennis Ball who acted under the name of Dennis Bryan. He predeceased her. She died of cancer on 18 July 1957 at Charing Cross Hospital, Westminster, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 56063


Senior, William (1861-1937), lawyer and author, was born on 17 December 1861 at Bond Street, Wakefield, Yorkshire, the son (there was also a daughter) of Thomas Senior (died 1892), solicitor, and his wife, Lucy Ellen Winter. He was admitted to Clare College, Cambridge, in 1879, and graduated BA in 1883. Admitted a solicitor in 1886, he practised law alone in Wakefield. 
In 1891 Senior published 'Tutor and Pupils: Talks about Twelve Law Maxims'. He was a member of the Yorkshire Archaeological Society, and in 1894 published 'The Old Wakefield Theatre', a historical account. In 1895, following the death of his father, with whom he had lately been in partnership, he gave up his Yorkshire practice and moved to London. Resigning from the roll of solicitors, he was called to the bar at the Middle Temple on 29 April 1896, though the nature of his subsequent law practice remains obscure. 
From 1902 to 1908 Senior wrote frequent articles for 'Cornhill Magazine' and 'Punch'; he is to be distinguished from the William Senior (died 1920) who was editor of 'The Field' during this period. He contributed regularly to the 'Mariner's Mirror' from its inception in 1911 until 1913; from 1913 to 1919, he belonged to its editorial committee. He was a member of the council of the Society for Nautical Research from 1912 to 1927. 
Senior was particularly interested in questions of maritime law, but he also wrote on general problems relating to the navy and the merchant marine. Much of his research was done at the Public Record Office; his articles, most of which appeared in the 'Mariner's Mirror' and the 'Law Quarterly Review', dealt with the maritime courts, their judges and lawyers, and the trials there. His 'Doctors' Commons' (1922) is anecdotal legal history for the layman, based upon a wide range of sources. The collection of old maritime cases which he published in 'Naval History in the Law Courts' (1927) is of interest for the examples of situations involving common seamen. 
His interest in English maritime courts and naval matters led Senior to maritime law in general. From 1930 until his death in 1937, Senior wrote an average of one article a year for the 'Law Quarterly Review'. These eight articles are short pieces about various European jurists and their contacts with medieval England. 
Senior died of a heart attack on 28 January 1937, at his home, 13 Alexandra Mansions, Chelsea, London. He had never married, and his residuary legatee was Clare College, Cambridge, which received approximately $46,000 'for the furtherance of the studies of legal history and comparative law'. 


@@@@@


doc= 56065


Tollemache, Lionel Arthur (1838-1919), writer and man of leisure, was born in Belgravia, London, on 28 May 1838, the second son of John Tollemache (1805-1890), benevolent landlord and affable tory politician, and Georgina Louisa, 'nee' Best, first wife and first cousin, who died on 18 July 1846. The other surviving son of this first marriage, Wilbraham, inherited the title of Baron Tollemache of Helmingham, which had been conferred upon John in 1876. 
As a younger son Lionel played no part in the management of the extensive Tollemache estates. Nor did he share his father's politics: he always described himself as a 'staunch Whig'. Yet he was proud of his family and sufficiently close to his father to be called upon to accompany him and his second bride, Minnie Duff, on their honeymoon. There were no fewer than twenty-four sons of this second marriage, of whom only twelve survived, along with one daughter. Tollemache considered his father to be 'the grandest specimen of a country gentleman that our generation has seen or is likely to see'. 
The pattern of Tollemache's life was shaped as much by physical misfortune as by family inheritance. Handicapped by a stammer, he suffered an accident in childhood which left him slightly lame. His eyesight was weak, and for many years before his death he was completely blind. There was something extraordinary, therefore, about his vast knowledge of books, including novels. He had a prodigious memory. He also came to rely on conversation. 
There was nothing unusual, however, about Tollemache's education, given his family background. He was sent to Harrow School in 1850, and from there was awarded one of two scholarships to Balliol. In 1860, after being granted permission to dictate his answers to an amanuensis, he was placed in the first class in 'literae humaniores'. He subsequently quoted frequently from the classics, using them as reference points in his depiction and analysis of the culture of his own time. His bent was speculative -- he was interested in science and, above all, in the possible shapes of the future, as well as in history -- but he savoured anecdotes about his contemporaries, and set out to be a Boswell for a selected few of them. 
After reading inconclusively for the bar Tollemache turned in 1868 to writing for London periodicals, including the 'Fortnightly Review', going on to collect and add to them in two privately printed volumes which he offered to a number of open libraries. 'Stones of Stumbling' (1884) dealt with philosophical and theological issues: its title was chosen to avoid offence to his evangelical father. 'Safe Studies' (1883) dealt with people and less controversial ideas. Both volumes were published and advertised at cost price in 1891. They included Boswellian dialogues in the vein of Abraham Hayward and character sketches which pointed to, rather than avoided, contradictions. Two of the Oxford characters, Mark Pattison and Benjamin Jowett, were the subject of whole volumes in 1885 and 1895. Later in life Tollemache published two volumes of personal recollections, 'Old and Odd Memories' (1908) and 'Nuts and Chestnuts' (1911). 
On 25 January 1870 Tollemache married Beatrix Lucia Catherine (1840-1926), the youngest daughter of William Tatton Egerton, Baron Egerton of Tatton, a Cheshire neighbour and neighbour of the Gladstones. A writer herself, she was in sympathy with his literary aspirations. The most remarkable of his books was his 'Talks with Mr. Gladstone', which appeared in June 1898, one month after Gladstone's death. Tollemache first met Gladstone in Oxford on 28 January 1857, but thereafter they met infrequently until more regular talks began at Biarritz in 1891. Gladstone, though cautious on some topics, unburdened himself a good deal to Tollemache, noting: 'he in particular is a very interesting person'. For health reasons Tollemache spent much of his life across the channel, and Biarritz, where he first met Pattison, was one of the aged Gladstone's frequent retreats. Tollemache was fascinated by longevity, and the talks were broad enough to encompass most topics, including religion. Immediate politics were avoided. The 'St James's Gazette' called the volume 'the most interesting book of the year. It is of lasting value to historians' (Briggs, ix). 
Tollemache's life was shorter than Gladstone's, but he reached the age of eighty and died at his home, Dunrozel, Haslemere, Surrey, on 29 January 1919. The couple was childless; his widow died on 24 December 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 56067


Trelawny, Sir John Salusbury Salusbury-, ninth baronet (1816-1885), politician and diarist, was born at Harewood, Cornwall, on 2 June 1816, the elder son of Sir William Salusbury-Trelawny, the eighth baronet (1781-1856), MP for East Cornwall (1832-7), and his wife, Patience Christian (died 1879), daughter of John Phillips Carpenter. The family, anciently landed in Cornwall, were baronets from 1628, owning 8000 acres in 1873; the third baronet was Sir Jonathan Trelawny, bishop of Bristol and Winchester, one of the seven bishops committed to the Tower by James II. Educated at Westminster School and Trinity College, Cambridge (BA, 1839), John Trelawny, as he liked to be known, was called to the bar (Middle Temple, 1841) but never practised. A captain in the Royal Cornwall Rangers militia (1840), he later commanded the 2nd Cornwall rifles. A cultured man of wide interests, he published in 1842 with R. P. Collier, first Baron Monkswell, the future politician and judge, a translation of the first two books of Lucretius; to which he contributed book 1 (Wright, 449-50). On 25 January the same year he married Harriet Jane (died 1879), daughter of John Hearle Tremayne MP, of Heligan, Cornwall, with whom he had three children. He first stood for parliament in 1841, when he unsuccessfully contested his father's old constituency. From 1843 to 1852 and again from 1857 to 1865, he represented Tavistock; in the interval he fought Brighton, Liskeard, and Bedford. Finally, he sat for East Cornwall in 1868-74. 
By his death Trelawny had largely been forgotten; he rated a very brief obituary in 'The Times'. In his day, he was a prominent back-bencher, a humane and usually realistic reformer, whose causes ranged from the deficiencies of Peel's 'Bank Charter Act', the subject of a pamphlet from him in 1847, to the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' regulating prostitution in naval ports and garrison towns. The almost surreptitious passage of the initial 'Contagious Diseases Act' of 1864 was largely his doing: 'The danger', he observed, 'is not so much in what to say as in what to avoid saying' ('Parliamentary Diaries', 286). He also championed the Maori against encroaching white settlers in New Zealand (Steele, 356). It was, however, his sponsorship of successive church rates bills (1858-63) on behalf of the Liberation Society that gave him considerable importance in the eyes of party leaders and whips. He is best described as a free-thinking gentry radical, and as such slightly old-fashioned even then. 'Old institutions', he wrote in 1862 ' -- even though imperfect or, in part, mischievous -- give a country, at least, a backbone' ('Parliamentary Diaries', 219). As a young man he had, however, advocated disestablishment, the basis of his claim in the 1840s to be an 'ultra Radical'. Strongly conservative where individual, as distinct from corporate, property rights were concerned, he was far from orthodox, and a determined libertarian, in matters of belief. 'Desire is prayer, and prayer, if not a kind of blasphemy, is desire', he told himself (ibid., 241). He brought in bills (1861-3) to allow professed unbelievers to give sworn evidence in criminal cases, content, after he had failed to carry them, to be 'thought to sin with Hobbes and Bentham' (ibid., 163). Not surprisingly relations with his dissenting constituents in Tavistock were sometimes difficult. He steadily opposed 'a sour and sectarian observance of... Sunday' ('Hansard 3', 113, 31 July 1850, 587), and supported, on political rather than religious grounds, the Maynooth grant. As a result, he felt obliged to give up his seat, consistently with his often stated willingness to do so when he lost his electors' confidence. Tavistock took him back in 1857; he had the duke of Bedford's interest on his side, but he retired again in 1865, following local criticism of his conduct in advocating the Sunday opening of museums, and resisting legislation to close public houses on the same day. His years as a member for his native county were comparatively uneventful; worsening health ended his parliamentary career. A conscientious member of the royal commission on the Contagious Diseases Acts in 1870-71, he defended them against a rising tide of criticism, publishing in 1872 an analysis of the commission's evidence. 
It was Trelawny's dedication to religious freedom that made him the Liberation Society's shrewd, if incongruous, choice in 1857 to introduce its annual bills to abolish church rates. Independent but staunchly liberal, landed and titled, well liked in the house, he was more congenial to the Commons than a middle-class nonconformist radical. He never became a member of the society, nor did he by then sympathize with its ultimate goal of disestablishment. His aim, shared by most of those who voted with him, and by a few tories, was to redress a mainly symbolic but emotive grievance as part of a larger policy, deeply rooted in the whig past, of comprehension. 'It seems to me', he reflected, 'the terms of joining the Church should be made as broad and easy as possible' ('Parliamentary Diaries', 241). He emphasized that the church had many friends among dissenters, who did not wish to see her overthrown; she was in no real danger from the liberationists. He obtained varying majorities for his bill in 1858-60, getting Palmerston's vote from 1859, although the Lords proved an insuperable obstacle. But from 1861 the tories, with the support of Gladstone and a handful of others on the Liberal side, were able to defeat Trelawny in the Commons; church rates were an open question in the Liberal cabinet. Increasingly uncomfortable with the militancy of Dr C. J. Foster, chairman of the liberationists' parliamentary committee, Trelawny desisted after 1863 from his attempts to pass their bill. Nevertheless, his efforts had brought the tories to the point where they introduced bills to exempt dissenters from the rate. Despite the so-called 'Conservative reaction' of the early 1860s, which Trelawny found worrying, abolition was only a matter of time. 
Trelawny's surviving diaries, published a century after his death, are a useful source for the period they cover. They preserve the cautiously progressive ambience of Palmerstonian parliaments, in which Trelawny's radicalism mellowed and he became a warm admirer of the premier: 'What a slave to his duty!' ('Parliamentary Diaries', 239). A master of parliamentary procedure, he was devoted to the house and to the deliberate political process it embodied: 'We educate each other' (ibid., 233). 
After the death of his first wife, Trelawny married, in 1881, Harriet Jacqueline, widow of Colonel E. G. W. Keppel. He died at his London home, 25 Albert Gate, Knightsbridge, on 4 August 1885 and was succeeded as baronet by his son William. 


@@@@@


doc= 56068


Nevill, Wilfred Percy (1894-1916), army officer, was born on 14 July 1894 at 15 Canonbury Park, North Islington, London, a younger son -- among nine children of whom seven survived childhood -- of Thomas George Nevill (1852-1903), coal merchant (of George Nevill & Son, Hoxton) and managing director of Kelly's Directories, and his wife, Elizabeth Ann, 'nee' Smith (1856- 'c'.1948). The family was affluent, and staunchly Anglican. Following T. G. Nevill's death they moved to Tennyson's House, Montpelier Road, Twickenham, Middlesex. Nevill, called Billie or Bill by his family, from 1902 to 1908 attended Penrhyn Lodge, Westgate-on-Sea, Kent, a small 'dame preparatory school', where he became captain of the school, gained cricket, football, and hockey colours, topped the bowling averages, and won the shooting prize. From 1908 to 1913 at Dover College, a small Victorian public school, he was notably successful at games: he played in the first fifteen, the first eleven -- as captain in 1913, and scoring 107 not out against 6th flotilla, RN -- and the first hockey eleven, and was a member of the school running team. In 1913 he was head prefect and head of School House. He was a sergeant in the Officers' Training Corps, active in the debating society, and on the committee of the school branch of the Navy League. In October 1913 he was admitted a pensioner at Jesus College, Cambridge, where he read for the classics tripos, intending to become a schoolmaster. Jesus was then known as a sporting college, and he played hockey for it. He also enjoyed winter sports and London musicals and reviews. 
In November 1914 Nevill was commissioned second lieutenant -- one of 'K's pups' ('Billie', 72) -- in the 8th battalion of the East Surrey regiment, whose depot was at Kingston, a few miles from his home. The 8th was a service battalion, a Kitchener's New Army unit, and was in the 18th (eastern) division commanded by Major-General F. I. Maxse. After a month's course at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, in December 1914, Nevill trained with his battalion in England, was promoted lieutenant (dated from 11 April 1915), and went to France with the battalion in July 1915. From August he served in the trenches, and in September he was promoted captain (backdated to 11 April 1915). He liked army life and applied for a regular commission. In November 1915 he was appointed a regular second lieutenant in the East Yorkshire regiment -- he wrote, 'Never heard of 'em before. I'm trying to get transferred to 1st E.S.R.' ('Billie', 73) -- though he continued to serve in the 8th East Surreys with the temporary rank of captain. He hoped after the war to serve in India. He wrote letters home to his family: in them he appears cheerful, jaunty, and confident of ultimate British victory. Concerned about inadequate religious provision -- he wrote home in April 1916, 'it's disgraceful how few services we get out here' ('Billie', 174) -- he held services for his unit. He may have been informally engaged to his sweetheart, Alice (Muffie or Muff) Schooling ('b'. 7 June 1898), who had been his next-door neighbour in Twickenham until her family moved to Hastings: her family assumed that the couple would have married had Nevill survived. 
The 18th division was part of the Fourth Army, commanded by General Sir Henry Rawlinson, which in 1916 was to attack the German lines at the Somme. On leave in England in May Nevill bought footballs for his company to dribble across no man's land in the offensive: he hoped that it would help their advance. There had been similar uses of footballs previously, but it is not known whether he had heard of them. At 7.27 a.m. on Saturday 1 July 1916, the first day of the battle of the Somme, Nevill went over the parapet, kicking off his football, and led his company across no man's land towards the German lines and Montauban. He was shot in the head and killed, just outside the German wire. He was buried in Carnoy military cemetery, Somme. 
Nevill was one of over 19,000 British killed that day: available statistics indicate that the most vulnerable rank was captain. Nearly 1000 officers were killed, and of these very few gained individual recognition from the wider public. However, Captain Nevill and his footballs were featured in the local and national press: the 'Illustrated London News' published a dramatic drawing by Richard Caton Woodville, 'The Surreys Play the Game!', and the 'Daily Mail' published a verse, 'The Game'. Nevill's deed was commemorated by his regiment, and the story was subsequently retold in successive accounts of the Somme. His letters home were preserved by his family, and were later edited as 'Billie: the Nevill Letters, 1914-1916' (1991) by Ruth Elwin Harris. Nevill is commemorated, with other men from east Twickenham, on the war memorial in St Stephen's Church, near his family home. 


@@@@@


doc= 56073


Fleetwood, Hester (d. 1714), compiler of recipes, was one of the seven children of Sir Robert Smyth ('c'.1594-1669) of Upton, Essex, barrister, and his wife, Judith ('c'.1605-1653), daughter of Nicholas Walmesley, esquire, of Dunkenhalgh, Lancashire. In 1651 or 1652 she married George Fleetwood (bap. 1623, d. in or after 1664), a widower with two children, who had been a signatory of Charles I's death warrant and was now a militia commissioner for Buckinghamshire, commanding regiments of horse and foot. She lived with him at The Vache, a large house in Chalfont St Giles, Buckinghamshire. Their first two sons died young but a third son, Robert, was baptized in 1659 and lived until 1712. There were also two daughters, Hester and Elizabeth ('bap'. 1663). 
Hester Fleetwood's life, and her children's prospects, changed dramatically when her husband, who had been knighted by Cromwell in 1656, was punished as a regicide following the Restoration. He was imprisoned in the Tower, and in 1664 a warrant was issued for his deportation to Tangier; it is uncertain whether he was in fact sent to Tangier or allowed to go to America. The Vache was confiscated and sold but the Fleetwoods were allowed to continue there during the lifetime of Hester's mother-in-law, Anne Fleetwood. Richard Baxter mentions that in 1665 three nonconformist ministers were at Mrs Fleetwood's house, David Clarkson, Samuel Cradock (Hester's brother-in-law), and Edward Terry, and that one person died of plague there. Upon the death of Anne Fleetwood on 29 May 1673 the household had to disperse. Hester Fleetwood, who had been bequeathed the contents of her bedchamber, including purple curtains, and the contents of her maid's room, was now homeless. It may have been then that she became a Quaker and went to live with the Russell family at Jordans, Chalfont St Giles. She is first recorded as attending a Quaker meeting in 1678, at Larkins Green. Her son Robert became, instead of a country gentleman, a glass-seller in London. 
While at The Vache, Hester Fleetwood compiled an interesting little manuscript recipe book, which still survives. The legibly written book contains over 300 cookery and medical recipes, including 'plague water the Vache way' and a recipe for horse-dung water to prevent convulsions in children. A recipe for 'one that cannot make water' required live bees to be dried on a hot tile and then powdered. An experimental recipe for rheumatic eyes called for two snails, each placed with the open end to the eye, and tied on with a cloth to prevent them crawling away. A diet drink containing senna and rhubarb was taken by Hester's brother-in-law Cradock, spring and autumn. Of several recipes for melancholy, Hester tried at least one with success. The book also showed how to make pheasants lay, how to make French bread, and how to slay any worm which has crept into a man's ear, within five nights at most. She was adept at shorthand, which she occasionally used to complete a recipe. The book has a long shorthand note dated 23 April 1661 (Charles II's coronation day, an event of great significance in a regicide's family), recording a dinner conversation with her mother-in-law, Anne, regarding various relatives and their religious persuasions. 
Hester belonged to the Upperside meeting of Quakers. She died on 9 February 1714 and was buried on the 14th at Tring, contrary to her will of 11 August 1712 (witnessed by Thomas Ellwood), which requested interment in the Quakers' burying-ground at New Jordans, under the supervision of her friends Mary Baker and Bridget Russell. The will mentions 'my loving friends William Russell and Bridget his wife, with whom I have long sojourned' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/540, fol. 47). The recipe book passed into the hands of the Russell family at Jordans. 


@@@@@


doc= 56074


Legh, Richard (1634-1687), politician, was born on 7 May 1634, the second but first surviving son of Thomas Legh DD (1593/4-1639), and his wife, Lettice (1610-1648), daughter of Sir George Calverley, of Lea, Cheshire. Legh's father was the rector of Walton on the Hill and Sefton in Lancashire until his death on 27 May 1639. The death of his cousin Peter Legh on 2 February 1642, following a duel, left his childless uncle Francis heir to Lyme. When Francis died on 2 February 1643 Legh inherited the Lyme estates. Legh was educated at Winwick grammar school, where the presbyterian rector, Charles Herle, was a trustee of his uncle Francis's will. On 18 June 1649 Legh was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, and on 23 May 1653 he entered Gray's Inn. 
Almost as soon as Legh came of age he was embroiled in county politics. The elections to the second protectorate parliament in 1656 saw Legh elected for Cheshire as part of a slate of gentry candidates agreed to by the new major-general, Tobias Bridge, because it kept the republican John Bradshaw out of the Commons. He was returned again for Cheshire in 1659. He was imprisoned in York in May 1659, and hence he avoided involvement in Sir George Booth's royalist uprising. 
In the elections for the Convention of 1660 Legh supported the return of Booth for Cheshire and came in himself for the borough of Newton in Lancashire, where his family owned the dominant interest, Legh having strengthened it with the purchase of the barony of Newton for $3500 in 1660. He was licensed on 31 December 1660 to marry Elizabeth (1642-1728), daughter of Sir Thomas Chicheley of Wimpole, Cambridgeshire. The marriage took place on 1 January 1661. They had six sons and seven daughters, one son and two daughters dying young. Legh's estate was calculated at $4500 p.a. when he was considered for the new order of knights of the Royal Oak, but an account book for 1662-3 suggests a rental of $2678 per annum. He was an inactive member of parliament, although generally a court loyalist, whom Anthony Ashley Cooper, first earl of Shaftesbury, labelled 'doubly vile' in 1677-8. He retired from parliament in 1679, but returned members of his extended family to the Exclusion parliaments. Legh was active in local affairs in the wake of the Rye House plot and Monmouth's rebellion. Following the accession of James II he returned his son, Peter ['see below'], to parliament in 1685. Legh died at Lyme on 31 August 1687, and was buried on 6 September at Winwick. An inventory of the contents of the house at Lyme and its farm and stables totalled $4179 14's'. 4died His widow was buried at Winwick on 4 June 1728. 


Legh was licensed on 21 December 1686 to marry Frances (1670-1728), daughter of Piers Legh (died 1671) of Bruche, Poulton, Lancashire, and his second wife, Abigail, and the heir of her half-brother, also Piers Legh, who had died in 1685. They had one son, who died in 1725, although Legh assumed responsibility for the upbringing of his own younger siblings. Legh was able to plead his youth in October 1687 when declining to serve as a deputy lieutenant under the Roman Catholic lord lieutenant, Caryll Molyneaux, third Viscount Molyneaux. Legh remained passive at the revolution in 1688, declining to support the adherents of the prince of Orange. He never stood for parliament again, and he refused the oaths to William and Mary. This political stance brought with it problems, such as the threat of double taxation and the possibility that the government would treat him as disloyal. In March 1694 he lost his place in the Lancashire commission of the peace. On 17 July 1694 Legh was arrested for treason in what was known as the Lancashire plot, following allegations by an informer, John Lunt. He was kept prisoner in Chester Castle until the end of August before being transferred to London, questioned by the secretary of state, Charles Talbot, duke of Shrewsbury, and sent to the Tower. He was then sent back to Chester where his trial collapsed for lack of evidence, Lunt and his accomplices having been discredited and no witnesses appearing against him on 24 October 1694. After this escape Legh made a deal with the only challenger to his electoral dominance at Newton, Thomas Brotherton, who had assisted his defence at his trial, and after that Legh was able to return without challenge two MPs for the remainder of his life. 
Legh kept a low political profile but he was again incarcerated in Chester following the discovery of the assassination plot in 1696. Following the accession of Queen Anne, Legh returned to the commission of the peace, and in 1708 there was a concerted effort to persuade him to take the oaths, Sir William Dawes, bishop of Chester, holding several meetings with Legh. Legh was present at the decisive vote at the meeting of the group of Jacobite sympathizers known as the Cheshire Club which decided not to join the northern English part of the Jacobite rising of 1715, following which the members ordered their portraits to be painted to commemorate the wisdom of their decision. However, with several brothers implicated in the rebellion Legh found himself taken into custody again in September 1715, and in 1722 he felt it prudent to seek out the protection of Simon, first Viscount Harcourt. 
Legh's wife died on 17 February 1728, and was buried at Winwick. In the absence of children Legh settled his estates on his nephews, the children of his deceased brother Thomas. Legh died in January 1744, being buried on 16 January at Winwick. 


@@@@@


doc= 56076


Thatcher, Peter (1587/8-1641), Church of England clergyman, was the eldest of at least three sons of Peter Thatcher of Queen Camel, Somerset. He matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, in May 1603 aged fifteen, graduated BA from Corpus Christi College in 1608, and proceeded MA in 1611. In 1616 he became vicar of Milton Clevedon, Somerset, sufficiently close to Queen Camel for it to be possible that he retained family connections there, and about the same time he married Anne Allwood, perhaps of a Somerset family; their second son was 
Thatcher had been invited by a determined group in the St Edmund's vestry who gradually acquired authority in the town and pushed through a programme of social and civic reform. He voiced his support for their campaign 'to reform the drunkenness, idleness, running to the alehouse and other such courses, which have been and are the bane of our poor in Sarum'. He found 'God's providence' at work in the plague epidemic of 1627 which scattered the opponents of the godly and so facilitated action for 'the public good' of the city (TNA: PRO, SP 16/527/4; Hants. RO, 44M69, L37/38). His aspirations were shared by other clergy in the west country, notably John White of Dorchester, with whom Thatcher had close contact, but he never acquired White's civic dominance in his own town. He appears readily to have yielded first place to the ambitious lawyer, Henry Sherfield, Salisbury's recorder, and to John Ivie, a Salisbury councillor. 
Sherfield's disgrace before Star Chamber in 1633, following his iconoclastic attack on a painted window in St Edmund's Church, brought a check to local reform and to Thatcher's prospects. Archbishop William Laud had criticized him in Star Chamber as one who 'hath not read all the divine service in a whole year together' (Emlyn, 'State-Trials', 1.404). Within a month of Sherfield's death, in January 1634, Thatcher was writing to Sir Robert Harley in search of a safer berth, but he turned down what must have been the tempting offer of the living of Brampton Bryan, Herefordshire, perhaps because his wife died on 23 March. According to Cotton Mather, Thatcher also contemplated following his second son, Thomas, and brother Anthony, whose emigration to New England he helped to finance in 1635; but that similarly came to nothing. He married Alice Batt (1604/5-1669), daughter of a parishioner, on 14 April 1635 and apparently lived quietly with his family in St Edmund's, where he died between 1 February 1641, when he made his will, and 28 February, when the vestry elected his successor. On 19 October the same year his widow married Francis Dove, another member of the St Edmund's reforming caucus and brother of a Long Parliament MP for the city. 
Thatcher left no publications, and the fate of any manuscripts is unknown. He left $50 each to his nine surviving children (six sons, three of them young and perhaps children of Alice, and three daughters), but his chief legacy was his library: more than a hundred volumes in Latin and English of biblical and devotional writings, ranging from Calvin and Beza through Thomas Cartwright to John Davenant and Nicholas Byfield, all carefully listed in a schedule to his will and bequeathed to Thomas in New England. The inheritance perhaps helped Thomas Thacher achieve greater prominence in urban reformation than his father: from 2 January 1644 as cleric-physician at Weymouth, Massachusetts, and from 1669 as pastor of the Third (Old South) Church in Boston, also in Massachusetts. He was the author of 'A Brief Rule', one of the first medical tracts published in New England, giving advice against smallpox, which was published in 1678. With his first wife, whom he married on 11 May 1643, Thomas had five children; he married in 1664 Margaret Sheafe, widow, of Boston. He died in 1678. 


@@@@@


doc= 56084


Sir Richard [iii] Reynell (1584-1649), eldest son of Sir Thomas [ii] Reynell, was born at East Ogwell. In 1596 he and his brother Thomas [iii] attended a school at Ashburton; he then went to Exeter College, Oxford, in 1602 and to the Middle Temple two years later. He married Mary, eldest daughter of Richard [iv] Reynell of Creedy, on 12 January 1617. His marriage added Holbeame to his family estates, and he was also rich enough to purchase Ogwell Petyven, part of the parish of East Ogwell. On 5 September 1625 Richard and Thomas were knighted by the king at Ford. The former had followed his father onto the commission of the peace and was almost as assiduous in his attendance. The Reynell presence was strong at quarter sessions; apart from his father-in-law's connection, his sister Francis married Charles Vaughan, clerk of the peace, while another sister, Lucy, married James Welsh, a JP between 1614 and 1647. 
Sir Richard [iii] Reynell achieved the higher county position of deputy lieutenant in 1629 but was not a militia officer. He was on the commission of array of 1642 but took no part in the civil war because of illness and from November 1644 'kept to his chamber' suffering from a bladder complaint and thought it 'some mitigation of his affliction that it discharged him from being interested in public affairs'. He was 'very adverse to blood and of a quiet and graceful disposition' (Devon RO, 4652M/F5/1). Sir Richard's first wife died in childbed on 5 July 1626. She had with him nine children, but only two sons and two daughters survived infancy. He married as his second wife in December 1636, Dorothy, the widow of Sir John Chudleigh. She died in March 1642 and was buried at East Ogwell, the first member of the family to be interred in the new vault that Sir Richard had built in the aisle of East Ogwell church in 1633, where he was also buried on 13 February 1649. 
The younger sons of Sir Thomas [ii] Reynell and Francis Reynell followed careers at court and in the army. Thomas [iii] Reynell (1589-1665) claimed in 1660 that he had served faithfully in the office of sewer in ordinary for fifty years and suffered much. He lost the grant he had held of the farm of wine licences in Devon, Cornwall, and Exeter and was fined $630 for living in the king's quarters at Oxford. He had been the member for Morpeth in the parliaments of 1624-9. He married Katherine, daughter of Sir Henry Spiller, and had houses in Weybridge and the Strand. His younger brother, Walter [iv], was born at West Ogwell on 10 March 1591. He served under Count Mansfeld and as a captain under Buckingham on the Ile de Re, where he was killed in 1627. Edward Reynell, only child of Sir Thomas's second marriage, was educated at Exeter College, Oxford, became rector of West Ogwell and published several religous works. He committed suicide in 1663, soon after the deaths of his son and daughter. 
The one notable member of the Malston branch of the family was 


@@@@@


doc= 56086


Eyre, Anne (1612/13-1681), account keeper, was probably the third of seven children of Samuel Aldersey (died 1633), a London merchant and haberdasher who had traded to Nuremberg, and his wife, Mary (died 1628), daughter of Philip van Oyrle of Nuremberg and Antwerp. Samuel Aldersey's association with the Collectors of St Antholin's, an influential puritan group aiming to control appointments to church livings and lectureships, among whose members was Robert Eyre, a prominent Lincoln's Inn bencher, resulted in a meeting between Anne and Eyre's son, Robert Eyre junior (1609/10-1655). They married at St Antholin's, London, on 22 March 1631, when Anne was eighteen years old. Her portion was $1000, a large sum which reflected the two families' wealth. 
The newly married couple went to Salisbury, Wiltshire, to reside in the house of Anne's father-in-law, The Cheesecross, a three-storeyed, fourteenth-century, timber-framed building (later 31 Cheesemarket). They attended services in the adjacent parish of St Edmund, led by a puritan rector, Peter Thacher. When in 1637 their own parish of St Thomas objected they and other offenders were summoned to the subdean's court in the cathedral for admonishment. 
In August 1638 Robert Eyre senior died and his son, now head of the household, started an accounts book. After six months Anne took over the book and the family's finances. The book survives, a remarkably detailed and interesting statement of the household's expenditure for the years 1638 to 1645. Neatly and conscientiously kept, it provides a possibly unique insight into the lifestyle of an urban family of the middling sort. By this time the household comprised, in addition to Anne and Robert, their four children, including Samuel Eyre (bap. 1638, d. 1698), the future judge (a fifth child having died in 1635), and four servants, including Anne Thacher, daughter of the puritan minister. The family's expenditure declined once the civil war started, despite additional spending on such items as cleaning armour and weapons, mending a musket, purchase of ammunition, and barricading the town. Despite these defensive preparations, when nearby Marlborough was looted in December 1642, the Eyres rented accommodation in the comparative safety of the Isle of Wight, where in July 1643 Anne and two of her children survived a smallpox attack. The Eyres had returned to Salisbury by October 1646, though their income, derived from property rents, was depleted. 
A surviving letter from Anne to her son, Samuel, in 1660 tactfully advises him to make enquiries before getting engaged: 'when done, not to be undone, and done either happy or unhappy' (Wilts. & Swindon HC, Eyre-Matcham MSS 1369, box 36); Samuel duly made an advantageous marriage. By 1672 Anne was living in Watling Street, London, with her mentally deranged daughter, Margaret Hassell, but she later moved back to Salisbury. In her will dated 1681 she left Samuel her book of Luther's sermons and 'all my surgery and physic books and receipts'; she was evidently living in comfortable circumstances. She was buried at St Thomas's, Salisbury, on 20 October 1681. Industrious and methodical, her life had been dominated by religion and family responsibilities. 


@@@@@


doc= 56094


Atherton, Eleanora (1782-1870), philanthropist, was born on 14 February 1782, the elder of the two surviving daughters of the four children of Henry Atherton, (1740-1816) of Lincoln's Inn, barrister, and his wife, Ann (1751-1826), daughter of Edward Byrom (1724-1773) of Manchester and his wife, Eleanora Halstead (1727-1758) of Lymm, Cheshire. Of Eleanora Atherton's education little is known, although she grew up in an intellectual environment. She settled in Manchester, and divided each year between the Byrom family home at 23 Quay Street and their country home at Kersall Cell, Salford. Eleanora Atherton was coheir of Henry Atherton and of Edward Byrom, and heir of her aunt, Eleanora Byrom of Manchester, and her uncle, William Atherton of Jamaica. Besides owning land and property in Manchester and Salford, she also owned property in London, Cheshire, Lancashire, and Jamaica. 
Eleanora Atherton inherited the cumulative riches of her forebears and became a prolific but unostentatious philanthropist. It is estimated that in her lifetime she gave several thousand pounds annually to local charities in Manchester and Salford, and her charitable bequests between 1838 and 1870 were thought to have amounted to about $100,000. Like many women of her day she donated her wealth to philanthropic organizations concerned with religion, children, the sick, and the elderly. She carried on the family tradition of church building and restoration. In 1841 she financed the building of Holy Trinity Church, Hulme, at an estimated cost of $18,000. When consecrated in 1843, this was described as the best ecclesiastical structure in the parish of Manchester. Jointly with her relative Colonel Clowes she gave the site for St Paul's Church, Kersall. In 1860 she paid for the restoration of the Jesus Chapel in the cathedral at Manchester and later contributed to the rebuilding of the cathedral's tower. She bequeathed $5000 for the support of St John's Church, Manchester, which had been built by a relative, Edward Byrom, along with funds to be invested for the support of clergy in other local churches and donations for the support of clergy widows. She was a supporter of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge and the National Society, and donated $5000 to the Manchester ragged and industrial schools, part of which was to be used for the building of a new wing in memory of her aunt, Eleanora Byrom. During her life and in her will she made substantial donations to medical charities in Manchester, including St Mary's Hospital, the eye hospital, the infirmary, and the dispensary, as well as institutions providing for the terminally ill. She erected almshouses in Prescot to the memory of her sister, Mrs Willis, at a cost of $10,000. Until the later years of her life she was involved as a committee member in the administration of the Manchester Ladies Female Jubilee Charity School and St Mary's Hospital, Manchester. 
Eleanora Atherton supported the literary work of Manchester's Chetham Society, and donated to the society the library of her forebear John Byrom, philosopher, poet, and probable Jacobite spy. In 1851 she organized the printing of a catalogue of his collection of 3327 books and 41 manuscripts. These included a carefully edited version (1854-7) of his manuscript shorthand diary accounts of his connection with the Jacobite rebellion and evidence of the involvement in the uprising of Eleanora's female forebears, Phoebe, Beppy, and Dolly Byrom. Passages excluded from the printed edition of his diary suggested his role as a Jacobite spy and possible lover of Queen Caroline. 
Eleanora Atherton was a calm, religious woman, gentle, sedate, and subdued in manner, with a dislike of ostentation and strong emotion. In the 1860s, in her old age, she was a familiar figure in Manchester, carried round the streets by her old retainers in a sedan chair. She spent the last three years of her life confined to her room. On her death on 12 September 1870 at her home in Quay Street, aged eighty-eight, Eleanora Atherton left a considerable fortune. She was interred at St Paul's, Kersall Moor, on 22 September 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 56097


Benson, Mary Eleanor (1863-1890), social worker and writer, was born on 16 October 1863 at Wellington College, Crowthorne, Berkshire, the elder daughter of the four sons and two daughters of Edward White Benson (1829-1896), later archbishop of Canterbury, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Sidgwick (1841-1918). Arthur Christopher Benson (1862-1925), Edward Frederic Benson (1867-1940), and Robert Hugh Benson (1871-1914) were her brothers, and Margaret Benson her younger sister. She was educated at Truro Girls' High School and Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford (1881-3), where she took the equivalent of a second in modern languages. In 1887 she published an article on the poet George Crabbe in 'Temple Bar'. 
On going down from Oxford Nelly Benson (as she was known) had planned to concentrate on literature and art but, feeling overpowered by a passionate desire to 'do something for the poor', she turned to social work. Anxious to help the poorest women and girls to help themselves, she felt especially addressed by the struggle of 'respectable' girls to stay 'respectable'. No friend to socialism, Nelly Benson did not consider structural alternatives to the British economic system that might diminish, or even abolish, extreme poverty, concentrating instead on personal intervention in particular cases. She was a voluntary, unpaid social worker rather than a pioneer of the emerging new profession. She did play a pioneering role, however, as honorary treasurer, in helping to establish the Women's University Settlement in Southwark, 1886-7, out of which courses in social work were later to develop at the London School of Economics. Her own personal approach to social work may be seen in the posthumous 'Streets and Lanes of the City' (1891), printed privately for her friends. The book gives a detailed account of Nelly Benson's emotionally draining commitment to help the daughter of an alcoholic mother, among other cases. 
Nelly Benson's writings include a schoolchildren's 'History of Russia' up to the abolition of serfdom (1885), a novel entitled 'At Sundry Times and in Divers Manners' (1891) about the growth of a woman's commitment to Christianity, and a long, surprisingly conservative article in the 'Nineteenth Century' (28, 1890, 616-26), 'In Defence of Domestic Service', in which she disputed the servants' need for two hours' leisure a day: 'They do not need or desire exercise and... as for going to entertainments... it would be giving them leisure such as hardly any of their class enjoy, and leisure that they have not yet learnt to use'. That article was, admittedly, defensive polemic in answer to Ellen Darwin's vigorous attack on the life endured by domestic servants published in the 'Nineteenth Century' the previous August. 
On 21 October 1890 Nelly Benson contracted diphtheria, almost certainly from an infection afflicting the local poor, and died on 27 October at her home, Addington Park, Croydon. She was buried at Addington church on 29 October. Her family, in her memory and according to her wish, made a bequest to supply the training, outfit, and convalescence or holiday of poor girls in Lambeth, the first preference being given to her own 'Bible' class girls (a clear indication that she did recognize the girls' need for recuperation and holidays after all). The Women's University Settlement established a nurseship for the poor in Southwark as her memorial. 
Nelly Benson had a complex, even enigmatic personality: lively, humorous, yet depressive; enormously active and physically vigorous yet often prostrated by chronic illness; intensely sympathetic to poor women yet also extraordinarily unimaginative at times as to how the light fell for them; in some ways a 'new woman', in others deeply conservative. She was the only child not to be afraid of her father -- or not to seem so -- but she was careful to project for him an acceptable image of a good daughter that in turn produced a memoir of her by him in the preface to 'Streets and Lanes of the City' which her siblings found unrecognizable. Her brother A. C. Benson presented her very differently in his preface to 'At Sundry Times'. Like her extraordinary mother, who was a Christian version of Virginia Woolf's Mrs Ramsay, Nelly Benson's most passionate relationships were with women, above all with the composer Ethel Smyth, whom her father could not tolerate. It is probable that her most real self is to be found in that correspondence. 


@@@@@


doc= 56101


Cotton, Mary Ann (1832-1873), poisoner, was born at Low Moorsley, co. Durham, on 12 October 1832, the elder daughter of teenage parents, Michael Robson (died 1846), miner, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Lonsdale (died 1867). She is reputed to have killed by the administration of arsenic at least eighteen people, although some estimates place the total considerably higher. There is no evidence that she was deranged; her motives were apparently the desire for improvement to her circumstances and for frequent changes of sexual partner. 
Mary Ann Robson was a pretty child with dark hair and eyes; she was a chapel-goer and, in her teens, a teacher at a Wesleyan Methodist Sunday school. Rumour later circulated that as a child she had pushed a boy to his death down a pit shaft. Her father died in a pit accident in 1846; her mother subsequently married George Stott, and opened a school in Murton. Mary Ann had worked as a nursemaid for three years before returning to help her mother with the school and to learn dressmaking. On 18 July 1852, and already pregnant, she married William Mowbray, a 26-year-old labourer, at Newcastle register office. They travelled around the country for several years in search of work, producing several children, all but one of whom died, possibly from natural causes. About 1856 they returned to Hendon, near Sunderland, where three more children were born; the eldest of these four survivors died within the year. Mowbray took out a life insurance policy on the three remaining children and his own life, and died in September 1864; two of the children rapidly followed him, the cause of death being given as diarrhoea, a common killer in those times. No suspicions were aroused, and Mary Ann collected about $30 from the insurance. 
The remaining child was sent to live with Mary Ann's mother, and the widow took up with one Joseph Nattrass, who soon left her to marry another woman. She became a nurse on the fever ward of Sunderland Hospital, where she earned praise for her work from the doctor in charge, and married, on 28 August 1865, a good-looking patient, George Ward, an engineer. She had hoped that this marriage would improve her social position, but Ward's ill health prevented him from working; he died from 'fever' in October 1866. A month later she became housekeeper to James Robinson, shipwright, a widower with five children, and soon became his mistress, bearing him a child. The youngest of the Robinson children died in 1867. At about this time Mary Stott asked Mary Ann to resume the care of her surviving daughter by her first marriage, and, after Mary Ann had removed a quantity of household goods from the Stott house, Mary Stott died unexpectedly on 15 March 1867. Mary Ann returned to Robinson and her prospects of marriage. Her daughter and two of the Robinson children died in the last days of April and early May 1867; despite the disapproval of his three suspicious sisters, Robinson married her on 11 August 1867 at Bishopwearmouth church. Another child soon arrived and departed, but a second was to survive its mother. In 1869 Robinson began to suspect, correctly, that his wife was cheating him over the housekeeping money and his building society savings; she departed with the baby (whom she soon abandoned with friends, and who was returned to its father), and never returned. 
For a while Mary Ann lived with a sailor, whose possessions she stole while he was at sea, and early in 1870 she became housekeeper, and in due course mistress, to Frederick Cotton of North Walbottle, a widower with three children. (Mary Ann had known his sister, Margaret, when she was in service.) By April 1870 Margaret and the youngest Cotton child were dead, and Mary Ann was pregnant. Cotton married her, bigamously, on 17 September 1870 at St Andrew's Church, Newcastle. The family moved from Walbottle to Johnson Terrace, West Auckland, after neighbours accused Mary Ann of poisoning their pigs, to which she had taken a dislike. Cotton would not insure the family as Mary Ann had hoped, and by September 1871 she was grieving ostentatiously for Cotton and two of the children, and was in receipt of funds provided by sympathetic neighbours and free coal from local mine owners. 
Again 'widowed', Mary Ann found that her former lover Joseph Nattrass, now a widower himself, was living nearby, and he became her lodger. He made a will in her favour, and, her fancy having been taken by an exciseman called Quick-Manning, by whom she was yet again pregnant, Nattrass died on 1 April 1872, leaving her $10 and a watch. Mary Ann's only encumbrance now was her seven-year-old stepson, Charles Edward Cotton. On poor relief herself, Mary Ann tried to have him placed with an uncle or in the workhouse. The master of the workhouse, a shopkeeper named Riley, became suspicious when she predicted that Charles, a scrofulous, macrocephalic child, whom the neighbours said she maltreated, would soon follow the rest of his family into the grave. When the boy died on 12 July 1872 Riley informed the local police, who held an inquiry. A slipshod autopsy did not reveal any sign of poisoning, and Mary Ann indignantly accused Riley of attempting to besmirch her reputation. But the doctor, who had visited Charles Edward the day before his death, carried out a second examination of the contents of the child's stomach. This revealed the presence of arsenic. The bodies of Nattrass and two of the Cotton children were exhumed and found to contain arsenic (Frederick Cotton's body could not be found). Mary Ann, who was deserted by Quick-Manning, was arrested and charged with the murder of Charles Edward Cotton. 
The trial was postponed until after the birth of Mary Ann's baby in January 1873, eventually taking place before a smartly dressed audience between 5 and 7 March at the Durham assizes. The defence argued that the child had inhaled arsenic fumes from green paint on the wallpaper; this defence was plausible, especially as there was no evidence that she had administered the poison, but evidence was offered that Mary Ann had purchased arsenic, ostensibly for treating bedbugs, and the results of the exhumations of the other victims were admitted as evidence. She was found guilty, and an appeal to the home secretary was refused. She was executed in Durham gaol, making no confession, on 24 March 1873 by the notoriously clumsy hangman William Calcraft, and hung choking for three minutes before she died. She was buried in the gaol on the same day. Her responsibility for the other deaths which had surrounded her was retrospectively surmised. Mary Ann Cotton, the 'Lucretia Borgia of the North', was, as far as can be ascertained, Britain's most prolific female killer; a street rhyme, beginning '
Mary Ann Cotton 

She's dead and she's rotten 

' kept the memory of her crimes alive in the north-east. 


@@@@@


doc= 56102


Crosse, Lavinia (1821-1890), Anglican nun, was born on 16 December 1821 at 45 St Giles', Norwich, the third daughter of John Green Crosse (1790-1850), surgeon and physician, and his wife, Dorothy Anne, 'nee' Bayly or Bayley (1792-1870). She had three sisters and four brothers. She inherited many of her father's personal traits: decisiveness, determination, and a concern for the poor. Educated at home, her friendship with E. H. Hansell of Magdalen College, Oxford, led her to read works by Anglican divines and contemporary Tractarians. Together with Catherine Hansell she worked as a district visitor among the poor in the parish of St Peter Mancroft. In 1854 she heard John Armstrong speak at the Norwich assembly rooms in support of a penitentiary at Shipmeadow to rescue girls and women in moral danger; shortly after, on 9 January 1855, Lavinia Crosse was asked by the council of the penitentiary to supervise this home, as the founder wished to withdraw. 
Visits to similar penitentiaries at Clewer, Bussage, and Wantage, as well as to convents on the continent, convinced Lavinia Crosse that the best way forward was as a religious sisterhood: new year's eve 1855 saw the inauguration of the Community of All Hallows by T. T. Carter of Clewer -- Mother Lavinia and two novices being received. Despite accusations of 'Romanism' by the local press and the reservations of the ruling council, the sisterhood began to grow. In September 1859 a new penitentiary was opened at Ditchingham, Norfolk, having been moved there from Shipmeadow. A new convent was also completed in 1877, and the community added an orphanage, a school, and a hospital. They expanded their activities to include also mission work in Norwich and the surrounding area, and work among Native Americans in British Columbia. 
Lavinia Crosse remained mother superior throughout her life, despite a long and painful illness. Nearly 600 women passed through the penitentiary during that time. In the words of her obituarist her 'attractiveness of disposition; her character -- spiritual-minded -- yet most practical; her tender heartedness and great love of justice; her indomitable energy... all had their full results' ('The Guardian'). Although 'she could not endure slovenly or careless work and so was sometimes esteemed severe', this was balanced by 'a strong love of fun and humour which never failed even in later life'. 
Mother Lavinia's friend and mentor the Revd William Scudamore, rector of Ditchingham and first warden of the sisterhood, died early in 1881 (he had exercised a strong influence on the community's development). Her own death on 26 June 1890 occurred at Aldeburgh, whence she had gone for rest and recuperation. She was buried in the Ditchingham parish cemetery on 1 July. The strength of character and single-mindedness of Mother Lavinia ensured that the community overcame all the difficulties which beset its early years. Although the work of the community has changed with the needs of society, its survival into the twenty-first century is a lasting tribute to its first mother superior. 


@@@@@


doc= 56104


Fry, Sophia, Lady Fry (1837-1897), philanthropist and political activist, was born on 11 June 1837 at East Mount, Darlington, co. Durham, the first of the two daughters of John Pease (1797-1868), woollen manufacturer and director of the Stockton and Darlington Railway, and Sophia Pease, 'nee' Jowitt (died 1870). Sophia Fry's outstanding contribution to philanthropy and politics was a consequence of the three main formative influences of her early life: the Quaker faith, Liberalism, and her family. The parental home at East Mount, Darlington, was run in accordance with Quaker culture and teachings, with an emphasis on philanthropy and public service. Sophia and her only sister, Mary Anna, were given an unusually well-rounded education: academic lessons from a governess were part of a regime which emphasized healthy outdoor pursuits and moral development. At the age of fourteen she spent one year at the Miss Taylors' school at Frenchay, near Bristol, where she developed a lifelong friendship with Sarah Sturge, who later married her cousin, Edward Pease, and first met her husband-to-be, Theodore Fry (1836-1912), a scion of the family of cocoa and chocolate manufacturers. 
They were married on 14 August 1862, and by all accounts theirs was a compatible and companionable union, producing eight children (four girls and four boys), and with shared interests in public service and politics. After an initial four years in Bristol, they set up a permanent home at Woodburn in Darlington, where Theodore became a partner in the iron-rolling mills at Rise Carr. He subsequently served on the town council, school board, and the board of guardians, and was mayor in 1877-8. Sophia became involved in a number of religious, charitable, and educational activities in which her organizational flair and gift for public speaking began to mature. 
Following family tradition, Sophia Fry had been drawn into visiting work from an early age, and developed a youthful interest in education for the poor. Her capacity for innovation was shown when, still a very young woman, she started a weekly class for pupil teachers, and set up a centre for cookery classes -- well before the development of domestic skills teaching in state elementary schools. After her marriage she helped to establish the Girls' Friends Day School in Bristol, and was active in the affairs of the Darlington High School for Girls, which was attended by her daughters. She ensured that women had a responsible share in the management of the British and Foreign School Society's North of England College to train mistresses for elementary schools, established in Darlington in 1879. A supporter of the Association for the Care of Girls and the Darlington Temperance Society, her broader philanthropic work included the running of mothers' meetings and savings clubs for women at the Hopetown mission. Perhaps her most significant contribution to the civic life of Darlington was a successful campaign to raise $10,000 to build the general hospital, which was opened in 1884. 
Sophia Fry was perhaps most notable for her pioneering work in encouraging women's active involvement in party politics and in establishing the national Women's Liberal Federation. The election of her husband as MP for Darlington in 1880 propelled her into campaigning and canvassing. Recognizing the valuable skills which women could bring to local constituency work, and inspired, as were others, by W. E. Gladstone's call to women during his Midlothian campaign, she set up a Women's Liberal Association (WLA) in Darlington in 1881, among the first in the country. Although the role of women in party politics was at this stage a contested one, she believed it to be their duty to work for the electoral success of the Liberal Party and thus to promote its stance on many of the great moral issues of the day. Later commentators have remarked that the experience she gained as an active philanthropist was the forerunner of her interest in politics. Aware of the need for local associations to have a national forum for communication and mutual development, she established the Women's Liberal Federation (WLF) in London in 1887, taking the position of honorary secretary, with Catherine Gladstone as a not very effective president. It quickly grew into a formidable organization of some 75,000 members and 360 local WLAs by 1892. 
However, it also acquired a reputation for 'strong feminism' and its national conferences aired many of the women's issues of the time. The most divisive and controversial of these was women's suffrage which Sophia, although personally in favour, rightly viewed as a threat to the harmonious working of the federation and a deflection from their main purpose of electing Liberals to office. When a group of rebel progressives succeeded in establishing women's suffrage as one of the official aims of the federation, Sophia led a group of moderates into forming a secessionist Women's National Liberal Association in 1892, which adhered to the WLF's original aims and preserved the important principle of local WLA autonomy. She became its first vice-president (1892-7). 
When her husband was created a baronet in 1894, Sophia assumed the title of Lady Fry. A serious accident while on holiday with her husband in Italy was the prelude to her untimely death the following year at the Grand Hotel, Biarritz, on 30 March 1897. She was buried in the Quaker meeting-house graveyard in Darlington on 3 April. Sir Theodore remarried in 1902. Sophia Fry is honoured for her pivotal role in bringing women to the fore of Liberal politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 56105


Saurin, Susan (1829-1915), Roman Catholic nun, was born on 21 September 1829 at Garballagh House, Duleek, co. Meath, Ireland, the youngest of six children of Michael Saurin, landowner, and his wife, Brigid, 'nee' Mathews. Two sisters were Carmelite nuns, one brother, Matthew, was a Jesuit priest, and another, Patrick, was a lawyer. Her brother Michael died in 1863. 
Susan entered Baggot Street Convent of Mercy, Dublin, in November 1850. Under the name Sister Scholastica, she became a fully professed nun on 3 October 1853, taking vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience. She was selected to join the founding nuns of a new Mercy convent first at Clifford, in the West Riding of Yorkshire (1856), and subsequently in Hull. Her superior in Clifford and Hull was Mother Mary Starr (Sister Joseph), whose mother assistant (deputy) was Mother Julia Kennedy (Sister Magdalen). All three nuns had trained together in Baggot Street. 
Under Starr's direction Saurin undertook a variety of menial duties in the convent, but in every task she seemed to incur the displeasure of her inexperienced superior, who excelled at highlighting Saurin's faults. Starr's displeasure reached its zenith when Saurin refused to disclose to her the substance of her conversation with a priest in confession and when Saurin wrote to her uncle, a priest in Drogheda, asking him to arrange a transfer for her to another convent in Ireland. These were deemed to be sins of disobedience and of the writing of clandestine letters. Bishop Robert Cornthwaite of Beverley (the local ordinary) received two requests to intervene. Starr insisted that he help her to get rid of Saurin by dispensing her from her vows. The Saurin family, on the other hand, insisted that he investigate the convent because of the ill treatment being meted out to Susan. 
A commission of inquiry was appointed, with a panel of five priest commissioners. Saurin was the only nun to be interviewed and cross-examined on twelve charges of faults against obedience, poverty, charity, and truth. The panel reported unanimously to the bishop against Saurin, although in their individual reports on the inquiry four of the panel had highlighted mitigating circumstances in Saurin's favour, including 'unrefuted testimony to several instances of extraordinary and unexemplary severity' (Leeds Diocesan Archives, 'Saurin v. Starr' MSS). Saurin was required to leave the convent. Her family was furious and vowed to seek justice in the courts. Saurin refused to leave the convent and to acknowledge the bishop's power to dispense with her vows without her consent. Starr and Kennedy ignored her views. Deeming her to be no longer a member of the community, they confined her to an attic room with many privations. She remained there for more than thirteen months until she almost starved to death. In May 1867, on the advice of her brother Patrick and a Hull physician, she left the convent quietly, unknown to Starr and Kennedy. 
The next time they met was on 3 February 1869 at Westminster Hall, London, to answer the case of 'Saurin v. Starr and another' before the lord chief justice and the court of the queen's bench. The case lasted a record twenty-one days and made significant history as 'The Great Convent Case'. Nuns, priests, parents, schoolchildren, the physician, and Bishop Cornthwaite were all called to give evidence. Starr and Kennedy were found guilty of wrongfully and maliciously compelling Saurin to leave the convent and of subjecting her to various indignities, assaults, persecutions, and annoyances, including trying to libel her before the bishop. The trial was given extensive media coverage and caricatures of the key figures occupied pages in 'Vanity Fair' and 'Punch'. The solicitor-general described the case as a scandalous affair in which no scandal had been discovered. The legal costs to the Hull nuns came to $6000. 
Details of Saurin's subsequent life as recorded in the Mercy annals are scant and misleading. Five years after the case, under the assumed name of Mary Brown, she entered the Visitation Convent at Westbury-on-Trym, near Bristol. As Sister Michael she remained incognito for many years, and died in the Visitation Convent at Harrow on the Hill on 10 February 1915, aged eighty-five years. She was buried first at the Visitation Convent and then reinterred at Kensal Green cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 56106


Cooke, Mary Lamley (1841-1916), peace campaigner, was born on 3 August 1841 at Gastard in Wiltshire, eldest of the three children of James Cooke (1809-1888), schoolmaster and private tutor, and his wife, Phoebe (1811-1890). By the age of twenty-one James Cooke was headmaster of the Friends' school at Wigton, but he preferred private tutoring. The family moved to Darlington, where he taught the family of Joseph Pease, and then, after a short period in Manchester, to Cork. In her early years Mary Cooke also taught, though she devoted most of her time to taking care of her parents. She did, however, develop an early interest in the peace cause and was secretary of the Cork Peace Association. After her father's death in 1888, she moved with her mother to Wandsworth, to live with her brother's family, and embarked upon a career of peace advocacy. 
In 1890 Cooke became the assistant secretary of the Peace Union, the central association of a network of more than thirty local Christian absolute pacifist groups set up by Priscilla Hannah Peckover and run mostly by Quaker women. The secretary at the time was another Quaker activist, Ellen Robinson (1840-1912), with whom Cooke travelled around the country addressing meetings in favour of international arbitration, mutual disarmament, and the involvement of women in the peace cause (Cooke took over as secretary in 1903 after Robinson retired). In 1896 she began to edit a peace journal, 'War or Brotherhood?' (begun in 1889 as 'Messiah's Kingdom', the organ of the short-lived interdenominational Christian Union for Promoting International Concord). 'War or Brotherhood?' was often more outspoken on political events than the peace committee of the Society of Friends, of which Mary Cooke was also a core member. In 1899, for example, the journal called for an immediate and specific protest against the South African War when the Society of Friends was unwilling to make such a protest. Although she had no party political influence, Cooke, along with influential Friends such as Edward Grubb and J. W. Graham, played a part in reminding Quakers of the importance to their faith of pacifism, at a time when the peace testimony was not central to the identity of many Friends and when the largely Quaker-funded Peace Society was increasingly moribund. 'War or Brotherhood?' ceased publication in 1909, but Cooke continued to write pamphlets, in particular for use in schools. 
With Joseph Frederick Green (1855-1932) Cooke was joint honorary secretary of the first four occasions of the National Peace Congress (1904-7) and of the National Peace Council, which was originally set up to organize the congresses. The initial impetus for these gatherings came from the Friends' peace committee, which proclaimed 'the desirability of more closely uniting those interested in the promotion of Peace in the United Kingdom, with the object of a national growth of the Peace Movement'. During the Edwardian period the National Peace Council and the National Peace Congress were successful in co-opting many representatives and bodies of progressive opinion into the specifically organized peace movement. As this demonstrates, Mary Cooke, though an absolute pacifist, was keen to collaborate with non-absolutist peace activists both in Britain and abroad: as a delegate from the Peace Union and the Friends' peace committee she attended the international peace congresses which were held most years from 1889 to 1913, and at which were aired a variety of peace ideologies. 
A frail, slight figure with a pronounced stoop, Mary Cooke was quiet and lacked a natural buoyancy of temperament. She was, however, a highly respected minister at the Kingston monthly meeting and sat on Friends' committees dealing with a variety of social subjects. Her pacifism was unshaken by the war, and she was soon to travel to a women's international congress at The Hague when laid low by illness. She died in Letchworth on 4 January 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 56107


Blackwood, Hariot Georgina Hamilton-Temple-, marchioness of Dufferin and Ava (1843-1936), vicereine of India, was born on 5 February 1843, the eldest child of four sons and three daughters of Archibald Rowan-Hamilton (1818-1860) of Killyleagh Castle, co. Down, in Ireland, and his wife, Catherine Anne (1820-1919), daughter of the Revd George Caldwell. She married on 23 October 1862, in the drawing-room at Killyleagh Castle, Frederick Hamilton-Blackwood, fifth Baron Dufferin and Claneboye (1826-1902) ['see 'Blackwood, Frederick Temple Hamilton-Temple-], who was elevated to the earldom of Dufferin in 1871 and became first marquess of Dufferin and Ava in 1888. They had three daughters and six sons. Theirs was a good-humoured and affectionate marriage. She was a child bride of innocence and beauty who seemed 'delicate but very gentle and pleasing' ('Later Letters of Lady Augusta Stanley', 91). She matured into a strong, decisive woman with a magnificent presence. 'Of a reserved nature, she gave her love and confidence sparingly but, when she did, the recipient was rich indeed' (Chapman-Huston, 90). 
Accompanying her husband to Canada in 1872, Lady Dufferin soon proved to be that rarity, a governor's wife who strengthened her husband's hand. Her popularity was probably unsurpassed among governor-generals' wives in Canada. She was resilient, zestful, attentive, shrewd, and kind, but never blase or spoilt by her official experiences. Her dignity and devotion to duty were both as natural as they were undeviating. An intrepid traveller in rough or frightening conditions, her endurance and stoicism were formidable. In Canada, as in later postings, it was a distinct advantage that: 'she could spend the night in a rough country sledge, or sleep in her clothes on a truss of hay, and yet appear in the morning as fresh and neat, and spick and span, as though she had had the most elaborate toilet appliances at her disposal. (Hamilton, 122)' She was very unhappy at leaving Canada on 31 August 1878. 
In 1879-81 Lady Dufferin was ambassadress at St Petersburg and in 1881-4 at Constantinople. The Dufferins in all their embassies were celebrated for their hospitality and kindness, treating their staff with charming informality; visitors felt as if they were staying in a country-house party. Despite her shyness, she was a consummate actress in amateur theatricals: her lead in Sheridan's 'The Critic' at Constantinople in 1881 was a particular success. Notwithstanding her Presbyterian upbringing, she had a great sense of fun and a feeling heart. 
The Dufferins arrived in India as viceroy and vicereine in December 1884. Lady Dufferin took lessons in Hindustani and later in photography. An indefatigible organizer, traveller, and hostess, she most memorably used her energies to found the National Association for Supplying Female Medical Aid to the Women of India, often known as the Countess of Dufferin Fund, in 1885. Its purpose was to relieve the suffering by illness and child bearing of Indian women. Her plan was to recruit and train women doctors, nurses, and midwives to provide medical advice and attendance under conditions which respected patients' wishes. With gentle, persistent authority she presided over countless fund-raising meetings; by the time she left India her scheme had been adopted in every province, and there were Countess of Dufferin Fund hospitals and dispensaries for women in all the principal states. This great act of constructive charity was commemorated by Rudyard Kipling in his 'Song of the Women'. She was depressed at leaving India, and the demonstrations of gratitude were unusually numerous and sincere. She was a great benefactor of Indian women, compassionate and uncondescending in her manner, whose initiative introduced Western ideas of hygiene and medicine into many parts of India: her work saved innumerable lives. 
Accompanying her husband in his embassies to Italy and France, Lady Dufferin maintained her reputation as the most effective diplomatic wife of her generation. According to George I of Greece, 'there was no lady in Europe who could enter a room like Lady Dufferin' (Nicolson, 145). She retired with her husband to Clandeboye in co. Down in 1896, although for much of her long widowhood she lived in a small house in Tedworth Square, Chelsea. Her sons were always short of money, and she made selfless economies to relieve their burdens. 
Lady Dufferin published her letters to her mother in the form of journals: 'Our Viceregal Life in India' (2 vols., 1889), 'My Canadian Journal' (1891), and 'My Russian and Turkish Journals' (1916). Her books focus on ceremonials, journeys, and festivities rather than high policy, but are vivid, picturesque, and amusing. They establish her near the forefront of nineteenth-century women travel writers. She savoured the ridiculous, but curbed her satiric powers in public. Her unpublished correspondence is often as fluent and elegant as her books. Lady Dufferin received the Crown of India (1884) and the Royal Order of Victoria and Albert (1889), and was created DBE in 1917. The Ottoman sultan and shah of Persia respectively bestowed on her the grand cross of the Chefakat (1883) and the order of the Lion and the Sun (1887). 
Lady Dufferin outlived her six sons and her eldest daughter: Archibald, the eldest son, was killed in the South African War in 1900; Terence died of pneumonia in 1918; the third son, Sydney, died shortly after birth, on 29 May 1867; the fourth, Ian, died similarly, on 6 August 1868; Basil was killed in action in 1917; and Frederick, the youngest, was lost in an aviation accident in 1930. The eldest daughter, Helen, Viscountess Novar, died in 1930; Lady Dufferin's two younger daughters survived her. The marchioness died of arteriosclerosis and heart failure on 25 October 1936 at her home in 4 Wellesley House, Sloane Square, Chelsea, and was buried on 28 October at Clandeboye. 


@@@@@


doc= 56108


Gordon, Mary Louisa (1861-1941), physician and prison inspector, was born on 15 August 1861 at Seaforth in Lancashire, the daughter of James Gordon and his wife, Mary Emily Carter. The Gordons had lived for generations in the Scottish borderlands. The circumstances of her upbringing and education remain obscure, but in her early twenties she trained at the London School of Medicine for Women. On 11 November 1890 she registered as a medical practitioner, having achieved licentiate status with the Royal College of Physicians in Edinburgh, the Royal College of Surgeons in Edinburgh, and the Faculty of Physical Surgery, Glasgow; she also achieved licentiate status in midwifery. She had to overcome sustained resistance to her project of a medical career among family and friends, who accused her of having a morbid interest in disease and believed that a medical career was a degrading and risky undertaking for a woman. One of Mary Gordon's most marked traits was that she acted on her convictions, often in the face of resistance. 
From 1890 to 1908 Mary Gordon practised medicine in London. She was appointed the first ever woman inspector of prisons in March 1908 and took up a post on the English and Welsh Prison Commission chaired by Sir Evelyn Ruggles-Brise. The appointment was made in line with one of the recommendations of the 1895 Gladstone committee on prisons, which was not acted upon until Herbert Gladstone himself became Liberal home secretary in 1905. Again her friends opposed this move, arguing that such an essentially bureaucratic and administrative post was unsuitable for a doctor. Mary Gordon was responsible for inspecting the female wings of about forty local prisons where women were held, and the convict prison, State Inebriate Asylum, and borstal for women, all at Aylesbury. Initially she was viewed with suspicion and anxiety in the Prison Commission, where she was frequently described as 'a new departure'; as she was not allocated an office, she had to work from her Harley Street clinic. Her job was to report annually to the commission on the maintenance of standards and regulations in all women's prison facilities in England and Wales, and to advise the Prison Commission generally on matters regarding the imprisonment of women and treatment of their inebriacy in the certified inebriate asylums for women. There was no training for this work, and Mary Gordon attached herself to a London prison for three days to discover how the system worked; she also visited women's prisons in France, the Netherlands, and Belgium. 
By 1908 the prisons were at the heart of the struggle for women's suffrage, for since late 1905 suffragettes had been committed to prison for offences in connection with the suffrage issue. Mary Gordon deeply sympathized with this cause: until mid-1914 she clandestinely corresponded with a leading suffragette, Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence (1867-1954), and with the Women's Social and Political Union about conditions in the prisons and about leaders (such as Emmeline Pankhurst) who were periodically in prison. At that time the police raided the headquarters of the Women's Social and Political Union and stumbled upon this correspondence. The Home Office demanded that she publicly dissociate herself from the organization, which Mary Gordon refused to do, arguing that her support for women's suffrage was not unlawful and that she had never supported violence. The outbreak of the First World War led to suspension of the movement and the matter rested. However, she was never forgiven by the Home Office and Prison Commission mandarins. In 1916 she took temporary leave of absence to do war work with the Scottish Women's Hospitals for Foreign Service, serving in Macedonia in the Serbian transport column; one of her superiors caustically remarked, 'she will not be missed'. As late as 1919 her appointment ten years before was described as 'a sop to feminism'. She retired in 1921. 
Mary Gordon's ideas about women offenders and imprisonment resonated closely with the new liberalism and dynamic psychology which had become symbols of reform and progress among many of her era. She argued that the retributive and punitive prison system characteristic of the nineteenth century was inherently flawed because most female prisoners were not susceptible to force or severity. In fact, she insisted, prisons in the admittedly less draconian era of the early twentieth century functioned like warehouses, storing a complex society with its own rules and roles, in which each prisoner was guaranteed a secure place and in which the criminal merely hibernated until release allowed resumption of crime. In these universities of crime women were brutalized and alienated rather than rehabilitated. Mary Gordon emphasized the necessity of scientific understanding of women offenders in order to apply reformatory measures to them: this faith in knowledge as a key to human progress pervaded all her thinking. Female criminality was to her the result of a very poor emotional environment in the home of the small child, physical and moral deprivation, stunted or distorted psychological development in childhood and adolescence, defective education, and exploitation by accomplished older criminals. To this environmentalist analysis Mary Gordon added a constitutional element also common in social scientific writings of the time: she claimed that many women offenders were suffering from inherited constitutional defects or mental defectiveness, and therefore easily fell victim to criminality. However, she most eloquently emphasized emotion and relationship as being at the core of the causes of crime and hence its cure, and paid close attention to contemporary clinical insistence on the centrality of such phenomena as repression, the unconscious, suppression, hysteria, regression, instinct, and fantasy in the production of female crime. Mary Gordon was deeply versed in the psychological theory of the time, which she quoted widely in her writing. 
Another consistent theme in Mary Gordon's thinking was that social institutions were part of an oppressive criminogenic chain beginning with very poor nurture and family relationships. The police and law, for instance, combined to brand young women as 'common prostitutes' for life; prisons suppressed emotion and individuality, increasing self-denigration. Gordon advocated optimistic and energetic systems of training; her vision was of women offender institutions designed as communities with high degrees of freedom of expression, creativity, enthusiasm, and hope, in which the individual prisoner imbibed these qualities from the collective ethos of staff and inmates. However, daunted on occasion by the sheer mass of female prisoners and fearful that the children of today's criminals would be the prisoners of tomorrow, Mary Gordon supported a substantial programme of mental, familial, and social hygiene. There is a contrast between her optimism and sudden expression of deep pessimism in her writing, but these two aspects of her philosophy were integrated in her insistence on the need for medical, psychological, and social scientific analysis, leading to the development of an individual programme of reformatory treatment for each woman prisoner: Mary Gordon wished the whole woman to be understood in the context of her physical condition, mentality, intellect, and morality. 
Mary Gordon's concern with feeling and experience was revealed in her other writing, most notably 'The Chase of the Wild Goose', published by Leonard and Virginia Woolf in 1936. This is an account, based on their journals, of two female lovers who fled persecution by their families in the late eighteenth century to set up home in the Vale of Llangollen, where they lived for fifty years. Mary Gordon dramatically excavated their intense yearning for one another and the protracted struggles they underwent to protect their relationship. Indeed, she believed that the experience of women at the hands of men was generally painful because men lacked the emotional and empathetic imagination of women. Her other publications were a novel, 'A Jury of the Virtuous' (1907), and her work on women prisoners, 'Penal Discipline' (1922). 
Mary Gordon never married and had no children: she remarked near the end of her life that this solitariness had been part of the price of freedom in a world which stifled human spirit. She spent her last years at Hawk Wood, Crowborough, Sussex, where she died on 5 May 1941. Historically significant as a pioneer of women officials at the top echelons of the prison system, she experienced great isolation and distrust even before the suffragette issue and yet remained convinced that knowledge and dedication would lead ultimately to freedom of the whole human spirit. 


@@@@@


doc= 56110


Foulis, David (1710-1773), composer and physician, was born on 8 October 1710 at Woodhall, Currie, Edinburghshire, the second of two sons and four daughters born to William Foulis (1674-1737) of Woodhall, an advocate, and his second wife, Helen Hepburn. David Foulis studied medicine at Edinburgh University under Alexander Monro from 1729 to 1732 before pursuing further medical studies in Leiden and Rheims in 1734-5. He graduated MD from Rheims on 10 October 1735 and was admitted a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in Edinburgh on 2 August 1737. From June 1741 until his death, Foulis was employed as physician to George Heriot's Hospital, the prestigious charity school in Edinburgh, a position which he shared with his good friend Colin Drummond from 1766. 
Foulis is more noteworthy as one of very few Scottish-born composers of the eighteenth century. It is unknown where he gained his musical education, but he probably learned some music as a boy before being exposed to the work of Italian composers when a student in the Netherlands and France. His compositions have been seen as expressions of the enthusiasm of Scottish musicians in the mid-eighteenth century for Italian music, widely shared in the Edinburgh Musical Society, of which he was elected a member on 8 June 1737 and was a director in 1739. His works suggest that he played the violin. As well as contributing two pieces to Niel Stewart's 'Collection of Marches & Airs', published in Edinburgh about 1761, Foulis wrote a distinguished set of six violin sonatas which were privately published about 1770 in Edinburgh as 'Six Solos for the Violin with a Bass for a Violoncello or Harpsichord'. The 'Gentleman' composer was not named, but the ascription of the works to Foulis, first made by William Stenhouse in his notes printed with the 1839 edition of James Johnson's 'The Scots Musical Museum', has never been challenged. The dedicatee, Francis Charteris, a well-known patron of music in late eighteenth-century Edinburgh, may have funded the publication. Foulis would certainly have known Charteris through the Edinburgh Musical Society. 
Foulis's finances seem to have run into difficulties after 1750. On 20 June 1753 he was struck off the membership list of the Edinburgh Musical Society for failing to pay his subscriptions, but later that year he negotiated a pay rise from $20 to $30 p.a. from Heriot's. His absence from the meetings of the Royal College of Physicians between January 1758 and July 1761 may suggest ill health. His situation had recovered sufficiently for him to serve as a councillor of the college from December 1764 to December 1765, but after 1 May 1770 he was in receipt of a pension of 7's'. weekly from the college. It was this body that subsidized his nursing care from February 1773 (when he was lodging with Miss Paton on Castle Hill, Edinburgh) until he died, presumably in Edinburgh, at some time before 19 April 1773, when Heriot's recognized Drummond as their sole physician on account of Foulis's death. There is no record of any will, nor is Foulis's place of burial known. The biggest enigma in Foulis's life is why he should have died in such an impecunious state, only miles from the large family mansion at Woodhall, near Edinburgh. He might have expected some kind of legacy on the death of his father in 1737 (his elder brother John having died in 1732), but William Foulis's will clearly excludes David, passing all the family property to John's son William. It is possible that David had incurred the family's wrath, perhaps by continuing his studies abroad after the death of John, or perhaps through his marriage. Not even the name of his wife is known; the only record of his marriage is a handwritten family tree among miscellaneous Foulis papers in Edinburgh Central Library which states: 'David practised as a physician in Edinr and died married' (XDA 758.3 F76). 


@@@@@


doc= 56112


Charles Beilby Stuart-Wortley, Baron Stuart of Wortley (1851-1926), lawyer and politician, became a QC and was tory MP for Sheffield. He was under-secretary for the Home Office in 1885 and again from 1886 to 1892; he was created Baron Stuart of Wortley in 1917. He was an urbane man with wide intellectual interests. His first wife was Beatrice (Bice) Trollope (1853-1881), daughter of the writers Thomas Adolphus Trollope, and his wife, Theodosia Trollope, and niece of the novelist Anthony Trollope. She died in childbirth the year after they married. His second wife was Caroline, daughter of Sir John Millais. 


@@@@@


doc= 56118


Parsons, Geoffrey Penwill (1929-1995), pianist and accompanist, was born on 15 June 1929 in Sydney, Australia, one of three sons of Francis Hedley Parsons and his wife, Edith Vera Buckland. He was educated at Canterbury high school, Sydney, and continued to the State Conservatorium of Music there as a pupil of Winifred Burston. His career as a pianist was launched when he won the Australian Broadcasting Corporation's concerto competition in 1947, which led to his first concert tour of Australia the following year (and, he later noted, his thirtieth tour there in 1993). While at the conservatorium he was encouraged by Vern Bartlett, a family friend who was also the leading accompanist in Sydney at that time, to give serious thought to making his own career in this role. 
Some trial recitals in this capacity with local singers suggested that Parsons should work further in this direction and brought him to the attention of Peter Dawson (1882-1961), a popular bass-baritone ballad singer, with whom he toured Australia and New Zealand in 1949. Dawson was due to make another of his tours of Britain, taking in Canada 'en route', and invited Parsons to join him. The Canadian dates fell through, but Parsons spent his last $60 on a passage to England in the hope of joining up with Dawson again. He arrived in England in 1950, and remained in the country for the rest of his life, first facing a personal crisis of no work or prospects when his dates with Dawson were restricted to six. Knowing, through Dawson, only some contacts working in the variety theatres, Parsons turned to them in the hope of obtaining work. 'I kept going along to the piers and being accompanist for mouth organs, bones I remember I played for, a piano accordion, jew's harp; I really did play for the lot', he later recalled (Askonas, 17). In addition he found some concert work rather in the shadow of Gerald Moore, then the first-choice accompanist for leading international singers. In 1955 it transpired that Moore could not be available to appear with the prominent German lieder singer Gerhard Husch on the latter's first return to Britain since the end of the Second World War. Parsons was approached to replace Moore, and the event was so successful that Husch engaged him again the following year and thereafter invited him to become his permanent accompanist. 
Although Husch was then nearing the end of his performing career, Parsons seized the chance to visit him in Munich for serious daily work on the lieder repertory. 'We worked virtually all day', said Parsons: 'the best possible school for me that I could have had. My interest in Lieder was good before that, but it became all-absorbing' (Askonas, 17). Word soon spread that Parsons had exceptional accomplishment as a gifted partner for a singer, bringing him an invitation from the recording executive Walter Legge to accompany his wife, the celebrated soprano Elisabeth Schwarzkopf, at London's Royal Festival Hall in 1961. They worked through seven three-hour rehearsals in preparation for the concert, and thereafter Parsons was in the forefront of his specialized profession. 
His investment of time and patience in meticulous preparation was a major component of Parsons's success in working with Schwarzkopf and other famous singers from many countries. Following the opening of London's new Barbican Hall in March 1982 he was invited to put together his own series of song recitals, no doubt to demonstrate the hall's suitability for small-scale events as well as orchestral concerts. In October of that year 'Geoffrey Parsons and friends' presented, within a single month, memorable themed programmes by individual singers, the 'friends' including Victoria de los Angeles, Dame Janet Baker, Nicolai Gedda, Felicity Lott, and Margaret Price, to whom were added on other occasions Elisabeth Harwood, Hans Hotter, Sena Jurinac, and Jessye Norman, to name but a few. Parsons wrote a programme article for his Barbican series, 'The art of the accompanist', wherein he defined his artistic ideal as 'producing a cushion of basically rich sound, on which the singer feels supported and borne along in utter safety' (Barbican Hall, 12 Oct 1982). He added, in the same article, 'We are expected to know all the 'standard' songs, and most of the unusual ones, in keys not only high, low and medium, but also appropriately higher, lower or more medium, printed or not'. Parsons did not confine his attentions to singers, but worked also with violinists such as Ida Haendel, Nathan Milstein, and Wanda Wilkomirska, and with the cellist Paul Tortelier. It was all part of what he called 'a life of unceasing and stimulating challenge' (ibid.), in which he invariably combined courtesy and regard for the artist he was accompanying with a justified sense of his own worth. Roger Vignoles, a fellow accompanist and occasional duet and two-piano partner, declared that the only word to do justice to Parsons in performance was 'immaculate' in relation to 'the seamless fluency of his playing' (Vignoles). 
Vignoles also testified to Parsons's 'unfailing generosity', not least to 'the dozens of younger musicians who came to his London home in West Hampstead', where 'he was an excellent and famously hospitable cook' (Vignoles). He enjoyed good food, fine wines, books, and paintings, liked to visit the theatre and always enjoyed opera, leaving an enduring memory of his playing for rehearsals of 'Der Rosenkavalier' at Glyndebourne one summer, just because he loved the work so much. He would converse as affably with an off-duty critic as he did with his own circle, which included his long-time domestic partner, the singer and voice teacher Erich Vietheer (who predeceased him in 1989). He was a committed Anglican, a benefactor of both St Albans Abbey and St Cyprian's, Clarence Gate, where he worshipped regularly and endowed a stained-glass window. He accumulated honours from London music colleges, was appointed OBE in 1977, and received the Order of Australia in 1990. His death from cancer on 26 January 1995, in the Middlesex Hospital, London, followed mercifully soon after the onset of the disease. 


@@@@@


doc= 56119


Fulton, Margaret Barr (1900-1989), occupational therapist, was born on 14 February 1900 at Bank House, Cheetham Hill, Manchester, the youngest of the five children of Dr Andrew Boyd Fulton (1862-1919), a medical practitioner, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Barr (1867-1946); both parents were Scottish. After receiving private tuition at home she was educated at Manchester High School for Girls. She became interested in occupational therapy following a chance encounter on a ship to the United States, and trained at the Philadelphia School of Occupational Therapy (1922-3) where she gained her diploma. The school had been set up in 1919, initially to instruct practitioners in working with soldiers who had been physically and psychologically traumatized during the First World War. It was associated with two of the founders of occupational therapy in the United States, Eleanor Clarke Slagle and Thomas B. Kidner, who were involved with the National Society for the Promotion of Occupational Therapy, established in 1917. Fulton also worked for six months at the Metropolitan Hospital in New York, developing her interest in psychiatry, before returning to Britain, where occupational therapy was virtually unknown. 
After some months looking for work, Fulton was introduced to Dr Robert Dods Brown, superintendent of the Aberdeen Royal Asylum, who persuaded the hospital board of directors to appoint her at an annual salary of $120 per year, living out. She was employed at the hospital from 1925 to 1963, being the first qualified occupational therapist to practise in the United Kingdom. By 1932, there were ten craft instructors employed in Scottish mental hospitals, who, together with Fulton, formed the Scottish Association of Occupational Therapists; Fulton was elected secretary and treasurer. The association was suspended during the Second World War, and when it was reconstituted in 1946 Fulton was elected to the chair, a position she held until 1949. She remained on the council, in various offices, almost continuously until 1971. 
In 1952 Fulton was a member of the preparatory commission which drew up the constitution for the World Federation of Occupational Therapists; she was elected its first president and served for the first eight years of its existence. She was involved in the organization of the first international congress of the federation, which was held in Edinburgh in August 1954, after which she was appointed MBE for services to her profession. She was made an honorary fellow of the World Federation of Occupational Therapists in 1960. 
Fulton was a strikingly handsome woman. She never married, but supported her mother until her death in 1946. As well as being an accomplished craftswoman, she was a gifted pianist. She published very little, though she was an effective, witty speaker and a prolific letter writer. She played a prominent role in the Soroptomists, an international association for professional women, through which she extended her worldwide circle of friends. After her retirement in 1963, she lived in Edinburgh, where she died after a short illness on 16 December 1989. Her body was cremated at Warriston crematorium, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 56125


Vogt, Marthe Louise (1903-2003), pharmacologist and neurochemist, was born on 8 September 1903 in Berlin, Germany, the elder daughter of Oskar Vogt (1870-1959) and his wife, Cecile, 'nee' Mugnier (1875-1962), both neurologists. Oskar Vogt came from a Lutheran family in Schleswig-Holstein and Cecile from Savoie. They had met in Paris where both were undertaking neuroanatomical research. In 1899 they moved to Berlin and, using income from their private practices, founded a small research institute. In 1930 the Kaiser Wilhelm Institut fur Hirnforschung was created specifically for them with funds from the Kaiser Wilhelm Gesellschaft zur Forderung der Wissenschaften and the Rockefeller Foundation. Vogt's younger sister, Marguerite ('b'. 1913), later became a distinguished geneticist. 
Marthe Vogt was educated at the Auguste-Viktoria-Schule at Berlin-Charlottenburg and graduated in medicine and chemistry from Berlin University in 1927. Her objective was always a career in research rather than clinical practice. While an undergraduate, she considered specializing in experimental psychology, but rejected it because of the lack of disciplinary focus. On qualifying she undertook an MD with her father, then completed a PhD in biochemistry before joining Paul Trendelenburg in Berlin University's department of pharmacology in October 1929. In December 1930 she became a research assistant in her parents' new institute and the next year, at the age of twenty-eight, she was appointed head of the division of chemistry. 
The facilities were excellent and her research productive, but in April 1935 Vogt left Germany on a one-year Rockefeller travelling fellowship, with no intention of returning. She first joined Sir Henry Dale's group at the National Institute for Medical Research in London, which was at the heart of the debate as to whether communication between nerves and their target cells was mediated by chemical neurotransmitters or by electrical conduction. Within a few months Dale, Vogt, and Wilhelm Feldberg had demonstrated that nervous control of voluntary muscle is due to release of acetylcholine. This was the crowning confirmation of the chemical hypothesis, for which Dale together with Otto Loewi received the 1936 Nobel prize. Vogt spent the second half of her fellowship at Cambridge with E. B. (Basil) Verney, studying renal hypertension. When her Rockefeller support lapsed Verney found her temporary funding from the Royal Society and she then obtained a three-year fellowship from Girton College, allowing consolidation of her Cambridge research into a second PhD. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 regional tribunals were set up to assess the security risk from German nationals residing in Britain: because of its proximity to the Wash, Cambridge was of especial concern. Vogt's resignation from the Berlin institute had never been accepted and she was therefore still officially a member of the German Workers' Front and so deemed a dangerous enemy alien. Following urgent intercessions to the Home Office by Dale, Verney, and others, however, her internment order was reversed and she was reclassified as a friendly alien. 
In 1941 J. H. (Jack) Gaddum offered Vogt a post at the Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain in London. This was an opportunity to establish an independent research profile at last. She spent the next six years elucidating the role of the adrenal gland in responses to stress and also began to think seriously about neurotransmitters in the brain. Initial studies were carried out on acetylcholine, again in collaboration with Feldberg. Then in 1947 she moved to Edinburgh to rejoin Gaddum, now professor of materia medica there, and she was appointed lecturer, rising to senior lecturer in 1951 and reader in 1952. From this time on, her research focused on the roles of monoamines as brain neurotransmitters. 
While at Edinburgh Vogt published over forty papers, including her two most important. In 1954 she documented the presence of greatly varying concentrations of the catecholamine molecule, noradrenaline, in different regions of the brain. Noradrenaline was known already to be the neurotransmitter in peripheral nerves that constrict blood vessels and, although it had been found previously in the brain, this was thought to be due to the presence of blood vessels. Vogt's findings, however, indicated that the brain itself possesses noradrenaline-containing cells. Years later Vogt recalled that the work 'took about four years to carry out (1950-1953) but the manuscript was accidentally buried on the editor's desk until I finally had the courage to enquire about its fate. It was then published with great speed and without editorial corrections. ('Current Contents', 227)' This study was the trigger for the international explosion of research that over the next twenty years elucidated the importance of catecholamine neurotransmitters in a wide variety of brain functions. It was followed in 1956 by a second definitive paper, describing (with Marguerite Holzbauer) the depletion of brain noradrenaline by reserpine. A natural plant alkaloid, reserpine was in the early 1950s the drug of choice for treating high blood pressure because it depleted noradrenaline from peripheral nerves and so relaxed blood vessels. What was not recognized was that reserpine also depleted brain catecholamines, causing mood depression that led to many suicides. Vogt's findings were later acclaimed as opening the way for development of therapeutically effective tranquillizers and antidepressants, but they were more immediately important in eliminating the high mortality associated with antihypertensive drug therapy. 
In 1958 Gaddum moved to the Agricultural Research Council Institute at Babraham, Cambridge, and in 1960 Vogt joined him as head of the pharmacology unit. Although she retired officially in 1968, she continued her research at Babraham for another twenty years, focusing on the brain monoamines dopamine and serotonin. In this period her elucidation of the neurotransmitter role of serotonin was particularly significant, since it formed the basis for development of a new armamentarium of antidepressant drugs such as Prozac. 
Vogt received many honours. In 1952 she was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, only the ninth woman to be so recognized. She became a life fellow of Girton College in 1970, was awarded honorary degrees by Edinburgh (1974) and Cambridge (1983) and honorary memberships of numerous medical and learned societies in Britain and abroad, and received the royal medal of the Royal Society in 1981 and the Wellcome gold medal of the British Pharmacological Society in 1983. 
Vogt never married. When her sister Marguerite was asked why neither of them had followed their mother's example in combining science and family life, she replied 'Ah, my mother. She was an exception to the rule' ('New York Times', 10 April 2001). Vogt was quiet and reserved, but unfailingly kind and hospitable to the many visitors who came to work with her. She was an avid and tireless tourist with a deep interest in ancient civilizations, and during her later years became a keen gardener, with rose growing a particular passion. She had a strong interest in human rights of all sorts. When invited to be included in a 'who's who' of women scientists she refused on the grounds that the book was sexually discriminatory. Rather typically, she added a handwritten 'sorry' to the typed refusal. Reduced mobility eventually forced her to leave Cambridge in 1990. She moved to live with her sister in La Jolla, California, where she died on 9 September 2003, the day after her hundredth birthday. 


@@@@@


doc= 56126


Bugga (d. 759x65), abbess, had the full name Haeaburh and was related to the Kentish royal house. She is first known from a letter she sent to Boniface, early in his career in Germany, with her mother, Eangyth, who was abbess of a Kentish monastery, to which Bugga subsequently succeeded. Their letter contains some interesting insights into the problems of running a double monastery, including rebellious monks and excessive demands from the king and his officials. Hostility from the king (Wihtred), presumably because they belonged to a rival branch of the royal house, had forced other members of their family to go abroad, including a cousin of Bugga's called Denewald (who later joined Boniface's mission), and Eangyth and Bugga sought Boniface's advice about also going overseas on a pilgrimage. One subsequent letter from Bugga to Boniface survives and two from him to her which testify to the mutual support they provided to one another throughout their lives. Although Boniface had been discouraging about the advisability of a pilgrimage, Bugga did eventually travel to Rome, probably in 738-9, where she met Boniface and asked him to pray for her kinsman King AEthelbert II of Kent, as the king subsequently recalled in a letter to the missionary. In old age she gave up her position as abbess to follow a more contemplative life. Archbishop Bregowine, writing between 759 and 765, reported to Lull that her 'depositio' was celebrated on 28 December, but the exact year of her death is not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 56127


Adam, Ruth Augusta (1907-1977), writer and feminist, was born on 14 December 1907 at the vicarage in Arnold, a mining parish in Nottinghamshire, the second of the four children of the Revd Rupert William King (1874-1955), a Church of England vicar, and Annie Margaret, 'nee' Wearing (1878-1945). She was educated from 1920 to 1925 at St Elphin's, Darley Dale, Derbyshire, a girls' boarding-school, and she then taught for five years in poverty-stricken elementary schools in the mining area of Nottinghamshire. On 24 May 1932 she married Kenneth Adam (1908-1978), a journalist on the 'Manchester Guardian' who later became the first director of BBC television. 
Ruth Adam's best novel, 'I'm Not Complaining', a tartly anti-Lawrentian view of women's lives in the depression, narrated by an unmarried woman teacher, was published in 1938 and was reissued as a 'Virago Modern Classic' in 1983. Between 1937 and 1947 Ruth Adam had four children (a daughter, the journalist Corinna Adam, and three sons) but she also managed to work for the Ministry of Information during the war and to write several novels of social reportage, a child's history of America, many radio scripts, including radio plays and broadcasts for the BBC's 'Woman's Hour', as well as the first of her 'Church of England Newspaper' women's pages. Between 1944 and 1976 Ruth Adam wrote more than 2000 of these weekly 'pages' in which she was free to articulate her position as a Christian socialist feminist for a sometimes startled readership composed mainly of church wives. She raised such issues as paid work for married women, the necessity for good childcare, and the social usefulness of older women in the community, and she also discussed the wider issues of the need for peace and justice and for an enlightened penal policy towards juvenile offenders, the plight of refugees, and the historical significance of Sylvia Pankhurst and the suffragettes. Her standpoint was that of a commonsensical 'social feminist' who insisted on the value of the work done by mothers in the home as well as on the contribution of women in careers. 
In 1955 Ruth Adam, with her friend the London county councillor Peggy Jay, co-founded the Fisher Group, a think-tank on social policy and the family which gave evidence to government committees of inquiry and contributed to such legislative reforms as the 1963 and 1969 'Children and Young Persons Acts' and the 'Local Authority Social Service Act' of 1970. Arising out of this concern Ruth Adam wrote her disturbing novels 'Fetch Her Away' (1954) and 'Look Who's Talking' (1960) about girls in care, which are rare in their sympathetic depiction of women social workers. A stark contrast is her novel 'A House in the Country' (1957), which gives a comic account of her own family's attempt at living in a commune. In 1966 and 1967 she published books on G. B. Shaw and on Beatrice Webb. Perhaps Ruth Adam's most unusual achievement was her writing, at the very end of her life, of 'A Woman's Place, 1910-1975', a succinct, witty, and trenchant social history of British women in the twentieth century that pulled the many interests of her own life together. Ruth Adam remained intellectually alert and alive to new ideas and events and this last book testifies to her thoughtful analysis of the gains and losses for British women up to and including the women's liberation movement. That she has been overlooked in the history of British feminist writing is largely due to her choice of a non-feminist readership -- teenage girls for her comic strip 'Susan: a Girl Nurse' in 'Girl'; harassed vicars' wives in draughty, impoverished parsonages for her women's page in the 'Church of England Newspaper'; and overworked women in the caring professions for her booklets and fiction on children in need. Moreover she was never an extremist, and hence escaped citation by both friends and foes of the women's movement. Ruth Adam's whole life testified to her kind of optimistic, gradualist feminism. Her marriage was a partnership of genuine equals and she regarded the children as the first job in hand for herself and her husband. But she was rarely seen without a book or a writing-pad, whether by the kitchen stove or in a hospital bed. Ruth Adam died at the Hospital of St John and St Elizabeth, Marylebone, London, on 3 February 1977. 


@@@@@


doc= 56132


Dundas, Robert Hamilton (1884-1960), classical scholar, was born on 30 August 1884 at 14 Athole Crescent, Edinburgh, the only son of George Smythe Dundas of Duns (1842-1909) and his wife, Georgina Lockhart Ross (died 1927). His father, a lawyer, was later sheriff substitute of Roxburgh, Berwick, and Selkirk. Robert was a descendant of the younger Pitt's cabinet colleague Lord Melville, but seldom if ever mentioned him. From Summer Fields, Oxford, Dundas went to Eton College as king's scholar (ninth on the list) in 1897, and thence to New College, Oxford, as a scholar in classics in 1903; he was taught by Alfred Zimmern, and after firsts in classical moderations and 'literae humaniores' (1905, 1907) was appointed to a lectureship in classics at Liverpool University in 1908, his superior (and another strong influence) being Professor Sir John Myres. In the following year he was elected to a studentship and tutorship at Christ Church, Oxford, where he taught Greek history for most of the next forty-six years. 
Dundas quickly made an impression on his Christ Church colleagues, and was elected (junior) censor and put on two key committees on 2 December 1914, in the knowledge that he would soon accept a commission in the Black Watch. He served briefly in France in 1915 and then in Mesopotamia; wounded during the Kut campaign, he was posted to India, where he was a military censor in Delhi, Simla, and Rangoon. He was twice mentioned in dispatches, and ended the war as a captain. Back at Christ Church by May 1919, he was at once reinstated as censor (to 1924); from 1925 his tutorial rooms, once occupied by C. L. Dodgson, and borrowed by A. Einstein during Dundas's world tour in 1930-31, were known to a long succession of Christ Church undergraduates, whatever their subject, as the place where Dundas had interrogated them on their arrival as to their knowledge of life and particularly of its financial and sexual aspects; some public schoolboys, forewarned by others, may have pulled his leg. 
Dundas regarded his tutorial and counselling activities as more demanding calls on his time than printed contributions to classical scholarship. He had long been intending to publish a work on Thucydides, but the material which he had collected was stolen or lost on a wartime train journey to Scotland and, given the advance of scholarship, it was then too late for him to start all over again. His publications were therefore limited to a rather over-written reminiscence entitled 'The last place in India' (1920), and the privately published Christ Church reports. Nevertheless, he taught many distinguished classicists, including E. S. G. Robinson. Sir John Masterman, Dundas's fellow censor, later commended him as 'the best-known and most honoured of all Christ Church tutors... the type of tutor who devoted his life to his pupils without any other competing activity'. 
In the senior common room, though never elected curator, Dundas often presided at formal sessions by seniority; here his inquisition had little place, the new arrivals being older (and, latterly, former service personnel); but he sang the praises of Christ Church -- without, it seemed, much detailed knowledge of its earlier history. He believed that he had lived in and had contributed to a golden age which his hearer, if Dundas's hopes were realized, could help to continue, especially if he held what to Dundas was the House's most important office: the censorship itself. When he reached retirement age (1955) Dundas was allowed to retain his rooms, and remained an active senior member. It is from this period that most reminiscences survive. In a stern reassessment, 'Mercurius Oxoniensis' (H. R. Trevor-Roper) held that 'as a scholler he was no great shakes', but for fifty years Christ Church was the centre of his life and efforts: to that institution and its members, and to his relatives and house in Scotland, he gave the time and affection which others would have lavished on immediate family and home. 
His 'Times' obituarist (K. G. Feiling, a colleague from 1909 to 1946 in Oxford and briefly in India) attributed Dundas's attitudes and values to his experience of Lothian and to the influence of his mother's 'long and admirable' life; the same writer thought that to Dundas college life was a 'training ground for action', and called him 'a pillar, in some ways the central pillar, of Christ Church'. There Dundas much enjoyed a duty which he performed from 1938 to 1959: compiling the Christ Church annual report circulated to all members of the House. Each year he accumulated and brought together all that he could discover of the activities of members, with lapidary comments on the deeds and attitudes of many; his first six reports described the impact of war (he was himself again censor in 1944-5), and the remainder the adjustment to peace and its novelties -- all this in economical and deeply considered prose (not without its Scotticisms), some of it rehearsed in advance to his often hard-pressed colleagues. The task allowed him to welcome, in somewhat guarded terms, the spouses of colleagues to the House's first Ladies Nights. 
Dundas was an example of the lay bachelor don after 1882: a kind if idiosyncratic host to many pupils, former pupils, and friends (there were 1648 names in his visitors' book). He was a generous and unproclaimed benefactor of the needy young, and by his will left $2000 to assist their travel (music, swimming, and travel were his own chief pleasures). He died at his home at Laurel Hill, Stirling, on 1 October 1960; his last words ('You women always want to have the last word' -- to his nurse), cited by Venables, are among the few such recorded of members of Christ Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 56135


Crane, Sir Edmund Frank (1886-1957), cycle manufacturer, was born on 21 November 1886 at 55 Cape Hill, Smethwick, Birmingham, the eldest of two sons in a family of six children of Edward John Crane, then a clerk, and his wife, Edith Maude Willmott. He was educated at Handsworth grammar school and soon after leaving became involved in the family's cycle business. The Petros Motor and Cycle Company Ltd, registered in his mother's name owing to his father's earlier bankruptcy, came to prominence in the early years of the century producing bicycles at prices well below those of the established manufacturers. This enterprise foundered in the face of hostility in the trade and went into liquidation in 1910. Crane, along with his father and brother Harry, only narrowly escaped imprisonment for alleged attempts to defraud the creditors of the business the following year, but their sentences were dismissed on their appeal. 
In 1910 Crane and Harry went into partnership and founded the Hercules Cycle and Motor Company Ltd with $25 capital. Beginning with an output of twenty-five machines a week, assembled from bought-in components and targeted for sale in the Birmingham area, the company grew at a rapid rate. By 1922 output of cycles had reached 700 machines a week, and by 1928, 300,000 machines a year, of which over a third were exported. By 1933 the company had reached a total output of three million cycles, which it doubled by 1939, making it the largest cycle manufacturer in the world. 
Crane's success lay in his commitment to produce a reliable and affordable bicycle, initially for lower-middle-class urban dwellers, and then for members of the working classes also. He placed great emphasis on the use of the bicycle for travelling to work rather than for weekend leisure usage, and the new inter-war housing estates, often ill served by public transport, provided a ready market. By a policy of scrupulously using the cheapest suppliers, and buying in bulk, the company drove down costs and where it was advantageous manufactured parts itself. Despite its name, the company remained highly specialized, did not enter the manufacture of motor vehicles, and did not contribute to innovations in bicycle design. In order to boost sales Crane spent considerable sums of money on advertising, particularly in newspapers, promoting cycling as a sport and in general, as well as making Hercules a household name. Crane married twice. His first marriage was on 22 May 1911 to a singer, Naomi, daughter of Samuel Tamkin, an artist from Edinburgh, with whom he had a daughter. The marriage was dissolved in 1938. His second marriage was on 10 August 1938 to Kathleen Margaret, daughter of Cecil Murray Wright, a soldier. 
As a businessman Crane was single-minded and autocratic. This brought him into conflicts within the industry, where he was regarded as ruthless and unsympathetic to the trade's overall interest. Disagreements with the industry's trade association, the British Cycle and Motor Cycle Manufacturers' Trades Union Ltd, ultimately led to Crane withdrawing his company from it in 1933. In later years Crane delegated management of the works to trusted subordinates, while devoting more effort to strategic issues. He assumed complete financial control when he bought his brother Harry's share of the business following disagreements over the scale of the company's advertising. Although an attempt was made by Raleigh Cycle Holdings Ltd to effect a merger in 1935, with a highly advantageous offer alleged to have been $2.5 million along with a place on the board of the proposed new company, Crane declined it, probably because he would have found loss of overall control unpalatable. In 1946 he nevertheless sold his business for $3.25 million to Tube Investments. After only a few months on the board of that company Crane retired, initially to South Africa and later to Jersey, where he lived at Villa Millbrook, St Lawrence. 
Crane's interests were golf and shooting and he was at one time a referee in amateur association football. His contributions to charitable works included donations towards the treatment of sufferers from tuberculosis. Although he did not enter political life at either local or national level, he made donations to the Conservative Party; for these public and political services, as well as for his company's export success, he received a knighthood in 1935. Crane died of heart failure on 18 September 1957 at Le Meridien, avenue Docteur Raymond Picaud, La Bocca, Cannes, in the south of France. 


@@@@@


doc= 56136


Voysey, Charles (1828-1912), theistic preacher, was born in London on 18 March 1828, the youngest son of Annesley Voysey (c.1794-1839) and his wife, Mary, daughter of Thomas Green. His father, the son of Henry Voysey and Ann Maria Annesley, 'nee' Ellison, was a direct descendant of John Wesley's sister, Susannah Ellison, and a noted architect. Henry Wesley Voysey, the geologist, was his brother. He was reputedly responsible for the first purpose-built office building in London, constructed 'c'.1823 in Clement's Lane. He afterwards emigrated to Jamaica, where he died of fever on 5 August 1839. Charles Voysey passed from Stockwell grammar school to St Edmund Hall, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1847 and graduated in 1851, when he was ordained and appointed to the curacy of Hessle, Hull. In 1852 he married Frances Maria, daughter of Robert Edlin, partner in the banking firm Herries, Farquhar & Co. They had six daughters and four sons, the eldest being Charles Francis Annesley Voysey (1857-1941), the architect. 
In 1858 Charles Voysey was appointed incumbent of St Andrew's, Craigton, Jamaica. After eighteen months he returned to England and, through A. P. Stanley's influence, obtained a curacy at Great Yarmouth, but six months later, in 1861, was appointed curate at St Mark's, Whitechapel. He was ejected from the curacy after preaching a sermon in which he denied the doctrine of eternal punishment. He was recommended in 1863 by the bishop of London, A. C. Tait, to the curacy of St Mark's, Victoria Docks, under Dr Henry Boyd, later of Hertford College, Oxford. Soon he became curate of Healaugh, near Tadcaster, and in 1864 became its vicar. 
Voysey began his career as a religious reformer by the publication, in 1864, of a sermon 'Is Every Statement in the Bible about our Heavenly Father Strictly True?'. It was withdrawn by Voysey after three editions when another clergyman involved in its production was censured. In 1865 he began the monthly publication of his sermons under the title 'The Sling and the Stone', which continued for six years. His sermons continued to be published after 1871, upwards of 1,250,000 copies being produced. His preaching and writing were denounced for unorthodoxy, and in 1869 he was required to appear before the chancellor's court of the diocese of York, where judgment was given against him. He appealed to the privy council and conducted his own defence, but the York chancellor's decision was upheld on 11 February 1871, and sentence of deprivation of his living was pronounced, to be rescinded if within a week Voysey expressly and unreservedly retracted the errors of which he had been convicted. This he refused to do. Before the judgment Voysey had begun to hold services in London at St George's Hall, Langham Place, to which he attracted a number of sympathizers, pledged to support the Voysey Establishment Fund. He thus started a movement which eventually took shape as an independent religious denomination under the name of the Theistic church. In 1885 he established for his followers a regular place of worship in Swallow Street, Piccadilly, where he continued to hold services for nearly thirty years. An observer of one of his services found it most remarkable for its similarity to the form of service of the Anglican church. 
Voysey's ultimate theological position amounted to the rejection of the creeds, biblical inspiration, the sacramental system, and the divinity of Christ, and his teaching was the inculcation of a pure theism, without any miraculous element. He was an attractive preacher, courageous and sincere in challenging doctrines which he believed to be erroneous, and he undoubtedly had a profound influence in deepening the religious sense of his followers, among whom was Anne Besant. He was one of the founders of the Cremation Society of England, and for twenty-five years a member of the executive council of the Homes for Inebriates. In politics he was an ardent Unionist. He died at his home, Annesley Lodge, Platts Lane, Hampstead, on 20 July 1912. He was succeeded at Swallow Street by Walter Walsh, but within a short time two separate congregations were formed, one retaining the name of the Theistic church, the other adopting that of the Free Religious Movement. The Swallow Street building was closed in 1913 and shortly afterwards demolished. 


@@@@@


doc= 56137


Michael Hall (1623/4-c.1670), a younger son of Richard Hall of Greet, Shropshire. Michael had been educated at Christ Church, Oxford, from where he matriculated aged seventeen in 1641; his wife was 


@@@@@


doc= 56138


Elizabeth Hall (d. 1679), sister of the ironmaster William Cotton (d. 1675) ['see under 'Cotton family]. They had nine children. In 1662 Cotton became partner of the Myddelton family of Chirk Castle in their Denbighshire ironworks and by 1663 Michael Hall was living at Ruabon, where the partnership's blast furnace was situated. He died about 1670, being succeeded as clerk in the ironworks by his eldest son, a second Michael Hall (1654-1684). Elizabeth Hall subsequently had the oversight of the furnace for which, in addition to 'riding charges' incurred for sales of iron and purchase of charcoal, she was paid $30 a year until her death in 1679. 
A younger son, 


@@@@@


doc= 56139


John [ii] Spencer (1629-1681), the son of John [i] Spencer's elder brother Randolph, who in 1650 was sent by his father to join Walter in Yorkshire, where he acted as a clerk in the ironworks. John [ii] Spencer's first wife, Sarah, had died in 1657 and through his second wife, Margaret ('nee' Clayton), widow of Robert Hartley of Cannon Hall, who died without male heir in 1656, John [ii] Spencer acquired a wooded and iron-bearing estate near Cawthorne and firmly established his family in Yorkshire. Randolph Spencer, having moved to join his son, was buried at Cawthorne in July 1658. 
Elizabeth Fownes's share in the ironworks devolved via her son-in-law William Cotton (died 1675), who was general manager of the works, on John Bancks. The share of Gilbert Fownes had gone to his son, William Fownes, while by buying one of Edward Spencer's shares Russell Alsopp himself became a partner. Until 1667, during the managership of Cotton, the partnership prospered, acquiring a slitting mill near Wigan to supply the Lancashire market. Thereafter, perhaps because Edward Spencer resided in Cheshire and Alsopp, Bancks, and the younger Fownes were London merchants, all remote from the works, mutual suspicion disrupted the partnership. Suit was followed by counter-suit, in both chancery and the Chester exchequer court, and during the 1670s the first Spencer partnership was wound up. The link with the Fownes family had been important for the development of the Spencer interest in the iron industry and rivalry with the Cotton family was a constant theme of its continuation, but the lessons of the 1670s appear to have been learned and the risk of ruin through litigation was henceforth avoided. 
Meanwhile, William Cotton and his cousin, Thomas Dickin, had acquired Colne Bridge forge from the former partnership in 1665 and a slitting mill was built there. In 1675 Cotton's son and heir, William Cotton ('c'.1648-1703), of Haigh Hall, and Thomas Dickin also bought the unexpired leases of Kirkstall forge and Barnby furnace. John [ii] Spencer took the first step in retrieving his family's fortunes the following year, when he joined Cotton and Dickin in a one-third share of Kirkstall and Barnby for $836, and they also began to operate a slitting mill at Kirkstall forge. John [ii] Spencer died on 19 April 1681, probably at Cannon Hall. 
It was mainly due to the energy of Spencer's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 56140


John [iv] Spencer (1719-1775), to retain an interest in the iron trade. Life as a country gentleman held more attractions for this product of Winchester School and University College, Oxford. He was unmarried, the last of his line, and announced his withdrawal from the business in 1765, his father, William, having died on 30 January 1756. His principal heir was his nephew Walter Stanhope of Horsforth and Leeds, who, in honour of his uncle, prefixed the name Spencer to his own. It is through this family that the accounts and documents relating to the various ironworks in which the Spencer family had an interest survived. 
Apart from the interlude of Cotton dominance between 1675 and 1703 the Spencer family played the leading role in establishing the charcoal iron industry in the area between Leeds and Sheffield and continuing it for 120 years. John [iii] Spencer was clearly the ablest of his line and it is sad that the survival of diaries and letter-book give a better insight into the life and character of William Spencer than into that of his father. However, William Spencer saw the concern through until within two years of the establishment of the Walker ironworks at Masborough; and the decision to withdraw made by John [iv] Spencer was probably a judicious one, because a quite special talent for innovation and change would have been needed to survive in the era of coke-smelted iron. 


@@@@@


doc= 56141


Armstrong, Edward Frankland (1878-1945), chemist, was born on 5 September 1878 at 38 Limes Grove, Lewisham, London, the oldest of seven children of Henry Edward Armstrong (1848-1937), professor of chemistry at the City and Guilds of London Institute, and his wife, Frances Louisa (1843/4-1935), daughter of Thomas Howard Lavers, chemist and druggist of Lewisham. His names reflected his father's admiration for his own teacher, Edward Frankland, though he was known to his family as Frank. At St Dunstan's College, Catford, whose headmaster, C. M. Stuart, had trained in chemistry, he encountered a strong scientific ethos; he went on to the Royal College of Science and then, a year later, to his father's chemistry department at the renamed Central Technical College -- later part of Imperial College. 
In 1898 Armstrong went to Kiel to study under the organic chemist L. Claisen, moving two years later to Berlin to work with J. van't Hoff on a phase rule project in physical chemistry concerned with a hemihydrate of calcium sulphate. His acquaintance at Berlin with Emil Fischer strengthened his interest in organic chemistry and, after receiving his PhD in 1901, he remained a further year as Fischer's assistant. He long maintained his interest in the chemistry of sugar and other carbohydrates. After returning to South Kensington he continued carbohydrate investigations, becoming in 1905 one of the first to receive a London DSc for research. In the same year he was appointed chief chemist to the biscuit manufacturers Huntley and Palmer at Reading, but also continued work on glycosides (and other plant chemicals) with his father and Frederick Keeble. In 1907 he married Ethel Mary, daughter of C. K. Turpin of Woolwich. They later had three sons and a daughter. Their eldest son died in infancy and their second, Kenneth Frankland ['see below'], was killed in an alpine accident. 
In 1914 Armstrong moved to Warrington as technical adviser to the managing director of Joseph Crosfield & Sons, manufacturers of soap and chemicals. Within a year he had become technical director and went on to study heterogeneous catalysis as well as the chemistry of soap and the natural fats from which it was made. His work led to a wartime government contract to make acetic acid and acetone by catalytic oxidation of ethanol. While at Warrington Armstrong also chaired the Soap Manufacturers' Employers' Federation and the Whitley Council for the soap industry. He became president of the Society of Chemical Industry for 1922-4, and of the British Association of Chemists for 1924-5. 
In 1925 Armstrong became managing director of the British Dyestuffs Corporation (BDC) at Manchester and Huddersfield, where he was widely welcomed for introducing scientific eminence on to a board notorious for antipathy to British chemical research. He was soon plunged into convoluted negotiations on the future of the British dyestuffs industry, then under severe pressure from German competition. Within a year his firm had taken over Scottish Dyes Ltd and shortly afterwards BDC itself became part of the new industrial giant, Imperial Chemical Industries. In the inter-war period Armstrong saw a threefold threat to the chemical industry: unfair foreign competition, an organizationally fragmented industry with no single voice in dealing with governments likely to interfere in wage-bargaining, and militant trade unionism. 
In 1928 Armstrong moved to London to open an industrial consultancy, advising several branches of industry, particularly gas companies, and accepting numerous directorships. He became vice-president of the Chemical Society (1933) and chairman of the British Standards Institution (1934-5, 1937-8). He was president of the Association of British Chemical Manufacturers in 1935, and was awarded honorary LLDs by St Andrews and Birmingham universities. A fellow of the Royal Society since 1920, he was elected vice-president 1942-3. During the Second World War he became chief scientific adviser to the government on air-raid precautions. He was president of the Royal Society of Arts from 1943, one of his last acts being to award a medal to Winston Churchill. 
A private man with no known hobbies, Armstrong was a rather ineffective speaker, though a gifted organizer and a good writer. He wrote 'The Simple Carbohydrates and Glucosides' (1910), 'Chemistry in the Twentieth Century' (1924), 'The Sea as a Storehouse' (1944), 'Raw Materials from the Sea' (1945), and, jointly with his son Kenneth, 'The Glycosides' (1931). He died at Princess Beatrice Hospital, Earls Court, on 14 December 1945 from complications following appendicitis. 


Armstrong, although modest like his father, was a fluent speaker and much in demand for both formal and informal occasions. He was regarded as 'strikingly handsome' (Robinson) and had wide and varied interests. He collected butterflies, studied graphic art and architecture, and was a keen traveller. However, he never had time to fully develop his many talents. While skiing in the Tyrol on 3 January 1935 he and a fellow chemist, John Howard, were killed by an avalanche near the Hoch Joch. He was buried at Vent, Oetzthal, Austria, on 10 January 1935. 


@@@@@


doc= 56142


Brough, John Cargill (1834-1872), science journalist, was born at Pontypool on 11 February 1834, the youngest son of Barnabas Brough (died 1854), a brewer and wine merchant, and his wife, Frances, 'nee' Whiteside. His brothers, William Brough ['see under 'Brough, Robert Barnabas], Robert Barnabas Brough, and Lionel Brough, became well known in literary and dramatic circles, their sense of humour being clearly inherited from their father, who also wrote for the music-halls. In 1839-40 his father gave evidence for the crown at the trial of the Chartist leader John Frost. As a result the family was ostracized and in 1843 moved first to Manchester, where Brough attended the grammar school, and then to London, where his father found work on the 'Illustrated London News' and Brough joined him as an office boy. In 1852 he became a clerk in the audit office of the South Western Railway Company, and began to study science at evening classes in the company's mechanics' institute, of which he became secretary and librarian. Here he also learned the art of popular lecturing. 
In 1857, following his marriage to Mary Elizabeth Kidd of Clapham on 24 September 1856, Brough resigned his clerkship to devote himself to freelance journalism, joining his bohemian brothers in the Savage Club and the Grub Street circle described in G. L. M. Strauss's 'Reminiscences' (1882). In 1859 he published a children's book, 'Fairy Tales of Science'. In 1864 he edited and wrote technical articles for Arnold Cooley's 'Cyclopaedia of Practical Receipts', and contributed to Strauss's 'English Workshops'. In 1860 he had become editor of 'The Ironmonger' and of the 'Chemist and Druggist'. He transformed the latter from a monthly trade journal into a chemical and pharmaceutical journal respected by the scientific community. Brough's growing interest in chemistry inspired him to launch the weekly 'Laboratory' in April 1867 in direct competition with W. Crookes's 'Chemical News'. It was not a commercial success and closed after six months, but its skilful mix of news, comment, and original scientific communications made it a model for Norman Lockyer's 'Nature' two years later. 
In 1864 Brough was elected to the Chemical Society, where he became renowned for his sociability and sense of humour. He was the principal poetaster of a group of convivial chemists, the B Club, and with others compiled the comic brochure 'Exeter Change' for the British Association meeting at Exeter in 1869. In 1870 he joined the comedian Thomas Archer in writing the drawing-room comedy 'An Eligible Situation'. For some months in 1869-70 he was a sub-editor for 'Nature', but rheumatic fever forced his resignation, as well as the abandonment of his two editorships. In 1870, through the kindness of friends, he was appointed lecturer, librarian, and superintendent of the London Institution in Finsbury Circus. His wife died in childbirth in 1867. Brough died of a 'disease of the heart' at Esher on 7 September 1872, leaving his three children, one of whom was the mining engineer Bennett Hooper Brough, and an adopted orphan nephew and niece destitute. He was buried at Norwood cemetery on 12 September. It was a mark of the affection and high regard in which he was held by his peers that an international appeal to secure the children's education raised $2000. Likened by his contemporaries to Charles Lamb, Brough possessed a shrewd intellect, untapped scientific abilities, and a gentle sense of humour that endeared him to scientific and literary friends alike. 


@@@@@


doc= 56143


Liversidge, Archibald (1846-1927), chemist and promoter of science in Australia, was born on 17 November 1846, at Turnham Green, Middlesex, the fourth son and eighth of nine children of John Liversidge (1810-1887), wheelwright and coachbuilder, and his wife, Caroline Sophia Jarratt (1813-1865), of Sussex. Ever moving to be near the highway traffic of London, the family finally settled in Hackney, where the elder brothers prospered in small business, light engineering, and commerce. As the youngest son, and thus freed from the family business, Liversidge was privately educated. He soon acquired the contemporary fascination for natural history. In the tradition of the Microscopical and Natural History Society of Hackney, 'habitual observation' became his motto. An enquiring mind led him from classes at the Anglican-inspired City of London College in Leadenhall Street (a precursor of the City University) to the popular lectures of the Royal Polytechnic Institution. In 1867 he won a royal exhibition to the Royal School of Mines (RSM) and Royal College of Chemistry; his teachers there included Edward Frankland, T. H. Huxley, and Warrington Smyth. 
In 1868 Liversidge became an assistant in Frankland's laboratory, where he learned analytical methods, taught chemistry at the Royal School of Naval Architecture and published his first scientific note ('Chemical News', 17, 1868, 49). Encouraged by the example of Frankland and Smyth, he showed equal proficiency in microscopy, spectroscopy, mineralogy, and mineral analysis. In 1870, with several analytical papers to his credit, he was awarded the associateship of the RSM; he was also among the first to win a Bunting exhibition (of $50) created by Christ's College, Cambridge, for men reading for the natural sciences tripos. 
Liversidge matriculated at Christ's in 1870 and was soon enlisted as a temporary demonstrator in chemistry. He started the Cambridge University Natural Sciences Club, and published papers in physiological biochemistry. His interests remained eclectic. In 1873, during his third undergraduate year but before he could take the tripos, he was appointed as reader in geology and assistant in the chemical laboratory at the University of Sydney -- a preferment secured by the patronage of the RSM. 
At Sydney, Liversidge was one of only four teaching staff. He had an ill-equipped laboratory and museum that occupied two rooms in a splendid neo-Gothic building, on a hill overlooking the commercial city, where fifteen students toiled for a BA degree that included experimental science. His challenge was to create a scientific metropolis at the periphery. Within a year he issued a manifesto calling for a school of science, and welcomed the introduction of secondary science as a university matriculation subject. In 1874 he became professor of geology and mineralogy; in 1882 geology was separated, and he became professor of mineralogy and chemistry. From the university, his influence radiated in all directions. 
In addition to teaching undergraduates, Liversidge was a 'public scientist', a participant in the transit of Venus observations, a leading analyst of water supply and fossil remains, a consultant to the mines department, and a trustee of the Australian Museum. He was also joint honorary secretary of the Royal Society of New South Wales, which he virtually re-established, and served three times as its president (in 1886, 1890, and 1901); he edited its 'Journal and Proceedings' from 1874 to 1885. In 1878 he helped represent New South Wales at the Paris Universal Exhibition, and produced a report on European museums and technical schools that guided colonial policy for the next fifty years. The following year he was a guiding force behind the international exhibition (the 'Garden Palace') in Sydney. The same year Sydney University followed London in creating a faculty of science, and Liversidge was its first (and almost perpetual) dean between 1880 and 1907. From the late 1870s he helped establish science at the new University of Adelaide, and frequently exercised his patronage in the appointment of chemists to government departments and museums in New South Wales. In the mid-1880s, as the colony approached the centenary of European settlement, he turned to the improvement of intercolonial scientific co-operation. Building upon visits to New Zealand, and professional friendships with Victorians, Queenslanders, and South Australians, he launched at Sydney in 1888 the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science (later ANZAAS). He was its honorary secretary until 1907, and president at its second Sydney congress in 1898. 
A bachelor, Liversidge lived for his friends and his work. He was a member of five clubs in London and Sydney and, until he moved to a generous house with sweeping gardens on salubrious Darling Point, a resident of the Union Club. By 1921, he had published over 120 scientific papers, and 22 colonial government reports, plus 16 other notes and articles. He was best known overseas for his studies of the geochemistry of gold, and was among the first to detect rare minerals in meteorites. In 1894 he helped establish the School of Mines at Sydney University. A devoted empirical analyst, he personified the 'inventory sciences' and refrained from speculation on contemporary theories of the earth. He published a chemical 'audit', 'The Minerals of New South Wales' (1876), which was enlarged in 1882 and 1888. 
Liversidge attracted few research students, but did count Douglas Mawson (1882-1968) among them. He belonged to twenty-six learned societies in Britain, Australasia, and the United States, but considered his election to the Royal Society in 1882 as the most important honour of his life. An avid collector of minerals and artefacts, Liversidge exhibited at several intercolonial and international exhibitions. He presented specimens of Australian minerals to a number of museums in the northern hemisphere; his own crystal collection went to the Australian Museum. 
Liversidge promoted degrees for women, and compulsory European languages, in lieu of the classics, for all undergraduates. Among his achievements was the appointment of T. W. Edgeworth David to Sydney's chair of geology in 1891. A dedicated empire man, Liversidge repeatedly sought ways to bring the ethos of South Kensington to Sydney. As a member of the board of technical education and trustee of the Museum of Applied Arts and Sciences (later the Powerhouse Museum), he advocated technical training, the metric system, and the industrial application of science, along lines he had seen argued in England. Thus he encouraged Sydney pupils to take the City and Guilds examinations, and founded in Sydney a section of the (UK) Society of Chemical Industry. He also helped form the New South Wales branch of the British Science Guild in 1907. In 1896, on the occasion of Kelvin's jubilee, Glasgow University awarded him an honorary LLD. Liversidge also contributed to colonial nationalism -- he promoted the idea of an Australasian equivalent of 'Nature' and an Australian Academy of Science half a century before either was realized. 
Liversidge retired, exhausted, from Sydney in 1907. He returned to England to live in some state at Fieldhead, Kingston Hill, Surrey, where he kept three domestic staff, and entertained visiting colleagues, nephews, and nieces. For the next twenty years he enjoyed a second career as a visiting researcher in the Davy-Faraday Laboratory of the Royal Institution. Liversidge never returned to Australia, despite advocating the first (and only) Australian visit of the British Association in 1914, but between 1910 and 1917, as vice-president of the Chemical Society, and as a member of the overseas branch committee of the Institute of Chemistry, he was active in promoting the cause of colonial scientists. During the First World War his advice was sought by the Admiralty on magnesium alloys used in German airships. For the British Science Guild he drafted recommendations for post-war government funding of science in the British universities. Peace brought a renewal of his private research at the Royal Institution where, as a mineralogist and crystallographer, he shared in the general fascination with the new technology of X-ray diffraction. He died, unmarried, of a heart attack, in his sleep, at home in Kingston on 26 September 1927, and was buried the following day at Putney Vale cemetery. 
Internationally known by entries in ten biographical directories, Liversidge received twenty-one obituary notices and several retrospective tributes. His will specified legacies of $500 to the Chemical Society, the Royal Society of New South Wales, and the AAAS, and to the chemistry department of the University of Sydney; and $500 to Christ's College, Cambridge, for a 'Lecturer alternately in chemistry and on the English language' with special reference to 'possible improvements in its grammar and spelling'. A portrait, by John Collier RA, was completed after Liversidge returned to England, and hangs in the Great Hall of Sydney University. Striking a pose similar to that of T. H. Huxley in Collier's famous painting, Liversidge is shown in academic dress, lecturing on the processes of reducing gold from its ores -- an image by which generations would remember him, long after his scientific statesmanship was forgotten. 


@@@@@


doc= 56145


Mellor, Joseph William (1869-1938), chemist, was born on 9 July 1869 at Lindley, Huddersfield, the son of Job Mellor, a draper, and his wife, Emma Smith. When he was ten years old, the family emigrated to New Zealand, where his father found work in the woollen mills of Kaiapoi and later Dunedin on the South Island. His working-class background ruled out any thoughts of higher education, and at the age of thirteen he left school to take employment in boot manufacturing. In the evenings, however, by light of a kerosene lamp, he read second-hand or borrowed books and performed some chemical experiments. 
Mellor's remarkable efforts at self-education eventually came to the attention of the director of the local technical school, who arranged for him to attend classes. In 1892 he was assisted by his school director to become a part-time student at the University of Otago in Dunedin. In 1898 he graduated with first-class honours and then took a teaching post at Lincoln Agricultural College. In the same year he married the organist at Mornington Methodist Church, Emma Cranwell Bakes. A few months later he resigned his post at the agricultural college and sailed from Port Chalmers to take up an 1851 Exhibition scholarship in Manchester, England. 
In 1902 Mellor obtained the degree of DSc from the Victoria University, Manchester. He then accepted a teaching position at Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire. In 1904, the local pottery industry started a pottery school which soon became part of the North Staffordshire Technical College. Mellor lectured there and later became the principal. He was also secretary of the newly formed Ceramic Society. During the First World War he directed a modest research programme on refractories, which became the first stage in the formation of the British Ceramic Research Association. In 1921 the British Refractories Research Association was formed with Mellor as director. In 1927 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. 
The Mellors had no children but he had four sisters in New Zealand and several nieces and nephews. He used to write to them amusing letters, illustrated with cartoons. Some of these were collected together by friends and published in 1934 under the title 'Uncle Joe's Nonsense'. In addition he described his trip to the United States in 1929 (when the Ceramic Society travelled to New York on board the Cunard Line 'Laconia') in a 36-page brochure illustrated by witty cartoons and comments; three of the cartoons were also published in the 'Journal of Chemical Education'. Two more cartoons were published a few years later in the same journal, in which Mellor showed himself fainting on the floor, and then recovering in hospital. 
Mellor published 116 papers and obtained six patents, nearly all of which were on clays, ceramics, and refractories. He also published five books on inorganic chemistry (1912-30), and pioneering texts on mathematics for chemists (1902) and chemical kinetics (1904), as well as on quantitative chemical analysis (1914), clay and pottery (1914), and metallography (1916). His major work, however, is a monumental sixteen-volume book on inorganic chemistry entitled 'Comprehensive Treatise on Theoretical and Inorganic Chemistry' published between 1927 and 1937 in 15,320 pages, complete with extensive references to the original literature -- a characteristic of all Mellor's books. The book also contains numerous quotations from famous writers and poets. It is difficult to believe that a work of this scale was produced by one person working alone. He dedicated it to: 'the privates in the great army of workers in chemistry... [whose] names have been forgotten, [but whose] work remains'. In his 1927 election certificate for the Royal Society his proposers for membership described this reference work as 'so valuable to chemists that its importance can hardly be over-estimated'. Mellor himself was described as 'the leading authority on the scientific principles underlying the Pottery Industry'. 
Mellor retired in 1934 and died four years later at his home, 132 Highlands Heath, Portsmouth Road, Putney, on 24 May 1938. He was cremated in London. Some pieces from his pottery collection and other archive material were donated by his widow to the University of Otago. He left behind a wealth of books that form an important source for research in the history of chemistry, and which his widow donated to the public library in Dunedin. In 1949 the New Zealand Institute of Chemistry created an annual Mellor lecture in his honour and in 1954 a plaque in his memory was unveiled at the University of Otago in the presence of the duke of Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 56146


Muller, Hugo Heinrich Wilhelm (1833-1915), chemist, was born on 31 July 1833 at Tirschenreuth, Bavaria, the son of a spinning-mill owner. The family later moved to Weiden, in the Oberfalz, Bavaria. He received his early education at Nuremburg, and in 1850 entered the University of Leipzig, where he attended lectures on chemistry, physics, mineralogy, and geology. In 1852 he moved to Gottingen to study under Friedrich Wohler (1800-1882), and in the same year he published his first mineralogical notice. In 1853 he obtained his doctorate, and in the spring he joined Liebig as assistant in Munich. 
In the spring of 1854 Muller moved to London, at the suggestion of A. W. Hofmann, to take up the post of private assistant to Warren De la Rue at the De la Rue printing company, based at Bunhill Row. Muller's first assignment was the investigation of Burmese naphtha (Rangoon tar). He mixed with a circle of talented chemists, including Friedrich August Kekule and, later, Peter Griess, Carl Alexander Martius, and William Henry Perkin. De la Rue and Muller published a number of chemical papers together during 1856-62. Muller studied coal-tar derivatives, including phenol, which he converted into rosolic acid. The results were published in 1859, in which year he joined the Chemical Society of London. Of major academic interest was his work during the early 1860s on the chlorination of benzene, which, he demonstrated, was enhanced by the presence of small amounts of iodine. This was later applied to other organic compounds. The German chemist Heinrich Caro, employed by Roberts, Dale & Co. of Manchester, supplied Muller with mineral pigments and lakes made from the aniline dye mauve, used at De la Rue for printing postage stamps from 1864. Muller specialized in the colours, varnishes, and fugitive inks which made the firm's reputation as a leading security printer. 
In 1866, Muller became a fellow of the Royal Society. He assisted De la Rue with the latter's pioneering work on celestial photography. In 1868, they devised a non-polarizable silver chloride voltaic element of constant electromotive force, and combined 11,000 cells each containing this element, to generate an electromotive force that was not previously considered possible. They carried out a major study of electrical discharges in gases using exhausted tubes, the results of which were published during 1868-83. In 1869, Muller acted as an intermediary between the Perkin firm of chemical dyestuffs manufacturers and the German company BASF, both of which had filed similar British patents for the manufacture of synthetic alizarin. Muller's contribution to the success of De la Rue led to contracts from the colonies and foreign governments, for which he was rewarded with a directorship. He became an expert in the field of paper making, which led him to the study of compounds present in leaves of various plants (1873-1912). Later, he turned to the species of the genus 'Primula', and was the first to discover naturally occurring flavone. 
Muller married Elisabeth Rusel Crosby in 1878, whereupon he assumed British nationality. They took up residence at Park Square East, Regent's Park, London, and in 1885 purchased an estate at Camberley, Surrey, where Muller created an outstanding garden. Apart from Muller's responsibilities at De la Rue, he acted as foreign secretary of the Chemical Society during 1869-85, and was its president during 1885-7. He was also a member of the convivial B Club of the Chemical Society, and of the chemical section of the British Association. From 1889 to 1915 he was closely connected with the Lawes Agricultural Trust. Muller retired from De la Rue in 1902, from which time he worked at the Davy-Faraday Laboratory, attached to the Royal Institution. He was president of the Mineralogical and Crystallographic Society of Great Britain from November 1901 to November 1904. Following the outbreak of war in 1914, he resigned his positions; according to Henry E. Armstrong, this was because of sympathies with Germany. Muller died at his home at Crosby Hill, Camberley, on 23 May 1915. His widow and daughter donated $1000 to the Chemical Society research fund and for the triannual Hugo Muller lecture. 


@@@@@


doc= 56147


Needham, Dorothy Mary (1896-1987), biochemist, was born in London on 22 September 1896, one of the three daughters (there was also a son) of John Thomas Moyle, a civil servant at the Patent Office, and his wife, Ellen Daves. Dorothy was educated in Cheshire at Claremont College, Stockport, a private school run by her aunt, and at St Hilary's, Alderley Edge. She entered Girton College, Cambridge, in 1915. After graduation in 1919, she began research, supported by a grant from the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, under Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins at the Sir William Dunn Institute of Biochemistry, Cambridge. Hopkins, having worked with Sir Walter Fletcher on lactic acid in muscle, interested Dorothy in the biochemistry of muscle contraction. She won the Gamble prize at Girton College in 1924 for an essay on the structure, function, and chemical constitution of different types of striated muscle. In 1925-8 she was a Beit memorial medical research fellow, gaining her PhD in 1926. 
On 13 September 1924 Dorothy Moyle married (Noel) Joseph Terence Montgomery Needham (1900-1995) with whom she had a close affinity in ideas and attitudes. There were no children of the marriage, a fact which served to deepen their relationship and their many shared interests, especially an unshakeable commitment to Christianity and socialism. They rarely collaborated in research, except during summer vacations spent in marine biology laboratories where they micro-injected amoebae and sea-urchin eggs with pH and rH indicators to determine the reaction of the cytoplasm. 
Between 1928 and 1940 Dorothy Needham taught widely both at Cambridge, where she gave advanced lectures on muscle biochemistry, and in America, France, Belgium, and other countries. Her most important research work dates from this period when O. Meyerhof, O. Warburg, and she, independently, elucidated the chemical changes by which glucose is broken down in the cell to yield the energy-rich compound adenosine triphosphate (ATP). She also studied the roles of pyruvic, succinic, and lactic acids, and transamination. Her influence in the Cambridge laboratory was profound, largely owing to her sympathetic gentleness combined with penetrating intelligence and a quiet sense of humour. She was affectionately known as Dophi to those who worked closely with her and who often remained her lifelong friends. Among her numerous post-graduate research students, some later attained high academic positions. 
During the Second World War Dorothy Needham was a member of the chemical defence group led by Professor Malcolm Dixon for the Ministry of Supply. In 1940-43 she worked on the effects of chemical weapons such as mustard gas on the metabolism of skin and bone marrow. She was also a member of the Biochemical Society committee (1941-3). In 1944 she accompanied her husband to Chungking (Chongqing), China, where he was appointed scientific counsellor at the British embassy and she was associate director of the Sino-British co-operation office which he established. During this period she contracted tuberculosis from which she only slowly recovered after her return to the Sir William Dunn Institute in 1945. She was awarded the ScD degree at Cambridge in that year and in 1948 was elected FRS, one of the earliest women fellows. Joseph Needham had been elected in 1941 and Dorothy's election made the Needhams the Royal Society's first married couple. 
Despite her academic distinction Dorothy Needham never held a pensionable post in the biochemical laboratory, but throughout her working life she received numerous research grants from various national bodies. During 1946-52 she worked on enzyme biochemistry on a grant from the Medical Research Council; afterwards, until 1955, she received a grant from the Broodbank Fund of Cambridge University. This was followed by work on smooth muscle for the Agricultural Research Council in 1955-62. She also received a Foulerton gift donation from the Royal Society in 1961-2 and a Leverhulme award in 1963, the year in which she retired after forty years spent in active research. 
From 1967 Dorothy Needham devoted herself to writing her 'magnum opus'; entitled 'Machina carnis', it was a historical account of studies in the biochemistry of muscular contraction. Published in 1971, this book represented the culmination of her life's work on the link between the uptake of oxygen and the binding of phosphates in energy-rich bonds in muscle tissue and it remains a unique and authoritative contribution to the history of muscle biochemistry. In 1972 she collaborated with Dr E. Bulbring in organizing for the Royal Society the first British symposium on the chemistry and physiology of smooth muscle. At the time of her death she was working with Mikulas Teich on a documentary history of biochemistry which was published in 1991. 
Dorothy Needham was an honorary fellow of three Cambridge colleges: at Lucy Cavendish College, which she was instrumental in establishing, she became a foundation fellow in 1965; at Girton, her own college, she became an honorary fellow in 1976; and at Gonville and Caius College, where Joseph Needham was master for eleven years (1965-76), she became an honorary fellow in 1979. As the wife of the master and hostess at the events and festivities held in the master's lodge, she was deeply appreciated by many members of Caius, both senior and junior. Her fellowship there pleased her greatly; she was the first woman to be admitted and was, for a long time, the only woman fellow. 
Dorothy Needham's chief hobby and relaxation was painting in watercolours and her travels all over the world provided opportunities for recording scenes and events which she experienced. Paying tribute to her in November 1988, Joseph Needham said, 'she retained a certain innocence, and a complete freedom from worldliness'. This was echoed by many of her students, who loved her for her qualities of kindness, warmth, and patience, while admiring her keen intelligence and strength of mind. In retirement, after leaving Caius in 1976, she began to show the early signs of Alzheimer's disease and very gradually she declined. She died peacefully at her home, 42 Grange Road, Cambridge, on 22 December 1987, at the age of ninety-one. The funeral service was held on 31 December at Caius College chapel, followed by cremation. 


@@@@@


doc= 56148


Stewart, Alfred Walter (1880-1947), chemist and novelist, was born on 5 September 1880 at 18 Annfield Terrace, Partick, Glasgow, the youngest of three sons of the Revd William Stewart, professor of divinity and biblical criticism at Glasgow University, and his wife, Jane ('nee' Richardson). He was educated at Glasgow high school, Glasgow University (BSc, 1902; DSc, 1907), and the University of Marburg, where he worked for a year with Ernst Carl Theodor Zincke (1902-3). In 1903 he went, with a scholarship, to University College, London, where he began his first original work. Supported from 1905 by a Carnegie research fellowship, he carried out at University College doctoral research on the reaction of aliphatic ketones with bisulfite and hydroxylamine, leading him to the conclusion that the contemporary theory of steric hindrance in chemical reactions was inadequate and required revision. 
Stewart's studies on the selective absorption spectra of organic compounds (1906) led to the concept of isorrepsis, which, expressed two decades before the application of electronic theory to organic chemistry, foreshadowed later ideas of resonance. His interest in stereochemistry, developed from his studies of the relationship between absorption spectra and chemical constitution, led to his first book, 'Stereochemistry' (1907), followed by 'Recent Advances in Organic Chemistry' (1908; 8th edn, 1948), its companion volume 'Recent Advances in Physical and Inorganic Chemistry' (1909), and two more general works, 'Chemistry and its Borderland' (1914) and 'Some Physico-Chemical Themes' (1922). 
In 1909 Stewart became lecturer in organic chemistry at Queen's University, Belfast. From 1914 he was for five years lecturer in physical chemistry and radioactivity at Glasgow University, before returning to Queen's University, Belfast, as professor of chemistry in 1919. While at Glasgow, Stewart married, on 5 September 1916, Jessie Lily Coats ('b'. 1884/5), daughter of a Baptist church minister, the Revd Jervis Coats of Glasgow, and his wife, the late Marion Wark Wyllie. The couple, who were married by the bride's father, had one daughter. 
In 1908 Stewart isolated the unstable organic compound ketene. In 1918 he proposed the name 'isobares' (later isobars) to designate elements with the same atomic weights but different atomic numbers. His main research during his second tenure at Queen's University was Tesla luminescence spectra. He developed a new field of emission spectroscopy by using a new method of excitation (the discharge of a high-tension transformer through a gaseous phase) to reveal series of spectra which he correlated with the structure of many organic compounds. However, Stewart was essentially a chemist of the classical pre-quantum mechanics tradition, and in his later years his 'Recent Advances' series lost relevance and authority. 
Aside from his textbooks, Stewart's greatest scientific contribution was as an inspiring teacher. Many of his students later occupied important industrial and academic positions. A small, unassuming, moustached polymath with broad interests and wide learning, he was a strikingly effective lecturer with an excellent sense of humour, fertile imagination, and a fantastically retentive memory. 
When Stewart's creative talents were no longer fulfilled by writing technical articles, he turned to fiction. In his later years he lectured only from about 11 a.m. to 1.15 p.m. and spent his afternoons writing novels, to which he devoted all his time after ill health forced his retirement in 1944. He was the author of twenty-seven novels -- twenty-five of them detective stories. Written under the pseudonym J. J. Connington, they earned Stewart a reputation as a novelist which overshadowed his reputation as a scientist. His first novel, 'Nordenholt's Million' (1923), a pseudo-scientific thriller, is one of the few of his books to deal with chemical subjects -- the nitrogen cycle and nuclear energy. His detective novels were praised by Dorothy Sayers, St John Ervine, and other writers and critics. 
Stewart's last novel was published in 1943, but he continued writing until the end of his life. He died of a heart attack at his home, 83 Balmoral Avenue, Belfast, on the morning of 1 July 1947, while engaged in his literary work. 


@@@@@


doc= 56149


Mills, William Hobson (1873-1959), organic chemist, was born in London on 6 July 1873, the eldest of the five children of William Henry Mills, a Lincolnshire architect, and his wife, Emily Wiles Quincey, daughter of William Hobson, of Spalding, Lincolnshire. Mills's parents returned to Spalding in the autumn of 1873. He was educated at Spalding grammar school and Uppingham School, and entered Jesus College, Cambridge, in October 1892, but spent the academic year 1893-4 at home recovering from a foot injury received at school. He obtained a first class in part one of the natural sciences tripos in 1896 and in part two (chemistry) in 1897. In 1899 he was elected to a prize fellowship of his college and went to work for two years under Hans von Pechmann at Tubingen, where he was awarded his doctorate. In the Tubingen laboratory he met N. V. Sidgwick of Oxford, who became his lifelong friend. They shared a deep interest in both chemistry and natural history. 
In 1902 Mills became head of the chemical department of the Northern Polytechnic Institute in London. On 11 August 1903 he married Mildred May Gostling ['see below'], chemist; they had one son and three daughters. In 1912 he returned to Cambridge to become demonstrator to the Jacksonian professor of natural philosophy, Sir James Dewar. (He succeeded H. O. Jones, who had been killed while climbing in the Alps.) Mills was also elected a fellow and lecturer of Jesus College. He was appointed a university lecturer in organic chemistry in 1919, and reader in stereochemistry in 1931, an appointment from which he retired in 1938. In 1940-48 he was president of Jesus College. 
Mills's researches can be classified as relating almost entirely to two main topics, stereochemistry and the cyanine dyes, in each of which he attained an outstanding position. The Cambridge school of stereochemistry had been founded by H. O. Jones and greatly developed by W. J. Pope, but its greatest achievements were due to Mills and his co-workers, whose most important investigations were as follows: the first experimental confirmation of the Hantzsch-Werner theory of the isomerism of oximes; the first optical resolution of a spirocyclic compound and of an allene compound; the confirmation of the tetrahedral configuration of quaternary ammonium ions and of the planar configuration of platinous complexes; and the development of the 'obstacle' theory, involving restricted rotation, to explain the optical isomerism of certain substituted diphenic acids. Mills synthesized and resolved several novel types of compounds, the optical activity of which was dependent on restricted rotation. 
Mills's work on cyanine dyes began early in the First World War. German photographic reconnaissance was carried out using plates which, by the addition of minute quantities of certain highly coloured compounds, had been 'sensitized' throughout the violet-blue-red regions, whereas the allies were initially using plates which were not sensitive in the red region and thus gave particularly poor results in early morning light. Pope and Mills investigated the preparation and chemistry of these 'photographic sensitizers', with the result that nearly all the dyestuffs used by the allies in the manufacture of panchromatic plates were produced in the Cambridge laboratory. Mills later greatly extended the knowledge of cyanine dyes. 
Mills was elected FRS in 1923 and received the Davy medal in 1933. He received the Longstaff medal of the Chemical Society in 1930, and was president of the society in 1941-4. He was president of the chemistry section at the British Association meeting in 1932. In 1937 he was George Fisher Baker lecturer at Cornell University, but contrary to tradition he did not publish the lectures. 
Mills was an accomplished field botanist and ornithologist. After his retirement he spent much time studying the sub-species of British bramble, which he collected, classified, and finally preserved in the botany department at Cambridge. 

Mildred May Gostling (1873-1962), chemist, was born at Stowmarket, Suffolk, on 15 December 1873, the daughter of George James Gostling, a dental surgeon and pharmaceutical chemist, and his wife, Sarah Abicail Aldrich. She was educated at Bedford College and Royal Holloway College, London, and was Bathurst student and assistant in the chemistry laboratory at Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1898-1900. Later (1901-2) she was demonstrator in chemistry at Royal Holloway College. At Cambridge she carried out research in organic chemistry in association with H. J. H. Fenton in the university laboratories. She published five papers, four of them in association with Fenton. Most of her research work was carried out before her marriage to Mills. 
Mills died at his home, 23 Storeys Way, Cambridge, on 22 February 1959; his wife died at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, on 19 February 1962. 


@@@@@


doc= 56150


Guthrie, Frederick (1833-1886), chemist and physicist, was born on 15 October 1833 in Bayswater, London, youngest of the six children of Alexander Guthrie, a tailor. Francis Guthrie, who distinguished himself as a mathematician in South Africa, was an older brother. Guthrie's early interest in chemistry was stimulated by Henry Watts, his private tutor until he enrolled at University College School, London, in 1845. Four years later Guthrie matriculated at University College where he learned mathematics from Augustus De Morgan and made a special study of chemistry in the laboratories of Professor Williamson. Before his graduation in 1855, Guthrie followed the pattern of many British chemists in pursuing a doctorate in the Germanic states. After a spell with Bunsen at the University of Heidelberg, he investigated organic salts and acids with Kolbe at the University of Marburg, attaining his PhD 'summa cum laude' in 1855. Parts of his thesis were published in Liebig's 'Annalen' and in other international journals. These included Guthrie's findings on what later gained notoriety as mustard gas, and his more felicitous proposals on the therapeutic applications of amyl nitrite. 
After returning to Britain, Guthrie accepted consecutive appointments as assistant in the laboratories of three distinguished chemistry professors: from 1856 he worked at Owens College, Manchester, with Edward Frankland, and then with his successor, Henry Roscoe, before taking up a post under Lyon Playfair at the University of Edinburgh in 1859. In that year his reputation in organic chemistry won Guthrie a fellowship of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and a lectureship in chemistry and physics at the Royal College, Mauritius, which he commenced in May 1861; later that year, on 10 December, he and his wife, Agnes ('nee' Bickell), had a son, Frederick Bickell Guthrie ['see below']. One of Guthrie's colleagues in Mauritius was the novelist and writer Walter Besant, with whom Guthrie formed a lifelong friendship; indeed it was probably Besant's influence that led Guthrie, while in Mauritius, to express poetic ambitions in 'The Jew', published in 1863 under the pseudonym Frederick Cerny. 
At this sparsely equipped outpost of the British empire Guthrie turned his chemical expertise to subjects immediately to hand such as the island's river-waters and its principal agricultural produce, sugar-cane. With similar resourcefulness he undertook an empirical investigation of fluid drops and bubbles in 1864-5, the results of which were published in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society'. However, as with many of his subsequent publications in physics, his non-mathematical conclusions were couched in his own idiosyncratic terminology. Two years later, in June 1867, both Besant and Guthrie left their posts after a major confrontation with the rector and at the height of a devastating fever epidemic. 
On his return to London, Guthrie worked with John Tyndall (1820-1893) on the thermal resistance of liquids, the collaboration resulting in his sole publication in the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions'. After his six years of relative isolation from Europe, his more strictly chemical work was not so well received, however.'Very bad' was the verdict of Herbert McLeod on a paper presented by Guthrie at the Chemical Society on 16 April 1868 (McLeod), and reviews of his chemistry textbooks were not always kinder. Guthrie's often precarious financial position improved somewhat in 1869 when, partly on Tyndall's recommendation, he took over Tyndall's lectureship in physics at the Department of Science and Art's School of Mines in Jermyn Street. 
In this post Guthrie not only taught mining students, but shared with Thomas Henry Huxley the new task of giving summer practical courses to the schoolteachers from the Department of Science and Art. Both soon campaigned for working space to extend these classes into a full academic year, and upon removal in 1871-2 to the Science Schools (renamed the Normal School of Science in 1881) in South Kensington, Guthrie acquired a ground-floor suite of laboratories on Exhibition Road. Elevated to a professorship, Guthrie worked on an intensive yet frugal scheme to equip the department's teachers with the skills and apparatus to give practical instruction in physics. With the financial support of the department and the collaboration of London colleagues G. Carey Foster and William Barrett, and the later assistance of C. V. Boys, Guthrie's scheme enabled hundreds of teachers to give school demonstrations on light, heat, electricity, and magnetism. Gradually this programme transformed the papers of the 100,000 or so Department of Science and Art candidates in physics that Guthrie examined. His associated textbook 'Magnetism and Electricity' (1873; 2nd edn, 1884) sold over 10,000 copies. In 1895, after his death, his 1877 text 'Practical Physics' was translated into Japanese (rendered as 'Simple experiments in teaching physics', and some of his apparatus incorporated into Japanese classrooms. 
Much scepticism had initially greeted Guthrie's Department of Science and Art-sponsored radical plan: 'Many told me that it could not succeed, many that it ought not to succeed' (Guthrie, 663). Given that it did succeed for many of his students, it is unfortunate that the most often cited source on Guthrie's instruction is the hostile testimony in H. G. Wells's autobiography. However, a few months after narrowly passing his last course in 1886, it was almost certainly Wells, as editor of 'Science Schools Journal', who described Guthrie as 'deservedly a favourite with all who have passed under his instruction' (Wells, 'Guthrie', 3). Guthrie's more distinguished scientific proteges Oliver Lodge, Silvanus Phillips Thompson, and John Ambrose Fleming certainly showed warm respect for 'old daddy', as they jokingly called him in the mid-1870s. 
The successful launch of the Physical Society of London in March 1874 owed much to Guthrie's support among teachers of physics in English schools and colleges -- especially in London. His reasons for founding it stemmed from his frustration at the Royal Society's publication of several innovative papers as abstracts in the society's 'Proceedings' rather than in full in its more prestigious 'Transactions'. It even took more than a year for Guthrie's account of 'approach caused by vibration' (1870) to appear in the 'Proceedings'. He was none the less elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1871 after Sir William Thomson took a keen interest in applying this paper's insights to his vortex model of the atom. In 1873, however, the Royal Society's referees were unconvinced by Guthrie's claims regarding a novel electrostatic phenomenon in hot metals, although this was subsequently interpreted by J. A. Fleming as the first observation of thermionic emission. 
In the summer of 1873 Guthrie canvassed support for a new society to discuss 'incomplete' physical researches that could not find an audience among existing scientific institutions. From the first gathering in March 1874, Guthrie acted as demonstrator for the experimental illustrations that were a central feature of the Physical Society's fortnightly meetings. Many, if not all, papers were primarily about experimental matters: Alexander Graham Bell, for example, gave the London debut of the telephone at a society meeting in 1877. Papers often related to lecture demonstration apparatus, reflecting the predominant presence of teachers in the society's membership. The 'Proceedings of the Physical Society' were also a vehicle for Guthrie's own researches on eutectics and cryohydrates. Despite James Clerk Maxwell's refusal to join, almost every major physicist in England was a member of the society by the time of Guthrie's tenure as president in 1884-6. 
Guthrie's wife, Agnes, predeceased him, as did two subsequent wives of whom nothing is known. Then, on 10 April 1882, he married Blanche Gertrude ('b'. 1861/2), daughter of Thomas Reynolds, professor of music. A genial, humorous, if eccentric character at the heart of London's physics community, Guthrie died from throat cancer four years later, on 21 October 1886. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 26 October. The loyalty and affection which Guthrie inspired in his friends is palpable in the efforts to which Huxley and others went to secure a state pension for his widow and younger children. 

Frederick Bickell Guthrie (1861-1927), agricultural chemist, was born on 10 December 1861 in Mauritius, the son of Frederick Guthrie and Agnes Bickell. He was educated at University College, London, and after receiving his PhD from the University of Marburg in 1882, he was successively demonstrator in chemistry at Queen's College, Cork (1882-88), the Royal College of Science, London (1888-90), and the University of Sydney (1890-91). On 15 November 1890 he married Ada Adams at Neutral Bay. The couple had two sons (both killed in the First World War) and a daughter. 
Guthrie's main scientific research in Australia was undertaken as a chemist to the department of agriculture (1892-1924) where he collaboratively developed methods of analysing wheat flour and important new techniques in cross-breeding wheats to produce robust strains with good baking qualities. Author or co-author of 180 papers, he was, from 1903 to 1904, president of the Royal Society of New South Wales. He died at Moss Vale, New South Wales, on 7 February 1927. His name is commemorated in the Guthrie medal, awarded every three years by the Royal Australian Chemical Institute. 


@@@@@


doc= 56151


Kenneth Frankland Armstrong (1909-1935), chemist, was born on 30 March 1909 at 98 London Road, Reading. He attended Oundle School before going up to Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1927. He obtained a natural science scholarship and, after a period in Geneva, obtained his BA in 1930 and his BSc (with first-class honours in chemistry) in 1931. In the latter year he was awarded a Henry Fund scholarship; he spent two years at Harvard under J. B. Conant and published several papers on chlorophyll. In 1933 he took up a Harmsworth senior scholarship of Merton College and began researches in the fields of organic chemistry and biochemistry. 


@@@@@


doc= 56153


Ingold, Sir Christopher Kelk (1893-1970), chemist, was born on 28 October 1893 at 142 Windsor Road, Forest Gate, Essex, the first of the two children of William Kelk Ingold (1861-1898), commercial traveller, and his wife, Harriet Walker (1865-1943), daughter of Christopher Newcomb and his wife, Emma. Ingold's father suffered from tuberculosis, and although the family moved to the Isle of Wight he died in Shanklin in 1898. Despite her husband's death, Ingold's mother chose to remain on the Isle of Wight to ensure that her two young children were raised in a healthy, outdoor environment. Thus, from an early age, Ingold developed a love of birdwatching that continued throughout his life. 
In 1905 Ingold entered Sandown county secondary school as a scholarship-supported day pupil, where he benefited from a group of young, gifted, and dedicated teachers, and learned not only science, but music and sports as well. He particularly liked cricket, which he played for a number of years; he played his Bosendorfer grand piano all his life. 
After completion of the intermediate BSc at school, Ingold moved on to Hartley College, Southampton, in 1911, where he studied chemistry under Professor David Boyd, graduating with an external BSc of the University of London in 1913. This gained him acceptance to work with Professor Jocelyn Thorpe at the Royal College of Science, London, where Ingold received both a Royal College scholarship and a University of London exhibition, giving him $100 for the year 1913-14. 
Ingold obtained his associateship of the Royal College of Science with first-class honours in 1914, and started immediately on a research programme. However, this was interrupted by the First World War when, in 1915, Thorpe sent him to Glasgow to run an industrial plant to manufacture SK lachrymator (a mixture of ethyl iodoacetate and alcohol), the tear gas extensively used by the British in shells throughout the war. For this work he was subsequently awarded the British Empire Medal. At the end of the war, his employer, the Cassel Cyanide Company, was anxious to retain his services, but Ingold had already decided that he wanted to follow an academic career. He had continued to collaborate with Thorpe throughout his sojourn in Glasgow, and submitted a thesis based on part of this work for the MSc degree of the University of London in 1919. (He had already received the diploma of membership of Imperial College for his postgraduate research.) Early in 1920 Ingold took a considerable cut in pay to accept an offer from Thorpe to return to Imperial College as a demonstrator in industrial organic chemistry. 
In the five years from 1920 to 1924 Ingold published fifty-two research papers, was co-author of a 500-page book with Thorpe, obtained the DSc degree from the University of London and, for two years running, won the Meldola medal for the most outstanding research during the year by a chemist under thirty years of age. He was also elected to the Royal Society (at the age of thirty), and was appointed to the chair of organic chemistry at Leeds University, taking up his post on 1 October 1924. During this same period Ingold found the time to woo a brilliant young postgraduate student at Imperial College, (Edith) Hilda Usherwood [(Edith) Hilda Ingold (1898-1988)]. They were married on 11 July 1923. 
Hilda Ingold was born on 21 May 1898 in Catford, London, the first of three children of Thomas Scriven Usherwood, and his wife, Edith. As all four of Hilda's grandparents were headteachers of London schools, and her father taught engineering at Christ's Hospital school in Horsham, Sussex, Hilda grew up in a learned and literary environment. She won many prizes in school and a scholarship to the renowned North London Collegiate School for Girls, which caused her father to move the family home to Finchley, Middlesex, in 1912, so that Hilda would have easy access to her new school. 
After an outstanding academic career at school, Hilda won the largest scholarship available, $50 per year for three years, to study chemistry and botany at Royal Holloway College. There she continued to win awards, including the Gilchrist scholarship, the Neil Arnott scholarship, and the Driver prize and scholarship (twice). In her graduating year, 1920, she won the Martin Holloway prize for the 'best and most efficient student, having regard to academic and intellectual distinction'. She graduated with first-class honours in chemistry. 
In January 1921 Hilda entered Imperial College and started chemical research under Dr Martha Whiteley towards the PhD degree. Exactly twenty-four months later she submitted her thesis, and she was awarded the degree the following month. She published a number of research papers as sole author and with Martha Whiteley, but she was collaborating with Ingold as early as 1921. They immediately established a rapport, and their chemical collaboration matured rapidly to a personal one. They were both rather shy, but she nevertheless had an engaging vivacity which, coupled with her intelligence, made her the ideal companion for the tall, handsome young lecturer. After their marriage, Hilda became essential to all areas of Ingold's life, and her grace, kindness, good humour, and stalwart common sense enriched the forty-seven years that they were to live and work together. 
After their marriage in 1923 Hilda Ingold continued her independent research, obtaining her DSc degree in 1926. However, after the birth of their first daughter, Sylvia, in 1927, research became a less important part of her life. Two more children completed their family, a son, Keith ('b'. 1929), and a second daughter, Dilys ('b'. 1932). Although Hilda continued to publish until 1947, she gradually shifted her support of Ingold to the administrative side, and it was in this field that she excelled at University College, London, from about 1939 until her retirement in 1968. She died on 8 August 1988 at Chelmsford. 
In the mid-1920s an extraordinary debate took place in the chemical literature concerning the arrangements of electrons in organic molecules, and how the electrons move between molecules as chemical reactions take place. Many people took part in the debate, but the principal protagonists were Robert Robinson (1886-1975) and Christopher Ingold. During this period, which overlapped Ingold's stay at Imperial College and his time at Leeds, he gradually clarified in his own mind the mechanisms of electron movement in molecules and finally synthesized his ideas into a systematic scheme for reaction mechanisms for the whole of organic chemistry. This scheme gave rise to a new way of thinking about organic reactions and of teaching organic chemistry, which has been in use ever since. While at Leeds, Ingold developed a large, active research group. He also began mountain climbing, which became a major recreational activity almost until the end of his life. 
In 1930 the chair of organic chemistry became vacant at University College, London, and Ingold was chosen to fill it. Almost immediately, however, he suffered medical problems with his eyes that required a rest from intensive reading and thus a break from his very heavy load. He took this rest in the form of a six-month leave in California, during which he wrote a review article ('Principles of an electronic theory in organic reactions', 'Chemical Reviews', 15, 1934, 225) summarizing his ideas. When this was published in the USA, it quickly became the seminal statement in the field of organic chemistry and led to the acceptance on both sides of the Atlantic of Ingold's interpretation of the theory of organic reactions. 
At the same time that Ingold arrived at University College, Edward Hughes (1906-1963) joined his research group as a postdoctoral fellow, and the two men began a collaboration that ended only with Hughes's death. Together they developed the system of reaction mechanisms for nucleophilic substitution reactions and elimination reactions at saturated carbon (SN1, SN2, E1, and E2) and elucidated the mechanism by which the Walden inversion occurred. 
In the early 1930s deuterium, the isotope of hydrogen with twice its normal mass, was first prepared in quantity. Ingold realized how this could solve the problem, first defined by Kekule in 1865, of the structure of the benzene molecule, on which Ingold had been working since 1922. In 1933 Hughes and co-workers started to separate pure heavy water in quantity from ordinary water, and Ingold and co-workers synthesized fully deuterated and half-deuterated benzene, C6D6 and C6H3D3. Measurement of the infra-red and Raman spectra of these molecules in 1935 allowed the proof to be made that the benzene molecule did indeed have a plane regular hexagonal structure. The complete analysis of the structure required the synthesis of benzene molecules containing one, two, four, and five atoms of deuterium per molecule. This difficult task was interrupted by the Second World War, during which the research laboratories of University College were evacuated to Aberystwyth. The final experiments were completed in the autumn of 1943 and the results published in 1945. By an analysis of the infra-red and Raman spectra of ordinary benzene, fully deuterated benzene, and five partially deuterated benzenes, twenty-nine of the thirty normal vibrations that occur in the molecule were identified with particular observed absorption bands. This allowed Ingold to calculate the complete internal force system of the benzene molecule. 
This was probably the greatest scientific contribution of Ingold's many research efforts. It won him the Bakerian lecture award in 1938, the Davy medal of the Royal Society in 1946, and, in 1953, an honorary degree from the University of Bologna, an ancient seat of learning that had rarely given such an award to a foreigner; in this last honour Ingold trod in the footsteps of Copernicus and Erasmus. 
Ingold followed this work with further ground-breaking studies on the excited state of benzene and on the excited state of acetylene, C2H2. The latter study demonstrated the first example of an excited state that was radically different in its geometry from the ground state. The excited state of acetylene was found to have a bent geometry, whereas the ground state is linear. In the field of reaction mechanisms, major advances were the identification of the nitronium ion, NO2+, as the active reagent in the nitric acid nitration reaction of aromatic molecules, and the general elucidation of the mechanisms of these reactions. In 1949 Ingold wrote twenty-two papers on this subject which were published in 1950 in the 'Journal of the Chemical Society', running consecutively and occupying 285 pages. 
In 1950 Ingold spent four months at Cornell University during which time he wrote his 'magnum opus', 'Structure and Mechanism in Organic Chemistry', published in 1953. It immediately assumed the status of 'bible' of organic chemistry in the Western world and eventually in the communist world, where Ingold's ideas had long been resisted. Ingold was finally received in Moscow in 1959, the year after he received a knighthood, and his book sold out on the first day of its publication in the USSR. 
During the 1950s and 1960s Ingold worked, in conjunction with R. Cahn and V. Prelog, on the sequence rule for the specification of the positions of four different groups tetrahedrally bonded to a chiral carbon atom. Since the mid-1950s their CIP sequence rule has been used throughout the world to specify the R ('rectus') or S ('sinister') handedness of a chiral (optically active) molecule. 
Ingold officially retired in 1961 but University College continued to appoint him annually as a special lecturer. He continued to lecture there and to accept invitations to speak around the world. He gave his last major talk in Venice in June 1970, and then commenced a gentle decline leading to his death at his home of forty years at 12 Handel Close, Edgware, on 8 December 1970. The cause of death was recorded as cerebrovascular degeneration and arteriosclerosis. 
Ingold received a great many honours, awards, honorary degrees, and visiting lectureships during his lifetime. His contribution to chemistry was succinctly encapsulated in the citation for the royal medal awarded to him by the Royal Society in 1952: 'it would be fair to say that no man has contributed with such detailed exactness and with such breadth of theoretical vision to our knowledge of the mechanism of organic reactions as has Ingold.' 


@@@@@


doc= 56154


Walker, Sir James (1863-1935), chemist, was born on 6 April 1863 at Dundee, the only son of James Walker, a flax merchant in the town, and his wife, Susan Hutchison, daughter of Arthur Cairns, also of Dundee. Walker showed an interest in science at Dundee high school, but although he passed the entrance examination for St Andrews University at the age of sixteen, he became an apprentice to a flax and jute spinner for three years. He finally entered Edinburgh University in 1882, where his teachers included Alexander Crum Brown (1838-1922), who diverted Walker's interests towards chemistry. Graduating BSc in 1885, he carried out experimental work with Thomas Carnelley in University College, Dundee, during his vacations and graduated DSc (Edinburgh) in 1886. He then spent three years in Germany studying with Ludwig Claisen and Adolf Baeyer in Munich and with the influential Wilhelm Ostwald (1853-1932) at Leipzig. Having obtained his PhD at Leipzig in 1889 he carried his new-found enthusiasm for physical chemistry back to Edinburgh where he had been appointed research assistant to Crum Brown. He held this post for three years, his chief work being on electrolytic synthesis. In 1892 he joined the laboratory of William Ramsay in University College, London, at that time the leading centre for physical chemistry in the United Kingdom. In 1893 he became Ramsay's second assistant. 
In 1894 Walker was elected professor of chemistry at University College, Dundee. He succeeded Crum Brown as professor of chemistry in Edinburgh in 1908. The First World War interfered with academic work, and Walker devoted himself instead to the manufacture of trinitrotoluene (TNT), then in great demand as a high explosive. In 1918 he returned to the manifold problems of the post-war period. He planned and saw built at Edinburgh one of the finest university chemical laboratories in the country, and established a research school there in order to provide the higher training for chemistry being demanded by the greatly expanded British chemical industry. He retired in 1928. 
As Ostwald's first British pupil and disciple, Walker had the unenviable responsibility of being the chief English-speaking protagonist of the new physical chemistry of Ostwald, J. H. van't Hoff, and S. A. Arrhenius, which was largely based on the last's controversial ionic theory. He proved an able propagandist, chiefly through his translation in 1890 of Ostwald's textbook, 'Grundriss der allgemeinen Chemie' ('Outlines of General Chemistry'), and most notably through his own readable textbook, 'Introduction to Physical Chemistry' (1899), which went through ten editions and was a set book in many British university chemistry courses. His most important work in this field was the elaboration of methods of electrolysis in the synthesis of dicarboxylic acids, and in finding support for the ionic theory. He published researches on hydrolysis, the affinity constants of weak acids and bases, investigated amphoteric electrolytes and reaction velocities, and determined molecular weights by freezing-point depressions. 
Although Walker made no important discoveries, his experimental work and his influence as a teacher did much to win support for physical chemistry in Great Britain. His advice was widely sought on a great variety of matters and given with equal readiness. He was a fine musician and possessed a flair for languages; Ramsay once mistook him for a German, while as a young man he was in great demand as a Russian translator. He was a founder member of the Alembic Club of Edinburgh which became well known for sponsoring reprints of historical chemical papers. He received many honours, both for his academic and industrial activities, including a knighthood in 1921 for his war work. The honorary degree of LLD was conferred upon him by the universities of St Andrews (1909) and Edinburgh (1929). In 1900 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, by which he was awarded the Davy medal in 1926. 
On 1 September 1897 Walker married Annie Purcell Sedgwick [Annie Purcell Walker, Lady Walker (1871-1950)], chemist, elder daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel William Sedgwick of Godalming. She was born in Cork on 4 December 1871 and educated at Girton College, Cambridge, where she gained second-class honours in the science tripos in 1893. She then joined Norman Collie as a research student at University College, London, where she met her husband. She published three papers on organic chemistry, but abandoned research after 1905. There was one son, Frederick, who became a geologist. Walker died at 5 Wester Coates Road, Edinburgh, on 6 May 1935; his wife died in the same city on 7 September 1950. 


@@@@@


doc= 56157


Howard, Sir Albert (1873-1947), agricultural botanist, was born on 8 December 1873 at Bishop's Castle, Shropshire, the fourth child of Richard Howard ('bap'. 1833, died 1893), farmer, and his wife, Ann Kilvert. As a child Howard worked on the family farm, an experience which affected his later attitude to agricultural science, making him critical of what he termed 'the laboratory hermit'. From Wellington College, Telford, he went in 1893 to the Royal College of Science, South Kensington, where he took his associateship in chemistry with first-class honours. On entering St John's College, Cambridge, in 1896, he specialized in biological subjects. In 1897 he was first in all England in the Cambridge agricultural diploma and the following year he was placed second in all England in the national diploma in agriculture. 
In 1899 Howard was awarded first-class honours in the natural sciences tripos and took up his first post, at Harrison College, Barbados. He was soon appointed mycologist and agricultural lecturer to the newly formed imperial department of agriculture for the West Indies. Influenced by the Cambridge botanist Marshall Ward, Howard was already developing the idea which became central to his view of plant disease, that parasites are less likely to attack plants which are healthy. In 1902 he joined the staff of the South-Eastern Agricultural College at Wye, in Kent, where his work on hops proved of great value to growers. He never really settled at Wye, and in 1905 accepted the post of imperial economic botanist to the government of India. Also that year he married Gabrielle Louise Caroline Matthaei (1876-1930), sometime fellow of Newnham College, Cambridge, who had produced outstanding work on plant respiration. 
Albert and Gabrielle Howard became known as the Sidney and Beatrice Webb of India, their planning and research being invariably a joint effort, and in 1913 Gabrielle was appointed second imperial economic botanist to the government of India. From 1905 until 1924 the Howards ran the experiment station at Pusa, carrying out research on many crops, notably wheat and cotton, and from 1912 to 1919 they were responsible for the fruit experiment station at Quetta. They based their work on holistic principles, as far as possible studying the plant in its context of ecological relationships. Howard greatly respected Asian agriculture, believing that it had lessons to teach the West about keeping soils fertile and crops healthy in difficult conditions. In 1914 Howard was appointed companion in the Order of the Indian Empire and helped establish the Indian Science Congress, of which he was elected president in 1926. 
Howard's dissatisfaction with the fragmented nature of agricultural research resulted in the creation of the Institute of Plant Industry at Indore. He and Gabrielle oversaw its planning and construction, which began in 1924. They were convinced that the health of plants was a function of soil fertility, and thought that food grown in humus-rich soil was likely to promote animal and human health. They gradually developed the Indore process of composting, which adapted oriental methods to Indian conditions. 
Gabrielle died suddenly in 1930 and Howard decided to leave India. He wanted to convey the lessons of the Indore process to Indian cultivators, and 'The Waste Products of Agriculture' (1931), written with his colleague Y. D. Wad, was intended as his final contribution to agricultural science. He returned to England in 1931 and also that year married Louise Ernestine Matthaei (1880-1969) ['see 'Howard, Louise Ernestine], who supported his work with the same dedication as her sister Gabrielle had shown. Howard was knighted in 1934. During the 1930s he travelled widely, advising cultivators in Asia, Africa, and Europe on adapting the Indore process to their circumstances; his expertise helped save the Costa Rican coffee industry from collapse. 
A pugnacious critic of chemical sprays and fertilizers, Howard spoke at many venues. From 1936 onwards he advised and wrote for the 'New English Weekly', a journal which enthusiastically promoted organic husbandry. In 1939 he and the nutritionist Sir Robert McCarrison launched the Cheshire doctors' 'Medical Testament' on agriculture and health. In 'An Agricultural Testament' (1940), Howard reviewed the achievements of the Indore process. His converts included Lady Eve Balfour and the horticulturist Lawrence Hills. Despite being a chief source of inspiration for the founding of the Soil Association in 1946, Howard refused to join, unhappy at its scientific work's being subject to control by laymen. He edited his own quarterly journal, 'Soil and Health' (1946-8). 
Howard's views on agriculture were underpinned by a religious faith in a natural order whose limits could not be exceeded with impunity. Possessed of an amiable brutality in debate, he commanded the respect of opponents for his sincere championing of humus. 'Farming and Gardening for Health or Disease' (1945) gives the best summary of his ideas and practice. He died of a heart attack at his home, 14 Liskeard Gardens, Blackheath, London, on 20 October 1947; his funeral service was held at Honor Oak crematorium three days later. He had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 56158


Divers, Edward (1837-1912), chemist, was born in London on 27 November 1837 of unrecorded parents. His early education was at the City of London School where his interest in chemistry was stimulated by Thomas Hall. At the age of fifteen he came under the influence of A. W. Hofmann and W. Crookes at the Royal College of Chemistry in Oxford Street. After one year's study (1852-3) Divers was briefly at the School of Mines and at John Stenhouse's laboratory in St Bartholomew's Hospital, where he came into contact with F. August Kekule and Heinrich Buff, both products of Liebig's Giessen laboratory. In 1854 he was appointed as teaching assistant and demonstrator at the newly created Queen's College, Galway, where he studied medicine, one of the few scientific degrees then available in Ireland; he was awarded the MD degree in 1860. For the next six years he engaged in a limited medical practice, also giving public lectures on chemistry in the Galway region. He started to investigate the chemistry of oxy-salts and acids; his first paper on magnesium ammonium carbonate appeared in the 'Journal of the Chemical Society' in 1862. In 1865 he married Margaret Theresa (died 1897), daughter of D. G. Fitzgerald of Mayfield, co. Cork, with whom he had a son and two daughters. 
Realizing that the scope for undertaking investigations in chemistry was seriously restricted in Galway, Divers returned to England in 1866. He did not abandon medicine completely: in the following seven years he was successively lecturer in materia medica at Queen's College, Birmingham, in medical jurisprudence at Middlesex Hospital, and in physics at Charing Cross Hospital, as well as lecturing on chemistry at the Albert Veterinary College. These institutions provided him with the facilities to accelerate his research on inorganic chemistry and papers describing his work began to flow from his pen. The most significant, 'The existence and formation of salts of nitrous oxide', describing the first synthesis of hyponitrites, was published in 1871. 
In July 1873, on the recommendation of A. W. Williamson, Divers went to Tokyo as lecturer in general and applied chemistry at the new Imperial Engineering College at Toranomon. In the previous decade a great transformation of Japan had taken place with the overthrow of the isolationist and xenophobic Tokugawa regime and the establishment of the Meiji (Enlightenment) government. A crash programme of education was put in place to bring Japan, still largely feudal in its institutions, into line with occidental countries. The new government saw the way forward by the importation of foreign experts. Divers was one of some forty-five scientists and engineers from England, Scotland, America, and Germany recruited to achieve this aim. 
Divers was the first British chemist to go to Japan, where he immediately set about building laboratories on the Liebig and Hofmann models. On Henry Dyer's retirement from the Engineering College in 1882 Divers became its principal, and when the college was incorporated into the Imperial University in 1886 he was appointed professor of inorganic chemistry. His dedication to research now became paramount, even after a test-tube explosion in 1885 robbed him of sight in his right eye. Together with Japanese co-workers he published extensively in international journals on the compounds of selenium and tellurium, and many other subjects. He was elected FRS in June 1885. 
In recognition of his role as founder of modern chemical studies in Japan, Divers was appointed to the order of the Rising Sun, third class, in 1886, and to the order of the Sacred Treasure, second class, in 1898. On retirement in 1899 he was made emeritus professor of the University of Japan, and a bronze bust was erected on the university campus. He returned to London in 1899, but continued his chemical activity, becoming president of the chemical section of the British Association in 1902, president of the Society of Chemical Industry in 1905, and vice-president of both the Chemical Society (1900-02) and the Institute of Chemistry (1905). He died, following an operation, at his home, 3 Canning Place, Palace Gate, Kensington, on 8 April 1912 and was buried at Brookwood, Surrey, on 11 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 56159


Druce, (John) Gerald Frederick (1894-1950), chemist and schoolmaster, was born on 8 December 1894 at 14 St John's Road, Leamington Spa, the son of Frederick Druce, an assistant manager of a coffee house (and later a gardener), and his wife, Hannah Freeman. Following the family's move to Reading, he was educated at Kendrick School and at University College, Reading (1911-12), before studying chemistry and botany at University College, London, where he graduated BSc in 1915. Following war service he pursued independent research, obtaining an MSc from the University of London in 1920. At University College he had met the Czech chemist, Jardslav Heyrovsky (1890-1967), who inspired him to visit Czechoslovakia in 1920 and to learn Czech and other Slavonic languages. He studied chemistry with Heyrovsky at the Charles University in Prague and was awarded a doctorate in 1923. In the same year Druce began to teach chemistry and botany at Battersea grammar school, where he set up a temporary research laboratory in the playground at St John's Hill, Clapham. Later, he built a laboratory in his garden. In 1921 he married Elsie Olive ('b'. 1895/6), the daughter of Edward James Caudell, a blouse manufacturer; they had one son. 
Mendeleyev had predicted the existence of two missing elements, eka- and dimanganese, in group VII of the periodic table, and the likely existence of elements of masses 43 and 75 had been confirmed from X-ray spectra by H. G. J. Moseley in 1915. Using his school facilities to concentrate solutions of pyrolusite, and in collaboration with the physicist F. H. Loring (died 1944), in 1925 Druce announced the discovery of missing element, atomic number 75, in the form of potassium per-rhenate. While Druce's preparation of a rhenium salt was undoubtedly genuine, the international community allowed the honour of discovery of the pure element to go to the Germans W. Noddack, I. Tacke, and O. Berg, who in the same year gave the name rhenium to the element they had isolated from columbite and molybdenite. Druce's findings were corroborated by Heyrovsky, who had also identified rhenium by means of polarography. Druce compiled the first textbook on the preparation and properties of this rare element in 1948. 
Druce was elected a fellow of the Chemical Society in 1915 and became a licentiate (1919) and fellow (1925) of the Royal Institute of Chemistry. He travelled extensively in eastern Europe, visiting Czechoslovakia at least once a year and wrote two books (1930 and 1936) on the country, as well as a monograph on the Czech scientists B. Brauner and F. Wald. He was a personal friend of the first Czech president, Thomas Masaryk (1850-1937) and shared his conviction that 'truth prevails' ('pravda vitezi'). Druce was awarded the order of the White Lion by the Czech government for his cultural and scientific work as well as membership of several Czech learned societies. His strong interests in the history of science were reflected in a book in 1925, and a London MA thesis in 1943. He published many articles on preparative inorganic chemistry, was a regular contributor to 'Chemical News', and served in an editorial capacity during its declining years, 1924-31. 
A quiet, unassuming man, Druce was an inspiring teacher who impressed his pupils with his experimental skills. He was probably the last chemist to find ways and means of doing original research in a secondary school environment. He died at the Royal Cancer Hospital, Fulham Road, London, on 22 June 1950. 


@@@@@


doc= 56160


Arthur Evans Moule (1836-1918) was ordained in London in 1861 and went as a missionary to Ningpo in the same year; he served there until 1869, witnessing in 1861 and 1862 the various attempts of the Taipings to capture the city. He returned to Britain in 1869 and from 1871 to 1876 was again at Ningpo. From 1876 to 1879 he was at Hangchow, and from 1882 he was secretary of the mission at Shanghai; he became archdeacon of Shanghai in 1890. Ill health required his return to Britain in April 1894. Moule published widely on Chinese affairs and translated works into Chinese. He took an especial interest in the opium trade, publishing 'The Opium Question' (1877) and addressing the church congress at Newcastle on it in 1881. He was married in 1861 to Eliza Agnes Bernau, younger daughter of John Henry Bernau, of Pomerania, also a missionary; three of their children -- Walter Stephen Moule, Arthur John Henry Moule, and William Augustus Handley Moule -- were missionaries in China. After returning to Britain, Moule was rector of Compton Valence, Dorset, from 1898 to 1902. He was then again in China until 1910. He died on 26 August 1918. 


@@@@@


doc= 56162


Winifred Kathleen Joan Davin (1909-1995), writer and editor, was born on 27 July 1909, in Otautau, New Zealand, the third of the five children of Michael Gonley (1869-1935), merchant seaman and later shopkeeper, and his wife, Winifred, 'nee' Crowe (1878-1934). She was educated at St Dominic's, a Dominican convent in Dunedin, and at Otago University, where in 1931 she met her future husband and introduced him to works of Joyce, Proust, Mansfield, Lawrence, and other writers who became important to them both. Winnie followed Dan to Europe and they were married on 22 July 1939, at the end of his Rhodes scholarship. She spent the war in Britain, while he served overseas, and later wrote a memoir of that time, 'A soldier's wife', published in 'Women in Wartime: New Zealand Women Tell their Story', edited by Lauris Edmond and Carolyn Milward (Wellington, 1986). 


@@@@@


doc= 56163


Bainbridge, Emerson Muschamp (1817-1892), department store owner, was born on 25 August 1817 in Eastgate, Weardale, co. Durham, the youngest child in the family of two sons and five daughters of Cuthbert Bainbridge (1772-1850), a farmer, and his wife, Mary Muschamp (1774-1850), the youngest child of Emerson Muschamp of Brotherlee, near Eastgate, bailiff to the bishop of Durham. His parents were devout Methodists. 
Bainbridge was educated at Eastgate village school, and from 1830 to 1835 was apprenticed to Thomas Kidd, a draper, of The Side, Newcastle upon Tyne. After spending two years in London working for Lewis and Allenby, a famous silk and shawl warehouse in Regent Street, Bainbridge returned to Newcastle in 1838. There he joined W. Alder Dunn in setting up a woollen and linen drapery business at 12 and 14 Market Street, in the newly developed city centre, opposite Grainger Market. On 22 August 1839 he married Anne (Annie) Hudson (1821-1902), the second daughter of Thomas Hudson, a tanner, of Newcastle. They had fifteen children, ten of whom survived childhood. 
From the outset the new drapery business was innovative. Dunn and Bainbridge marked their goods with fixed prices, which was less intimidating for the customer than was the old practice of individual bargaining, and they extended the range of goods, moving into 'novelties' such as gloves, stockings, and ribbons, and cords and tassels to go with their household fabrics. In 1841 the partnership was dissolved, with Dunn continuing to trade next door while Bainbridge operated from 12 Market Street, which he named Albert House. Bainbridge went into partnership with his cousin John Bell Muschamp, and the firm continued to expand the range of its merchandise, so that by 1845 their stock included mourning clothes, furs, and ready-made muslin dresses. In 1846 Bainbridge and Muschamp bought 11 Market Street and opened a 'French room', with goods imported from Paris. In an advertisement of 1846 they stated that 'Bainbridge and Muschamp are resolved that they will not be undersold by any House in the Kingdom'. By 1849 there were twenty-three separate departments, making Bainbridge's probably the first department store in the world, predating Au Bon Marche of Paris, which opened in 1852 and was the model for American stores in the 1860s. 
The expansion continued in the 1850s. Bainbridge and Muschamp began to manufacture clothes on the premises, and in 1852 they bought two more adjoining shops and moved into men's ready-made clothing. The partnership with John Bell Muschamp ended in 1855, and from then on the business was called Bainbridge & Co. Bainbridge was successful partly because he was able to take advantage of the growth of the city centre and the expansion of the lower middle classes, who flocked into his store, eager to benefit from the lower prices, high quality, and wide range of drapery and haberdashery products. In 1865 he bought a 500 foot block of buildings behind Market Street, and a few years later he knocked them down and built a new store, four storeys high. He added a carpet-planning showroom in 1881 and a new building to house his carpet-beating machinery in 1884, and in 1885 he bought the Coach and Horses inn in Bigg Market, demolished it, and built a new furniture department. He extended the business to Leeds in 1883, when he bought a factory there to manufacture boys' and men's clothing, and in 1889 he moved his boot and shoe manufacturing business to the city, where by 1892 he employed a staff of nearly one thousand. 
At the 1887 Jubilee Exhibition in Newcastle, Bainbridge & Co. set up a sumptuous house-furnishing exhibit. Bainbridge installed electric light in his store in 1890, and it was one of his employees who invented the 'Ariel messengers' to carry cash through the store by overhead tubes. By 1892 Bainbridge's employed a staff of 600 in Newcastle, and the store had 11,705 square yards of floor space. Shopping at Bainbridge's was seen as a pleasurable social activity, and the store offered not only a wide range of goods but also services such as funeral arrangements and house removals. Bainbridge had a paternalistic attitude towards his staff. He housed many of his workers in special accommodation, and before his death in 1892 he had established a benevolent society, offering sickness and holiday benefits, social activities, and sports teams. 
Brought up in a Methodist household, Bainbridge became a Methodist lay preacher and a leading member of the Brunswick Place Methodist Chapel in Newcastle, and he was active in the temperance movement. He preferred to employ Methodists, often from the lead-mining districts of co. Durham. As his wealth increased he was able to build in the late 1860s a large family house in Newcastle, Leazes Villa, and to buy in 1877 a 1775 acre country estate, Eshott, near Felton, Northumberland. Here, at Eshott Hall, he lived the life of a country gentleman. He made additions to the house, including a tower, improved the land, built labourers' cottages, erected a chapel, and started a library, and he enjoyed game shooting as a sport. At the same time he continued to be actively involved in the business, and his energy remained remarkable. Bainbridge was a director of the Consett Iron Company and of several collieries. He was a Liberal and served as a JP. 
Bainbridge died at Eshott Hall on 21 February 1892 after suffering a stroke. Three of his four surviving sons, Thomas Hudson Bainbridge (1842-1912), George Bargate Bainbridge (1850-1944), and Arthur Emerson Bainbridge (1862-1930), had joined the firm, and in his will Bainbridge left them each a third share in the business. Another son, Emerson Muschamp Bainbridge (1845-1911), became a colliery manager and owner. The firm continued to prosper under the second and third generations of the family. George Bargate Bainbridge served as chairman until his death in 1944; and his son, (George) Aubrey Bainbridge (1881-1950), was managing director of Bainbridge & Co. until 1946. However, the firm ran into difficulties during the 1930s, and in 1938 Bainbridge's of Leeds went into liquidation. 
The only member of the fourth generation of the family to enter the business was 
Bainbridge and his cousin Bill Sanderson became joint managing directors of the business in 1948 under the chairmanship of Sir Robert Burrows (who was married to the daughter of Arthur Emerson Bainbridge, the son of the founder of the firm); but without large amounts of capital it was impossible to revitalize the business, and in 1952 Bainbridge's was sold to the John Lewis Partnership. With the help of capital investment from John Lewis, Bainbridge later modernized the store and by the time of his retirement in 1974 he had built Bainbridge's up to be one of the leading department stores in the country. When new premises were opened in the Eldon Square shopping centre in Newcastle upon Tyne in 1976, Bainbridge's became the largest John Lewis store outside London. Bainbridge was appointed OBE in 1974. He died on 29 April 1976 and was buried on 4 May at the parish church at Corbridge, Northumberland. 


@@@@@


doc= 56164


George Vivian Muschamp Bainbridge (1910-1976). Born on 15 November 1910 at Lough House, Benridge, Morpeth, Northumberland, he was the elder of the two sons of (George) Aubrey Bainbridge of Morpeth and his first wife, Mary, the daughter of Robert Atkinson Turnbull, a dentist, of Newcastle upon Tyne, and the great-grandson of Emerson Muschamp Bainbridge (1817-1892). Having read modern languages and psychology at Christ's College, Cambridge ('c'.1929-1932), he entered the business in 1932 and the following year was one of four new directors appointed to the board. On 8 February 1934 he married Pamela Ann Fenwick ('b'. 1913/14), the youngest daughter of Frederick Burnand Fenwick of Newcastle upon Tyne, the son of John James Fenwick, founder of Fenwick's department store ['see under 'Fenwick family (per. 1882-1979)]. Bainbridge was in the Territorial Army and served with distinction in the Royal Artillery during the Second World War, reaching the rank of major. After the war he found time for voluntary work, serving as chairman of a number of organizations in the north-east, including the Murray House community centre and youth club, the Northumberland and Tyneside Council of Social Service, and the Byker community development project. 


@@@@@


doc= 56167


Daniell, Madeline Margaret (1832-1906), educationist, was born at Secrole, India, on 19 May 1832, the daughter of Major Henry Carter of the Bengal native infantry and his wife, Helen Gray. She attended the Edinburgh Institution for the Education of Young Ladies and a finishing school in Europe. On her return to India she married on 13 November 1851 Charles Astell Daniell (1833-1855), a cornet in the 18th light cavalry. He died in Lahore on 24 November 1855 leaving her with one son. 
Madeline Daniell made her home at 1 Inverleith Terrace, Edinburgh, where, in the 1860s, she played an important role in the campaign for higher education for women. When the Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association was being formed, the first meeting of the executive committee was held in her house in 1866 and she became honorary secretary. Mary Crudelius (president) and Mrs Ranken (treasurer) were the other office bearers. Their principal university advisers were professors Masson and Laurie and Dr Arthur Mitchell. The initial object of the association was to provide women with the opportunity for advanced post-school education, but specifically not to encourage women to provoke male opposition by attempting to enter the professions. In the first year (1867-8) 263 women enrolled for the programme which commenced in the Hopetoun Rooms as a series of lectures by Masson on the history of English literature. Thereafter other classes were developed in experimental physics and mental philosophy. 
Mary Crudelius was an important leader of the group, but she suffered from poor health; in the period 1866-9 much of the work was actually taken on by Madeline Daniell, whose 'devoted labours... are often mentioned' by Mrs Crudelius in her correspondence (Burton, 23). Madeline attended many of the lectures and negotiated with Masson about the examinations which, it was agreed, had to be identical to those undertaken by male university students. She appears to have herself sat some of the first exams. Madeline formed friendly contacts with leaders of the women's movement elsewhere, including Emily Davies and Elizabeth Wolstenholme (Elmy), and was in contact with the organizers of the parallel Glasgow association. Madeline's sister Mrs De Lacy Evans, also the widow of an Indian officer and later wife of the editor of 'The Scotsman', was one of the group of women who in 1869 joined Sophia Jex-Blake in the unsuccessful attempt to enable women to gain admission to medical lectures at Edinburgh. 
About 1870 Madeline Daniell moved to St Andrews to care for her invalid mother. There she played a part in the establishment of St Leonard's School for Girls, which provided middle-class girls with a high-quality education as a foundation for subsequent university-level study. All the teachers were to be women, one principal aim being to provide appropriate professional occupations for educated women. Madeline seems to have been one of the originators of the plan for St Leonard's and, in 1877, she was one of the two founding honorary secretaries of the St Andrews School for Girls Company. 
After the deaths of her mother and her son Madeline Daniell moved to London, where she became active in work for the Charity Organization Society. She lived for a time in the East End of London, where she took a particular interest in the plight of impoverished women. In June 1887 she met the brilliant young essayist and poet Constance Naden (1858-1889), and for the next two years the women were close friends and companions. These were years which Madeline described as 'a time of great happiness'. In the autumn of 1887 the two women embarked on an extensive tour of Greece, Turkey, Egypt, and India, before returning to settle at Naden's house in Grosvenor Square. In 1889 Constance Naden died, and when her collection of essays, 'Induction and Deduction', was published in the following year under the editorship of Dr R. Lewins, Madeline contributed an affectionate 'Memoir' as an introduction, in which she described something of the friendship. 
The early death of Naden resulted in another move for Madeline Daniell, on this occasion to Southport, where she lived for a period with Miss Kay Shuttleworth. There once again she was active in various women's and charitable organizations, including the Women's Suffrage Society, the Women's Local Government Society, and the University Extension Society. She was also a member of the Women's Liberal Association. From about 1898 she suffered from a prolonged paralysing illness which effectively ended her active career. Her last years were spent at Southsea, Hampshire, where she died at her home, Ashburton, in Ashburton Road, on 21 April 1906. 


@@@@@


doc= 56169


Bicknell, James David (1906-1988), record producer, was born on 1 September 1906 at 42 St John's Wood Road, London, the son of Gilbert Elhannan Bicknell, stockbroker, and his wife, Florence Ferrier Ross. He was educated in the high Anglican tradition of Marlborough College between 1919 and 1924, and gained a musical training in London and Paris. Bicknell intended to follow his father into the City, but at the age of twenty-one met Trevor Williams, chairman of the Gramophone Company (popularly known as HMV) and a friend of the Bicknell family, who offered him a job in the company's international artistes department. Bicknell later recalled that joining the business, for which his mother had worked before her marriage, made him feel as if he were coming home. 
In 1927, the year Bicknell joined the international artistes department, the record industry was still undergoing a period of technological transition from mechanical to electrical recording. The new process made records sound more realistic and permitted large-scale recordings of orchestral and other works. As the existing catalogue of records had been rendered obsolete by these changes, the company was engaged in a major re-recording programme. At the time Fred Gaisberg, the British record industry's founding father, was the artistic director of the international artistes department. He took the young Bicknell under his wing and taught him the basics of artist and repertoire management. As Gaisberg's assistant Bicknell was involved in recording important performers such as Alfred Cortot, Jacques Thibaud, Pablo Casals, and Fritz Kreisler. In 1931, in the midst of the great depression, the Gramophone Company merged with its competitor, the Columbia Graphophone Company, to form Electric and Musical Industries Ltd (EMI). Despite the difficulties caused by the depression, the 1930s were a highly creative time for Bicknell. Among the many important recordings he made during the 1930s was a series of Mozart operas by the newly formed Glyndebourne Company, including first ever complete recordings of 'La nozze di Figaro', 'Don Giovanni', and 'Cosi fan tutte', which remained touchstones of performance on record into the late twentieth century. 
Bicknell's career was interrupted by war service, when he was commissioned into the Oxford and Buckinghamshire light infantry, serving in Britain, France, and Germany. He was appointed MBE for bravery under fire. In 1946 he returned to EMI where he immediately began to rebuild the classical catalogue. He visited Italy and made contracts with rising young artists, such as the conductors Victor de Sabata and Guido Cantelli. They included the Italian violinist Giaconda de Vito (1907- 'c'.1994), daughter of Giacomo de Vito, a doctor of agriculture, whom Bicknell married on 16 November 1949. They had no children. The decade following his return was one of great upheaval for EMI. The company lost much of its classical repertoire when its two American licensees, RCA Victor and American Columbia, terminated their agreements. In addition, EMI's late entry into the LP market meant that in order to compete it had to create a fresh catalogue in a short time. It was during this period that Bicknell and his colleague Walter Legge made the transition from artist and repertoire managers to record producers, responsible for creating a unique artistic form of performance on records. Bicknell was responsible for many of Cantelli's great recordings and those of another major post-war signing, the Spanish soprano Victoria de los Angeles. 
In 1957 Bicknell became manager of EMI's international artistes department and gave up record making altogether. However, he supervised the modernization and expansion of the company's classical recording programmes, introducing stereo recording in 1957 -- a move which required the complete remaking of the existing classical catalogue. His period as manager was clouded by the difficulties he encountered trying to manage Walter Legge, whose costs were seen as increasingly extravagant by EMI's dynamic new chairman Sir Joseph Lockwood. However, by the time he retired in 1971, ending a supremely successful career spanning forty-four years and encompassing some of the most dramatic changes in the history of the record industry, he had created a major catalogue of classical music, expanded the range of music available to consumers, and dramatically increased sales of such records. 
On his retirement Bicknell became EMI's honorary archivist, and continued to sit on several important committees such as the advisory panel to the Arts Council, and the governing committee of the British Institute of Recorded Sound. A tall distinguished man and a refined gentleman of the old school, Bicknell lived out his retirement with his wife in their Hertfordshire home, with occasional visits to their apartment in Rome and other travels. Curiously, he never wrote his memoirs, but, courteous to the end, he remained a major source of knowledge for broadcasters and historians of the recording industry. 
Bicknell died, aged eighty-two, of bronchopneumonia and cancer of the pharynx at his home, Flint Cottage, Troutstream Way, Loudwater, Hertfordshire, on 5 September 1988. Throughout his career, Bicknell combined extraordinary ability in the field of recording with a diplomatic, easy-going personality -- an essential feature in the often difficult atmosphere of the recording studio -- which earned him the respect of colleagues and artists alike. At his retirement lunch in 1971, the veteran pianist Gerald Moore described Bicknell as 'a loveable character... who did his work with such enormous dignity and extraordinary modesty'. 


@@@@@


doc= 56170


Bentall family (per. 1904-1993), department store owners, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 56171


Gerald Chalmers Bentall (1903-1971), department store owner, was born at Glendon Lodge, Fassett Road, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, on 17 February 1903. Educated at Tonbridge School, he joined Bentalls in 1922 and was appointed a director in 1925, when the firm became a limited company. He became general manager in 1928. As a territorial, he was called up at the outbreak of the Second World War, but was released from the forces in order to help his father run the store; he succeeded his father as chairman and managing director in 1942. Bentall's first marriage, which took place on 30 April 1930 to Edith Marjorie Shouler ('b'. 1906/7), ended in divorce and on 2 March 1945 he married his second wife, Marjorie Sydney Meller ('b'. 1909/10), a department store welfare officer. They had one son. This marriage also ended in divorce. 
Gerald was faced with heavy death duties following Leonard Bentall's death, and in 1946 the business was converted into a public company. He began to expand the number of stores in 1947, when he bought Bentall & Sons Ltd in Worthing, Sussex, founded by his great-uncle Charles Bentall in 1875. The business grew to include stores in Ealing and Tunbridge Wells. He was appointed CBE in 1950, and on 8 October 1959 he married his third wife, Sybil Gladys Brett ('b'. 1897/8). He retired as managing director in 1963 and as chairman in 1968, and died on 17 September 1971 at his home, Witley Park, Brook, Godalming, Surrey. His ashes were interred on 22 September at Dorking cemetery in Surrey. 
Leonard Bentall's younger son, 


@@@@@


doc= 56173


Burbidge family (per. c.1870-1966), department store managers and directors, were managing directors and chairmen of Harrods from 1893 to 1959, through three generations. The first member of the family to enter the business was 


@@@@@


doc= 56174


Sir Richard Grant Woodman Burbidge, third baronet (1897-1966), who was born at 53 Stanhope Gardens, Kensington, London, on 23 June 1897. Burbidge was educated at Rugby School and commissioned into the army in 1914. He served in the RASC and saw action with the 47th division train, rising to the rank of captain. He trained in the retail trade in America in 1919 before joining Harrods Ltd in 1920. He succeeded his father as managing director in 1935, and was chairman from 1945 until 1959, when the Harrods Group was taken over by House of Fraser. He served for a while as managing director under Hugh Fraser but the two men did not get on. Burbidge later held directorships at British Home Stores Ltd and Maple & Co. Ltd. During the Second World War he was one of the civilians on the board of the Navy, Army and Air Force Institutes. 
Burbidge married Gladys Amelia, eldest daughter of Charles Frederick Kearley, a contractor of Kensington, on 14 October 1925. They had a son and daughter. This marriage was dissolved, and on 6 December 1946 he married a widow, Joan Elizabeth Hamilton, 'nee' Mosley. Very much the traditionalist in his manner, he was well liked by his staff, most of whom he knew by name, and considered charming by all who knew him. Burbidge was appointed CBE in 1946. He died at his home, Walnut Tree Cottage, Ashampstead, Berkshire, on 2 February 1966. He was survived by his second wife. 
Under the careful direction of the Burbidge family Harrods attained its status as the biggest, most elegant and best stocked of London's great department stores. The magnificent terracotta building became one of the capital's landmarks and the many departments, particularly the vast food halls, earned a worldwide reputation for quality. 


@@@@@


doc= 56175


Sir (Richard) Woodman Burbidge, second baronet (1872-1945), born on 7 December 1872 at 35 Upper George Street, Marylebone, London. Educated at St Marylebone Grammar School, he joined Harrods Stores Ltd in 1893, becoming general manager in 1901. On the death of his father in 1917 he became the second baronet, and was appointed managing director of Harrods Stores Ltd, by then the biggest store in the country. He became chairman in 1921, a post he held until his death in 1945, retiring as managing director in 1935. He also sat on the boards of Dickins and Jones Ltd, D. H. Evans Ltd, and Kendal Milne & Co., Manchester, which together formed the Harrods Group, as well as of Harrods (Buenos Aires) Ltd. He travelled frequently to North and South America on business. 
Burbidge served on many committees including the Ministry of Munitions stores purchases advisory council, the Ministry of Munitions staff investigation committee, and the Empire Marketing Board, and he was treasurer of the Tariff Board. Burbidge was appointed CBE in 1919, a commander of the order of Leopold II of Belgium by King Albert in 1920, in recognition of organizing the construction, by Harrods Stores Ltd, of hospitals and airsheds behind the Belgian front line, and in 1917 he received the Marie Regina cross of Romania for organizing relief for Romanian refugees. Burbidge inherited his father's capacity for work, but also enjoyed sports such as coursing, horse-racing, and yachting. 
On 2 September 1896 Burbidge married Catherine Jemima (1872-1964), daughter of Henry Grant of Sodbury House, Great Clacton, Essex; they had one son, Richard Grant Woodman Burbidge, and three daughters. Burbidge always affectionately referred to his wife as Mother when talking to staff, and they both took a great interest in the Harrodian Sports Club, Lady Burbidge presenting prizes at the Harrodian Club annual sports days long after her husband's death. Both ensured that staff amenities improved, providing a clinic, staff bank, and staff and buyers' councils. Burbidge was a religious man and he encouraged staff in religious studies, and he and Lady Burbidge regularly attended the staff 'Bible' study group meetings. 
Burbidge was involved in the building of the YWCA headquarters in London (completed in 1932), and the Purley Schools (for orphans of employees in the textile trade) benefited to the sum of $53,716 during his year as appeals chairman. 
Burbidge died at his country home, Cisswood, Lower Beeding, Horsham, on 3 June 1945 and was buried at Littleton on 7 June. Queen Marie of Yugoslavia was represented among the large gathering at his memorial service at Holy Trinity Church, Brompton, on 11 June. He was succeeded by his son, 


@@@@@


doc= 56176


Butt, Sir Alfred, first baronet (1878-1962), music-hall entrepreneur and racehorse owner and breeder, was born on 20 March 1878, the only son of Frederick Butt, a builder. He was educated at Westminster School and, after leaving school, worked in the accounting department at Harrods as a clerk on a salary of 15's'. per week. He was then employed by the Palace Theatre, Cambridge Circus. 
Butt's subsequent career was built around the management of this theatre, which he made into one of the most prestigious, fashionable, and financially successful variety theatres in London. Appointed company secretary of the Palace Theatre Ltd in 1898, at the age of nineteen, he soon after became assistant manager and, on the death of Charles Morton in 1904, manager of the music-hall. In 1906 Butt was promoted to managing director, a position he retained until 1920. Butt's management of the Palace was characterized by the production of novel and lavish entertainments and he became especially associated with the introduction of foreign performers to British music-hall audiences. The most notable of these included famous continental performers such as Anna Pavlova (1909) and Yvette Guilbert (1910), although he also developed very close business links with American vaudeville which ensured a continuous flow of top American stars to Britain. 
In 1910 Butt greatly extended his music-hall business by assuming control of the deceased Thomas Barrasford's circuit of halls and by merging his interests with those of Walter de Frece to create the Variety Theatres Controlling Company Limited (VTCC). These developments rapidly made Butt one of the most influential figures in the music-hall industry and enabled him and de Frece to challenge the dominance of Moss Empires within the industry. Butt also became involved in the management of the Globe, Queen's, and Empire theatres (1914), and the Gaiety and the Adelphi (1915), and was responsible for the construction of the Victoria Palace and Glasgow Alhambra. 
During the First World War, Butt became involved with the Ministry of Food and oversaw the introduction of compulsory rationing in 1917. In acknowledgement of this role, and also for his contributions to war charities, Butt was knighted in 1918. Having been adopted as the Unionist parliamentary candidate for North Paddington in June 1918, Sir Alfred reduced his involvement in the variety theatre, disposing of his interests in the VTCC (1919) and the Gaiety, Adelphi, and Palace theatres (1920). He did, though, take on the chairmanship of the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, in 1919, and was its managing director from 1925 to 1931. Butt finally obtained a seat in parliament in November 1922 as the representative for Balham and Tooting. He enjoyed a lengthy parliamentary career, the apogee of which was the award of a baronetcy in the 1929 dissolution honours list for his political and public services. His political career ended in disgrace, however, when in 1936 he was forced to resign after a scandal implicating him in obtaining personal financial gain from leaked budget proposals disclosed to him by his friend J. H. Thomas, the colonial secretary. 
Butt held a long-standing interest in gambling and in his younger days he played chemin de fer at casinos in Deauville and other resorts. Horse-racing was another passion, and after his enforced retirement from public life he turned his attention towards the racing world, acquiring the Brook stud in Newmarket. He was a successful owner-breeder, winning the 1946 Oaks with Steady Aim. He was also responsible for the breeding of Petition. As a two-year-old, the horse won the New Stakes at Ascot, and also finished first in the Gimcrack and the Champagne Stakes. Although fancied to win the 2000 Guineas, Petition had an accident at the start. Other successful mares that Butt owned were Quick Arrow, Solar Flower, and Spend a Penny. 
Butt married Georgina Mary, daughter of Frederick Say of Norwich, in 1902; they had a son, born in 1908. Georgina died in January 1960 and, in August 1960, Butt married Wilhelmine Wahl, who had been his nurse-companion for a number of years ('Daily Telegraph', 10 Dec 1962). He died at his home, Clarehaven, Bury Road, Newmarket, on 8 December 1962; his funeral was held at Cambridge crematorium on 12 December. His only son, (Alfred) Kenneth Dudley Butt, succeeded to the baronetcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 56177


Cooke, William (1807/8-1886), circus manager, was the second son of Thomas Taplin Cooke (1782-1866) and Mary Ann ('nee' Thorpe). He was twice married. His first wife was Mary Ann Spicer (1808/9-1874); they had five children, the eldest of whom, William Henry (1833/4-1905), became an important partner in his business affairs from the 1850s. His second wife was Sarah Saunders, with whom he had two children. 
Between 1853 and 1860 Cooke managed Astley's Amphitheatre in London, continuing its long-established equestrian tradition by producing circus entertainments. At Astley's he earned recognition for producing Shakespearian plays, such as 'Macbeth' and 'Richard III', as equestrian dramas. In addition to managing the London house at this period, Cooke also ran a company that toured the provinces during the 'tenting season'. The 1858 season was a notable failure for him and his tenting company as they sought to rival a visiting American horse-tamer by demonstrating before provincial audiences the secrets of horse-taming; suspicion was aroused by these so-called secrets in communities such as Norwich and Cheshire where a sound knowledge of horse-taming prevailed, at least among grooms. Cooke's financial position at this stage is unclear, but there is some speculation that he steadily lost money during his years as manager of Astley's. In 1860 he retired from the management of Astley's and the report in 'The Era' gives an indication of the negative market forces affecting Cooke and possibly other impresarios in the 1850s: 'we are not in Mr Cooke's confidence and are therefore ignorant of the cause which induces him to retire from the position which he has held with such credit to himself... but with all the spirit and skill as a manager, it is not difficult in these free trade days to perceive what anxiety and responsibility must attend the conduct of a high priced and restricted theatre, whose lessee, unable to meet the economy of the times, is compelled to keep up exclusive and protectionist prices. ('The Era', 5 Feb 1860, 11)' After his retirement from Astley's, Cooke established the Victoria Riding Establishment in Church Road, Wimbledon. 
Cooke's other major achievement was his role in creating the first equestrian friendly society, the Dramatic Equestrian and Musical Agency and Sick Fund Association, a society established in 1855 on the progressive principle, common among other such organizations in this period, of 'sooth[ing] the hours of sickness, accident, and old age while elevat[ing] the profession' ('The Era', 29 July 1855, 10). The agency was important since it provided for performers who were traditionally excluded from those friendly societies set up by established theatres, such as Drury Lane and Covent Garden, and by the Actors' Benevolent Fund which catered to the elite of the acting profession. As such it was resorted to by employees of the circus, who could afford its relatively reduced subscription rates. In addition to being a founder member of the organization, Cooke sat on its board of trustees for many years, and was appointed a life governor along with his first wife, Mary Ann. Cooke died at the age of seventy-eight at his residence, 149 Acre Lane, Brixton, on 6 May 1886. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 56180


Fenwick family (per. 1882-1979), department store owners, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 56181


(James Frederick) Trevor Fenwick (1901-1979), was born on 8 March 1901 at 31 Queens Road, Newcastle upon Tyne. He was educated at Uppingham School, and went up to Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1919, to read economics, the first member of the family to go to university. He graduated BA in political economy in 1922. In 1931 he married Elizabeth Vere Meldrum of Pitlochry. They had three sons and one daughter; all the sons went into the family business, and became directors in the 1960s. 
Trevor Fenwick was also interested in the fashion side of the business, and tried to show designs based on the latest Paris collections in Fenwicks within weeks of their being unveiled. He visited the United States in the 1930s, and came back with notebooks full of ideas from Macys and other New York stores. It was he who was responsible for turning the Bond Street store into a leading fashion house. In 1927 he started 'Fenwick News', a monthly in-house paper and an example of the firm's forward-looking employment policies. 
During the Second World War Trevor Fenwick worked at the Ministry of Information in London, and later at the Ministry of Labour, and he also represented Jesmond ward on Newcastle city council from 1940 to 1951 as a Progressive Party member. Fenwick was chairman of Fenwicks Ltd from 1962 to 1972, when he was succeeded by his brother John ('b'. 1910), but he remained on the board of directors until 1978. He was chairman of the Retail Distributors' Association in 1955, and a member of the Consumer Council. He also chaired the Newcastle Medical Charities Fund, and played an important part in the formation of the Newcastle junior chamber of commerce. 
Trevor Fenwick died on 1 January 1979 at Twyford Abbey, Ealing, London, only the third chairman of the family business, which continued to be run by members of the Fenwick family. His oldest son, J. J. Fenwick, who became chairman in 1979, stood aside in 1997 to make way for his nephew Mark Fenwick, while most other members of the family continued to join the business. 


@@@@@


doc= 56183


Arthur James Fenwick (1878-1957), second of the three sons of J. J. Fenwick, was born at 8 Fern Avenue, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 14 August 1878. He was educated at New College, Eastbourne, before leaving school at fifteen to do a six-month apprenticeship with Meyer in Paris, like his elder brother. In Paris he worked in the Black department (selling funeral wear), and was particularly excited by the world of high fashion. Back in Newcastle, he began work as a junior in the stockroom, in charge of the whalebone used in making corsets. At first he was less interested in the business than his brother, and took up dog breeding, even starting his own kennels. But he was appointed to the board of directors at the age of twenty-one, and the fashion side of the business engaged his interest. It was he who was responsible for the development of the French Salon at the Newcastle store. In 1904 he married Ann Emily (Annie) Beavan, sister of his brother Fred's wife; they had one daughter. He was passionately interested in the circus, and was particularly associated with Bostock and Wombwell's Travelling Menagerie, which often visited Newcastle before it was dispersed in 1931. In 1944 he was made a life member of the Showmen's Guild of Great Britain. He died on 16 February 1957 at his home, 12 Brandling Park, Jesmond, and bequeathed his large collection of circus memorabilia to the Laing Art Gallery, which mounted an Arthur Fenwick Circus Exhibition in 1966. 
The oldest child of Fred B. Fenwick, 


@@@@@


doc= 56184


Frederick Burnand Fenwick (1874-1961), the eldest son of John James and Mary Fenwick, was born on 26 June 1874 at 47 Alexandra Place, Newcastle upon Tyne, and educated at the Leys School, Cambridge. He left school at sixteen to serve a six-month apprenticeship in Paris with E. Meyer et Cie, suppliers of fine materials to leading fashion houses, before starting work in his father's Newcastle store at 2's'. 6died a week. He became a director in 1897. In 1899 he married Margaret Leyson Beavan, and they had two sons and three daughters; their youngest daughter, Pamela Ann ('b'. 1913/14), married George Vivian MuschampBainbridge (1910-1976) ['see under 'Bainbridge, Emerson Muschamp], great-grandson of the founder of Bainbridge & Co., in 1934, a marriage which made the links between the owners of the two leading department stores in the north-east even closer. 
Fred Fenwick was impressed by the freedom with which customers were able to walk around the large Paris department stores such as Galeries Lafayette and Au Printemps, and by the Christmas bazaars held by these stores. In 1902 he persuaded his father to make the showrooms accessible to all classes, when the first grand Christmas bazaar was announced in the local newspapers, extending 'A welcome to customers to walk around the store. Assistants are not allowed to speak to visitors. Walk around today, don't buy. There is time for that another day' ('Newcastle Journal', 27 Nov 1902). Always quick to take advantage of events that were in the news, in July 1909, after Bleriot flew across the channel, Fenwick sent a telegram to the Newcastle press to announce that Fenwicks was preparing clothes for air travel. 
After his father's death in 1905 Fred Fenwick became chairman of Fenwicks Ltd, and continued his father's policy of buying nearby properties in order to make room for expansion, both in Newcastle and London. In 1912 the showroom space in the Bond Street store was doubled, with a 'Louis XIV salon' added, and in 1913 a new frontage for the Newcastle store was completed. By the mid-1920s the Newcastle store had fifty departments, but it continued to be an exclusive fashion house, with the emphasis on quality rather than quantity, and customers came from all over the north of England. There was further expansion in the 1930s, when Fenwicks bought the Townsend Galleries, a china and glass shop at 99-105 Northumberland Street, and although Fenwick had wanted to sell the Bond Street leases in the 1920s, he later expanded the London business. In the 1930s he opened another shop at 179-83 Regent Street, attracting customers such as the duchess of Kent, but it had to close soon afterwards. 
Fenwick's public service included forty-one years on the committee of the Newcastle Dental Hospital, for which he was awarded an honorary MA by Durham University in 1945, and he was elected as an independent business candidate to Newcastle city council in 1923. At his death, in Newcastle, on 8 June 1961, he had worked in the family business for seventy-one years, including fifty-six years as chairman, and in the last week of his life he was still working, writing letters about extensions to the Bond Street store. The 'Newcastle Journal' called him 'the man who made shopping a pleasure' (9 June 1961). 
His younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 56186


Frece, Sir (Abraham) Walter de (1870-1935), music-hall entrepreneur and politician, was born on 7 October 1870 at 90 Salisbury Street, Everton, Liverpool, the eldest son of Henry de Frece, music-hall manager, and his wife, Marian Rowe. He was born into a prominent Liverpool theatrical family and although, after completing his education at Liverpool Institute and in Brussels, he was initially apprenticed to an architect, he ultimately followed all three of his brothers into the theatre. Jack and Ben became music-hall managers and Lauri was an actor. 
De Frece wrote songs for many top music-hall performers, including Dan Leno, for whom he wrote 'The Shopwalker', and Vesta Tilley (1864-1952). He married the latter on 16 August 1890: her real name was Matilda Alice Powles, and she was the daughter of Henry William Powles, comedian. Vesta Tilley specialized in male roles, including Burlington Bertie. They had no children. 
It was as a music-hall manager and company director that de Frece had his greatest success. His music-hall interests expanded rapidly during the 1890s and especially after the turn of the century, and by 1909 he owned or controlled around fifteen theatres, mainly located in northern industrial towns. He was one of the first music-hall entrepreneurs to appreciate the opportunities presented by the rapidly expanding leisure market in seaside resorts and also controlled a number of theatres on the south coast. 
In 1910 de Frece went into partnership with Sir Alfred Butt, through the formation of the Variety Theatres Controlling Company Limited (VTCC). This merger provided de Frece with access to the lucrative metropolitan market and, he hoped, with the opportunity to resist the spiralling wage demands of variety performers. It also constituted the first real challenge to the predominance of Moss Empires (with whom de Frece had been briefly allied during 1909) within the music-hall industry. After the conclusion of a 'triple alliance' between the VTCC, Charles Gulliver (of the London Theatres of Varieties Limited), and Oswald Stoll in 1912, de Frece became one of the most powerful men in the music-hall business. 
During the First World War, de Frece organized theatrical and cinematic entertainments for the troops and to raise money for wounded veterans. In 1918 he was appointed a trustee of the King's Fund for Disabled Officers and Men and in 1919 he was knighted in recognition of his war work. After the war de Frece and Vesta Tilley withdrew from active involvement in the music-hall business. In 1919 de Frece sold his interest in the VTCC to Charles Gulliver, although he remained chairman of the company. In the same year he floated the Alliance Film Company. 
Increasingly, however, de Frece and his wife dedicated themselves to public life. He was elected the Unionist MP for Ashton under Lyne in February 1920, his success in this contest being widely attributed largely to his wife's ability to mobilize the newly enfranchised female electorate. As 'The Times' (14 February 1920, 15) noted, 'the most significant fact of the election is the further example it has supplied of the influence of woman in politics and the power of the women's vote.' De Frece stood down as the representative for Ashton under Lyne after being sued by an unsuccessful Labour candidate whom he branded as a Bolshevik sympathizer, but was immediately re-elected to represent Blackpool. He continued in parliament until 1931, when he retired on account of the ill health of his wife. While an MP, de Frece championed the cause of the theatrical business. He campaigned vigorously for the abolition of the entertainments tax imposed during the First World War, and in 1924 was elected founding chairman of the House of Commons entertainment industry committee. He served as a deputy lieutenant of Berkshire, and was also honorary colonel of the 9th battalion of the Manchester regiment. 
Sir Walter and Lady de Frece retired to Monte Carlo, where they lived until his death from pneumonia and a fever on 7 January 1935 at the Park Palace. His recreations included racing, golf, and motoring, and he cultivated a debonair image, dressing in the fashion of 'a man about town rather than one of large business enterprises' ('Daily Telegraph', 8 Jan 1935). He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 56187


Gaisberg, Frederick William (1873-1951), recording engineer and record company executive, was born on 1 January 1873 in Washington, DC, the second of four children of Wilhelm Gaisberg and his wife, Emma, 'nee' Klenk. His father was the son of German emigres and worked at the United States Federal Printing Office. His mother encouraged the young Gaisberg to learn the piano, for which he had a natural talent. Gaisberg was educated in Washington, DC, until the age of sixteen, and was a chorister at St John's Episcopal Church. 
The piano remained Gaisberg's first love, and as a schoolboy he earned pocket-money playing piano accompaniments for singers, comics, and others making cylinder records for the Columbia Phonograph Company. His name was announced on these records as 'Professor Gaisberg'. In 1889 he met Charles Sumner Tainter, who had invented the cylinder graphophone, and through his influence he was sent to the American Graphophone factory at Bridgeport, Connecticut, where he was trained as a precision engineer. Returning to Washington, Gaisberg worked for the Columbia Phonograph Company, recruiting performers and accompanying them at recording sessions. 
In 1894 Gaisberg met Emile Berliner, inventor of the gramophone, which used disc records. Upon first hearing a Berliner record Gaisberg was, in his own words, 'spell-bound by the beautiful round tone of the flat gramophone disc', which was, even in its infancy, far superior to the cylinder records. Gaisberg joined Berliner initially as an impresario and accompanist, but later as a Berliner-trained sound engineer, a training that formed the basis of his later career and achievements. 
In 1898 Berliner sent Gaisberg to London where he established a recording studio making the first European disc records for the Gramophone Company, Berliner's British and European licensees. In 1899 this business was reconstructed and expanded. As a consequence, Gaisberg went on the first of his many European tours making records for the various distinctive local markets. As the company's principal recording engineer, he then travelled further afield, capturing on record the music of artists in Russia, India, and the Far East. However, Gaisberg's most important contribution to the Gramophone Company's success came in 1902, when he recorded the Italian tenor Enrico Caruso in Milan. These recordings not only enhanced Gaisberg's own reputation but also established the gramophone as an important means for spreading art and culture around the world. This was how Gaisberg viewed the gramophone record itself: as a means to an end. Years later, he told a colleague that he saw his task simply as one of making as many sound photographs or gramophone disc sides as possible during each recording session. Thus, Gaisberg did not view the recording process as an art form in itself, nor, modestly, did he view himself as an artist. 
When Gaisberg made his first recording of Fyodor Chalyapin, the great Russian bass, he began a lifelong friendship which was to see him help Chalyapin escape Russia after the Bolshevik revolution. In the decades after the first Caruso recordings, Gaisberg built up the HMV label's classical catalogue, signing and recording important international performers such as Beniamino Gigli, Nellie Melba, John McCormack, and Fritz Kreisler. Gaisberg briefly considered quitting the business in 1918 after the death of his brother William from influenza after a recording expedition to the western front, but his determination kept him going. In 1921 Gaisberg became HMV's artistic director in the newly formed international artistes department, and, after the introduction of electrical recording in 1925, he abandoned recording in favour of artiste and repertoire management. Electrical recording nevertheless provided Gaisberg with the opportunity to both re-record many artistes and extend the range of music available on record. He remained artistic director after the formation of Electric and Musical Industries (EMI) in 1931, a depression-led merger between the Gramophone and Columbia Graphophone companies, and supervised the international artistes department during the dark days of the great depression, keeping faith in the viability of the recording industry even as the company's American affiliates RCA Victor and American Columbia were dissolving their catalogues and allowing Gaisberg to sign their artistes to the HMV and Columbia labels. Throughout the 1930s Gaisberg continued to develop newer artistes like the violinist Yehudi Menuhin, and deepened his working relationship with established performers, particularly the British composer and conductor Sir Edward Elgar. 
At the age of sixty-six, in 1939, Gaisberg retired, allowing the men he had trained -- Walter Legge and David Bicknell -- to pick up the baton. Gaisberg remained a consultant to EMI for the rest of his life, and continued to have an important influence on the recording industry as a whole. In particular, in the late 1940s he argued in favour of long-play and stereophonic recording, both of which were introduced the following decade. Gaisberg never married and, apart from war enforced moves, he lived out the remainder of his life with his sister Carrie in London. During this time he wrote his memoirs, published in London as 'Music on Record' in 1946, and he continued to travel extensively, particularly to his native USA. 
The enormous regard and affection in which Fred Gaisberg was held was displayed at a banquet held at the Savoy Hotel on 21 April 1939 to honour his fifty years in the recording business and to mark his formal retirement. It was appropriately attended by figures from the world of recorded music which Gaisberg had helped to create, such as Sir Thomas Beecham, Gracie Fields, Richard Tauber, and Artur Rubinstein. Throughout his career, Gaisberg combined an artistic sensitivity with a friendly, modest, diplomatic nature which won him the respect and friendship of many. His dedication to and ingenuity within the recording industry remain legendary. 
Gaisberg died in his sleep in the early hours of 2 September 1951 at his home, 42 Crediton Hill, Hampstead, London, and was buried in London later that month. 


@@@@@


doc= 56189


William Hardy (1852-1928), was born at Clayport Street, Alnwick, on 29 October 1852 and attended Duke's School from 1861 to 1867. Apart from founding the gun and fishing tackle business, he also had interests in the Alnwick Brewery and the 'Alnwick and County Gazette', being a director of both companies. William married, on 19 October 1882, Barbara Mary, the daughter of Robert Leighton of Felton, Northumberland; they had five sons and a daughter. Two of the sons, Lawrence Robert and Harold John, were also casting champions and all the family held posts in the firm; at incorporation seven of the family were directors. William died at his house, Oaklands, Alnwick, on 7 February 1928. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 56190


Hardy, John James (1854-1932), manufacturer of fishing tackle, was born at Grosvenor Terrace, Alnwick, Northumberland, on 4 April 1854, the second son of John James Hardy ('b'. 1831), coroner for north Northumberland, and his wife, Jane Newton. After attending Duke's School, Alnwick, in 1862-8 he was intended for a career in marine engineering but instead joined a firm making guns and fishing rods, which was founded in Alnwick in 1872 by his elder brother, William Hardy ['see below']. 
The first of its type in the town, the business grew steadily. Traditional handicraft skills were combined with detailed engineering innovation to produce rods made from bamboo segments (some, especially the Palakona range, built round a steel core) and aluminium reels such as the Model Perfect, much sought after by collectors. The gunmaking was soon supplanted by angling goods, shown in increasingly comprehensive catalogues; the 1905 issue had 400 pages, mostly of items made in house. By the time it moved to a substantial new factory, Alnwick's North British Works, in 1890, the firm had acquired a reputation as the manufacturer of some of the world's finest, and most expensive, fishing tackle, with retail branches in Edinburgh, Manchester, and London, as well as extensive overseas outlets. 
Although its employees grew rapidly in number, from thirty to, eventually, several hundreds, it remained a paternalistic family business, with annual works' outings paid for out of the profits; when it was made into a private limited liability company in 1907 many of the employees, including women fly tyers, bought shares. The firm's success lured competitors to Alnwick but they never matched its achievements. John James Hardy served as managing director until his seventies. He developed considerable skills as a publicist and Hardys became a major exhibitor at international exhibitions, winning fifty-two gold medals and other awards for the quality of its products. William held royal warrants from George V and from the kings of Italy and Spain. 
A dedicated fisherman from childhood, John James used his prowess as a pleasure angler to win international casting competitions, using ordinary Hardy production rods as another form of advertising. After his first victory in Edinburgh in 1892, and a good placing in Scarborough two years later, he established his reputation at the Crystal Palace in 1904 by winning four separate events in the trout and salmon sections, the first person ever to do so, and then triumphed at the Franco-British exhibition in 1908, together with his nephews as back-up. After further victories in France, in competitions sponsored by the Casting Club de France, his last appearance was in London's South Norwood at the age of seventy-eight, when he demonstrated various casting techniques. He was also a prolific and highly regarded angling journalist, which led 'Country Life' to commission his major standard work, 'Salmon Fishing', in 1907. In that book he demonstrated his deep understanding of riparian ecology and his passion for inventing new fishing lures. 
A solid Conservative and Anglican, Hardy never married. An inveterate traveller in Britain and Europe in search of business, fishing, and shooting, he remained firmly attached to Northumberland, settling eventually in Alnmouth. He died in his house there, Alnbrae, on 24 June 1932, from the after-effects of a seizure brought on by fishing the River Coquet a month earlier; his funeral in Alnwick parish church on 28 June was packed by Hardys employees. Apart from bequests to servants and local churches, he endowed a university entrance scholarship for boys from his old school, Duke's. 
His elder brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 56192


Harris, John Mortimer Green (1864-1939), department store manager, was born on 21 March 1864 at 164 Field Street, Everton, Liverpool, the son of David Stephen Harris, draper's assistant, and his wife, Anne Green. He was of Welsh descent. Little is known about his early life, but he worked for a department store in Liverpool until 1908, when he was asked to become a director of Browns of Chester, as manager of the drapery department. Harris married Mary Roberts, and they had a son and a daughter. 
In 1908 the store became a private limited company under the chairmanship of Harry Brown but Harris ran Browns (it was first referred to as 'Browns of Chester' in 1913) for over thirty years, and developed it from an old family business into a large modern department store. He successfully promoted Chester, with its black and white timbered medieval houses, as the alternative to the industrial grime of Liverpool and Manchester, and persuaded county people from the Wirral and north Wales to drive into Chester in their motor cars to do their shopping. The store continued to specialize in French fashions (advertisements were often priced in francs), and the first fashion show to be put on outside London was held by Browns in the ballroom of the Grosvenor Hotel, Chester, in 1913. 
Expansion continued after the war, and, when the fashion designer Lucy Duff Gordon gave a talk 'Dress -- what to wear and how' in 1924, she told the 'Daily Sketch' that Browns was 'one of the most up-to-the-minute department stores I have ever been in.... I've never seen a shop as good as this anywhere in England' (Willcock, 192). Browns of Chester claimed to be the 'Harrods of the North', and as the mayor of Chester said when opening the new four-storey building in 1926, Browns was Chester, and Chester was Browns. 
On the death of Harry Brown in 1936, Harris became chairman, and Harry Brown's son, S. H. Brown, became a director, thus ensuring the continued involvement of members of the Brown family in the business. John Mortimer Harris died on 10 August 1939 at Brookfield Nursing Home, Brookfield Gardens, West Kirby, Hoylake, Cheshire. 
His son, 
L. M. Harris was put in charge of publicity, and it was he who was responsible for making Browns a fashionable place to do one's shopping. The restaurant opened in 1926, and the roof tea garden in 1927, while the 'salon de beaute' was followed by a palmistry service in 1932. When the new building opened in 1926 there was an exhibition of Roman antiquities discovered during the excavations. Messrs Bees, the seed merchants, held the first of their annual flower shows there in 1926, with talks on flowers and plants by their horticultural experts. 
In 1929 Harris was made a director, and, when in 1934 Browns faced a financial crisis as a result of the depression, he became general manager, and took over day-to-day control of the business. On the death of his father in 1939 he was appointed chairman and managing director. In 1943 Harris commissioned the first of several surveys by Mass-Observation Ltd, a public opinion research organization, with the aim of making Browns more appealing to a wider clientele. He later became a director of Mass-Observation Ltd. From 1948 to 1950 he was chairman of both the Drapers' chamber of trade and the Association of Retail Chambers of Trade, and from 1950 to 1951 he was president of the appeal for the Linen and Woollen Drapers' cottage homes, devoting six working days a month to this. Harris was married to the fashion buyer for Browns, Dorothy Freda (1899-1988), daughter of James Parker. 
After the war Browns was able to expand again, and in 1950 annual turnover reached $1 million for the first time. In order to compete, the store had to cater for a middle-class market, and in the 1950s the French fashion parades were revived. In October 1950 the Paris collection of Jean Desses was flown over to Browns, the first time a complete Paris collection had been shown in a British store. In 1953 the famous Paris milliner Mlle Andree Fosse spent a week at Browns designing and making hats for customers, and in 1956 and 1960 Pierre Balmain's winter collection was presented. In 1959 Mme Ginette Spanier, directrice of the House of Balmain, described Browns of Chester as one of the best stores in the world. 
In December 1960 the firm became part of the Peter Robinson department store, sector of the Montague Burton Group. In consequence Harris retired as chairman but turned to writing again. In the 1930s he had been interested in philosophy and psychology, and published a number of books and pamphlets. In the 1940s he had also begun lecturing widely on retail business efficiency, and from 1957 he developed the idea of unit cost accounting, a new method of pricing. He published 'Profit and Personality in Retailing' (1961), with Ulric M. Spencer, and 'Buyer's Market: How to Prepare for the New Era in Retailing' (1963), written with Mass-Observation Ltd. He also published, again with Mass-Observation, 'Long to Reign over Us: the Status of the Royal Family in the Sixties' (1966). A fellow of the Royal Economic Society, Harris was appointed a JP in 1955. He was a member of the Liberal Party, serving on the national executive as well as working for the party in the north-west. He and his wife spent the last years of their lives in Monte Carlo. Harris died on 30 January 1989 at 133 avenue du Petit Juas, Cannes, France. 


