@@@@@


doc= 6179


Cook, Sir Thomas (c.1410-1478), draper and mayor of London, was the eldest son of Thomas Cook, draper, a warden of London Bridge (1440-57), and grandson of Robert Cook of Lavenham, Suffolk; the family were probably weavers and clothiers and the move to become drapers of London was a natural one. The post of alnager (inspector of woollen goods) in Lavenham and elsewhere in Essex was held by the two Thomases between 1432 and 1457, and the younger became a considerable power in the cloth industries of Essex and Suffolk, building on his father's successes. In the 1440s they were members of the mercantile party opposing the aspirations of the artisan tailors, clients of the drapers. Thomas the younger was on the common council of London by the 1440s and he had also married Elizabeth, one of the two daughters of the wealthy draper 
In the summer of 1450 London was threatened by the rebel forces of John Cade (died 1450): at some time in June Cook received a safe conduct from Cade to negotiate with him on the city's behalf at Blackheath, but precisely what transpired is unknown. As a gesture of conciliation the city removed the unpopular Malpas from his aldermanry, and Malpas almost certainly saved his life by leaving the city before the rebels gained access on 3 July; his house, the Green Gate, was looted of a considerable fortune. 
In the 1450s and 1460s Cook's business success continued, unaffected by the change of kings. He lent to the crown and secured the collectorship of customs at Southampton, possibly from Queen Margaret herself. He was himself a substantial importer of woad through Southampton. In 1453 he was sheriff; his ninth attempt secured an aldermanry (Vintry, 1456), moving quickly to Broad Street (1458). Both Cook and Malpas are likely to have been among the city's leading men who supported the Yorkist earls in July 1460, and, in Cook's case at least, the accession of Edward IV on 4 March 1461. Malpas, however, had panicked at the march of Queen Margaret's army on London after the second battle of St Albans on 17 February 1461, took ship, was captured by the French, and ransomed for 4000 marks, quarrelling with Cook in the process. 
Cook's mayoralty from October 1462 to October 1463 saw him engaged in the major operation of placing a vault of brick and stone over the Walbrook River (onto which his Pope's Alley house backed) and raising gifts and loans for the king's campaigns in the north against the Lancastrians and the Scots. He was created a knight of the Bath at Queen Elizabeth's coronation (24-25 May 1465). 
By the 1460s Cook's landed estate was considerable. In London he moved to a great house next to the Austin Friars, taking as his tenant for his previous house the Medici representative, Gherardo Canigiani. He and Malpas had been systematically building up an estate in the area of Havering, Essex, since the 1450s; with his neighbours there, Avery Cornburgh and Thomas Urswick (died 1479), Cook secured for Havering a royal charter and the status of a liberty in 1465; he was also licensed to fortify his house at Gidea Hall and to enclose 200 acres. 
In 1468 an invasion scare, prompted by the capture of Lancastrian agents, led to Cook's arrest, with many others, on a charge of treason. The accusation against Cook originated with John Hawkins, a servant of John, Lord Wenlock (died 1471), who had confessed under torture. In the search for evidence many of his goods were confiscated and his property damaged. The trial opened on 4 July at Guildhall: on the instruction of the chief justice, Sir John Markham (died 1479), Cook was acquitted of giving treasonable aid but not of concealing the plots revealed to him, the offence of misprision. The penalty was a fine of 8000 marks ($5333 6's'. 8died) set by the king, which shocked many, including the judges, even when compared with the value of some of the goods seized. Robert Fabyan (died 1513), an apprentice of Cook whose father led the sureties for Cook's fine, recorded many details in his great chronicle of London years later; his overall judgement of Cook represents him as an arrogant man, and also endorses the trial's verdict as just. Cook successfully negotiated a release from the 800 marks surcharge of the 'queen's gold', a matter in which he was probably assisted by his son-in-law, John Forster, receiver-general of the queen. The stories of later chroniclers, which entirely exonerated Cook, blamed the proceedings against him on the enmity of Richard Woodville, Earl Rivers (died 1469), the treasurer of England, and his wife, Jaquetta, duchess of Bedford, the looting of his property on their rapacity, and even the resignation of the trial judge on their revenge, cannot be substantiated. Despite his considerable losses at this time Cook remained a very rich man, and the death of Philip Malpas in 1469 after his other daughter, Philippa Josselyn, had died childless, further compensated Cook by bringing almost all Malpas's fortune to the Cooks. Malpas was buried in St Andrew Undershaft, London. 
Edward IV's exile (1470-71) allowed Cook to have a brief revenge, but his attempt to claim compensation against Lord Rivers's heir in parliament, and his high-handed behaviour against those he thought had acted against him, seem to have cost him many friends, including his brother-in-law Ralph Josselyn -- though their quarrels may have also been over property and loans. Cook regained his aldermanry and played such an important role in supporting the new Neville-Lancastrian regime in London that, on Edward's return, he fled abroad. He was captured by the Hanse, ransomed by Margaret of York, duchess of Burgundy (died 1503), and returned, a sick man, to house arrest with his friend, Avery Cornburgh, in Essex. Pardoned in 1472, he was again on commissions in 1475. 
Cook was adroit at keeping his Essex estate unencumbered despite considerable losses during his two 'troubles' which included his lands in other counties and his great house at the Austin Friars. The losses, debts, and lawsuits incurred as a result of his second 'trouble' probably far exceeded those of 1468. He was still a very wealthy man, however, when he drew up his will on 15 April 1478, shortly before his death at his house near the Austin Friars; he asked to be buried in the church of the Austin Friars and he remembered some Essex connections and relatives; he established an almshouse for ninety years and, like Malpas, wanted very public prayers for his soul in the city, although he did not feel obliged to spend Malpas's $1800 to help him through purgatory. Cook's will was designed to create a coherent estate in Essex for his eldest son, Philip (a young man whose lack of 'good rule' had been criticized in Malpas's will, and who remained unsteady); consequently it ignored both his wife's wishes over her Malpas lands and the interests of his surviving sons, John and William (he hoped they would be priests), and of his daughter, Joan, wife of John Forster, one of his major supporters from 1468 to 1472. Their lawsuits, and Elizabeth Cook's will of 1484, secured a more equitable distribution of the land, but nevertheless the heirs of Malpas and Cook, through Philip, remained the dominant landowners in Havering for 200 years. 
A different sort of survival from the Cook household is a memoranda book belonging to John Vale of Bury St Edmunds, Sir Thomas's man of affairs (now BL, Add. MS 48031A), compiled partly at least from the varied contents of the Cook family archive, in 1478-84, and containing many, now unique, copies of political broadsides of the fifteenth century and literary texts, as well as letters received by Cook as mayor. The apprenticeship of the future chronicler and alderman, Robert Fabyan, overlapped with the service of Vale, but Fabyan had no access to Vale's collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 6180


Cooke, Thomas (1703-1756), translator and writer, was born on 16 December 1703, at Braintree, Essex, the son of John Cooke (died in or after 1728), an innkeeper, and his wife, Rebeckah. His father, according to Pope, was a Muggletonian. Cooke was educated at Felsted School, where he excelled in classics. While quite young he was introduced to Thomas Herbert, eighth earl of Pembroke, who employed him and encouraged him in his classical studies. In 1722 Cooke went to London to earn his living by his pen, contributing articles to the daily papers, and attaching himself to the whigs. He came to know Thomas Tickell, Ambrose Philips, Leonard Welsted, Richard Steele, and John Dennis. Dennis was the subject of a letter (24 January 1734) from Cooke to John Baker of St John's College, Cambridge, published some fifty years later in the 'European Magazine' (February 1786, 91-2). In it Cooke gave an account of Dennis's acute poverty and the gifts of money from several prominent people, including the earl of Pembroke and Horace Walpole. Appended to the letter is a transcription of a Latin document detailing Dennis's birth, paternity, education, death, and burial. John Nichols, signing himself M. Green, one of his known pseudonyms, reprinted most of Cooke's letter which formed part of the Baker collection in the Harley MSS in the British Library (7031) in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1st ser., 65, February 1795, 105-6). 
Cooke's earliest publications were a poem on the death of the duke of Marlborough (1722), a translation of the poems of Moschus and Bion, and 'Albion, or, The Court of Neptune, a Masque' (1724). In 1725 he issued anonymously a poem entitled 'The Battle of the Poets', attacking Pope, Swift, and their friends, and eulogizing the writers of his own school. He continued the campaign by publishing in the 'Daily Journal' (6 April 1728) notes on Pope's version of the Thersites episode in the second book of the 'Iliad', proving to his own satisfaction that Pope was no Greek scholar. Pope resolved to pillory Cooke in the 'Dunciad', but news of his intention reached Cooke, and he, taking alarm, wrote two letters to Pope (11 August and 16 September 1728), repudiating his connection with the offensive publications. With the second letter he forwarded a copy of his newly issued translation of Hesiod. In letters to Lord Oxford, Pope showed some sign of accepting Cooke's denial, but when the 'Dunciad' appeared at the close of the year, Cooke occupied a place in it (B ii. 138), and was held up to ridicule in the notes. By way of reply Cooke reissued his 'Battle of the Poets' and his letters on the Thersites episode, with new and caustic prefaces, in 1729. The volume was entitled 'Tales, Epistles, Odes, Fables, &c.', and contained several other of Cooke's published poems, some translations from the classics, 'proposals for perfecting the English language', and an essay on grammar. Pope was here described as 'a person who with but a small share of learning and moderate natural endowments has by concurring and uncommon accidents acquired as great a reputation as the most learned and exalted genius could ever hope'. In 1731 Cooke collected a number of the letters on the political and literary controversies of the day he had contributed, under the pseudonym of Atticus, to the 'London Journal' in 1729 and 1730, and dedicated the book to Horace Walpole. Letter 5 is on 'the controversy betwixt the poets and Mr. Pope'. Pope renewed his attack on Cooke in his 'Epistle to Dr. Arbuthnot', 1.146 (1735). 
Cooke tried his hand at every kind of literary work. In 1726 he published 'The Bath, or, The Knights of the Bath', a poem suggested by the revival of that order, to which was added the now very rare 'Scandalous chronicle, or, A ballad of characters, written for the use of the poets, and proper to be sung at their next sessions'; 'Philander and Cydippe', a poem; and an edition of Marvell's works, with a memoir. Subsequently he issued separately a long series of odes, with dedications addressed to Lord Chesterfield and other persons of influence. William Oldys says that Cooke compiled 'Seymour's Survey of London' in 1734. In this same year he wrote a short 'Life of King Edward III of England'. And about this time he contributed to the 'Weekly Oracle', numbers 54 and 56 on the Phalaris controversy being by him. Four years later he wrote the preface to the poem by Samuel Wesley the younger entitled 'The Battle of the Sexes'. Another edition of Cooke's collected poems appeared in 1742. 
Cooke achieved a wider and deserved reputation by his translations from the classics. In 1728 he translated Hesiod, the first translation in English; his early patron, the earl of Pembroke, and Lewis Theobald contributed notes. Each of the two volumes bears the dedication to a notable personage, and the practice of seeking and acquiring a dedicatee continued for all his subsequent writings. He was thereafter known as Hesiod Cooke. The edition was reissued in a number of early anthologies. An edition of Terence, with an English translation (3 vols.), followed in 1734, and a translation of Cicero's 'De natura deorum', with elaborate critical apparatus, in 1737. In 1741 Cooke produced an edition of Virgil with English notes and a Latin paraphrase, and in 1754 appeared the first and only volume -- a translation of the 'Amphitruo' -- of the long-promised edition of Plautus. Samuel Johnson said that Cooke was soliciting subscriptions for this book for twenty years, and that the proceeds of his canvass formed his main source of income. Cooke, according to Sir Joseph Mawbey, said that Johnson was 'half a madman, half a scholar, three parts a Roman Catholick, and a compleat Jacobite' ('GM', 1st ser., 61, 1791, 1184). 
Cooke was extremely successful in obtaining subscribers to his projected edition of Plautus's plays, according to Isaac Reed, editor of the 'European Magazine' (December 1791, 406-7). When the first, and only, volume of the Plautus was published in 1746, there were 713 subscribers. Eighteen years earlier, in 1728, Cooke managed to get only 174 subscribers to his translation of Hesiod. In the intervening years he had sharpened his techniques. Reed, in the 'European Magazine' piece cited above, reprinted two letters from Cooke to prospective subscribers in which his methods are clearly seen. 
Cooke also wrote for the stage. In 1728 he helped his friend John Mottley with 'Penelope, a Dramatic Opera'. The 'Triumphs of Love and Honour', with a prologue by Sir Robert Henly, then a student of the Inner Temple, was acted at Drury Lane on 18 August 1731, and was published in the same year with an essay 'on the stage, and on the advantages which arise to a nation from the encouragement of the arts'. The essay, with long criticisms of Shakespeare's 'King Lear' and Addison's 'Rosamond', was also issued separately. 'The Eunuch, or, The Darby Captain', a musical farce adapted from Terence, was performed at Drury Lane on 17 May 1737, with Charles Macklin in the part of Captain Brag. In 1739 Cooke published a tragedy called 'The Mournful Nuptials', together with 'some considerations on satire and on the present state of our public entertainments'. It was acted under the title of 'Love the Cause and Cure of Grief, or, The Innocent Murderer' at Drury Lane on 19 December 1743. His most successful effort was 'The Battle of the Poets, or, The Contention for the Laureat' (1730), a new act introduced into Fielding's 'Tom Thumb', acted six times and republished in 1744, with a prologue by Sir Robert Henly, according to Sir Joseph Mawbey. Mawbey also stated that he had offered Garrick a manuscript play by Cooke entitled 'Germanicus', but Garrick declined it. Cooke subsequently wrote songs for Vauxhall, and dialogue and songs for John Rich's production of Theobald's very popular 'Harlequin, a Sorcerer'. About 1742 Cooke took part in Colley Cibber's theatrical quarrel, and issued, under the pseudonym Scriblerus Quartus, 'The Bays Miscellany, or, Colley Triumphant', which included two new satiric dialogues, 'Petty Sessions of the Poets' and 'The contention of the Laurel as it is now acting at the New Theatre at the Hay-Market', together with a reprint of the 'Battle of the Poets'. In 1743 an extravagantly eulogistic epistle in verse addressed by Cooke to the countess of Shaftesbury appeared, together with a prologue and epilogue on Shakespeare, the former spoken by Garrick at Drury Lane on 21 January, before and after 'The Merchant of Venice' for his benefit, and the latter by Mrs Woffington. Cooke formed a fine collection of printed plays, which he sold to Mrs Oldfield, the actress, and after her death it was purchased (1737) by Queen Caroline for $200. 
About 1741 Cooke became editor and author of the well-known 'Craftsman', in succession to Nicholas Amhurst. In 1748 his free criticisms of the Pelham administration led the duke of Bedford, a secretary of state, to proceed against him for libel, and he was placed under the care of a parliamentary messenger for several weeks, but received no further punishment. Religious discussions interested Cooke, and he approached them from an advanced point of view. In 1748 he published anonymously a letter (addressed before 1732 to Archbishop Wake) 'concerning Persecution for Religion and Freedom of Debate, proving Liberty to be the support of Truth and natural property of Mankind', which was prefixed to 'A Demonstration of the Will of God by the Light of Nature'. This work was dedicated to the third earl of Shaftesbury, and portions of it criticize the argument of Samuel Clarke (1675-1729), with whom Cooke was for the most part in agreement. In 1756 he supplied Dr Leonard Howard, rector of St Saviour's, Southwark, with some unpublished poems and old correspondence as material for the second volume of Howard's collection of 'Ancient Letters'. Among Cooke's correspondents were men prominent in the church and in the universities, as well as a number of writers. 
Cooke was always in debt, and his difficulties increased with his years. He died in great poverty on 29 December 1756 at a small house in Lambeth, which he was in the habit of describing to casual acquaintances as a magnificent mansion. He was buried on 1 January 1757. A few literary friends subscribed to his funeral expenses, and contributed to the support of his widow, Anne, a sister of Charles Beckingham, and his only child, a daughter, Elizabeth. Anne died in March 1757, and Elizabeth in the autumn of 1758 in the Lambeth workhouse. Cooke, though of a convivial temper, had a cynical humour; he introduced Samuel Foote to a club as 'the nephew of the gentleman who was lately hung in chains for murdering his brother'. Sir Joseph Mawbey, to whom Cooke left his manuscripts, contributed a long anecdotal biography, with copious extracts from his commonplace books, to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for 1791, 1792, and 1797. There he described Cooke as of a 'bold and daring temper' and 'blunt, and sometimes coarse', as well as 'not infrequently dictatorial and assuming, which often disgusted strangers, and made him feared by many' ('GM', 1st ser., 61/2, 1791, 1092; 62/1, 1792, 30). 


@@@@@


doc= 6181


Cooke, Thomas (1722-1783), Church of England clergyman and eccentric, born in Hexham, Northumberland, on 23 October 1722, was the son of John Cooke, a shoemaker at Hexham. He received his education as king's scholar at Durham School, and afterwards entered Queen's College, Oxford (22 February 1743), where he never took a degree. He obtained the curacy of Embleton, Northumberland, and soon was brought into notoriety by the singularity of his religious notions. He maintained that the Jewish ceremonies were not abrogated by the Christian dispensation, and insisted on the necessity of circumcision, supporting his doctrine by his own practice. At this period he assumed the names of Adam Moses Emanuel. 
On being deprived of his curacy Cooke moved to London, where he was known as the Bearded Priest, on account of his unusual appearance. Calling himself 'a Minister of Christ's Universal Catholick Church' (Baker, 1.145-6) and urging the necessity of double Sabbath observance and regular mortification, he preached in the streets, and became an author; but as his unintelligible jargon did not sell he was reduced to great distress. Resorting to desperate shifts to relieve himself, he became notorious for soliciting subscriptions for works that were never published, and for helping himself to meals that had not been bought for him, contending that 'the goods of fortune should be held in common by all God's creatures' (ibid.), and producing a range of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew authorities in justification for his conduct. For two or three years he was confined in Bethlem Hospital (Bedlam). 
On his release Cooke travelled through Scotland and went to Ireland in 1760. Ultimately he returned to the north of England, and until a few years before his death subsisted on a pension allowed him by the Society of the Sons of the Clergy. Here he occupied himself with writing odes, letters, epigrams, and strictures of one kind or another. His last undertaking involved a plan for the alteration of St Nicholas's Church in Newcastle, and 'a project for making, what he called, a grand universal Church upon true evangelical principles' (Baker, 1.145-6). His death, which occurred at Newcastle upon Tyne on 15 November 1783, is said to have been occasioned by his copying the ascetic practices of Origen too closely. 
Cooke published two dramatic works: 'The King cannot Err' (1762), a comedy, and 'The Hermit Converted, or, The Maid of Bath Married' (1771), also a comedy. Neither piece was ever performed on the London stage. 


@@@@@


doc= 6182


Cooke, Thomas (1763-1818), writer on physiognomy, was born in Sheffield on 20 March 1763. He was employed in trade early in life, but when he was twenty-two years old he began the study of physiognomy and later became a popular and widely respected physiognomist with a large circle of curious enquirers. His papers were collected and published only posthumously, under the title of 'A Practical and Familiar View of the Science of Physiognomy' (1819), and his work was illustrated with the first series of lithographic drawings produced by the London Lithographic Institution from copies of drawings in the writings of Johann Caspar Lavater (1741-1801) and Petrus Camper (1722-1789). A lithographic silhouette of Cooke forms the frontispiece to the book. A believer in the free agency and moral accountability of man, he claimed in this work that the practice of physiognomy produced an intellectual and social knowledge of human character: it effected a 'moral and religious sentiment' and a 'philosophical and rational thought'. According to his friend, I. G. Marshall (later editor of his writings), 'his remarks were always communicated in a serious and earnest manner, and were sometimes marked by a singular union of impressive wisdom and kindness' ('A Practical and Familiar View', 3). Cooke died in Manchester on 26 July 1818. 


@@@@@


doc= 6183


Cooke, Thomas (1807-1868), optician, the eldest son of James Cook, a shoemaker, and his second wife, Jane, was born at Allerthorpe in the East Riding of Yorkshire on 8 March 1807. His education was limited to two years at the national school, after which he was put to his father's trade. But inspired by accounts of Captain Cook's voyages, he took up the study of mathematics and navigation, and was on the point of becoming a seaman when his mother's tears persuaded him to seek a less hazardous livelihood. Further study enabled him to open a village school, and it was here that he met Hannah Milner, a pupil, who in 1831 became his wife. He moved to York in 1829 and for the next seven years supported himself by teaching, while continuing to devote his spare moments to the study of mathematics and practical mechanics. Optics attracted him, and to make practical use of his knowledge he constructed a reflecting telescope. Since the requisite metals cost money he turned to refractors, finding cheap material in the thick bottom of a glass tumbler. He developed methods of shaping and polishing, and eventually succeeded in producing a reasonably good achromatic telescope; the instrument was later purchased by Professor John Phillips of Oxford, his lifelong friend and patron. 
With a growing family to support, Cooke decided to embark on a full-time career as an optical instrument maker, and by March 1837 he had opened his first shop, at 50 Stonegate, York, selling refracting and reflecting telescopes, microscopes, opera glasses, spectacles, eye-glasses, optical lenses, single- and double-barrelled air-pumps, electrical machines, barometers, thermometers, spirit levels, hydrometers, globes, sundials, and mathematical instruments. His first important order was from William Gray FRS for an equatorial telescope with a lens of 41/2 inch diameter; this was followed in 1851 by a commission from Hugh Pattinson of Gateshead for one of a 7 inch aperture, lent in 1856 to Professor Piazzi Smyth for his expedition to Tenerife. These successes added so much to Cooke's reputation and business that in 1855 he built a new factory, known as the Buckingham Works, in Bishophill, York. It was one of the earliest scientific instrument manufactories in the country. Here Cooke made most of his own machine tools, the lens-grinding equipment was powered by steam, and metals were cast in his own foundry. He also attended exhibitions at home and abroad, often being awarded medals for the excellence of his workmanship. In 1860 he constructed an equatorial telescope for Prince Albert, later erected at Osborne House on the Isle of Wight. But his largest enterprise was undertaken for Robert Stirling Newall, a manufacturer of submarine cables at Gateshead. Cooke committed himself to the onerous task of producing a huge telescope with an object-glass 25 inches across and of the highest quality in design and finish. The optical part of the commission was completed early in 1868, but Cooke, worn out by the anxieties induced by so vast an undertaking, died on 19 October 1868 at the Buckingham Works from 'disease of the nerves'. He was buried at York cemetery. The great telescope was mounted in the following year and was completed at Newall's estate at Ferndean near Newcastle in 1871. At that time it was the world's largest refractor. It was subsequently transferred to Cambridge University observatory and later to the Greek national observatory in Athens. A pair of 5 foot transit instruments constructed by Cooke for the Indian Trigonometrical Survey was described by Lieutenant-Colonel Strange before the Royal Society in 1867. They were among the largest portable instruments of their class. Cooke also invented an excellent automatic engine for the graduation of circles, and was the first to devise machinery for engraving figures upon them. He perfected the astronomical clock, and built nearly one hundred turret clocks for public institutions and churches. 
Cooke restored Britain to the forefront in the field of practical optics. By his methods of grinding and polishing lenses their production was rendered easy and cheap, and his object-glasses were acknowledged to be extremely fine, both in definition and colour. His construction methods brought comparatively large instruments within the reach of an extensive class of amateur astronomers. His excellent system of equatorial mounting reduced the problems of flexure, torque, and vibration. Admirable workmanship was combined, in all his instruments, with elegance of design. Simplicity, truthfulness, and modesty distinguished his private character. He was admitted a member of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1859, served on its committee in 1865-6 and contributed to its proceedings a paper, 'On a new driving-clock for equatorials' ('Monthly Notices', 28, 1867-8, 210-13). In his will he bequeathed 'everything' to his wife and the business was continued by two of his four sons, Thomas and Frederick. 


@@@@@


doc= 6184


Cooke, Thomas Potter (1786-1864), actor, was born on 23 April 1786 in Titchfield Street, Marylebone, Middlesex, the child of Joseph Cooke, a surgeon 'of great respectability' ('Actors by Daylight', 24, 1838, 186), and his wife, Mary. After Joseph Cooke's death in 1793 his wife seems to have gone into service, and Cooke himself to have become an errand boy; however, seeing a nautical melodrama fired him with enthusiasm to join the navy. Having been provided with clothing by the Marine Society, he was entered as a 'servant' under the name Thomas Cook on the muster-roll of HMS 'Raven' on 30 July 1796, giving his age as thirteen, the minimum age for entry into the service. The 'Raven' took part in the siege of Toulon and was under Admiral Jervis's command at the battle of Cape St Vincent (14 February 1797), when Cooke probably worked as a powder monkey. He narrowly escaped death when the 'Raven' was later wrecked off Cuxhaven and the crew struggled to survive by clinging to the wreckage for two days and nights in intensely cold weather. Cooke managed to reach the shore but suffered a near-fatal attack of rheumatic fever. He was eventually able to return to sea, however, serving aboard HMS 'Prince of Wales', which took part in the blockade of Brest. 
In 1802 came the peace of Amiens and on 27 April the end of Cooke's naval career. He joined a travelling circus 'at a modest salary of fifteen shillings a week' (Stirling, 2.107), turned to the stage for a living, and made his first appearance in January 1804 at the Royalty Theatre in Wellclose Square, then used by Philip Astley as his winter quarters. Impressed no doubt by Cooke's fine physique and athletic prowess, Astley engaged him for several seasons at his Amphitheatre, and he also appeared at the Lyceum and in Dublin. Cooke had a talent for arranging pantomimes and theatrical spectacles, and in 1809 R. W. Elliston recruited him as stage manager for the Surrey Theatre. He first made his mark as actor there in the role of Roderick Dhu, a fierce highland chieftan, in T. J. Dibdin's 'The Lady of the Lake' (24 September 1810). He stayed with Elliston until 1816 and thereafter obtained engagements at various London theatres, including Drury Lane, building up a reputation but without any very notable triumphs, apart from a German character Hans Ketzler, a 'wonderful admixture of cowardice and courage' ('ILN', 1853, 319), in George Soane's 'The Innkeeper's Daughter' (Drury Lane, 7 April 1817). In 1819 he married Louisa Maria Ann Cremer of Brompton, who was, according to 'The Drama', 'a lady of great accomplishments and large property' ('Drama', 4, 58) and with whom he had one daughter. 
In 1820 Cooke was engaged at the Lyceum Theatre (English Opera House), where he made a great hit as Ruthven, the demonic protagonist of Planche's 'The Vampire' (9 August 1820) and again as Dirk Hatteraick in the same dramatist's adaptation of 'Guy Mannering, the Witch of Derncleugh' (1821); in the latter role he finely displayed 'that determined ferocity that might be supposed to belong to the captain of a daring band of robbers' ('Drama', 1, 1821, 201). In July 1823, when he was still at the Lyceum, Cooke's skills as 'a pantomimist of the first rank' (Stirling, 2.106) brought him sensational success in the non-speaking role of the Monster in 'Presumption, or, The Fate of Frankenstein' (28 July 1823), R. B. Peake's adaptation of Mary Shelley's novel. He was to perform this role 365 times in all during his career, including eighty at the Porte St Martin Theatre in Paris in 1825-6 (during which time he suffered one of those attacks of gout that plagued him throughout his life). Another triumph in a similarly silent role, the spectral Vanderdecken in Fitzball's 'The Flying Dutchman' at the Adelphi (4 April 1826), confirmed Cooke's excellence in supernatural roles. According to the 'Illustrated London News'
'others played ghosts and demons with unquestionable success; but how mechanically and solidly.... It was he who first infused them with a true poetic element -- gave them a dreamy indistinctness -- a vague suggestive shadow, which, while it chained the senses, set the imagination loose. ('ILN', 1853, 319)' Cooke was already noted for his excellence in sailor roles (the heroic British seaman Jack Gallant, for example, in Moncrieff's 'Shipwreck of the Medusa' at the Coburg on 19 June 1820, and Philip in J. B. Buckstone's hugely successful 'Luke the Labourer' at the Adelphi on 17 October 1826) before his reputation in this respect made a quantum leap with his creation of the role of the patriotic English coxswain Long Tom Coffin in Fitzball's 'The Pilot' (Adelphi, 31 October 1825), adapted from Fenimore Cooper's novel. Cooke's performance in this role (which he was to play 562 times in all) was 'highly picturesque' and gave to the stage figure of the sailor 'a new feature of thoughtfulness and mystery, and a tinge of the romantic' ('The Stage', 8, 1829, 73). In his 'Road to the Stage' (1827) Leman Rede mentions a 'characteristic touch' of Cooke's in his Coffin performance, 'invariably recognised, and applauded': 'previous to commencing his combat with the [American] Sergeant he pauses to take tobacco, and afterwards when he has driven his adversary from him, claps his sword into his mouth while he hitches up his trousers', thereby illustrating 'cool habitual bravery' (Rede, 104). Even his Tom Coffin was eclipsed, however, by his Sweet William in Douglas Jerrold's 'Black-Eyed Susan'. First performed at the Surrey on Easter Monday 1829, it had a phenomenal run of over 300 nights there and, from 30 November for over two weeks, Cooke also acted William at Covent Garden every night after finishing his Surrey performance: 'a hackney cab brought the triumphant William in his blue jacket and white trousers from the Obelisk to Bow Street' ('GM', 3rd ser., 16, 1864, 676). Cooke's William, featuring the superlative hornpipe which was one of his trademarks, became a veritable national institution, and in 1853, when he was giving a season at the Standard Theatre in the East End, the 'Illustrated London News' recorded that he had played the part 785 times during his career. This tailor-made role brought out all his powers -- his athleticism and heartiness and, in the final scenes, his ability to invest his sailor figures with both pathos and dignity. Above all, he embodied the nautical: 'His hitch, his swing, his back-handed wipe, his roll -- in short, his every look, gesture and motion are redolent of the blue water and the lower deck; and all this is qualified by... a degree of feeling which is far more like truth than acting. ('London Literary Gazette', 3 Oct 1829, 654)' After William, he created only one more major role, another sailor, Harry Hallyard in J. T. Haines's 'My Poll and my Partner Joe' (Surrey Theatre, 31 August 1835). His immense popularity continued unabated, however, and he generally took short engagements at different theatres to perform the repertory of his most celebrated roles. 
In 1849 Cooke applied for, and was awarded, the naval general service medal with a St Vincent clasp in respect of his service aboard the 'Raven'. In 1857 Henry Morley considered his Tom Coffin at the Adelphi 'a marvel': 'the singing voice has gone, and that is all... For about five minutes of hornpipe the veteran's breath is good and his feet are as nimble as they were when they twinkled for the pleasure of our forefathers' (Morley, 164). His last appearances were at Covent Garden on 29 October 1860, for the benefit of the Dramatic College, founded as a retirement home for actors (Cooke was deputy master), and at the Princess's Theatre on 2 May 1861 for the benefit of an actor's widow. His wife's death in 1863 shook him severely, and he moved from his home at 38 Woburn Square to live with his married daughter, Mrs Hugh Cumming, at 37 Thurloe Square, where he died (from what the death certificate describes as 'decay of nature') on 4 April 1864. He was buried in Brompton cemetery, London on 10 April. His obituary in 'The Era' acclaimed him as someone who, 'by the high character of his private life, has reflected so much credit on the Profession he adorned' ('The Era', 10 April 1864). Having always practised 'strict economy' he had 'amassed a large fortune' (Stirling, 2.107), and in his will left $2000 to the Dramatic College to be invested to provide a prize for 'the best Drama on a Nautical or National subject', the copyright to be retained by the college, with a further $1000 to fund an annual dinner for the college's inmates and officers on 23 April, the birthday he proudly shared with Shakespeare. A. R. Slous's 'True to the Core: a Story of the Armada' (Surrey Theatre, 8 September 1866) was the first prize drama, and there was another award in 1868 (J. S. Dilley and James Albery's unperformed 'The Mate of the Mountjoy'), but funds proved insufficient to sustain the competition, and the college itself came to a rather ignominious end in the late 1870s. 


@@@@@


doc= 6185


Cooke, Thomas Simpson (1782-1848), singer and composer, was born in Dublin, and received his first musical instruction from his father, Bartlett Cooke, an oboist at the Smock Alley Theatre. He performed a violin concerto in public at the age of seven. He later studied composition with Tommaso Giordani, and in 1797 was engaged as leader of the orchestra at the Crow Street Theatre, Dublin, for which he composed several overtures and songs. He also kept a music shop from 1806 to 1812. 
After several years Cooke's ambitions led him to appear in a new capacity, as a dramatic singer, and he chose for his debut the role of the Seraskier in Storace's 'The Siege of Belgrade'. His success was such that he sang the same part in London at the English Opera House at the Lyceum Theatre on 13 July 1813. On 14 September 1815 he began his long connection with the Drury Lane Theatre, when he appeared as Don Carlos in Linley's 'The Duenna'. For almost twenty years he held the post of principal tenor, and from about 1821 he was director of music. During this period he composed music for more than fifty productions at the theatre, including a version of 'Oberon' (1826). For some time, after about 1823, he appeared alternately as a singer and as orchestral leader. He was a member of the Philharmonic Society, and occasionally served as leader of the orchestra or conductor at its concerts. He also belonged to the Royal Academy of Music, though he was not one of the original members. From 1828 to 1830 he was one of the music managers of Vauxhall Gardens, and until 1838 he sang as principal tenor at the chapel of the Bavarian embassy in Warwick Street. He was engaged by Alfred Bunn to direct the music and conduct at both Covent Garden and Drury Lane. 
Cooke adopted, with substitutions of his own, many successful foreign operas for the English stage, including 'Abou Hassan' (Drury Lane, 4 April 1825), after Weber; 'The White Lady' (Drury Lane, 9 October 1826), after Boieldieu; 'The Jewess' (Drury Lane, 16 November 1835), based on Halevy; and 'The Siege of Corinth' (Drury Lane, 8 November 1836), after Rossini. One of his last works for the stage was the vaudeville 'The Follies of a Night', with words by Planche, which was first performed at Drury Lane on 5 October 1842. Of all his compositions, the song 'Love's Ritornella', from 'The Brigand Chief' (Drury Lane, 18 November 1829), was perhaps his most popular. From about 1830 onwards he spent much of his time composing glees, and several examples of his works won prizes at the catch and glee clubs. 'Six Glees for Three and Four Voices' were published in 1844, and others were issued individually. As early as 1828 he published a treatise entitled 'Singing Exemplified in a Series of Solfeggi and Exercises, Progressively Arranged' (which was reviewed in the 'Quarterly Musical Magazine and Review' in that year), and he subsequently became a widely popular singing master. Among his many distinguished pupils were Maria Tree, Elizabeth Rainforth, and, perhaps the most eminent, John Sims Reeves (1818-1900), whose first London appearance at Drury Lane in 1842 was made under the auspices of Cooke. 
In 1846 Cooke was appointed leader for the final two years of the Concerts of Ancient Music, succeeding John David Loder in that capacity. He was renowned as a musician for his versatility; he played the violin, flute, oboe, clarinet, bassoon, horn, cello, double bass, and piano, and was also a man of great wit. He died on 26 February 1848 at his home in Great Portland Street, London, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. His eldest son, Henry Angelo Michael (Gratton) Cooke (1809-1889), was a successful oboist and bandmaster. 


@@@@@


doc= 6186


Cooke, William (d. 1553), judge, is said to have been born in Chesterton, near Cambridge, where he had a house, and to have attended Cambridge University, although the latter point is dubious. His parentage is obscure, but his father may have been the East Anglian attorney called William Coke who was likewise a member of Gray's Inn. He was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1528, probably from Barnard's Inn, and became an ancient in 1536. A collection of moots in the inns of court and chancery from about this time, bearing his name, is in the British Library (Harley MS 5103). He was elected to read in Gray's Inn in 1544, but managed to evade the duty until 1546, when he read as serjeant-elect; a copy of the reading, which was on the 'Statute of Tithes' of 1540, is also in the British Library (Hargrave MS 92, with the disputed cases in Hargrave MS 253). He was steward of the manor of Chesterton in the 1540s, was elected recorder of Cambridge in 1546, having already been a justice of the peace for the county since 1542, and is said to have acted as steward of courts for several Cambridge colleges. His creation as a serjeant, delayed by the king's death, took place in February 1547. Three years later he was appointed one of the king's serjeants, and on 16 November 1552 one of the justices of the common pleas. He occupied his place in Westminster Hall for less than one year, dying on 24 August 1553. There is an elaborate monument in the church of Milton, Cambridgeshire, where he was lord of the manor from 1548 and where he was buried, with brasses depicting him in his judicial robes with his wife, Alice, and a long Latin inscription. The motto 'Plebs sine lege ruit' ('People come to ruin without law'), which occurs on the brass, was used for the rings at the serjeants' call the previous year. He had two sons, Thomas and Henry, and three daughters, Agnes, Mary, and Dorothy. 


@@@@@


doc= 6187


Cooke, William (1709-1780), antiquary and numismatist, was born at Barnard Castle in co. Durham on 16 August 1709, the eldest son of John Cooke (died 'c'.1714), apothecary and surgeon there, and citizen and member of the Barber-Surgeons' Company of London. In 1719 Cooke's mother, Lucy, obtained his admission to Christ's Hospital whence he proceeded as a Moses exhibitioner to Pembroke College, Cambridge, in June 1726. In 1730 he graduated BA and in 1733 MA, taking orders as a priest in 1731. He was instituted to the living of Enford, Wiltshire, in 1733, and held it until his death. He was also rector of Oldbury on the Hill and Didmarton, Gloucestershire, and by 1754 had been appointed chaplain to the earl of Suffolk. 
Cooke's first publication, which came out in 1746, was a translation of the works of Sallust, with a life of the historian and a summary account of the relevant period of Roman history. In 1752 he was incorporated a member of St Mary Hall, Oxford, and in 1754 his 'Enquiry into the Patriarchal and Druidical Religion, Temples, &c.', appeared, arguing for the close kinship of the Hebrews and ancient British, on the basis of archaeological, religious, and cultural similarities, as well as such feats of comparative philology as seeing 'Hartlepool' as 'a manifest corruption of 'Heracleopolis'' and deriving the Welsh toponym element 'aber'- from Apher, the companion of Hercules. The book, which drew upon the works of Stukeley for its data and those of John Hutchinson for its spirit, fitted into a well defined eighteenth-century category of erudite, druid-inspired fantasies. A second, revised edition appeared in 1755. A desire to reconcile classical mythology with Christian reason also led him, about 1760, to undertake a revised edition of Samuel Boyse's 'New Pantheon', which he described as a work intending to divest heathen theology of 'the Marvellous'. Further editions came out until the seventh and last in 1777. 
Cooke died at Enford on 25 February 1780. For some time previously he had suffered from ill health, but managed to complete and send to press a laborious numismatic work, which was corrected and published by his son in two volumes in 1781 as 'The Medallic History of Imperial Rome'. Prefaced by a lengthy list of subscribers, it applies coins to the illustration of Roman history and the lives of the emperors. The plan of the book is good but the engravings very poor, and most of the coins seem to have been previously published in other works. The name of Cooke's wife is not known; his son William matriculated from New College, Oxford, in 1765, aged nineteen, and graduated BA in 1768. 


@@@@@


doc= 6188


Cooke, William (1711-1797), college head and dean of Ely, was born in St James's, Westminster, on 15 October 1711, the son of William Cooke. He was sent to Harrow School in 1718, and placed upon the foundation at Eton College in 1721. In 1731 he matriculated as a scholar from King's College, Cambridge, and became a fellow in 1734. He graduated BA in 1735, and soon afterwards became an assistant master at Eton. In May 1743 he was unanimously elected headmaster, but he found his health too weak for the place, and in 1745 took the college living of Sturminster Marshall, Dorset. On 28 January 1746 he married Catherine, daughter of Richard Sleech, canon of Windsor. 
In 1748 Cooke was elected a fellow of Eton College, and resigned Sturminster on being presented to the rectory of Denham, Buckinghamshire; he was also bursar of Eton. In 1765 he proceeded DD, and was appointed chaplain to the earl of Halifax. In 1768 he accepted the rectory of Stoke Newington. On 25 March 1772 he was unanimously elected provost of King's College, Cambridge. He was vice-chancellor of the university in 1772-3. The antiquary William Cole had a low opinion of Cooke's abilities and claimed that Eton had been glad to lose him, but Cooke doubtless had provoked Cole's scorn by raising the rent of his cottage at Milton. In April 1780 he received a prebend in Ely, and on 9 August 1780 was appointed to the deanery. 
Cooke published a few sermons, in one of which (1750) he provoked a slight controversy by defending Thomas Sherlock against Conyers Middleton in his interpretation of 'a more sure word of prophecy' in the second epistle of 'Peter'. Cooke also published anonymously a small collection of poems entitled 'Musae juveniles' (1732). He died at Bath on 20 October 1797. 
Of Cooke's twelve children, Catherine married Bishop Samuel Hallifax (1733-1790), and one of his sons, Edward Cooke (bap. 1755, d. 1820), became secretary at war in Ireland. Another son, 


@@@@@


doc= 6189


William Cooke (bap. 1749, d. 1824), Church of England clergyman and classical scholar, was baptized at Eton on 8 May 1749. He matriculated from King's College, Cambridge, in 1765 and graduated BA in 1770. A fellow of his college from 1768 to 1786, he was regius professor of Greek in the university from 1780 to 1792. He published an edition of Aristotle's 'Poetics' in 1785, to which was appended the first translation of Gray's 'Elegy' into Greek verse. Ordained deacon on 1 September 1779 and priest on 23 June 1785, he was appointed rector of Hampstead-with-Hessingham in Norfolk in 1785. He published a few sermons, two of which examined the nature of moral liberty and civil liberty. His principal work was 'The Revelations Translated, and Explained throughout' (1789), in which he compared 'Revelation' to Sophocles' 'Oedipus tyrannus' and to Homer. He soon afterwards became mentally deranged and died on 3 May 1824. 


@@@@@


doc= 6190


Cooke, William (1757-1832), legal writer, second son of John Cooke, was born at Calcutta, where his father was an administrator. He was educated at Harrow School and was admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn on 19 November 1777. He was called to the bar there in November 1782, and in 1785 published 'A Compendious System of the Bankrupt Laws'. He soon obtained a considerable practice in chancery and bankruptcy, and in 1816 was made KC and bencher of his inn. 
In 1818 Cooke was commissioned by Sir John Leach to proceed to Milan for the purpose of collecting evidence concerning the conduct of Queen Caroline. He reached Milan in September of that year, and reported the result of his investigations in July 1819. The report, which was forthwith laid before the cabinet, led to the introduction of the celebrated bill of pains and penalties against the queen in the House of Lords on 5 July 1820: this accused Caroline of 'licentious behaviour', and proposed to dissolve her marriage. About this time Cooke began to be much troubled by frequent attacks of gout, which caused him to abandon court practice. He continued, however, to practise as a chamber counsel until 1825, when he retired from the profession. He was one of the witnesses examined before the commission on chancery procedure in 1824. 
During the last few years of his life Cooke resided at his house, Wrinsted Court, Frinsted, Kent, where he died on 14 September 1832. His work on the 'Bankrupt Laws' passed through eight editions by 1823, and was, during his life, the standard authority on the subject. Cooke is often erroneously credited with the works of the writer William Cooke (died 1824). 


@@@@@


doc= 6191


Cooke family (per. c.1800-1865), engravers, artists, and publishers, came to prominence with William Bernard Cooke (1778-1855), who was born in Charles Street, Hatton Garden, London, the son of a German immigrant confectioner from Frankfurt am Main, Johann Bernhard Guck, who changed his name to John Bernard Cooke. His mother was Maria Anna White (died 1821). An older brother of George Cooke ['see below'], with whom he frequently worked, W. B. Cooke was apprenticed to William Angus, engraver of 'The Seats of the Nobility and Gentry in Great Britain and Wales' (1787-[1800]). He married, on 12 April 1804, Elizabeth Blundstone (died 1830); there were no surviving children. His second wife was a sister of Anastasia Cromek, wife of the watercolourist Robert Hartley Cromek, whose maiden name was Priestman; they married in 1831, and she died in 1840. 
William Bernard Cooke was employed on John Norris Brewer's 'The Beauties of England and Wales' (1805), and much of his work thereafter was in the same vein. Sir Henry Charles Englefield, bt, chose W. B. and George Cooke to engrave the illustrations to his 'A description of the principal picturesque beauties, antiquities, and geological phenomena of the Isle of Wight and coast of Dorset' (1816) because of their truth to the original drawings and absence of engravers' invention. 
W. B. Cooke opened a print gallery and shop at 9 Soho Square, London, with an exhibition entitled 'Engraving by Living British Artists under the Patronage of His Majesty' (1821), the catalogue claiming that: 'The Professors of the interesting and highly useful art have long felt the necessity [of]... direct communication with its Patrons and Admirers... and have invited their Brothers to co-operate by sending their work... Under such auspices the British School of Engraving may confidently hope to arrive at a higher degree of Public estimation. (p. 1)' Subsequent exhibitions included drawings, some loaned by private collectors and some for sale, in 1822, 1823, and 1824.'Picturesque Views of the Southern Coast of England' (1814-26) totalled forty-eight plates and thirty-two vignettes chiefly after drawings commissioned from J. M. W. Turner who closely supervised the proofs. Drawings by Alexander, F. L. T. Francia, Havell, Samuel Prout, and William Westall were included. The copperplates were engraved by, among others, W. B. and G. Cooke, E. Finden, E. Goodall, and W. Miller. It was acknowledged as a high point in the monochrome reproduction of watercolour drawings. The engravers worked in the line manner but were: 'a school truly indigenous, both in its style and its technical means... not... line-engraving at all, as practically all the work was done by etching... a wriggling wormlike line which is absolutely opposed to all the reasonable possibilities and conventions of graver work... in such contrast to the true ideals of the etcher's art that we would still be content to call its exponents line-engravers. (Hind, 221-2)' W. B. Cooke's dealings with Turner and John Constable show him to have had a keen business sense. His reputation rested on topographical, especially marine or coastal, subjects, and on antiquarian interests. Typical are Turner's five 'Views in Sussex' (1819), Thomas Allason's 'Picturesque Views of the Antiquities of Pola in Istria' (1819), James Hakewill's 'A Picturesque Tour of Italy' (1820), T. L. Donaldson's 'Pompeii... Including Recent Excavations' (1827), and 'Vases, Altars &c from the... Louvre' (1828), drawn by W. B. Cooke and Thomas Boys, and engraved by Henry Moses. W. B. Cooke's apprentices were Frederick Smith, J. C. Allen, and W. Brandard. Samuel Redgrave wrote that he showed great ability and enterprise, published 'several of his own plates', but did not succeed (Redgrave, 'Artists', 96), a somewhat harsh verdict repeated by R. E. Graves. William Bernard Cook died at his home, 9 Camden Square, Camberwell, on 2 August 1855, of heart disease, and was buried on 8 August in Nunhead cemetery, London. His executors were Thomas Goff Lupton, engraver, and son. 

George Cooke (1781-1834) was born on 22 January 1781 in Charles Street, Hatton Garden, London, a younger brother of W. B. Cooke, and apprenticed to James Basire (1769-1822) in 1795. He married, on 26 October 1808, Elizabeth Harriet Eglinton (1785-1882), with whom he had eleven children, the second being the marine painter Edward William Cooke RA (1811-1880). George Cooke's wife kept a boarding-school, Albion House, Barnes, at which the daughters of Clarkson Stanfield RA and David Roberts RA were pupils and where he was drawing-master. His indentured apprentices were George Hollis, John Barnett, W. J. Cooke ['see below'], W. Miller, Thomas Shotter Boys, Percy Heath, Theo Lindsey Aspland, and F. R. Hay. 
Basire, remembered as a neglectful master, produced for the 'Oxford Almanack' engravings of drawings by J. M. W. Turner, and George Cooke's enthusiasm for these led him to plan a published series of that artist's watercolours. He engraved fifteen of the plates for Turner's 'Picturesque Views of the Southern Coast of England' (1814-26) but a disagreement with Turner over the disposal of proofs led to an acrimonious severing of relations. He worked with W. B. Cooke on many of the series mentioned above, and there were also 160 plates from his hand in John Pinkerton's 'General Collection of Voyages and Travels' (1808-14) in which he had to make acceptable pictures from 'mere tracings... & abortions of art' ('Arnold's Magazine of the Fine Arts', 1834, 555). He undertook the engraving of the 2000 aquatint plates for the publisher Conrad Loddiges & Sons' work 'The Botanical Cabinet' (20 vols., 1817-33). His studio and family being fully employed in its regular appearance, he moved to a house adjoining the Loddiges at their Hackney nursery gardens. 
George Cooke published 'Views of London and its Vicinity', in parts, in 1826-34, planned to illustrate the developing metropolis; his painter friends gave him drawings for engraving for which his son Edward William had made preliminary outlines to save established artists, including A. W. Callcott, David Roberts, Clarkson Stanfield, and Samuel Prout, time and labour. Projected as eighty plates, on copper, it was overtaken by similar works quickly produced on steel plates which, whatever the quality, gave proofs of unvarying clarity. Conservative dislike of steel led him to avoid it but rivals using it outdistanced him and prospered. Cooke meanwhile doggedly maintained traditional high-quality proofs from copper, supervising printing to ensure the best results. However, he reduced 'London' to forty-eight plates, the last number being published posthumously, by his widow. 
A great many books of the 1820s contain plates of picturesque scenery and topographical interest from George Cooke's hand. 'Sunderland Iron Bridge', after Edward Blore, with 'effect' by F. L. Francia, was produced for R. Surtees' 'The History and Antiquities of... Durham'. He engraved after A. W. Callcott a view of Rotterdam, and had begun two further large plates of Antwerp and Dover, but by the failure of his agent in the financial crash of 1825-6 he lost money, putting an end to the venture as well as straitening his circumstances. His 'Views of the Old and the New London Bridges' (1833), from his son Edward's drawings, was engraved and etched conjointly; although the work was very well received, George Cooke's name does not appear on the title-page. 
George Cooke was a member of the Associated Society of Engravers whose aims included securing recognition by the Royal Academy for engravers to be full academicians. They also embarked on engraving and publishing selected paintings in the National Gallery. Cooke was also a member of the Graphic Society, the Calcographic Society, and the Artists' Joint Stock Fund. He died on 27 February 1834 of brain fever at his home, Albion House, Terrace, Barnes, Surrey. He was buried in St Mary's Church, Barnes, on 6 March. He was remembered for his 'buoyancy of spirit, industry, perseverance, temperance and unsullied integrity' ('Arnold's Magazine of the Fine Arts', 1834, 560). 

William John Cooke (bap. 1796, d. 1865), engraver, was baptized in London on 5 April 1796, the son of John Conrad Cooke ('b'. 1770, died before 1829), eldest brother of W. B. and G. Cooke, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Harrison. He was apprenticed to his uncle George Cooke about 1810. He married in 1823 Mary Boys, sister of his fellow apprentice Thomas Shotter Boys, the lithographer. 
A pioneer worker on steel, which his former master despised, W. J. Cooke won in 1826 the Isis gold medal of the Society of Arts for improvements in fluids for etching on steel and the invention of an 'apparatus for gradating tints'. He engraved drawings by Richard Parkes Bonington whom he met in 1825 and with whom he remained friends. 'Rouen from Bon Secours' and 'Chillon', both small in size, were published in 'Friendship's Offering' in 1826. Cooke was a frequent visitor to the house of his former fellow apprentice John Barnett, where Bonington died in 1828. 
William John Cooke engraved mainly for the annuals 'The Gem', 'The Amulet', 'The Bouquet', and 'Friendship's Offering'. He also contributed plates to 'Stanfield's Coast Scenery' by Clarkson Stanfield (1836) and the 'Oriental Annual', after works by W. Daniell (1834). He also engraved plates after J. M. W. Turner's drawings of Nottingham, Plymouth, Newark Castle (Scotland), and the Thames at Mortlake, and 'Calais Pier', after David Cox, which was engraved for the 'Gallery of the Society of Painters in Water Colours' (1832). His work is sometimes signed W. Cooke Junr. A set of W. J. Cooke's pencil studies (priv. coll.) recording the ruins of the Palace of Westminster after the fire of 1834 was proposed for engraving jointly with his cousin Edward, but never carried out. 
In 1840 the decline in the fashion for illustrated annuals and the possible adverse effect of photography upon engraving in England caused W. J. Cooke to move with his family to Darmstadt. He made topographical drawings in England and Germany, perhaps with publication in view but died in Darmstadt on 6 April 1865. His family later returned to England. His son William Montague Cooke ('b'. 1824) evidently inherited artistic talent for he gave drawing instruction to the children of Princess Alice, princess of Great Britain and Ireland, and grand duchess of Hesse and by Rhine. 


@@@@@


doc= 6192


Cooke, Sir William Fothergill (1806-1879), developer of electric telegraphy, was born on 4 May 1806 at Ealing, Middlesex, one of two sons and two daughters of William Cooke (1776/7-1857), surgeon, and his wife, Elizabeth Ann, 'nee' Fothergill. In 1822 William Cooke was elected physician to Durham Infirmary, a post he held until 1842. His son attended Durham School in 1822-3, then Edinburgh University, before entering the Indian army, becoming an ensign. After five years in India he resigned his commission on grounds of ill health, and took up his father's profession, studying anatomy at Paris and then at Heidelberg, under Professor Munke. He prepared the wax models which his father used for his own anatomy lectures in 1842. 
Electric telegraphy came to Cooke's notice while he was at Heidelberg, several people having demonstrated its feasibility. Professor Munke's lectures included a demonstration of telegraphic apparatus on the principle introduced by Baron Schilling in 1835. Hitherto, such experiments had been confined to the classroom and laboratory; Cooke realized the commercial possibilities, and conceived the idea of using the invention in connection with the various railway systems then developing. He abandoned his studies and devoted himself entirely to telegraphy. In 1836 he returned to England and conducted experiments with his friend and solicitor, Burton Lane. Cooke found that, although his apparatus worked across a room, it would not work through 1 mile of wire. He sought help from Michael Faraday and Peter Roget; neither could assist, but Roget, who knew of the work of Charles Wheatstone, referred Cooke to him. 
Cooke and Wheatstone first met on 27 February 1837, by which time Cooke was negotiating with the Liverpool and Manchester Railway Company for the use of his (Cooke's) telegraphs. After one or two interviews, in which Wheatstone seems to have frankly revealed to Cooke all the work he had done towards perfecting the electric telegraph, a partnership was agreed upon between them, and duly entered into in May 1837. Wheatstone had neither taste nor leisure for business details, while Cooke possessed a good practical knowledge, much energy, and business ability of a high order. Wheatstone and Cooke's first patent, 'for improvements in giving signals and sounding alarms in distant places by means of electric currents transmitted through electric circuits', was signed by William IV on 10 June 1837. Cooke now proceeded to test the utility of the invention, the London and Blackwall, the London and Birmingham, and the Great Western Railway companies successively allowing the use of their lines for the experiment. It was found, however, that with five needles and five line wires the expense was too great, and in that form the electric telegraph was abandoned. In 1838 an improvement was effected whereby the number of needles was reduced to two, and a patent for this was taken out by Cooke and Wheatstone. Before a parliamentary committee on railways in 1840, Wheatstone stated that he had, conjointly with Cooke, obtained a new patent for a telegraphic arrangement. The new apparatus required only a single pair of wires instead of five, and was greatly simplified. The telegraph was still too costly for general purposes. In 1845, however, Cooke and Wheatstone succeeded in producing the single needle apparatus, which they patented, and from that time the electric telegraph became a practical instrument, and was speedily adopted on all the railway lines of the country. In the meantime, a bitter controversy arose between Cooke and Wheatstone, each claiming the chief credit of the invention. Cooke contended that he alone had succeeded in reducing the electric telegraph to practical usefulness at the time he sought Wheatstone's assistance, and on the other hand Wheatstone maintained that Cooke's instrument had never been, and could never be, practically applied. More of the actual work of invention was no doubt done by Wheatstone than by his partner, though Wheatstone agreed that he could not have succeeded commercially without Cooke's 'zeal and perseverance and practical skill'. An arrangement was arrived at in 1843, by which the telegraph patents were assigned to Cooke, with the reservation of a mileage royalty to Wheatstone. Subsequently, Wheatstone sold all his rights in Great Britain, Ireland, and Belgium to Cooke for $30,000. In 1846 the Electric Telegraph Company was formed in conjunction with Cooke, the company paying Cooke $120,000 for the earlier patents. 
On 5 June 1838 Cooke married Anna Louisa (died 1891), daughter of Joseph Wheatley, a solicitor, at Treeton near Rotherham, Yorkshire; they had one daughter. For some years Cooke employed himself very actively in the practical work of telegraphy, but after his separation from Wheatstone he did not achieve much in the way of invention. He tried to obtain an extension of the original patents, but the judicial committee of the privy council decided that Cooke and Wheatstone had been sufficiently remunerated, and that the electric telegraph had not been so poor an investment as they had been led to believe by the press, the shareholders having received a bonus of $15 per share, besides the usual dividend of four per cent on $300,000. The Albert gold medal of the Society of Arts was awarded on equal terms to Cooke and Wheatstone in 1867; and two years later Cooke was knighted, Wheatstone having had the same honour conferred upon him the year before. Cooke subsequently lost all the money he had made from the telegraph in unsuccessful mining ventures in north Wales. A civil-list pension of $100 p.a. was granted to him in 1871. He died at Castle Street, Farnham, Surrey, the home of his son-in-law, on 25 June 1879. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 6193


Cooke family (per. c.1800-1865), engravers, artists, and publishers, came to prominence with William Bernard Cooke (1778-1855), who was born in Charles Street, Hatton Garden, London, the son of a German immigrant confectioner from Frankfurt am Main, Johann Bernhard Guck, who changed his name to John Bernard Cooke. His mother was Maria Anna White (died 1821). An older brother of George Cooke ['see below'], with whom he frequently worked, W. B. Cooke was apprenticed to William Angus, engraver of 'The Seats of the Nobility and Gentry in Great Britain and Wales' (1787-[1800]). He married, on 12 April 1804, Elizabeth Blundstone (died 1830); there were no surviving children. His second wife was a sister of Anastasia Cromek, wife of the watercolourist Robert Hartley Cromek, whose maiden name was Priestman; they married in 1831, and she died in 1840. 
William Bernard Cooke was employed on John Norris Brewer's 'The Beauties of England and Wales' (1805), and much of his work thereafter was in the same vein. Sir Henry Charles Englefield, bt, chose W. B. and George Cooke to engrave the illustrations to his 'A description of the principal picturesque beauties, antiquities, and geological phenomena of the Isle of Wight and coast of Dorset' (1816) because of their truth to the original drawings and absence of engravers' invention. 
W. B. Cooke opened a print gallery and shop at 9 Soho Square, London, with an exhibition entitled 'Engraving by Living British Artists under the Patronage of His Majesty' (1821), the catalogue claiming that: 'The Professors of the interesting and highly useful art have long felt the necessity [of]... direct communication with its Patrons and Admirers... and have invited their Brothers to co-operate by sending their work... Under such auspices the British School of Engraving may confidently hope to arrive at a higher degree of Public estimation. (p. 1)' Subsequent exhibitions included drawings, some loaned by private collectors and some for sale, in 1822, 1823, and 1824.'Picturesque Views of the Southern Coast of England' (1814-26) totalled forty-eight plates and thirty-two vignettes chiefly after drawings commissioned from J. M. W. Turner who closely supervised the proofs. Drawings by Alexander, F. L. T. Francia, Havell, Samuel Prout, and William Westall were included. The copperplates were engraved by, among others, W. B. and G. Cooke, E. Finden, E. Goodall, and W. Miller. It was acknowledged as a high point in the monochrome reproduction of watercolour drawings. The engravers worked in the line manner but were: 'a school truly indigenous, both in its style and its technical means... not... line-engraving at all, as practically all the work was done by etching... a wriggling wormlike line which is absolutely opposed to all the reasonable possibilities and conventions of graver work... in such contrast to the true ideals of the etcher's art that we would still be content to call its exponents line-engravers. (Hind, 221-2)' W. B. Cooke's dealings with Turner and John Constable show him to have had a keen business sense. His reputation rested on topographical, especially marine or coastal, subjects, and on antiquarian interests. Typical are Turner's five 'Views in Sussex' (1819), Thomas Allason's 'Picturesque Views of the Antiquities of Pola in Istria' (1819), James Hakewill's 'A Picturesque Tour of Italy' (1820), T. L. Donaldson's 'Pompeii... Including Recent Excavations' (1827), and 'Vases, Altars &c from the... Louvre' (1828), drawn by W. B. Cooke and Thomas Boys, and engraved by Henry Moses. W. B. Cooke's apprentices were Frederick Smith, J. C. Allen, and W. Brandard. Samuel Redgrave wrote that he showed great ability and enterprise, published 'several of his own plates', but did not succeed (Redgrave, 'Artists', 96), a somewhat harsh verdict repeated by R. E. Graves. William Bernard Cook died at his home, 9 Camden Square, Camberwell, on 2 August 1855, of heart disease, and was buried on 8 August in Nunhead cemetery, London. His executors were Thomas Goff Lupton, engraver, and son. 

George Cooke (1781-1834) was born on 22 January 1781 in Charles Street, Hatton Garden, London, a younger brother of W. B. Cooke, and apprenticed to James Basire (1769-1822) in 1795. He married, on 26 October 1808, Elizabeth Harriet Eglinton (1785-1882), with whom he had eleven children, the second being the marine painter Edward William Cooke RA (1811-1880). George Cooke's wife kept a boarding-school, Albion House, Barnes, at which the daughters of Clarkson Stanfield RA and David Roberts RA were pupils and where he was drawing-master. His indentured apprentices were George Hollis, John Barnett, W. J. Cooke ['see below'], W. Miller, Thomas Shotter Boys, Percy Heath, Theo Lindsey Aspland, and F. R. Hay. 
Basire, remembered as a neglectful master, produced for the 'Oxford Almanack' engravings of drawings by J. M. W. Turner, and George Cooke's enthusiasm for these led him to plan a published series of that artist's watercolours. He engraved fifteen of the plates for Turner's 'Picturesque Views of the Southern Coast of England' (1814-26) but a disagreement with Turner over the disposal of proofs led to an acrimonious severing of relations. He worked with W. B. Cooke on many of the series mentioned above, and there were also 160 plates from his hand in John Pinkerton's 'General Collection of Voyages and Travels' (1808-14) in which he had to make acceptable pictures from 'mere tracings... & abortions of art' ('Arnold's Magazine of the Fine Arts', 1834, 555). He undertook the engraving of the 2000 aquatint plates for the publisher Conrad Loddiges & Sons' work 'The Botanical Cabinet' (20 vols., 1817-33). His studio and family being fully employed in its regular appearance, he moved to a house adjoining the Loddiges at their Hackney nursery gardens. 
George Cooke published 'Views of London and its Vicinity', in parts, in 1826-34, planned to illustrate the developing metropolis; his painter friends gave him drawings for engraving for which his son Edward William had made preliminary outlines to save established artists, including A. W. Callcott, David Roberts, Clarkson Stanfield, and Samuel Prout, time and labour. Projected as eighty plates, on copper, it was overtaken by similar works quickly produced on steel plates which, whatever the quality, gave proofs of unvarying clarity. Conservative dislike of steel led him to avoid it but rivals using it outdistanced him and prospered. Cooke meanwhile doggedly maintained traditional high-quality proofs from copper, supervising printing to ensure the best results. However, he reduced 'London' to forty-eight plates, the last number being published posthumously, by his widow. 
A great many books of the 1820s contain plates of picturesque scenery and topographical interest from George Cooke's hand. 'Sunderland Iron Bridge', after Edward Blore, with 'effect' by F. L. Francia, was produced for R. Surtees' 'The History and Antiquities of... Durham'. He engraved after A. W. Callcott a view of Rotterdam, and had begun two further large plates of Antwerp and Dover, but by the failure of his agent in the financial crash of 1825-6 he lost money, putting an end to the venture as well as straitening his circumstances. His 'Views of the Old and the New London Bridges' (1833), from his son Edward's drawings, was engraved and etched conjointly; although the work was very well received, George Cooke's name does not appear on the title-page. 
George Cooke was a member of the Associated Society of Engravers whose aims included securing recognition by the Royal Academy for engravers to be full academicians. They also embarked on engraving and publishing selected paintings in the National Gallery. Cooke was also a member of the Graphic Society, the Calcographic Society, and the Artists' Joint Stock Fund. He died on 27 February 1834 of brain fever at his home, Albion House, Terrace, Barnes, Surrey. He was buried in St Mary's Church, Barnes, on 6 March. He was remembered for his 'buoyancy of spirit, industry, perseverance, temperance and unsullied integrity' ('Arnold's Magazine of the Fine Arts', 1834, 560). 

William John Cooke (bap. 1796, d. 1865), engraver, was baptized in London on 5 April 1796, the son of John Conrad Cooke ('b'. 1770, died before 1829), eldest brother of W. B. and G. Cooke, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Harrison. He was apprenticed to his uncle George Cooke about 1810. He married in 1823 Mary Boys, sister of his fellow apprentice Thomas Shotter Boys, the lithographer. 
A pioneer worker on steel, which his former master despised, W. J. Cooke won in 1826 the Isis gold medal of the Society of Arts for improvements in fluids for etching on steel and the invention of an 'apparatus for gradating tints'. He engraved drawings by Richard Parkes Bonington whom he met in 1825 and with whom he remained friends. 'Rouen from Bon Secours' and 'Chillon', both small in size, were published in 'Friendship's Offering' in 1826. Cooke was a frequent visitor to the house of his former fellow apprentice John Barnett, where Bonington died in 1828. 
William John Cooke engraved mainly for the annuals 'The Gem', 'The Amulet', 'The Bouquet', and 'Friendship's Offering'. He also contributed plates to 'Stanfield's Coast Scenery' by Clarkson Stanfield (1836) and the 'Oriental Annual', after works by W. Daniell (1834). He also engraved plates after J. M. W. Turner's drawings of Nottingham, Plymouth, Newark Castle (Scotland), and the Thames at Mortlake, and 'Calais Pier', after David Cox, which was engraved for the 'Gallery of the Society of Painters in Water Colours' (1832). His work is sometimes signed W. Cooke Junr. A set of W. J. Cooke's pencil studies (priv. coll.) recording the ruins of the Palace of Westminster after the fire of 1834 was proposed for engraving jointly with his cousin Edward, but never carried out. 
In 1840 the decline in the fashion for illustrated annuals and the possible adverse effect of photography upon engraving in England caused W. J. Cooke to move with his family to Darmstadt. He made topographical drawings in England and Germany, perhaps with publication in view but died in Darmstadt on 6 April 1865. His family later returned to England. His son William Montague Cooke ('b'. 1824) evidently inherited artistic talent for he gave drawing instruction to the children of Princess Alice, princess of Great Britain and Ireland, and grand duchess of Hesse and by Rhine. 


@@@@@


doc= 6194


Cookes, Sir Thomas, second baronet (bap. 1648, d. 1701), benefactor, was baptized on 6 December 1648 at Feckenham, Worcestershire. He was the elder son of Sir William Cookes ('c'.1616-1672) of Norgrove, Worcestershire, and his second wife, Mercy, 'nee' Dinely (1628/9-1694). William Cookes, a royalist descended from an old, wealthy Worcestershire family, was created a baronet on 24 December 1664: an honour which cost him $1095. 
Thomas Cookes matriculated from Pembroke College, Oxford, as a gentleman commoner on 7 June 1667, and was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 26 June 1669. He succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his father in July 1672, and on 28 August 1672 he married Mary Windsor (1658/9-1695), daughter of Thomas Windsor, Lord Windsor (later first earl of Plymouth), and niece of the celebrated George Savile, marquess of Halifax (1633-1695). Cookes's bride was aged thirteen or fourteen; he was twenty-three. His seat was Bentley Pauncefote at Tardebigge, Worcestershire, but he owned property in sixteen west midlands parishes and in London: an inheritance perhaps all the larger because his younger brother, William, died in 1673, aged twenty-two. 
Lady Mary Cookes died on 3 January 1695. On 6 December 1695 the widower married another young bride, Lucy ('b'. 1681), daughter of Bernard Whalley of Billesley, Warwickshire, and his wife, Lucy, 'nee' Baldwin. Both of Sir Thomas's marriages were childless, but he preserved his name through educational charities. He endowed and virtually refounded Bromsgrove School in 1693 and did the same for Feckenham School in 1696. More significantly, by the terms of his will, made on 19 February 1697, he left $10,000 in trust to endow a new college in Oxford University or to add to an existing foundation there. At this new or augmented foundation, as yet unnamed and unlocated, preference would be given to Bromsgrove and Feckenham schools and to Cookes's kin in the election of scholars and fellows. The archbishop of Canterbury, three other bishops, and all twenty-five heads of Oxford colleges and halls were named as trustees of the benefaction. 
When Sir Thomas's intentions for Oxford became known, the claims of Gloucester Hall were pressed by its principal, Benjamin Woodroffe (1638-1711), who by the end of 1698 obtained a charter of incorporation (which proved to be invalid in law) and drew up confused statutes for the new college in terms that temporarily antagonized Cookes. The case for Balliol College was then put by its future master John Baron ('c'.1669-1722). Both claimants approached Sir Thomas directly, both preached highly partisan sermons on charity in Feckenham church (Baron in 1699, Woodroffe in 1700), and both produced printed arguments in 1702. 
Cookes died on 8 June 1701 and was buried on 10 June beside his first wife in Tardebigge church. His will was proved on 9 July 1701, but the trustees were politically divided and very slow to interpret and execute his intentions regarding the gift to Oxford. In 1707 they decided that it should go to Magdalen Hall, but Simon Harcourt (1661?-1727), the lord keeper, decreed in the court of chancery on 31 October 1712 that it had been Cookes's intention that his charity, now swollen by interest to $15,000, should go to Gloucester Hall. The trustees reluctantly accepted his decree on 16 November 1713, and Gloucester Hall was formally incorporated as Worcester College on 29 July 1714. One witness in the chancery case declared that Cookes 'was a very wavering and unsteady and humoursome man in the manageing of his affairs' (Worcester College Archives, deposition of William Cookes, April 1712, 7), and others testified to the same effect. However, Harcourt had probably correctly divined Sir Thomas's settled wishes, even though his own primary concern was to increase his political influence in the university by ensuring that his chaplain, Richard Blechinden (1668-1736), became principal of Gloucester Hall on Woodroffe's death in 1711 and subsequently provost of Worcester College. Blechinden was a far less colourful character and a less able scholar than Woodroffe, but a more competent man of affairs. 
Cookes left a fee-simple estate of about $3000 p.a. and a personal estate of $40,000, including the $10,000 for Oxford. His will stipulated arrangements for his burial beside his first wife, but made no mention of the woman he had married just over a year before making the will: presumably she already had an adequate settlement. After Cookes's death she married Charles Knotsford of Queenhill, Worcestershire. Cookes's residuary legatee and executor was his nephew and godson, Thomas Winford (1673-1744), who took his uncle's name and, on the death in 1702 of his own father, a baronet, became Sir Thomas Cookes Winford; he was MP for Worcestershire from 1707 to 1710 and supported Gloucester Hall's claim to his uncle's gift. 


@@@@@


doc= 6195


Cookesley, William Gifford (1802-1880), classical scholar, son of John Cookesley, was born at Brasted, Kent, on 1 December 1802. He was educated at Eton College and at King's College, Cambridge, which he entered as a scholar in 1821. He graduated BA in 1826, MA in 1829, and held a fellowship from 1824 until 1831. Cookesley was an early member of the University Cricket Club, which was founded in 1820. He played in the first match against Oxford in 1827, but failed to score in a game which was unfinished owing to rain. He was ordained deacon in 1827 and priest in 1835. On 20 March 1831 he married Augusta, daughter of John Davy Foulkes. From 1829 until 1854 he was an assistant master at Eton. In 1857, having served a curacy in Ipswich, he was appointed vicar of Hayton, Yorkshire. He became incumbent of St Peter's, Hammersmith, in 1860, and rector of Tempsford, Bedfordshire, in 1868. He died there on 16 August 1880, his wife having predeceased him. He was survived by a daughter. 
Cookesley published a number of school editions of classical authors, including several of Pindar (1838, 1844, 1851). He also produced some volumes of sermons, and various theological books and pamphlets, including works against popery (1849), on Jews in parliament (1852), and on Mosaic miracles (1853), and a volume of criticisms of Bishop Colenso's views on the 'Pentateuch' (1863). 


@@@@@


doc= 6196


Cookson, George (1760-1835), army officer, sixth son of Captain Thomas Cookson RN (died 13 Nov 1775), and grandson of William Cookson of Wellington, Shropshire, was born at Farnborough, Hampshire, on 29 April 1760. He entered the Royal Navy in 1773, and served with his father, but after his father's death in 1775 Lord North gave him a cadetship to the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, which he entered in 1777. He became second lieutenant, Royal Artillery, in 1778, and lieutenant in 1780. His early service was principally in the West Indies, and on one occasion, in 1785, he commanded all the artillery on the Black River (on the Spanish main in South America) until its evacuation. In November 1792 he was promoted captain-lieutenant, and in 1793 accompanied the duke of York's army to the Netherlands. He opened the first British battery against the city of Valenciennes, and commanded the British gunners in the trenches and at the successful storming of that city. On the conclusion of the campaign he was promoted captain and appointed to the command of no. 7 company, 5th battalion. He served two years at Gibraltar (1797-8), and in 1800 was made brevet major. In that year he commanded the Royal Artillery with General Maitland's expedition against Belle Ile, which afterwards joined the force sent against Ferrol under Sir James Pulteney, and was eventually incorporated with the artillery under Sir Ralph Abercromby's command in the Mediterranean. Cookson was appointed to manage the landing of the field pieces in Abercromby's disembarkation on the coast of Egypt, and he was so rapid that the guns were in action almost as soon as the infantry, and did great service in covering the landing of the rest of the army. During the whole Egyptian campaign Cookson greatly distinguished himself, especially at the siege of Alexandria, when for a time he commanded all the fifty-two guns employed at the siege, and in the attack on the castle of Marabout on 22 August, when he was publicly thanked by Sir Eyre Coote. On 29 October 1801 he was made commandant of the ancient Pharos, and appointed to command all the artillery in Egypt, and he was afterwards presented with a gold medal by the grand vizier, an honour conferred on no other artillery officer. 
After his return to England Cookson was promoted lieutenant-colonel, and in September 1804 was appointed to command the artillery in the Dublin district. He had made the acquaintance of Lord Cathcart in the Netherlands, and at that general's special request he was appointed to command the artillery accompanying the expedition to Hanover in 1805. The expedition, however, did nothing, and after its failure Cookson returned to Dublin. He was again, at Cathcart's request, ordered to accompany that general's more important expedition to Denmark in 1807, and commanded the batteries on the right during the bombardment of Copenhagen; but he received no recognition of his services on this occasion, though the officer commanding the artillery, Colonel Blomefield, was made a baronet. In October 1808 he embarked in command of the forty-eight guns and 1200 artillerymen ordered to form part of Sir David Baird's army intended for the Peninsula, and when Baird joined Sir John Moore, Cookson took command of all the horse artillery with the combined army. He commanded it with great ability throughout Moore's retreat, and especially distinguished himself at the action off Benevente on 29 December 1808, when General Lefevre-Desnouettes was taken prisoner. At the close of the retreat, 3 miles from Corunna, he successfully blew up two great magazines of powder, containing some 12,000 barrels, to save them from the enemy, but he missed the battle of Corunna, as he had embarked with the horse artillery the night before. 
In April 1809 Cookson received the command of the artillery in the Sussex district, which he held until 1 August 1814, except in July 1809, when he commanded the artillery in South Beveland during the Walcheren expedition up to the fall of Flushing. Few artillery officers saw more varied service than Cookson, but as he did not serve in the post-Corunna Peninsula campaigns or at Waterloo he was never even made CB for his services. He was promoted in regular course colonel on 17 March 1812, major-general on 4 June 1814, and lieutenant-general on 22 July 1830. 
Cookson was married three times. In 1786 he married Ann Helena (1766-1789), daughter of Dr Thomas Weir of Jamaica; they had no children. In 1791 he married Sarah (1769-1798), daughter of John Parker, banker, of Hornsey and London. They had three children: two died young and George ('b'. 1793), an officer in the 3rd guards, was killed at the battle of Fuentes d'Onoro on 5 May 1811. Cookson married in 1807 Margaret, only daughter of William Remington; they had a large family and she survived him. He died at Esher, Surrey, on 12 August 1835. 


@@@@@


doc= 6197


Cookson, Henry Wilkinson (1810-1876), college head, was born on 10 April 1810 at Kendal, Westmorland, the sixth son of Thomas and Elizabeth Cookson. Wordsworth was one of his godfathers. He was educated at Kendal grammar school and at Sedbergh School, then under the headmastership of Henry Wilkinson, an old friend of the family from whom he derived his second baptismal name. In October 1828 he entered Peterhouse, or St Peter's College (as he always preferred to style the most ancient college in the University of Cambridge). His private tutors were Henry Philpott, who as bishop of Worcester was to pronounce the last words over his grave, and the famous William Hopkins of Peterhouse. He graduated BA as seventh wrangler in 1832, MA in 1835, and BD and DD in 1848. Elected a fellow of his college in 1836, Cookson was appointed tutor in 1839; his pupils included William Thomson (later Lord Kelvin). He was proctor in 1842. 
In 1847 Cookson succeeded Dr Hodgson as master of his college, and also as rector of Glaston in Rutland until 1867 when the two offices became separated under the new college statutes. In 1855 he married Emily Valence, elder daughter of Gilbert Ainslie DD, master of Pembroke College. They had one daughter. Cookson died, after an illness of a few days, on 30 September 1876, in Peterhouse lodge, Cambridge; he was buried in the churchyard of the college benefice of Cherry Hinton, near Cambridge. 
Cookson was one of the most influential members of his university. With his mathematical abilities he combined strong scientific sympathies and distinct literary tastes. He rendered substantial service to the Cambridge Philosophical Society, of which he was president in 1865-6. A staunch protestant, in 1870 he defended the maintenance of religious tests in the university; it was no secret that in 1867, through Lord Derby, he was offered the bishopric of Lichfield, which he declined. In politics a Conservative, he was an energetic chairman of the committee in support of Anthony Cleasby during the parliamentary election for one of the university seats in February 1868. He was elected vice-chancellor on five occasions (1848, 1863, 1864, 1872, and 1873) and was almost continuously a member of the council of the senate from its institution in 1856 onwards. His 'unerring eye for the bye-paths of university business... earned him the nickname 'the artful dodger'' (Brooke, 53). Although he became proverbial at Cambridge for prudence and caution, he was hardly less distinguished by a genuine enthusiasm for progress, and especially for the extension of the studies of the university, and an increase in the number of its professorial chairs. Thus he drew particular satisfaction from the practical results of university administration, such as the augmentation of the Woodwardian Museum, the enlargement of the botanical garden, and the erection of new museums; and he was one of the first to advocate the application of a proportion of the funds of the colleges to the endowment of new professorships. Altogether, he had no slight share in the remarkable development of Cambridge after 1850. 


@@@@@


doc= 6198


Cookson, James (bap. 1751, d. 1835), Church of England clergyman, was baptized on 14 April 1751 at Martindale, Westmorland, the son of John Cookson. He received his academic education at Queen's College, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1777. He graduated BA on 13 June 1781, and proceeded MA on 13 July 1786. Meanwhile he had been instituted, in September 1785, to the family-owned rectory of Colemore with Priors Dean, Hampshire, to which he was inducted the following October. Colemore and Priors Dean were both small livings with fewer than 200 inhabitants. He was also for many years curate of the neighbouring village of Steep, and about 1796 was presented to the vicarage of Harting, Sussex. Popular report says that he was put into the last-named living under a bond of resignation, and that when asked to resign he said 'his conscience did not allow him to do so'. As incumbent of Colemore he was also a trustee and frequently acting curate of East Tistead. 
Despite the cares of three parishes some miles apart, Cookson found time for writing. His first work was entitled 'Thoughts on Polygamy' (1782) and consisted of reflections on the institution of marriage and its obligations. He outlined the laws relating to it, and particularly discussed 26 Geo. II, ch. 33, commonly called the 'Marriage Act'. Cookson also commented on the Revd Martin Madan's 'Thelypohthora', and suggested a scheme for the prevention of prostitution. His next work was 'A New Family Prayer-Book' (1783). This was followed in 1784 by 'The Universal Family Bible'. Between the appearance of the last two works Cookson had become master of Churcher's College, Petersfield, through the recommendation of Lord Clanricarde, a local Hampshire landowner. In 1784 Churcher's College was a small establishment, with only a dozen boys in residence. 
Cookson was of eccentric habits, and is said once to have announced in church, 'I have forgotten my sermon, but I will read you a true account of the battle of Waterloo.' In 1814 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He died on 6 January 1835 at Petersfield, and was buried on 12 January in the chancel of Colemore church, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 6199


Cookworthy, William (1705-1780), porcelain manufacturer and Quaker minister, was born on 12 April 1705, the eldest child of William Cookworthy (1670-1718), a Quaker serge maker of Kingsbridge, Devon, and his wife, Edith (died 1759), daughter of John and Mary Debell of St Martin by Looe, Cornwall. After his father's death, Cookworthy's mother was left in severely straitened circumstances after the loss of money invested in South Sea stock. In 1720 the young Cookworthy began an apprenticeship with the Quaker apothecaries Timothy and Sylvanus Bevan of Plough Court, London, walking from Devon to save the coach fare. The Bevans recognized his outstanding skill and took him into partnership at the end of his apprenticeship -- the firm of Bevans and Cookworthy, wholesale chemists and druggists, being established in Plymouth under Cookworthy's management in 1726. His principal customers were doctors and apothecaries in the three south-western counties and the naval fraternity in Plymouth. 
On 12 February 1736 Cookworthy married Sarah, daughter of Peter and Elizabeth Berry of Fullerns, Somerset, at Taunton Friends' meeting-house. They had five daughters. Sarah Cookworthy died on 11 September 1745. His wife's death was a turning point in Cookworthy's life. In his grief he withdrew temporarily from business and spent several months in retirement at Looe. Thereafter, his brother Philip took over the day-to-day management of the business, leaving Cookworthy freer to devote his energies to his religious work and his china clay experiments. 
Cookworthy was the first to recognize that the twin ingredients of Chinese porcelain, kaolin for the body and petuntse for the glaze, were to be found in the china clay and moorstone (or 'growan', as it was known locally) of the Cornish moors. His interest in the chemistry of porcelain can be traced to 1745, when he met the discoverer of china clay in Virginia. It was probably between then and 1748 that Cookworthy discovered the china clay and moorstone deposits on Tregonning Hill, Germoe parish, Cornwall. By 1758 his porcelain-making experiments had resulted in a successful firing of clay from Tregonning Hill, but it was the discovery of an abundant deposit of high-quality china clay and moorstone at Carloggas, St Stephen parish, near St Austell, that proved to be the turning point. Thomas Pitt (later Lord Camelford), the owner of the Carloggas estate, helped Cookworthy to obtain a patent to manufacture porcelain using the Cornish ingredients in 1768 and provided finance for his experimental work. In 1768 Cookworthy opened a porcelain factory at Coxside, near the quayside at Plymouth. It was a small concern with share capital of under $300, half provided by Cookworthy and other local men, and half by a group of Quakers from Bristol, where Cookworthy had been involved in a china works for several years. The market for the blue and white china produced at Plymouth included exports to America. 
In 1770 the Plymouth factory closed, apparently because of difficulties with maintaining quality. The numerous pieces classed as seconds suggest that Cookworthy had been unable to acquire a sufficiently skilled workforce in Plymouth. The business was transferred to 15 Castle Green, Bristol, where porcelain was manufactured under Cookworthy's supervision until 1773, when he decided to sell his interest in the factory and his patent rights to Richard Champion, his business partner. Champion continued to make porcelain in Bristol until 1778, when -- his capital spent -- he closed the factory. He later sold Cookworthy's patent to a syndicate of Staffordshire potters, who exploited Cornish china clay for the production of bone china. True porcelain manufacture, pioneered by Cookworthy, virtually ceased in Britain with the closure of the Bristol works. 
Cookworthy was also well known as a Quaker minister and religious thinker. He emerged from his period of retirement during his bereavement with strengthened faith; thereafter he adopted the traditional 'plain' dress and speech of the Quakers, though he continued to move in scientific and literary circles. Between 1745 and 1747 he took an unpopular stance, urging his Quaker neighbours in Plymouth not to compromise their pacifist principles by dealing in 'prize goods' from captured vessels. From that time he became an active Quaker minister, travelling widely in the three south-western counties, representing Devon Friends at the yearly meeting in London for the first time in 1748, and becoming the mainstay of Plymouth meeting. 
Cookworthy believed firmly in the importance of the central Quaker doctrine: the power of the divine inner light operating on the human heart. This led him to explore beyond the Quaker fold to the writings of others who stressed the mystical side of religion. His publication in 1751 of a translation of Muralt's 'L'instinct divin' as 'The Divine Instinct Recommended to Men' was the prelude to translations of the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg, the Swedish visionary. He was perhaps attracted by Swedenborg's belief that personal relationships, particularly those of man and wife, survived beyond the grave. Cookworthy published 'The Doctrine of Life' in 1763, the first of Swedenborg's works to appear in English, and collaborated with Thomas Hartley (died 1784) in the translation of Swedenborg's 'Heaven and Hell' (published 1778), accompanying Hartley on a visit to Swedenborg in London. That Cookworthy's faith was highly individual and could not be bound by the confines of Quaker orthodoxy is highlighted by an episode on his deathbed: he took bread and wine, inviting his daughters to join him, saying that he felt it his duty to follow the scriptural injunction despite the Quaker testimony against ritual sacraments. 
Cookworthy was a polymath, more scholar than businessman, his reputation for absent-mindedness and his 'mild but intellectual countenance' (Selleck, 228) confirming the impression of a man absorbed in study. A linguist, he was fluent in Latin and French, and his circle of acquaintances was wide and extended well beyond fellow Quaker intellectuals such as John Fothergill to include such figures as John Smeaton, who lodged with him during the building of the Eddystone lighthouse, and Captain James Cook, who, with Joseph Banks and Daniel Solander, dined with him before sailing from Plymouth in 1768. Cookworthy's willingness to embrace unorthodox beliefs, seen in his attraction to Swedenborg, was also visible in the scientific field. He firmly believed that divining rods could locate metallic lodes, and contributed an essay advocating their use to William Pryce's 'Mineralogia Cornubiensis' (1778). 
Cookworthy's scholarship drew comment from those who knew him. The naval officer John Jervis was reported as saying that no one could be in Cookworthy's company 'without being the wiser and better for it' (Selleck, 170). A young American who spent a whole day discussing politics, religion, and history with Cookworthy in 1776 found in him 'the most sensible Learned kind Man I ever knew... an amazing Memory, excellent Delivery, and a Stile that we no where else meet with, catholic in the extreme, deep in Argument, meek, humble... in short the most refind and accomplished Man. (Morgan, 109-10)' Cookworthy fell ill in May 1780 and died at his home in Notte Street, Plymouth, on 17 October 1780, aged seventy-five. He was buried in the Quaker burial-ground at Plymouth on 21 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 6200


Cooley, Thomas (1740/41-1784), architect, is said to have been born in England; his parentage is unknown. He was apprenticed to a London carpenter named Reynolds, and subsequently became clerk to William Grenell, master joiner in the office of works. By 1763 he had become a pupil of Robert Mylne and by 1765 he was working as Mylne's clerk. Cooley reputedly devoted all his spare time to the study of architecture: he competed for premiums awarded by the Society of Arts, winning third prize in 1763 and second prize in 1764 and 1765. He also exhibited designs at the Free Society of Artists between 1765 and 1768. 
In March 1769 Cooley won the Dublin Royal Exchange competition, a success which, according to Dublin rumour, was due to Mylne's influence with the committee. He moved to Dublin to supervise the execution of the exchange and settled in the city for the rest of his life. In 1775 he succeeded Joseph Jarratt as clerk and inspector of civil buildings at the barrack board. He enjoyed the patronage of Richard Robinson, archbishop of Armagh, who employed him as his architect for building projects in the city and diocese of Armagh: these included the archbishop's palace (1770), the public library (1771), the royal school (1774), and the gaol (1780). It was to Cooley's office that Robinson sent the young Francis Johnston from Armagh to train in the profession; after Cooley's death Johnston succeeded him as the primate's architect. In Dublin itself, in addition to the Royal Exchange, Cooley designed the chapel of the Hibernian Military School in Phoenix Park (1771), Newgate prison (1773-81), and the north and west ranges of the west court of the Four Courts, begun in 1776 and completed after his death by James Gandon. His two major country house commissions were Caledon House, co. Tyrone (1779), for James Alexander, later first earl of Caledon, and Rokeby Hall, co. Louth, designed shortly before his death for Archbishop Robinson and carried out by Francis Johnston. His participation also seems to have been crucial in the design of Ardbraccan, co. Meath (1773-5), for Henry Maxwell, bishop of Meath. 
When Gandon arrived in Ireland in 1781, he pronounced that Cooley and Thomas Ivory were the only two architects 'properly so called' (Mulvany, 49-50) in Dublin. In Cooley's architecture the richness and elaboration of the Dublin Royal Exchange, a domed structure with a giant Corinthian order on two facades, is unique. A rational sobriety prevails in his other buildings: their quality depends on interval and balance, and their restrained style prepares the visitor for interiors which often exhibit a sophisticated manipulation of architectural elements and an innovative elegance of detail unmatched by other Irish architects of the time. 
Cooley was said to have 'supported an unimpeached character for integrity' ('Freeman's Journal') but was also thought to be supercilious. He died of a bilious fever in Anglesea Street, Dublin, in 1784 in his forty-fourth year, leaving a son, William, and a daughter; his wife had predeceased him in January 1779. His collection of books, drawings, prints, antique medals, a camera obscura, and other items was sold at auction in April 1784. William Cooley married Emily, daughter of his father's executor, the sculptor Richard Cranfield; their son Thomas Cooley (1795?-1872) was a portrait painter in Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 6201


Cooley, William Desborough (1795?-1883), geographer and controversialist, was probably born on 16 March 1795 in Dublin, the son of William Cooley ('b'. 1772/3), a Dublin barrister, and grandson of the architect Thomas Cooley. Educated privately and then from 1811 to 1816 at Trinity College, Dublin, he developed an interest in the history of discovery, physical geography and surveying, and the mathematics which went with it, the last interest leading to later publications on Euclid. 
Cooley's life from 1816 to the early 1830s is obscure, but he then emerged on the London literary scene as an editorial associate on 'The Athenaeum', a writer for the 'Foreign Quarterly Review' who had revealed the false claims of J. B. Douville to discoveries in Angola, and the author of a 'History of Maritime and Inland Discovery' in 1830-31 which remained standard for about forty years. He offered his services to the 'Edinburgh Review' as a controversial writer on Irish subjects but the editor restricted him to geographical and African subjects on which he contributed eleven major reviews in three years. One of these, in 1835, revealed the existence of the then unknown Lake Tanganyika and distinguished what later became known as the Bantu and their languages. At this time Cooley was in contact with W. F. W. Owen and J. B. Emery, who had surveyed east Africa's coasts, and with two visiting Arab traders and their African servants who knew the interior. Collating their information with what little was available from Portuguese sources and from ancient authorities and then 'rectifying' it all, Cooley built up a picture of east Africa's geography which was set out in a major article with a map for the 'Journal of the Royal Geographical Society' in 1845 and elaborated in a book, 'Inner Africa Laid Open', in 1852. Practical exploration now began to show that some of the details were wrong but Cooley became notorious for refusing to accept travellers' findings. He denied, for example, that there was snow on the summits of Kilimanjaro and Mount Kenya (though he had revealed the existence of these mountains) and he insisted that lakes Tanganyika and Malawi were connected as one water. When Livingstone mentioned particular Ngoni peoples, he said they did not exist. Perhaps demolishing Douville's claims had given Cooley too much of a taste for contradicting explorers, while his Irish background and combative temperament set him at odds with the English geographical establishment. More serious was his failure to realize that history moves on: for example, locations of peoples correctly deduced from sixteenth-century sources were no longer necessarily correct. In the end, his stubbornly held views made his geography absurd. 
The problem was compounded by Cooley's relationship with the Royal Geographical Society. A member from its origin in 1830, he was elected to the council in 1832 and became a vice-president in 1835. He used his position to try to organize some exploring expeditions but none came to full fruition. He blamed the society and also accused the secretary, Alexander Maconochie, of mishandling the subscriptions -- a grievance which still rankled forty years later. Cooley had to resign from his offices. Although he continued freely, and not altogether unjustifiably, to criticize the society in its years of prosperity for using the popularity of the great explorers to increase its fashionable appeal, he was given free membership and, at its instance, a $100 civil-list pension in 1859. Meanwhile, a stream of articles in 'The Athenaeum' and other periodicals commented learnedly, forcefully, and not always mistakenly on the work of explorers in Africa and elsewhere. 
Foremost among Cooley's positive achievements was the formation in 1846 of what he originally proposed to call the Columbus Society -- a body which would make available to its subscribers in printed form records of important voyages and travels of the past. The idea arose partly out of Cooley's displeasure at the Royal Geographical Society's failure to act in this area and his own failure to make much of a success of a publication series entitled 'The World Surveyed'. Renamed the Hakluyt Society, with Cooley as its first secretary and the editor of one of its earliest publications, the new body soon established itself as one of the country's major text-publishing learned societies and has flourished ever since. Increasing deafness and the pressure of other work led Cooley to resign the secretaryship in 1849, but he continued on the council until 1859. 
It is a pity that the promising concepts which bore fruit in Cooley's 'Physical Geography' of 1876 were not developed further. His other achievements may be said to be his attempts to bring rigour into what passed for geography in Britain in the mid-century. He was not wrong to criticize Livingstone's misreading of Herodotus which led to delusions about the 'fountains of the Nile'. Nor was he wrong in his 'Claudius Ptolemy' of 1854 to question the credulous acceptance of ideas like the 'mountains of the moon' on the alleged authority of Ptolemy. Cooley did useful work on Somaliland and its history and on Arabic source materials for west Africa. His ideas on Africa, however misplaced some of them were, raised awareness and promoted serious study of the continent and its peoples. The information he acquired for his 'discoveries' of the 1830s and 1840s has remained useful evidence for historians of Africa. 
Having lived for many years in comparative poverty, Cooley died of bronchitis on 1 March 1883, at 55 Crowndale Road, Somers Town, London. He is thought to have been unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 6202


Cooling, Richard (d. 1697), government official, was from a family apparently of Shropshire origins, and with several members in government service. Wood was of the opinion that he 'was originally, as it seems, of All Souls' College' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 2.285-6). He was to claim that he had undertaken 'hazardous services' towards the restoration of Charles II, and had assisted in preparations for the subsequent coronation ('CSP dom.', '1677-8', 120). More certainly, by 5 July 1660 he was acting as secretary to the lord chamberlain, the second earl of Manchester, and was one of the persons incorporated MA at Oxford with Manchester, on 8 September 1665. He continued to act as secretary to successive lord chamberlains until April 1697, while building up a collection of other offices. Thus he was appointed a commissioner for licensing hackney coaches in 1670 and acted as clerk of the robes and wardrobes from 26 September 1680 and, having vacated this post by March 1685, again from 1689. Perhaps a clerk-in-extraordinary to the privy council from 1679, he was sworn a clerk-in-ordinary on 21 February 1689. Pepys was acquainted with him, and regaled by him with court gossip. His attitude to office seems appropriately expressed in his reported comments that 'his horse was a Bribe, and his boots a bribe, and... he was made up of bribes, as an Oxford scholar is set out with other men's goods when he goes out of town' (Pepys, 8.369); a colleague remarked, at his death (17 June 1697), that he 'had the reputation of a 'griping' officer to little purpose' leaving little in property and hefty debts ('CSP dom.', '1697', 203). He bequeathed to his wife ('now liveing'; TNA: PRO, PROB 11/440), Mary ('nee' Cullum), son Charles, and daughters Mary and Anne (he appears to have had at least one other son, Richard) little more than the residue of leases on some small properties, mostly in Shropshire, and of his house in Suffolk Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 6203


Coombes, Robert (1808-1860), oarsman, was born at Vauxhall, Surrey, and was apprenticed at an early age as a waterman on the Thames. His first sculling victory came in July 1836 and during the next fifteen years he established himself as one of the principal professional scullers of his time. Although he was only 5 feet 7 inches tall and his rowing weight was normally under 9 stone, his skill often allowed him to beat men of greater strength and weight. Coombes's greatest achievements as a sculler were in the professional championship of England, a race held at infrequent intervals whenever a suitable challenger emerged. He was beaten at his first attempt on 1 November 1838 by the holder, Charles Campbell, but he defeated Campbell easily on 19 August 1846, the first time the championship was rowed over the Putney to Mortlake course on the Thames in London. He won the title twice more, beating Robert Newell on 29 September 1847 and Tom Mackinnery on 7 May 1851. He lost the championship to Thomas Cole, a younger man, on 24 May 1852 by only half a length. He challenged Cole again on 14 October of that year but lost once more; it was his last important sculling race. 
Coombes also excelled in fours. He stroked a Thames four that beat Henry Clasper's crew on the Tyne on 16 July 1842, a race that prompted Clasper to develop the first keelless, outrigged boat. Two years later, on 21 June 1844, Coombes's crew lost to Clasper's at the Royal Thames regatta in London, although it won the fours championship on the final day. Using a boat similar to that designed by Clasper, Coombes won the championship for a second time in 1846 and again in 1849. On the latter occasion Clasper was the stroke, and this was the only time Coombes sank his differences with his Tyne rival. It was claimed in the press at the time 'that circumstances, not inclination exactly, conduced to this union'. 
Coombes's expertise attracted the attention of the university oarsmen. He trained the losing Oxford crew for the 1840 boat race and the victorious Cambridge boat in 1846. There were two races in 1849, and Coombes coached Cambridge on both occasions: Cambridge won the first but lost the second. When he was asked to coach the 1852 Cambridge crew, Coombes found himself at the centre of a fierce argument about the use of professional watermen in the training of university oarsmen. Oxford had expressed disquiet on the issue in 1846 and 1849 but on this occasion T. S. Egan, for many years the mentor of Cambridge rowing, was also concerned at Coombes's presence and defected to Oxford, where he trained a crew that won the boat race with ease. It was a decisive moment for certain amateur oarsmen, mainly those from the universities and the more important metropolitan clubs, who subsequently tried to distance themselves from the professionals and any oarsmen of working-class origin. Coombes was never again involved with a boat race crew but he explained his training methods at the end of a small volume published in 1852, 'Aquatic notes or sketches of the rise and progress of racing at Cambridge by a member of C. U. B. C.'

Later in life Coombes fell into poverty and began to suffer various mental disorders, and in 1859 he was admitted to the Kent Lunatic Asylum at Barming Heath, Maidstone. He died there on 25 February 1860. He was buried at the expense of his friends in Brompton cemetery on 7 March; the funeral was attended by the leading London watermen. 


@@@@@


doc= 6204


Coombes, William Henry (1767-1850), Roman Catholic priest, was born on 8 May 1767, at Meadgate in Camerton, Somerset, where his family was well established. His grandfather had been the local blacksmith, and it seems likely that George Coombes, the landlord of the Camerton Inn, was William Henry's father. It was probably his uncle, the Revd William Coombes, vicar-general of the western district, who sent him to the English College at Douai, where he was admitted on 22 July 1779. He was ordained priest in 1791 and taught at the college in 1792-3. During the tumult of the French Revolution, Coombes twice escaped from Douai, the second time successfully, reaching Austrian lines on 20 October 1793. On his arrival in England he was appointed professor of theology at Old Hall Green College. He was an accomplished Greek scholar, and in 1797 he published 'Sacred Eloquence', a selection of readings from the Greek fathers. This was followed in 1799 by the publication of an account of his escape from Douai. He also published some letters on Catholic matters in William Cobbett's 'Register', under the pseudonym of 'the British Observer', between 1804 and 1806. On 12 December 1801 Pope Pius VII conferred upon him a DD. 
In 1810 Coombes accepted the mission at Shepton Mallet, which he held for the next thirty-nine years. From his arrival until the sisters moved to Westbury near Bristol in 1830, he acted as spiritual director to the adjacent Convent of the Visitation, which undoubtedly stimulated his interest in the history of the order. In 1812 he published a translation of Jacques Marsollier's 'Life of St Francis of Sales'; this was followed by another translation, 'The Spiritual Entertainments of St Francis of Sales' (1814), which he dedicated to the Visitation sisters. In 1830 he published his own 'History of the Life of St Jane Frances de Chantal'. He also published a polemical work, 'The Essence of Religious Controversy' (1827), and a protest about those clauses in the 1829 'Catholic Relief Bill' which related to monastic institutions. In June 1849 he retired to Downside Abbey, where he remained until his death on 15 November 1850. He was buried in the Downside cemetery. Little is known of his character, although the vicar of Camerton, the irascible John Skinner, recorded that Coombes caused 'much unnecessary trouble' over the collection of his uncle's tithes in 1807 (Coombs, 262). Lady Jerningham, who became acquainted with Coombes in Bath in 1808, described him as 'A good Grecian and clever, agreable ['sic'] also and pious. Not conceited, always wears spectacles' (E. Castle, ed., 'The Jerningham Letters', 1896, 1.326). 


@@@@@


doc= 6205


Cooper, Abraham (1787-1868), battle and animal painter, was born on 8 September 1787 at Red Lion Street, Holborn, London. His father was a tobacconist and later became an innkeeper at Holloway and for a time at Edmonton, but with little financial success. Cooper attended a local school and showed an early aptitude for drawing, especially horses and dogs, attracting the attention of a Mr Phillips, for whom he painted watercolour portraits of his horses. At thirteen Cooper went to work for his uncle, William Davis, manager of Astley's circus, famous for its spectacular equestrian dramas, providing the boy with opportunities to study horses at first hand. However, he refused an equestrian role with John Kemble at Covent Garden about 1809, and from this year determined to become an artist. About this time, wishing to have a portrait of a horse he had often ridden, Cooper bought a small book on oil painting and set about the task himself. The horse's owner, Henry Meux, seeing the finished picture, 'Frolic', was so delighted with it that he insisted on buying it for his own collection. William Davis knew the celebrated horse painter Benjamin Marshall. The generous Marshall, appreciating Cooper's talent, addiction to hard work, and personal charm, freely gave him studio space, encouragement, and instruction, and introduced him to prospective patrons. Cooper also studied and copied illustrations in the 'Sporting Magazine' and became a contributor in 1811 with a portrait of a pointer, 'Basto', described as a very staunch young dog. During his lifetime Cooper provided 189 subjects which were engraved in the magazine. He exhibited first in 1812 at both the Royal Academy and the British Institution. Initially his subjects were horses, dogs, and some wild animals, but from 1815 he started showing meticulously researched battle paintings, often of the civil war, usually including mounted soldiers. He was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1817, and it was said that his painting shown in 1820, 'The Battle of Marston Moor', led to his election as Royal Academician that year. Becoming an academician within seven or eight years of taking up oil painting was a remarkable achievement. Between 1812 and 1868-9 Cooper exhibited 332 pictures at the Royal Academy (and seventy-three at the British Institution). Although only a quarter of these paintings were battle scenes, he was acknowledged as the country's principal battle painter, with a similar standing to Peter Hess in Germany and Horace Vernet in France. A slightly plaintive correspondent of the 'Art Journal' wrote that 'Between the years 1828 and 1831 the artist seems to have been so much occupied with painting portraits of famous racers, hunters, and roadsters, as to leave no time for pictures of a more important character' ('Art Journal', 1863, 90). With changes of taste, the twentieth-century public largely forgot his battle pictures, but his many racehorse portraits, perhaps lacking some of the vibrancy of those by his mentor Marshall, came into vogue as well as providing a valuable and accurate record for turf historians. Two of his most famous racehorse portraits, both exhibited at the Royal Academy, were the winners of the St Leger in 1836 and 1837. Lord George Bentinck's Elis with John Day up and the trainer John Doe with his hack was followed by Mango, the property of Bentinck's great rival Charles Greville, clerk to the privy council. Cooper's conversation piece 'The Day Family', exhibited in 1838, shows the artist as a master of portraiture, both human and equine, and composition in placing the six figures of the celebrated racehorse trainer and his family, two horses, and a mule carriage in a natural grouping. This painting was bequeathed by Sir Abe Bailey to the National Gallery of South Africa. A very similar version, also dated 1838, is in the Tate collection. Cooper was particularly adept at catching the character of Arab horses and 'Adonis', his portrait of George III's favourite charger which had been imported from Hanover to improve the royal stud, is a perceptive study of this attractive breed. He painted coursing and shooting scenes, but the hunting field only on rare occasions. He also gave lessons to J. F. Herring (1795-1865) and to William Barraud (1810-1850), and his son, Alexander Davis Cooper ('fl'. 1837-1888), must have benefited from his father's advice in his genre painting and illustrations of scenes from Shakespeare. Abraham Cooper lived throughout his life in or near London, dying at his home, Woodbine Cottage, Woodland Street, Greenwich, on 24 December 1868. He was buried in Highgate cemetery. His obituary in the 'New Sporting Magazine' remembers him as 'a guileless pleasant gentleman with little jealousy in his nature' ('New Sporting Magazine', 100), which probably accounted for his personal effects being valued for his widow, Frances, at less than $200. 


@@@@@


doc= 6206


Cooper, Alexander (bap. 1609, d. c.1660), miniature painter, was baptized at the church of St Nicholas Cole Abbey, in the City of London, on 11 December 1609, the second son of Richard Cooper ('b'. 1577) and Barbara, sister of John Hoskins (c.1590-1665), the miniaturist; Richard and Barbara had married at the same church on 1 September 1607. Following Richard Graham's biographical note on Samuel Cooper (1607/8-1672) historians have until recently believed that Alexander was the elder of the two brothers (Edmond, 'Limners and picturemakers', 99; Edmond, 'Samuel Cooper', 84). Graham also states that Samuel and Alexander were brought up by Hoskins, so it is assumed that Richard and Barbara died while the children were in infancy. Little is known of their upbringing or training but the Dutch chronicler Joachim Sandrart suggests that Alexander learned the art of miniature painting from Peter Oliver -- 'Oliverii hujus discipulus longe celeberrimus' ('[he was] by far the most celebrated pupil of this Oliver'; Sandrart, 312). Both boys must have benefited greatly from the expertise of their uncle. 
Historians have also believed that Alexander Cooper went abroad in the early 1630s and passed the rest of his life in northern Europe, dying romantically in Stockholm in 1660, 'alone, while at work, and with his brush in his hand' (Williamson, 90-91). The notion that Cooper died thus in Sweden may have derived from documents in the Swedish royal archives recording applications for payment of salary from the king of Sweden, such as those of 1651-3 (transcribed in Foster, 1, appx, 91-3), in which Cooper apparently claims to be terminally ill. The language of such applications is, however, conventional and does not necessarily indicate that Alexander was on the point of death. In the second application Cooper signals his intention of returning to England or of going to Tuscany but he seems to have remained in Sweden or Denmark until about 1656. In June 1658 he was in York with members of his extended family, signing a deposition in a probate case and claiming to have been resident at his brother's house in Covent Garden 'for these two yeares last past' (Edmond, 'Samuel Cooper', 83-5). He is not mentioned in any of the later documents relating to the Hoskinses and the Coopers, so he may indeed have died about 1660, probably in England rather than in Sweden. 
The earliest work in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, that is plausibly attributed to Cooper dates from about 1628-30. From the 1630s there is a group of portraits of Elizabeth of Bohemia and her family and household in the Bode Museum, Berlin. A portrait of Charles Louis, count palatine, datable to about 1632 (V&A), is signed with the initials AC. These sitters were all patrons of Peter Oliver and could have been painted in the Netherlands or, since they are not necessarily from the life, in London, where the English sitters painted by Cooper in these years would have been. In the 1630s Alexander Cooper may have contributed to the output of the Hoskins studio. About 1642, when his brother was becoming established in London, Sandrart records that he was in Amsterdam and that he brought with him portraits of the 'aulae Anglicanae' (Sandrart, 312). This is usually taken to mean the luminaries of the English court in London but possibly refers to the English courtiers of Elizabeth and Frederick of Bohemia in The Hague. Thereafter documentary evidence of payments to him and the identities of sitters place him consistently, until the mid-1650s, on the continent -- in the Netherlands, Sweden, and Denmark -- the recipient of quite lucrative royal patronage. He is documented as receiving erratic payments in the Swedish royal accounts from 1647 to 1657 (Williamson; see also Cavalli-Bjorkman, 'Svenskt Miniatyrmaleri', 18-25). Cooper is referred to as 'court painter' from 1647 in Sweden (Cavalli-Bjorkman, 'Cooper', 7). 
The stylistic evidence tends to confirm Sandrart's statement that Cooper was Oliver's pupil. His work projects into the mid-century the brightness and hard focus of Hilliard and Oliver, as in the 'Frederick III of Denmark' of 1656 (Rosenborg Castle, Copenhagen), which was by then slightly archaic in the context of the English miniature but was directly analogous in appearance to the continental enamel. His backgrounds are often in the flat colours of the sixteenth-century tradition; they include unconventional colours such as lavender or grey, sometimes lightened or shaded behind the figure, and on occasion even showing a curious non-naturalistic variant of a technique of floating wet washes into one another, originally developed by Hilliard to simulate the sheen of silk curtains in the background of the miniature. No landscape background by Cooper is known, which suggests that he was out of touch with the Hoskins studio during this phase of activity. Unlike Oliver or Hoskins he worked with a hatching stroke, shorter and much less graphic than that of his brother but firm and precise. The surviving 'oeuvre' is, however, small and much of it spread through the royal collections of the states in which he worked, including especially that of Sweden (Nationalmuseum, Stockholm). In the Victoria and Albert Museum and in other English collections there are few signed works to give a solid indication of stylistic criteria, and there are disturbing variations in technique among the works attributed to him that pass through the saleroom. 


@@@@@


doc= 6207


Cooper, Andrew (fl. 1660), poet, details of whose life are scarce, is best known as the author of 'Stratologia, or, The History of the English Civil Warrs, in English Verse', printed in London in 1660. Written from an observer's perspective, and signed 'A.C.', the verse examines the principal events of the civil war from its causes until the execution of Charles I, and concludes by predicting further upheaval: '
blood for blood 

Cryes out aloud, and will be understood, 

Revenge whereof although the Gods delay, 

It's with more Fury, that they may repay. 
(p. 171)' Cooper's 'Epistle to the reader' (sig. A3'v') warns of taut, blunt, and violent language, due in part to the poem's themes, but also to Cooper's own background. Wounded three times before the age of eighteen, he had had his education interrupted by military demands: '
When first for Oxford, fully there intent, 

To study learned Sciences I went. 

Instead of Logicke, Physicke, School-converse, 

I did attend the armed Troops of Mars. 
(ll. 13-16)' The succeeding verses are a product of periods of imprisonment, but Cooper articulates hopes to supplement his first volume with a sequel: '
And if thou shalt accept these first Essayes, 

Shortly perchance we may in smoother Layes 

The second part of our sad Annals sing, 

Till the blest Restauration of our King. 
(ll. 29-32)' The verse itself is dedicated to the Honourable Conyers Darcy (1622-1692) of Hornby Castle, Yorkshire. Cooper, stimulated by Darcy's faith and valour, eulogizes the achievements of Darcy's regiment, and acts as a witness to the personal cost of his allegiance, in terms of physical wounds and financial risk: '
Your sufferings since the Warres who hath not known 

You paid both for your Souldiers, and your own 

Loyalty, nor would your brave mind submit 

To imposition, till much mov'd to it 

By your most vertuous Lady's prayers and tears 

Your name the last in that black Roll appears. 
(ll. 25-30)' An earlier text, 'A Speedy Post; with More News from Hull, York and Beverley', printed in London for John Thomas in 1642, has been attributed to Cooper on the basis of his close involvement in the battles of the civil war. The author, Andrew Cooper, provides a detailed news report of events surrounding the arrival in York of Charles I, and his courting of support prior to his departure from the city in August. Initially focusing on a recent skirmish in Anlaby, Cooper then relates the daily polarization of the two parties, the anxious gathering of conscripts, and the tangible prologue of conflict: 'the Country hereabout is put in a great feare, if civill Warrs begin amongst us, that ruin and distruction will befall this Kingdome, which God of his mercy prevent' (p. 6). He ends with prayers for unity and concord, and with the promise of future instalments and literary undertakings. Both Sir Egerton Brydges and Thomas Corser have speculated that the poet was related to Anthony Ashley Cooper, created earl of Shaftesbury in 1672. 


@@@@@


doc= 6208


Cooper, Anthony Ashley, first earl of Shaftesbury (1621-1683), politician, was born shortly after 3 a.m. on 22 July 1621 at the house of his grandfather Sir Anthony Ashley, baronet, in Wimborne St Giles, Dorset, 'the eldest child then living' (Christie, vol. 1, appx 2, p. xxv) of Sir John Cooper, baronet (died 1631), of Rockbourne, Hampshire, and his wife, Anne Ashley (died 1628), of Wimborne St Giles. He was baptized on 3 August and given both names of his maternal grandfather in fulfilment of a promise his parents had made to Sir Anthony. Anthony had a younger sister, Philippa (1623-1701), and a younger brother, George ('b'. 1625), about whom little is known. His father, created a baronet in 1622, represented Poole in the parliaments of 1625 and 1628, supporting an attack on the Arminian tendencies of the bishop of Winchester, Richard Neile, in February 1629. Both his parents died while Anthony was still a child; his mother on 20 July 1628, his father on 23 March 1631. 
Through birth and through his relatives' and his own marriages Cooper became connected to some of the most powerful families in England. The Coopers and the Ashleys were of minor gentry stock, but both families had steadily built up their landed possessions over the generations, and the marriage between John and Anne in 1616 united extensive neighbouring estates in Dorset, Hampshire, and Wiltshire, as well as outlying properties in Somerset, Staffordshire, Derbyshire, and Middlesex. In 1622, two years after the death of his first wife, Sir Anthony Ashley, now aged seventy, married nineteen-year-old Philippa Sheldon, who was related to George Villiers, marquess of Buckingham, then the most powerful figure at court. In 1629 Sir John Cooper took as his second wife Mary, the widow of Sir Charles Moryson and one of the daughters of Sir Baptist Hicks, to whose great commercial fortune she was coheir. Mary's grandson from her first marriage was Arthur Capel, first earl of Essex. Cooper himself married three times over the course of his life. On 25 February 1639 he married Margaret (died 1649), third daughter of Thomas Coventry, first Baron Coventry, Charles I's then lord keeper; she brought with her a dowry of $4000; the marriage also connected him with George Savile, later first marquess of Halifax, whose father married Margaret's sister. Margaret was Cooper's own choice as bride, and he appears to have been genuinely in love with her. The marriage, however, brought no children. Margaret had two miscarriages (in 1646 and 1647) and gave birth to a stillborn girl in December 1647; she was seven and a half months into her fourth pregnancy when, on 10 July 1649, she 'fell suddenly into an apoplectical convulsion fit' and died (Christie, vol. 1, appx 2, p. lii). Cooper's second wife was Lady Frances Cecil (1633-1652), eldest daughter of David Cecil, third earl of Exeter, whom he married on 15 April 1650 when she was still only seventeen. The couple had two sons: the first, Cecil, died in childhood; the second, Anthony Ashley, eventually became second earl of Shaftesbury. Frances died on 31 December 1652, aged only nineteen. On 30 August 1655 Cooper married Margaret ('bap'. 1627, died 1693), sixth daughter of William Spencer, second Baron Spencer of Wormleighton, sister of the first earl of Sunderland (who had been killed at Newbury fighting for the king in 1643), and the niece of Thomas Wriothesley, fourth earl of Southampton; she also brought a dowry of $4000. Although the marriage remained childless, it appears to have been happy. 
Cooper's inheritance was troubled. His father, as a result of heavy gambling and extravagant spending, had run up debts in excess of $35,000. In addition most of his lands were held by knight service, which meant that his heir and estates would pass into the hands of the court of wards. Sir John's two trustees, Edward Tooker (who had married one of Sir John's sisters) and Sir Daniel Norton (a colleague of Sir John's in the Commons and the husband of Cooper's godmother), bought the wardship of the boy from the king for $3000, but found themselves still under the authority of the court of wards when it came to selling land to meet Sir John's debts. Sir Francis Ashley, the younger brother of Sir Anthony, then the king's serjeant-at-law, persuaded the court to sell some of the richest parts of the estate, which enabled Sir Francis and two of the commissioners for the sales to pick up several properties at less than market value. Cooper later estimated his loss from what he called 'the injustice and oppression of that Court' at $20,000 (Christie, vol. 1, appx 1, p. viii). He was far from being reduced to poverty, however; a survey made in 1638 calculated that a yearly revenue of $2349 15's'. 9died from the lands remaining to him was improvable to over $7000. 
As he was growing up Cooper was exposed to a number of puritan influences. His first tutor was Aaron Guerdon, a noted puritan selected for him by his grandfather, who felt the youth 'could not have too deep a dye of religion' (Haley, 12). Following his father's death the young Sir Anthony Cooper, bt, as he now became, went to live at Southwick, near Portsmouth, with his father's trustee, Sir Daniel Norton, a man of puritan leanings who had joined the attack on Arminianism in the parliament of 1629. Here he was tutored by a man called Fletcher, about whom we know only that he was an excellent teacher of grammar. When Sir Daniel died in early 1636 Cooper joined the household of the other trustee, Edward Tooker, at Maddington, near Salisbury, where he was put into the care of a third tutor, an MA from Oriel College, Oxford, who left so little impression that later in life Shaftesbury was unable to remember his name. In March 1637 Cooper entered Exeter College, Oxford, where he studied under its rector, Dr John Prideaux, regius professor of divinity, a strong upholder of the Calvinist doctrine of predestination and another vehement opponent of Arminianism, before entering Lincoln's Inn on 18 February 1638, where he was exposed to the puritan preaching of Dr Edward Reynolds and Joseph Caryll. 
Following his marriage to Lord Coventry's daughter in February 1639 Cooper, being still a minor and therefore not yet having come into possession of his property, moved into his father-in-law's household, and apart from occasional visits to Wimborne St Giles lived in the lord keeper's houses at Durham House in the Strand and at Canonbury in Islington. He inherited the short stature of his grandfather and as an adult was markedly below average height. He was also plagued by ill health, suffering from an internal condition which left him with a permanent dull aching pain on his left side, but which invariably flared up during the middle of the day to cause a bout of such intense pain that he was forced to lie down wherever he was. Portraits reveal a man with marked features, though by no means unattractive, and a face that shows character, composure, and intelligence. Although his education had been unsystematic he attained the educated gentleman's usual knowledge of the classics, history, and law. 
In March 1640 Cooper was chosen to serve as member for Tewkesbury for the Short Parliament (13 April-5 May) when still a minor, thanks in part to the influence of the Coventrys, whose family seat was at nearby Croome D'Abitot in Worcestershire. However, he was not asked to stand for Tewkesbury again in October 1640 at the elections for what was to become the Long Parliament, the Coventry connection probably working to his disadvantage at a time when opinion in the county was hardening against those associated with the court. In December he contested the by-election for the borough of Downton in Wiltshire, but a double return was made, and although (according to Cooper's own account) the committee of privileges decided in his favour its report never came before the Commons. When civil war broke out in 1642 Cooper at first tried to avoid taking sides. Although he left London after the king's departure from Whitehall in January 1642 he did not join the court, instead making his way to Rufford, Nottinghamshire, to stay with his brother-in-law, Sir William Savile. He was present in the county when Charles I raised his standard at Nottingham on 22 August and rode from Rufford to Nottingham to see the king, though whether or not he actually witnessed the ceremony is unclear. He left with the king for Derby on 13 September, but 'only as a spectator', he later claimed in his autobiographical sketch, 'having not as yet adhered against the Parliament' (Christie, vol. 1, appx 2, p. xxvii); indeed, he did not accompany Charles beyond Derby, but instead retired northwards, away from the scene of military operations. 
In spring 1643, however, with the expected speedy resolution to the conflict not having materialized, Cooper decided that he should return to Dorset, make his choice, and take part in the upcoming campaign. During that summer he threw in his lot with the royalists and at his own expense raised a regiment of foot and a troop of horse, of which he became a colonel and captain respectively. Nevertheless he hoped for a compromise settlement. According to a later memoir written by John Locke he went to see the king at Oxford and asked to be allowed to treat with the parliamentary garrisons, starting in his own county of Dorset, offering to restore things to 'the same posture they were before the war' and promising a free parliament to 'do what more remained to be done for the settlement of the nation' ('Works of John Locke', 1812, 9.267). Cooper did begin some private negotiations for the surrender of Dorchester but had achieved nothing when the royalist victory at Roundway Down in mid-July, followed by the fall of Bristol, changed the military balance in the area. By 2 August royalist troops under the command of Lord Carnarvon were at the gates of Dorchester and Cooper was one of three royal commissioners appointed to treat with the town the next day. Dorchester surrendered without resistance in return for being spared plunder and punishment; Weymouth and Portland soon followed suit. However, the terms of the surrender were betrayed by Prince Maurice, whose troops arrived in the area shortly afterwards and immediately set about plundering both Dorchester and Weymouth. Carnarvon resigned his command in disgust, while Cooper and Maurice were said to have exchanged 'some pretty hot words' (ibid.). Maurice next tried to stop Cooper's appointment as governor of Weymouth and the Isle of Portland -- a commission promised him by Maurice's predecessor as commander of the royalist forces in the west, the marquess of Hertford -- on the grounds of inexperience. Cooper was able to persuade the chancellor of the exchequer, Edward Hyde (the future earl of Clarendon), to intercede with the king on his behalf, and in the end Charles agreed to confirm the commission; at the same time, however, the king wrote to Hertford to express concern over Cooper's youth and lack of military experience, urging the marquess to use his influence with Cooper to persuade him to resign as soon as he could without losing face. Cooper remained in the post for the rest of the year and was compensated with other honours, being made sheriff of Dorset and president of the council of war for that county. Locke's memoir claims that Cooper now made another attempt to bring the civil war to an end and framed a design to raise a third army of clubmen in several parts of the kingdom 'to suppress the armies on both sides' ('Works of John Locke', 1823, 9.268). Locke's account is problematic, however, since the clubmen movements did not emerge until 1645; moreover, there is no firm evidence to suggest that Cooper was involved in the formation of the clubmen in the west country at this later date. 
Early in 1644 Cooper resigned all his commissions under the king and on 24 February presented himself at parliament's quarters at Hurst Castle. Clarendon alleged that it was pique at being forced to give up the governorship of Weymouth that led Cooper to quit the king's party, but this seems unlikely, since going over to parliament meant giving up the shrievalty and turning down an offer of a peerage (both of which were more prestigious honours than the governorship of a small port) as well as leaving the greater part of his estates in Dorset, Somerset, and Wiltshire behind enemy lines. In his autobiographical sketch penned in January 1646 Cooper claimed that he took this step because he saw that the king's aim was 'destructive to religion and the state' (Christie, vol. 1, appx 2, p. xxix); indeed, others left the royalist cause at this time, out of concern about the increasing Catholic influence at court, Charles's truce with the Catholic rebels in Ireland, and the general view at royalist headquarters that a settlement must be imposed by conquest. When examined before the committee of both kingdoms in London on 6 March 1644 as to his reasons for coming over Cooper said that he believed the royalist side had no intention of 'promoting or preserving.. the Protestant religion and the liberties of the kingdom'; that he was 'fully satisfied... of the justness' of parliament's proceedings; and that he was willing to take the solemn league and covenant, now the general test of loyalty following parliament's recent treaty with the Scots (Christie, 1.50). 
On 10 July 1644 the Commons gave Cooper permission to leave London and join the county committee for Dorset and on 3 August the Dorset committee granted him a commission to command a brigade of horse and foot in Dorset with the title of field marshal-general. His first action was in the taking of Wareham, which capitulated on 10 August. On the 14th both houses of parliament voted to add him to the committee for governing the army in Dorset, and on the 22nd the Commons agreed that he should be allowed to compound for his sequestrated estates by payment of a $500 fine (though the fine was never paid and was later discharged by Oliver Cromwell). Back in Dorset, Cooper played an active role on the county committee, many of whose letters carry his signature first. On 25 October he was appointed commander-in-chief of a parliamentary force of 1500 men to oppose the royalist forces in the area under the command of Sir Lewis Dyve. He led the attack on the home of Sir John Strangways at Abbotsbury, west Dorset, in early November, went on to take Sturminster and Shaftesbury, and in December assisted in the relief of Colonel Robert Blake at Taunton. Taunton, however, was to be Cooper's last military action. Although a parliamentary committee sent him instructions in May 1645 to besiege Corfe Castle nothing ever came of this because the troops he was to use were occupied elsewhere. His military retirement may have had something to do with the new modelling of the army and the passage of the self-denying ordinance on 3 April 1645; although not a sitting MP Cooper still regarded himself as rightful member for Downton and may have thought it unwise to jeopardize his claim to the seat by retaining his commissions. Indeed, in autumn 1645 he did try to gain admission to parliament as member for Downton through his original petition, though the Commons resolved that 'no Person that hath been in actual War against this Parliament' should 'be admitted to sit as a Member' ('JHC', 4, 1644-6, 260). Yet he may have been forced to cease military service because of ill health; in June and July 1645 he spent six weeks in Tonbridge with his wife where 'he drank the waters', and in February 1646 he underwent two minor surgical procedures -- having 'a nerve and vein cut' on both occasions (Christie, vol. 1, appx 2, pp. xxxi, xxxiii) -- which left him confined to his chamber for several days. 
Cooper nevertheless continued to serve in local office. In October 1645 he resumed his place on the Dorset county committee, often serving as chairman. In December the committee sent him to Ottery St Mary, Devon, to ask the general of the parliamentary army, Sir Thomas Fairfax, for troops to assist in the besieging of Corfe Castle; Cooper's role, however, was exclusively civil, and he was not present when Corfe Castle finally surrendered in April 1646. In December 1646, after the end of the first civil war, parliament appointed Cooper high sheriff for Wiltshire, a post he held until 11 February 1648, when he was replaced by his uncle, possibly for reasons of ill health. In July parliament made him one of the commissioners for the militia in Dorset and also a commissioner for the rate for Ireland for Dorset. 
It was towards the end of the first civil war that Cooper began his investments in commerce and overseas plantations. On 23 March 1646 he records in his diary signing 'articles concerning my plantation in Barbadoes' (Christie, vol. 1, appx 2, p. xxxiv), while at the beginning of the next month he notes that two local boys bound themselves to him to serve there for seven years. Cooper had a joint share in a plantation of 205 acres, which employed twenty-one white servants and nine adult black slaves. Investments in the sugar plantations led him to acquire a quarter share in a small slave ship, the 'Rose', which was involved in the triangular trade between England, Guinea, and the West Indies. He sold his share of the Barbados plantation (105 acres) in 1655 for $1020. 
Unfortunately Cooper's diary, which runs from 1646 to 1650, remains silent on the great political issues of these years. It is normally thought that his sympathies lay with the presbyterians, though this needs qualification. He was not a religious presbyterian; he never advocated a policy of rigid conformity, and retained throughout his life a distaste for ecclesiastical authority. In his youth he had been friends with the noted puritan preacher William Strong, who was presented to a living near Wimborne in 1640 and who after the first civil war was to gather an Independent congregation which met in Westminster Abbey. Later in life Cooper was to have as his chaplain the Scottish Independent divine Robert Ferguson. He appears to have supported the cause of the political presbyterians in parliament against the army officers in 1647-8, but he nevertheless showed himself willing to serve the Commonwealth at the local level after the regicide in January 1649. Thus in February 1649 the new regime made him a JP of the quorum for the counties of Wiltshire and Dorset and of oyer and terminer for the western circuit (though he was not actually sworn in until 16 August, perhaps hinting at some initial qualms about serving). In April he was appointed commissioner to regulate the contribution paid by the counties of Wiltshire and Dorset, and in January and February 1650 he not only subscribed the engagement of loyalty to the new regime but agreed to serve on a commission tendering the engagement to others. 
No more is heard of Cooper until 17 January 1652, when the Rump Parliament named him to an extra-parliamentary commission of twenty-one, headed by Sir Matthew Hale, for the reform of the law. The Hale commission, which was dominated by moderates, made a series of well-reasoned proposals for law reform designed mainly to appeal to the middle ground, although none of them was to be implemented. On 17 March 1653 the Rump pardoned Cooper 'of all Delinquency' ('JHC', 7, 1651-9, 268), thereby opening the door for him to sit in parliament. Cromwell dissolved the Rump on 20 April, but Cooper was nominated to serve in the Barebones Parliament which assembled on 4 July, where he sat for the county of Wiltshire. He was made a member of the council of state on 14 July and appointed to a number of important committees, including the committee 'for the business of the law', which was intended to pick up where the Hale commission had left off, and he was among those present at a conference with the envoys of the United Provinces on 21 July when Cromwell put forward proposals for a close union between the two commonwealths. He firmly aligned himself with the moderates in the assembly, voting against abolishing tithes before an alternative maintenance had been worked out (15 July) and opposing the passage of a further bill for the sale of delinquents' estates (30 August). On 27 August he reported from the council of state to parliament on the case of the former Leveller John Lilburne, who had been banished by the Rump under pain of death, but who had since returned to England where he had been found 'Not Guilty of any crime worthy of death' by an Old Bailey jury who had taken it upon themselves 'to be Judges of matter of law, as well as matter of fact' ('State trials', 5.446-7). Cooper made no recommendation as to what to do with Lilburne, though parliament decided that Lilburne should continue in prison. Cooper was re-elected to the council of state when the time arrived to renew the body at the beginning of November, and supported a committee recommendation that tithes be continued when the issue again came before the assembly on 3 December. When the assembly voted on 10 December, by a majority of just two, to reject the committee's recommendation he joined with those who decided to turn up early on the morning of Monday 12 December 1653 to vote their own dissolution. 
Within four days a new constitution, the 'Instrument of government', establishing Cromwell as lord protector, was installed, and under its terms Cooper was named as one of fifteen members of the new council of state (though he never received his allotted salary of $1000 per annum). He was thus a member of the council which, in March 1654, approved the removal of John Lilburne to Jersey, where the writ of habeas corpus would not run: a loophole in the law which ironically was to be stopped by the so-called 'Shaftesbury Act' of 1679. In the elections to the first protectorate parliament in summer 1654 he was chosen by three constituencies -- Wiltshire, Poole, and Tewkesbury -- opting to sit for the more prestigious county seat, where he had emerged victorious after a fierce partisan contest. Under the new constitution Wiltshire had ten MPs, and the election that July came to be disputed between two rival slates of ten candidates: one a group of determined republicans, headed by Edmund Ludlow; the other a mixture of Cromwellian partisans, presbyterians, and erstwhile cavaliers, headed by Cooper. So many voters showed up on election day that the poll had to be switched from Wilton to Stonehenge. There Cooper urged the electorate to choose 'such as were of healing spirits', not those who 'were for putting of all things into confusion and disorder' (Firth, 1.388-9), and the under-sheriff eventually declared his slate elected, though Ludlow alleged electoral malpractice and claimed that his own party were in the majority. 
The first protectorate parliament spent much of its existence debating the detailed terms of the 'Instrument of government', though unfortunately the records do not provide much insight into where Cooper stood on the issues involved. On 27 November 1654 he was one of the tellers against a motion for restoring the old 40's'. freehold county franchise, which the instrument had replaced by a voting qualification of $200 worth of real or movable property. On 23 December he supported a proposal that Cromwell should be offered the title of king, as part of a last-ditch effort to prevent the protector from breaking with his parliament and ruling through a standing army; however, it failed to generate much interest and was not even pressed to a division. Shortly afterwards Cooper broke with Cromwell. He attended the council for the last time on 28 December and was not present when it next met, on 5 January 1655. That same day parliament voted an entirely inadequate sum for the army, and a few days later Cooper moved a resolution to make illegal the collection or payment of revenue not authorized by parliamentary grant. Cromwell dissolved the parliament on 22 January. Ludlow alleged that Cooper moved into opposition because Cromwell refused to let him marry his daughter, Mary, but there is no contemporary corroboration for this. Instead Cooper's change of sides was probably motivated by a genuine concern about political developments under the protectorate. 
The exiled Charles II thought that Cooper had turned royalist, and on 26 February 1655 wrote offering forgiveness and reward if he would help secure a restoration. Cooper did not reply and remained aloof when Colonel Penruddock launched his royalist rising in the west country in March 1655. Elected to serve for Wiltshire in the second protectorate parliament (which met on 17 September 1656), he was among about one hundred members whom the council of state refused to allow to sit, and together with sixty-four similarly excluded members he signed a letter of protest to the speaker, which was delivered by the presbyterian Sir George Booth. His was also one of ninety-eight names appended to a printed remonstrance against Cromwell that appeared a few days later, accusing the protector of having 'assumed an absolute arbitrary sovereignty' and charging anyone who approved of the exclusion with being a 'Capital enemy to the Commonwealth' ('To All the Worthy Gentlemen'), though the work appears to have been written by a disgruntled Commonwealth man, who affixed the names of the excluded members without authority. Cooper finally took his seat on 20 January 1658, following Cromwell's acceptance of a revised version of the 'Humble Petition and Advice' (which stipulated that the excluded members should be allowed to return), and took the oath of fidelity to the protector as chief magistrate of the Commonwealth. That same month Cromwell discharged the fine of $500 imposed on Cooper by the Long Parliament for delinquency. Cooper joined with the opposition to the 'other house' which had been created by the petition and advice, and a frustrated Cromwell dissolved this parliament on 4 February. 
Nothing more is heard of Cooper until the calling of Richard Cromwell's parliament in early 1659, which was elected according to the old system of county and borough representation for English members, though still with the new Scottish and Irish members provided for by the 'Instrument of government'. Cooper was returned for both Wiltshire and Poole, but as before chose to sit for the former. The house spent most of its time debating the validity of the existing constitution, where Cooper sided with the republicans, challenging the 'Humble Petition and Advice' and insisting that the bill to recognize Richard Cromwell should contain additional clauses limiting the powers of the protector, particularly with regard to the key issues of control over the militia and the negative voice. Although the house agreed that before the 'Bill of Recognition' was committed it could declare additional clauses binding the protector's power to be part of the bill, the Cromwellians managed to deflect the issue by insisting that the position of the 'other house' be settled first. The house agreed that it should be part of the 'Bill of Recognition' to declare that parliament was to consist of two houses, but fell into endless debates about the composition and powers of the 'other house'. Cooper wanted the question of whether the second chamber should consist of the old lords or the new ones nominated by Oliver Cromwell determined first (making clear his own hostility to the new lords), though some of the opposition thought it better to impose bounds on the 'other house' before settling the question of membership. As a way through the impasse supporters of the government proposed that the house should transact with the 'other house' as a house of parliament, with the proviso that this should not 'exclude the rights of the old peers that have been faithful'. In a speech on 7 March Cooper condemned this as a trick, for by pretending to safeguard the rights of the old peers it in reality destroyed their claim to constitute the upper house. The house then turned to debating the right of the Scottish and Irish members to sit. In discussing the Scots, Cooper insisted he was 'as much for the Union as any man' and would have the Scots 'have as fair a legislature as may be', but objected to the way in which they were brought in 'upon the interest of the Chief Magistrate' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 4.189). Those who wanted the Scottish and Irish members to continue to sit, however, carried the day. On 28 March the house returned to the question of whether it should transact with the 'other house'. Again Cooper condemned the idea, alleging that if they gave 'this other House' the right of veto over business transacted in the Commons it would effectively give the protector 'a whole negative' to block whatever proceedings he did not like ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 4.284). In the end the 'other house' was recognized, though only for the duration of the existing parliament. Cooper also opposed a bill purporting to end the excise and customs duties after the protector's death, which was a thinly veiled attempt to confirm the protector's right to levy these for life, urging members not to settle the revenue before they knew what their money would go to support. The debate was adjourned, but never resumed, and the bill failed. 
Richard Cromwell dissolved parliament on 22 April 1659, and the Rump Parliament, which had been forcibly dissolved by Oliver Cromwell in 1653, was restored on 7 May (Richard Cromwell resigned as protector on 24 May). Cooper again tried to revive his claim to sit for Downton, the matter being referred to a committee which never reported. He was, however, appointed to the council of state on 19 May as one of the ten non-members in an executive body of thirty-one. Some of the republicans on the council objected to his sitting, suspecting him of royalist sympathies; to allay any suspicion he asked to be tendered the oath of loyalty to the Commonwealth 'without a single person, kingship or house of peers' (Haley, 113). That same month he rejected a second personal advance from Charles II. He sat on the council until 11 July, when he returned to Wimborne to attend to his estates. In August he was arrested on suspicion of complicity in Sir George Booth's unsuccessful presbyterian royalist uprising in Cheshire -- Booth was a known friend and was reported to have been in correspondence with Cooper -- but on 14 September the council found him not guilty of any involvement. 
Thus exonerated, Cooper resumed his seat on the council, but he opposed the army's suspension of the Rump on 13 October 1659 and stopped attending the council of state two days later. When the army replaced the council of state with its own committee of safety on the 25th he threw in his lot with the republicans Thomas Scott, Sir Arthur Hesilrige, Henry Neville, and five others who continued to meet secretly as the rightful council of state. On 9 November he and Scott unsuccessfully tried to induce London's common council to petition for the restoration of the Rump. The secret council now came to see General George Monck, commander of the forces in Scotland, as their main hope. On 16 November Cooper and Hesilrige met three of Monck's commissioners in London and urged that Monck should declare for the recall of the Rump, claiming that he would have the support of all the inferior officers and common soldiers stationed near London. That same day appeared a printed remonstrance, with Cooper's one of the 450 names appended, protesting against the interruption of the parliament by the army and calling for the restoration of the Rump 'and the settlement of this Nation upon the constant succession of Parliaments' ('The Remonstrance', 3). While waiting for Monck the secret council secured the support of the garrison of Portsmouth (3 December), commanded by Cooper's long-term friend Colonel Whetham, and Cooper was given a commission to command all the forces in London expected to join the revolt against the committee of safety. He was arrested on suspicion of planning to raise the counties of Wiltshire and Dorset, but since his plot involved London and not the west country, he was truthfully able to deny all such allegations and was released after giving his word not to leave London without permission. He now slipped into hiding in the City, where he and his colleagues launched a conspiracy to seize the Tower of London, with the help of the lieutenant of the Tower, Colonel Fitch, on 12 December. Tipped off in advance, the committee of safety had Fitch arrested and the plot came to nothing, but Cooper, Scott, and others wrote an open letter to General Charles Fleetwood, commander-in-chief of the army, on 16 December defending the attempt and insisting that the Rump was the only authority which could 'be hoped to make the sword subservient to the civil interest, and settle the government in the hands of the people by successive and free parliaments unlawfully denied to them' (Christie, vol. 1, appx 5, p. lxxvii). 
Developments were soon to play into Cooper's and his allies' hands. With the fleet under Admiral Lawson having already declared for the Rump, on 23 December troops assembled at Lincoln's Inn Fields and resolved to stand by parliament and follow the orders of the council of state. The Rump reassembled on 26 December and appointed Cooper one of the seven commissioners to have temporary control over the armed forces (until Hesilrige returned on the 28th) and one of the three to have temporary control of the Tower (until his friend Colonel Morley was made lieutenant on 7 January 1660). On 2 January Cooper was one of the ten non-members voted to a new council of state; three days later a committee was set up to report on the disputed Downton election, and on 7 January he was finally allowed to take his seat in the Long Parliament, some nineteen years after his original election. On his admission to the house he took the engagement of 1649 to be faithful to the Commonwealth. When an additional clause was put to the council of state renouncing Charles Stuart he declined to take it, but so did the majority of the council, including impeccable republicans like Colonel Hutchinson; he still made no attempt to engage in correspondence with the exiled court, and in mid-January Hyde wondered whether Cooper would 'ever serve the King' (Ogle, 4.517). Nevertheless Cooper had begun to break company with his former republican allies, and according to the royalist agent John Mordaunt, the Rump became divided into two irreconcilable parties, one headed by Cooper, the other by Henry Neville. When the Rump set about remodelling the army regiments to remove officers who had supported the committee of safety they gave Cooper Fleetwood's regiment (18 January), which he proceeded to fill 'with officers for his turn' (Firth, 2.206). With Monck now on his march south from Scotland, Hesilrige and Scott offered Cooper command of the army to march against him, but he refused, saying he had given Monck his 'word to be his friend, and therefore could not break it' (Christie, 1.205). Upon Monck's arrival in London, Hesilrige and his supporters on the council of state, in an attempt to ruin Monck's credit, urged the general to punish the City for recent disturbances and for threatening to withhold taxes until there was a free parliament by dismantling the gates and arresting eleven prominent citizens. Cooper made a desperate effort to dissuade Monck from taking such action, though in vain. Having dutifully carried out his commands on 10 February, Monck then learned that the Rump, instead of confirming him as commander-in-chief as promised, had decided to appoint five commissioners to control the army. Cooper, together with Lady Monck and some other friends, now convinced the general of the need to 'take some vigorous course' if he was to prevent his ruin (Christie, 1.208). On 11 February Monck marched with his own troops into the City and sent the Rump a letter reminding them that his army had undertaken not only to restore the parliament but also to vindicate the people's liberties and demanding that writs be issued out within a week to fill all the vacant seats. When the Rump decided to place restrictions on who should be allowed to stand Cooper urged Monck to restore the secluded members. This was done on 21 February with Cooper, as colonel of Fleetwood's regiment, commanding the escort. Two days later parliament appointed Cooper to a new council of state which consisted entirely of presbyterians and others who had played no part in the regicide and were not committed to a republic. The Long Parliament finally voted its own dissolution on 16 March 1660. 
It was only now that Cooper began to draw closer to the royalist cause; in late February Lady Willoughby reported to Hyde that Cooper was a 'firm friend to the King', and a letter from Charles II to Cooper in mid-March about procuring the 'peace and happiness of the nation' this time received a 'civil' response (Ogle, 4.573, 600, 660). Cooper may initially have favoured a conditional restoration, since in mid-April he attended a meeting of the 'presbyterian knot' at Sussex House, who were pressing for a settlement along the lines of the treaty of Newport negotiated with Charles I in 1648. However, as MP for Wiltshire in the Convention Parliament, which met on 25 April, he decided to acknowledge an unconditional restoration, and was one of twelve voted by the Commons on 8 May to go to The Hague to invite Charles II to return. 
Cooper accompanied Charles II on his triumphal return to England in late May and was among those who received a special recommendation from Monck for a place on the privy council. Further support for his appointment came from the incoming treasurer, the earl of Southampton, who was thought to be more than capable of keeping his nephew by marriage on the path of loyalty. Thus at Canterbury on 27 May Charles named Cooper to his new privy council; two days later he appeared at the head of his regiment of cavalry at Blackheath, where the army assembled to welcome Charles back into the capital. He availed himself of the free pardon offered by Charles's declaration of Breda of 4 April, and received a formal pardon on 27 June. He was granted further pardons under the great seal on 10 February and 8 June 1661. 
Although not one of the inner ring of the privy council, known as the committee on foreign affairs, as a member of the Convention Cooper acted as an important spokesman for the government. On 4 July he helped defeat a motion that those who served under the protectorate should refund their salaries -- 'he might freely speak', he said, 'because he never received any' -- claiming that the proviso was 'dangerous to the peace of the nation' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 4.78) and pointing out that it reached important members of the new royal administration, such as General Monck and Admiral Montagu. On 16 July he successfully argued for a postponement of the discussion of a bill to settle religion, the government wanting to address what in its view were more urgent matters first. In the debates over the 'Indemnity Bill' (passed 29 August), which was to decide who should be exempted from the general pardon, Cooper urged lenity. He saved Hesilrige's life, arguing that only those who had been guilty of shedding Charles I's blood should be punished; he also signed a certificate in favour of Colonel Hutchinson, another former republican colleague, and spoke in favour of the regicide Colonel George Fleetwood. As a member of the special commission for the trial of the regicides excluded from the general amnesty, however, he took part in the sentencing to death of a number of former colleagues and associates: Hugh Peters, who had served with him on the law reform commission of 1652-3; Major-General Harrison, who had sat with him on the council of state in 1653; and Thomas Scott, an ally in the revived Rump of 1659 and one who towards the end of that year had joined with him in the conspiracy to seize the Tower. In November he spoke out against the revival of the court of wards (abolished by the Long Parliament in 1641), at whose expense he had suffered in his youth, and supported the continuance of the Long Parliament's excise duties to compensate the crown for loss of revenue from former rights of wardship. As a privy councillor he served on numerous committees, including the committee to deal with the plantations and the council for trade, being one of the government's hardest workers. His reward came on 20 April 1661, when in the coronation honours Charles II created him Baron Ashley of Wimborne St Giles. He took his seat in the Lords on 11 May and two days later he was appointed chancellor of the exchequer and under-treasurer (probably owing the latter appointment to the influence of his uncle Southampton). 
Some biographers have claimed that Ashley vehemently opposed the 'Corporation Act' (passed 19 December 1661), which restricted municipal offices to Anglicans, but there is no firm evidence to support this; he was not even present at the decisive conference between the Lords and Commons on the act on the 19th. Indeed, at this stage he appears to have supported the government's desire for greater control over the towns, remarking at one Lords committee meeting in early February 1662 that 'the greatness of corporations' was 'inconvenient to monarchy' (Seaward, 151). Nor did he intervene in the debates over the 'Act of Uniformity' (passed May 1662), and when the Lords debated the Commons' amendments making the act more stringent he was not recorded as being present. He did, however, support efforts to alleviate the plight of dissenters. He was a member of a Lords committee in July 1662 that tried to insert a clause into a bill allowing for late subscription to the 'Act of Uniformity' that would have made it possible for moderate dissenters to conform, though the amendment was rejected by the Commons. He joined Sir Henry Bennet, the earl of Bristol, and Lord Robartes in advising Charles to issue his first declaration of indulgence on 26 December 1662 in favour of peaceable nonconformists and loyal Catholics, and when parliament made Charles withdraw the indulgence in February 1663, denying the legality of the dispensing power on which it was based, he supported Robartes's efforts to introduce a bill to allow the king to dispense protestant nonconformists (though not Catholics) from the 'Act of Uniformity'. In the face of opposition to the 'Dispensing Bill' from Lord Chancellor Clarendon, Ashley proclaimed in the Lords on 12 March how unfortunate the king was that 'the great Officers of the Crown' should oppose 'such a Prerogative' (the dispensing power) as perhaps 'would be found to be inherent in him without any Declaration of Parliament', adding that he wondered why they would not trust the king ('Life of... Clarendon', 2.471). Clarendon, stung by the attack, described the bill as 'Ship-Money in Religion, that Nobody could know the End of' (ibid., 2.473). The bill was dropped in committee, but Clarendon's outspoken remarks cost him favour with the king. 
Ashley had not always seen eye to eye with the lord chancellor since the Restoration. In 1661-2 he had joined with Bristol in opposing Charles's proposed marriage to Catherine of Braganza and the consequent commercial treaty with Portugal, which had been backed by Clarendon, because the match brought England into the French orbit, implying, as it did, support for the Portuguese in their struggle for independence from France's rival Spain. Following the clash over the 'Dispensing Bill' Ashley seemed to be the rising star at court: in April 1663 the French ambassador observed how Ashley was 'perfectly in the King's graces' and predicted that he, Bristol, Bennet, and 'the rest of that clique' might 'well give trouble to the Chancellor' (Christie, 1.272). Ashley still retained some connections with the chancellor. For example, on 24 March 1663 the two men were among the eight named as joint proprietors of the projected colony of Carolina. Nor did Ashley support Bristol's rash attempt to impeach Clarendon in July. Nevertheless he continued to be associated with the chancellor's reputed enemies: it was during this time that he first struck up a political association with the earl of Lauderdale, and by early 1664 Ashley was firmly identified as part of Lauderdale's anti-Clarendonian Cabal. 
Ashley's sympathy for dissent led him to try to soften the impact of the 'Conventicle Bill' which came before the Lords on 28 April 1664 and he was a member of a Lords subcommittee that managed to mitigate the harshness of the penalties originally suggested by the Commons. On 24 December, following the outbreak of renewed hostilities with the Dutch, he was appointed treasurer of the prize commission, accountable to the king alone; Clarendon, jealous of Ashley's growing influence, objected to the bypassing of the normal exchequer routine, but was forced to back down. Clarendon remained confident 'that few men... had a worse Opinion of [Ashley's] Integrity' than Charles himself ('Life of... Clarendon', 2.466); on the surface, however, Ashley seemed genuinely in the royal favour. Indeed, on 10 August 1665 Charles did him the honour of a surprise visit to his house at Wimborne, and a couple of weeks later both the king and queen were entertained there. It was now that Ashley met the king's teenage illegitimate son, James, duke of Monmouth, for the first time. 
In the brief parliamentary session of October 1665, held at Oxford because of the plague, Ashley unsuccessfully opposed Sir George Downing's appropriation proviso to the 'Subsidy Bill', restricting the use of the money thus raised to the sole purpose of carrying on the Dutch war, on the grounds that the precedent, once set, might deprive ministers of any flexibility over how to use the money received from parliamentary taxation. According to his own, later account, he also supported his uncle Southampton's attempt to block the passage of the 'Five Mile Act', which forbade ejected nonconformist ministers from coming within 5 miles of any town or their former parish, though the records of the Lords do not list him as among the bill's opponents. When Ashley returned to Oxford in June 1666, seeking relief from his internal abscess by drinking the local spa water, he chanced to make the acquaintance of John Locke, beginning what turned out to be a lifelong friendship. When Ashley took up residence in Exeter House, off the Strand in London, in spring 1667, he invited Locke to live in his household. 
In the parliamentary session of 1666-7 Ashley joined the duke of Buckingham in supporting the passage of the 'Irish Cattle Bill', designed to prevent the importation into England of Irish fat cattle. As a landowner he was concerned about the effect the Irish imports were having on cattle breeders in his native south-west, but he also used the occasion to strike out at the lord lieutenant of Ireland, James Butler, duke of Ormond -- either from a personal antipathy to Ormond, a jealousy that Irish peers might rise above English ones, or as a subterfuge to attack the high-church party at court (of which Ormond was one). He followed this up by proposing in the committee of privileges that Irish peers should lose any right to precedence over English commoners, and was rumoured to be preparing a bill to alter the Irish book of rates so as to force Ireland to import foreign commodities only through England. The 'Irish Cattle Bill' passed the Lords on 23 November 1663 by a vote of sixty-three votes to forty-seven (noticeably all the bishops voted against it), but the matter did not rest there, since the Lords had replaced the word 'nuisance' in the bill, which would have prevented the king from granting dispensations from it, with the legally more innocuous words 'detriment and mischief'. The Commons refused to accept this, and were supported by a minority of peers, including Ashley and Buckingham, who argued that it did not take away from the royal prerogative to make laws indispensable, since most laws made for the king's benefit were, such as the laws against treason. In the end the word 'nuisance' was reinserted and the bill became law on 14 January 1667. 
The dispute over the 'Irish Cattle Bill' represents the first time that Ashley stood on the same side as a discontented majority in the Commons against the court interest. As such it temporarily cost him royal favour. When the treasurer, Southampton, died in May 1667, Charles, instead of appointing Ashley, who was under-treasurer, as his successor, put the Treasury into commission; he did, under protest, name Ashley as one of the commissioners, though not as one of the quorum. Following the failures of the Dutch war Clarendon himself was now in trouble, and was stripped of the chancellorship on 31 August. Yet despite having been at odds with the former chief minister on many issues for several years Ashley did not seek to reingratiate himself with the king by supporting the attempted impeachment of Clarendon in November, which was backed by Charles himself and pressed in the Lords by Ashley's former political allies Buckingham, Bristol, and Bennet (now earl of Arlington). Indeed, he successfully opposed a motion to commit Clarendon to the Tower on a general charge of treason, arguing that he could not be committed unless detailed charges were brought. 
The administration that succeeded Clarendon's is normally referred to as the Cabal, following the initial letters of the ministers who signed the phoney treaty of Dover of 1670 -- Clifford, Arlington, Buckingham, Ashley, and Lauderdale. In fact, the five never formed a coherent ministerial team. Initially Arlington and Buckingham ran the government, though there were rivalries between the two. Ashley was out of favour following Clarendon's fall, and it was some time before he obtained a leading place in the king's councils; although he continued as chancellor of the exchequer and a commissioner of the Treasury, he had still not been placed on the king's inner cabinet, the so-called committee of foreign affairs. The fall of Clarendon suggested that the time might be right to modify the religious settlement erected at the Restoration, and Ashley joined with Buckingham, Arlington, and the latitudinarian Bishop Wilkins of Chester to persuade Charles to endorse schemes for the comprehension of more moderate dissenters within the established church; two government-backed comprehension bills were drafted in October 1667 and February 1668, though they came to nothing. However, in May 1668 Ashley fell desperately ill. From the detailed notes kept by John Locke it appears that Ashley was suffering from a hydatid cyst of the liver, which now ruptured. (The condition is caused by a parasite transmitted through dogs or sheep.) Locke advised an operation, which was performed by a surgeon named Knollys on 12 June and undoubtedly saved Ashley's life. More dubiously it was decided that the tube which had been inserted during the operation to drain fluid from the abscess should remain permanently there, to allow for possible further drainage: hence later tory pamphleteers christened Shaftesbury 'Tapski', an allusion to the copper tap affixed to the end of the tube (the Polish ending because tories accused Shaftesbury of wanting to make England an elective monarchy like Poland). 
It was at this time that Ashley resumed his interest in colonial affairs. Back in July 1660 he had been placed on the privy council's standing committee on trade and plantations, and later that year had helped set up the council of trade and council for foreign plantations, though these latter two bodies rapidly became moribund. When the standing committees of the privy council were reorganized in January 1668 Ashley was again placed on the committee for trade and plantations and, once he had recovered from his operation, was influential in resuscitating the council of trade, which received its commission in October. He became an 'ex officio' member of the revived council for foreign plantations, set up on 30 July 1670, and president of the council of trade and foreign plantations when the two councils were merged in September 1672 (he continued to serve until April 1676, when the council was superseded by a committee of the privy council). He invested in the Hudson's Bay Company (chartered 1670), being appointed its deputy governor on 24 November 1674, and was instrumental in setting up the Bahama Adventurers' Company in autumn 1672. His darling, however, remained Carolina, and in 1669 he helped draw up the fundamental constitutions of Carolina, a copy of which in Locke's hand is preserved among the Shaftesbury papers. 
On the domestic front Ashley joined Arlington and Buckingham in supporting the proposal for a political union with Scotland in 1669 and was at last admitted to a meeting of the committee of foreign affairs that June to discuss the terms, which he had had a hand in drawing up. Some progress was made over the next year, but when the Scots refused to consider a reduction in their existing parliamentary representation in any combined parliament the scheme was dropped. Despite Ashley's sympathy for the plight of dissenters he did not join with those peers who signed a formal protest against the passage of the 1670 'Conventicle Act', though he probably supported the amendments by which the Lords reduced the penalties the Commons wanted to impose for attendance at nonconformist conventicles. 
By now the question of the succession had already begun to occupy people's minds. Catherine of Braganza remained childless and the heir to the throne was therefore still Charles's brother, the duke of York, whose Catholicism was already suspected. Following the fall of Clarendon, Ashley joined Buckingham and the earl of Carlisle in trying to persuade Charles to declare his eldest illegitimate child, James, duke of Monmouth, legitimate. When that failed, attention turned to trying to persuade Charles to divorce his wife and remarry. Hence the significance of the 'Roos Remarriage Bill', which came before the Lords in March 1670. Lord Roos had already obtained a divorce in the ecclesiastical court and his children had been declared illegitimate by parliament, but he was now seeking an act to allow him to remarry; if parliament could establish its competence to pass such an act the implications for a potential royal divorce were obvious. In the debate in the Lords on 28 March Ashley spoke strongly in favour of the bill, taking the line that marriage was a civil contract, not a sacrament, and therefore should be managed by the civil magistrate. The measure passed, though Charles was never to avail himself of the precedent. 
Ashley was kept out of the negotiations for the secret treaty of Dover, signed on 22 May 1670, whereby in return for French subsidies Charles promised to announce his own conversion to Catholicism and join with France in an attack against the Dutch republic. Since preparations for war could hardly be kept secret, a mock treaty ('traite simule') was concluded for the benefit of Ashley, Buckingham, and Lauderdale, omitting the so-called Catholic clauses (of which only Arlington and Clifford among the Cabal had any knowledge). Ashley had reservations about a French alliance (he had initially asked for time to think it over), but he was also concerned about Dutch commercial competition, and when in July, as one of the royal commissioners appointed to discuss a projected treaty on overseas trade with the Dutch ambassador, it became obvious to him that any concessions from the Dutch in the East Indies or elsewhere could only be won by force, he fell in with the plan. The 'traite simule' was signed by the five members of the Cabal on 21 December; Ashley, Buckingham, and Lauderdale, however, insisted on adding a number of Dutch territories to the English share of the spoils, to ensure future English control of the mouths of the Scheldt and Rhine, much more than the French had initially bargained for. 
In 1671 Ashley was one of the peers who pressed for a reduction of the duty on sugar imposed by the Commons' 'Supply Bill', fearing that the new rate would have an adverse effect on colonial sugar planters. The Commons objected to the Lords' attempt to interfere in a money bill, and the bill was lost when the king prorogued parliament on 22 April. That September Ashley and Clifford were together responsible for a momentous change in the administration of the customs when they proposed abandoning the traditional practice of employing customs farmers and suggested that the revenue should be collected by the king's own commissioners instead. The change was well received by London merchants and eventually redounded to the king's profit. In the short term, however, Charles was desperately short of money to fight the Dutch war. The government therefore decided upon the stop of the exchequer in January 1672, which involved stopping the repayment of loans to bankers out of the proceeds of taxes. Although many contemporaries blamed Ashley, the policy was in fact Clifford's; Ashley opposed it as being against 'common justice', 'the law', and the king's 'constant promises', and predicted that it would 'ruin thousands' and depress trade (Christie, 2.59). 
The declaration of war against the Dutch was preceded by the issuance of a declaration of indulgence on 15 March 1672, suspending 'all manner of penal laws in matters ecclesiastical' against both protestant nonconformists and Catholics, and allowing the former to take out licences to hold their own religious meetings in public (Kenyon, 407). The government believed it necessary to conciliate the nonconformists lest they side with their Dutch co-religionists once war was declared, and Ashley strongly supported the measure. The declaration of war was followed by new honours for the members of the Cabal, to induce them to remain united behind the controversial royal policy. Ashley became earl of Shaftesbury and Baron Cooper of Paulet, the patent being dated 23 April 1672, and on 17 November he was appointed lord chancellor. When parliament reconvened on 4 February 1673 Shaftesbury, in his new official capacity, gave a lengthy address justifying the royal policy in which he urged the need for large supplies in order to prosecute the war, accused the Dutch of being the common enemies of all monarchies and their only rivals in trade (declaring in one famous outburst, 'Delenda est Carthago, Carthage must be destroyed'), defended the stop of the exchequer (while urging the Commons to consider what might be done to help the bankers who had been affected by it), and vindicated the declaration of indulgence. 
The Commons unanimously voted a supply of $1.26 million to be raised over a period of eighteen months, but demanded the redress of a number of grievances before it would enact the 'Supply Bill'. Prior to the reconvening of parliament Shaftesbury, as lord chancellor, had issued writs to fill thirty-six seats that had fallen vacant during the prorogation. Although there were precedents, normally such writs were issued by the speaker, and since the great majority of the newly elected members were supporters of the court Shaftesbury's initiatives looked like an attempt by the government to pack parliament. Colonel Giles Strangways, an old Dorset rival, led the attack, and the elections were declared void. The Commons also demanded that Charles withdraw the indulgence. Shaftesbury advised the king to send an answer to the Commons maintaining the ecclesiastical supremacy but denying any claim to suspend laws in which the properties, rights, and liberties of the subject were affected and offering to concur with any bill presented to him for liberty of conscience; the Commons refused to accept this, however, and in the end Charles himself backed down and cancelled the indulgence. The Commons then presented an address against the growth of popery and proceeded to promote a 'Test Act' (enacted 20 March 1673), requiring all holders of civil and military office to take the Anglican sacrament and make a declaration against transubstantiation. Despite his championship of the indulgence Shaftesbury supported the 'Test Act', though there was nothing necessarily inconsistent in this; even dissenters at this time realized that the most they could hope for was religious liberty, not full civil liberty. Shaftesbury took the Anglican sacrament together with the duke of Monmouth at St Clement Danes Church in the Strand, with Shaftesbury's secretary, John Locke, serving as witness to both. Shaftesbury supported a bill for the ease of dissenters when it came before the Lords towards the end of March, though he wanted to insert a clause giving the king power to issue proclamations on religious matters and he objected to the Commons' proposal to restrict the ease to those who were willing to subscribe to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', which would have excluded many sectaries. The adjournment on 29 March put a stop to further debate on the bill, and parliament failed to pick up on the measure when it reconvened in October. 
The failure of the indulgence and the passage of the 'Test Act' meant the days of the Cabal were numbered. For the time being, however, Shaftesbury remained in office, despite moving closer to the political opposition in parliament. Although some, including the king, suspected his loyalty, it is highly unlikely that he was involved in any intrigues with the Dutch against the English government, though now he was certainly keen to end the war and in favour of negotiating peace directly with the Dutch. The failure of the duke of York to take the Anglican sacrament at Easter 1673, moreover, reignited Shaftesbury's concern about the prospect of a Catholic successor. In June a letter of his to the duke urging him to change his religion was circulated. The succession issue became more pressing when York decided to take the Italian archduchess Mary of Modena (a French protegee) as his second wife in autumn 1673; James had two daughters with his first wife, Anne Hyde (died 1671), both of whom had been brought up as protestants, but a son with his second would take precedence in the succession and raised the prospect of a never-ending succession of Catholic kings. The marriage had been celebrated by proxy, and Mary had still not arrived in England when parliament reconvened on 20 October. York was anxious that parliament should be prorogued immediately for a few days, to prevent the Commons protesting against the match; Shaftesbury, however, deliberately retarded the summons of the lower house before the Lords, which gave the Commons time to draw up an address to the king urging that the marriage not be consummated. It was too late to put a stop to the marriage, however, so Shaftesbury now revived the idea of trying to persuade Charles to divorce the queen and take a second wife. He also joined with Arlington, Ormond, and secretary Henry Coventry in advising Charles to send his brother away from court. York was incensed and pressed the king to dismiss Shaftesbury from office. Charles, who had become increasingly suspicious of Shaftesbury's loyalty over the last few months and now had reason to believe he was intriguing with Scottish malcontents in order to stoke up opposition to Lauderdale in the upcoming session of the Scottish parliament, agreed that his lord chancellor would have to go. On Sunday 9 November he sent Secretary Coventry (Shaftesbury's brother-in-law) privately to Exeter House with two warrants, one for the seals, and the other for a royal pardon for all crimes committed before 5 November; Shaftesbury is reported to have said 'It is only laying down my gown, and putting on my sword' (Christie, vol. 2, appx 3, p. xliii n.). 
It was not clear at first that Shaftesbury's fall from favour would be permanent. Towards the end of November 1673 Arlington tried to broker a reconciliation with the king, and even persuaded the French ambassador that Shaftesbury might be won back with an appropriate bribe. Shaftesbury refused such overtures, protesting that he would not 'be a friend to the French King' and support 'an interest that was so apparently destructive to [Englishmen's] religion and trade' (Christie, vol. 2, appx 3, p. xliv). According to the Venetian secretary he instead set himself up 'as the organ of the Spanish party' and offered the king friendship with Spain, peace with the Netherlands, reconciliation with parliament, and money to defray the expenses of the last war, if he would 'repudiate the queen and make a second marriage, so as to exclude by his own offspring the suspected progeny of the duke of York' ('CSP Venice', '1673-5', 183). 
In the parliamentary session which began on 7 January 1674 Shaftesbury's main preoccupation was the threat of popery and the prospect of a Catholic succession. On the 8th he gave an impassioned speech warning that there were more than 16,000 Catholics in the London area ready to rebel, prompting the Lords to address the king for a proclamation ordering all papists to depart 10 miles from the capital, and four days later he proposed that every peer should take the oath of allegiance before entering the house, including the duke of York. Shaftesbury was now co-ordinating tactics with a group of malcontent peers -- including Carlisle, Fauconberg, Holles, Salisbury, Buckingham, and Halifax -- who met at Holles's house to discuss what measures to introduce in parliament. The fruits of their efforts were revealed on 24 January when Salisbury moved for a bill to provide for the education of York's children as protestants, Carlisle proposed that in future neither the king nor any prince of the blood should marry a Catholic without the consent of parliament, and Halifax called for the disarming of all Catholics. The Lords responded by appointing a committee to prepare a bill for securing the protestant religion. When, on 10 February, the house came to debate the clause in the proposed bill forbidding a prince of the blood from marrying a Catholic without parliamentary consent Carlisle and Halifax proposed that the penalty for its breach should be exclusion from the succession. Shaftesbury spoke strongly in favour of the measure, insisting that there were precedents, though the proposal was dropped in the face of opposition from the bishops and the lord keeper, Sir Heneage Finch. Shaftesbury and Carlisle were next said to be considering proposing that York's regiments of guards be disbanded, while Shaftesbury also accepted responsibility for presenting a petition that Ireland was in danger from a French invasion; when Charles learned that the opposition peers were intending a direct attack on York, and might even seek to accuse him of treason, he speedily prorogued parliament (24 February). It would be wrong to create the impression that party lines were irreconcilably drawn in this session, however. Shaftesbury and his presbyterian associates, Holles, Carlisle, Fauconberg, Clare, and Salisbury, together with Charles's new leading minister, the earl of Danby, supported a 'Comprehension Bill' sponsored by the bishop of Winchester and backed by six other bishops, which would have removed some of the presbyterian ministers' chief objections to the 'Act of Uniformity'. The bill passed the Lords but was lost with the prorogation. 
On 19 May 1674 Shaftesbury was expelled from the privy council; he was subsequently removed as lord lieutenant of Dorset and ordered to leave London. Successive prorogations meant that parliament did not meet again until 13 April 1675. Early in the new year there was talk that Shaftesbury was to be brought back into favour by the court, and might even be appointed vicar-general in ecclesiastical affairs, a position previously held only by Thomas Cromwell. On 3 February, however, Shaftesbury wrote a letter to the earl of Carlisle, which was widely circulated in manuscript, where he stated that the only advice he could offer the king would be to call 'a new Parliament', and that he would not return to court until he saw that 'the King thinks frequent parliaments as much his interest as they are the people's right' (Christie, 2.201). With Danby having determined upon an alliance with Anglican royalists and a strict enforcement of the penal laws against both Catholics and protestant nonconformists, even York began making overtures for a possible alliance with Shaftesbury's group of disaffected peers. By early April an astonished Venetian secretary could report that Shaftesbury (who was back in town for the upcoming parliamentary session) and York were reconciled, and that Holles 'and the rest of the confederates [had] all assured the duke of their desire to serve him' ('CSP Venice', '1673-5', 391). When parliament assembled later that month Danby brought forward his notorious 'Test Bill', which would have required all office-holders and members of both houses to declare against the lawfulness of resistance and swear never to endeavour the alteration of the government in either church or state. Shaftesbury led the opposition to the test in a lengthy series of debates which lasted over several weeks, maintaining that resistance to those commissioned by the king could, in some circumstances, be legitimate and that endeavouring to alter the church so as to restore it, say, 'to what it was in Queen Elizabeths days might consist with his being a very good Protestant' ('Letter', 22). Yet despite all Shaftesbury's efforts opponents of the test were in the minority in all divisions. The bill got held up, however, as a result of a jurisdictional dispute between the Lords and Commons over the case of 'Shirley v. Fagg', the central issue of which involved whether the Lords had the right to hear appeals from lower courts when they involved members of the Commons. Shaftesbury did his best to ensure that the two houses remained at loggerheads over the case, thus causing a deadlock to business and leaving Charles with no alternative but to prorogue parliament (9 June). In a surprising development Shaftesbury was admitted to kiss the king's hand on 13 June. The reconciliation was probably York's doing; he apparently promised Shaftesbury that he could procure a new parliament and Danby's dismissal, while Charles, who never liked committing himself to one minister, welcomed the chance to keep other options open. In the end Danby succeeded in blocking the initiative and Shaftesbury was ordered away from court again on the 24th. 
In July 1675 Giles Strangways, MP for Dorset, died, which meant there would be a by-election once parliament reconvened in October and the speaker authorized the sending out of a writ. At first Shaftesbury said he would back Lord Digby, the son of the earl of Bristol, but when he learned that Digby was corresponding with the court he threw his support behind Thomas Moore of Hawkchurch, the principal supporter of conventicles in the county. Digby felt betrayed and at a chance meeting in late August threatened Shaftesbury with his sword, saying: 'You are against the King, and for seditions and factions, and for a commonwealth, and I will prove it, and by God, we will have your head next Parliament' (Christie, 2.215). Shaftesbury brought an action for 'scandalum magnatum' against Digby and obtained $1000 in damages; he gave the money to help rebuild the town of Northampton, which had been badly damaged in a fire. Digby nevertheless won the by-election by a large majority of over 1700 votes to 520, and in the subsequent session of parliament Digby's father, Lord Bristol, also launched a verbal attack on the earl, for which he was forced to apologize. 
Shaftesbury must have spent some of summer 1675 preparing 'A Letter from a Person of Quality to his Friend in the Country', a 15,000-word pamphlet attacking Danby's test which began by accusing 'the High Episcopal Man, and the Old Cavalier' of conspiring since the Restoration to make 'the Government absolute and Arbitrary' and establish divine right monarchy and episcopacy, not 'bounded or limited by humane Laws' ('Letter', 1). The pamphlet caused quite a stir when it hit the streets in November: at first it sold for just 1's'., but it was soon fetching 20's'.. There has been debate as to whether the tract was really Shaftesbury's work or Locke's, or whether the earl dictated it and his secretary wrote it down, though it was probably a collaboration of some sort. When parliament reconvened on 13 October Shaftesbury did his best to revive the dispute over 'Shirley v. Fagg', in the hope that if another session ended in deadlock the king would be forced to dissolve parliament and call new elections. He was probably one of those who persuaded Shirley to bring in his petition again, and when Danby tried to divert it Shaftesbury gave a lengthy speech (20 October) in which he linked the interests 'of the Poorest man in 'England'' to the preservation of the rights of the upper house, since no prince, Shaftesbury claimed, 'ever governed without 'Nobility' or an 'Army'', and that if you did not have the one you would inevitably have the other (A. A. Cooper, earl of Shaftesbury, 'Two Speeches', 1675, 7). He ended with a stinging attack on the bishops, accusing them of not believing the king was ''King by Law'' but that monarchy was ''of Divine Right'' (ibid., 10): if this be true, he said, 'our 'Magna Charta' is of no force, our Laws are but Rules amongst our selves during the Kings pleasure' and 'All the Properties and Liberties of the People, are to give way, not onely to the interest, but the will and pleasure of the Crown' (ibid., 11). On 20 November, in a premeditated move, Shaftesbury seconded Lord Mohun's motion that in order to bring the dispute over 'Shirley v. Fagg' to an end, the king should dissolve parliament. When the motion, which was also supported by York and the Catholic peers, was narrowly defeated by a vote of fifty to forty-eight, Shaftesbury and twenty-one other peers entered a protest, on the grounds that 'according to the ancient Lawes and Statutes of this Realm... there should be frequent and new Parliaments' and that the actions of the Commons had made it impossible for the two houses to work together ('JHL', 13, 1675-81, 33). Charles prorogued parliament two days later until 15 February 1677. Shaftesbury was probably involved in the publication of 'Two Seasonable Discourses Concerning the Present Parliament' (1675), purporting to consist of arguments used in the debates of 20 November, which predicted that a new parliament would vote the king money, preserve the church, grant dissenters liberty of conscience, and deliver Catholics from the penal laws if they were deprived of access to court and prevented from holding office and bearing arms. 
In mid-February 1676 Charles sent the secretary of state, Sir Joseph Williamson, to Shaftesbury with a message to leave town; Shaftesbury refused to go, protesting that he meddled with nothing but his own private business. When he was subsequently seen receiving visits at Exeter House from opposition MPs and discontented elements in the City, Danby urged Charles to send Shaftesbury to the Tower; Shaftesbury was saved because Williamson refused to sign the necessary warrant. Exeter House was proving too expensive to keep up, however, now Shaftesbury was no longer lord chancellor, and he moved out in the summer. After spending a few months in the west country he moved into Thanet House in Aldersgate Street in the autumn. Shaftesbury was still in London when, at the shrieval election at the Guildhall on 24 June, linen draper Francis Jenks made a sensational speech urging the common council to petition the king for a new parliament, arguing that as a result of the fifteen-month prorogation the present one was 'ipso facto' dissolved because two statutes from Edward III's reign required parliaments be held every year. Although government pamphleteers accused Shaftesbury of being behind the initiative, it was Buckingham who had put Jenks up to it; Shaftesbury opposed the step as premature. He did, however, decide to pursue the idea in the upcoming session of parliament. He and his allies printed and dispersed a number of pamphlets outlining their case; one, 'Some considerations upon the question, whether the parliament is dissolved, by its prorogation for 15 months?', answered the objection that the prorogation of parliament was a matter solely for the royal prerogative by insisting not only that parliament could restrict that but that it could even 'bind, limit, restrain and govern the Descent and Inheritance of the Crown it self' (Holles, 26). Shaftesbury tried to convince York that this had been put in at the last minute without his knowledge; Buckingham, on the other hand, told York that Shaftesbury 'had drawn it, and caus'd it to be inserted' (Clarke, 1.505). When parliament met on 15 February Buckingham, backed by Shaftesbury, Salisbury, and Wharton, proclaimed that in accordance with the statutes of Edward III no parliament was legally in existence; the motion was rejected, and when the four refused to ask pardon for their action they were sent to the Tower. Shaftesbury tried petitioning for his release, to no effect, and so in June he brought a writ of habeas corpus before king's bench; the judges, however, determined they had no jurisdiction in the matter, since the prisoner was being held by a superior court while parliament was in session. Although Charles freed Buckingham, Salisbury, and Wharton shortly thereafter, he was determined to humble Shaftesbury, while Shaftesbury remained determined not to apologize. What seems to have changed Shaftesbury's mind was the raising of an army in England, supposedly to be used in a war against France but which many thought was the first step in a design to establish a standing army. On 25 February 1678 he finally made a full submission, begging the king's and the house's pardon, and apologizing for bringing his action of habeas corpus. He was released the next day. During his stay in the Tower, Shaftesbury compiled a list of the political sympathies of the lay peers and members of the House of Commons, marking those whom he thought of as his allies with a 'w' for 'worthy' and his enemies with a 'v' for 'vile', using double or triple letters to signify extra degrees of worthiness or vileness. 
Early in 1678, when it looked as if Charles might declare war on France, the French ambassador approached Russell, Holles, and Buckingham offering Louis XIV's help in securing a dissolution of parliament; Russell, in return, promised to work to prevent further votes of supply and promised to engage Shaftesbury in the affair. Shaftesbury must have known of these discussions, since Russell visited him in the Tower on several occasions, but it is doubtful whether the suggested meeting between Shaftesbury and the French ambassador ever took place upon Shaftesbury's release. Indeed, far from wanting to help the French king neutralize Charles II on the foreign policy front, in March Shaftesbury joined with Buckingham, Holles, Halifax, and others in urging the Lords to join with the Commons in addressing the king to declare war immediately on France. When war was not forthcoming Shaftesbury supported the Commons in pushing for a speedy disbandment of troops, and on 25 June he signed a protest against a Lords' amendment to the 'Disbanding Bill' delaying the date at which the forces were to be disbanded. Charles prorogued parliament on 15 July; it was not to reconvene until 21 October, which was after Titus Oates had made his revelations of a supposed popish plot to murder the king and massacre English protestants. Shaftesbury played a prominent role in the Lords in prosecuting the plot, being a member of nearly all the important committees. On 2 November he proposed that the Lords should demand that York be removed from the king's presence, though he did not press the matter to a division. He supported the 'Test Act' designed to exclude Catholics from both houses of parliament, and on 29 November was one of three peers who entered a protest against the Lords' refusal to concur with a Commons address for removing the queen and her retinue from court after Oates had accused her of being involved in the plot. With Danby now under threat of impeachment, the king prorogued parliament on 30 December; on 24 January 1679 he dissolved it. Outside parliament Londoners were already beginning to view Shaftesbury as the great hero of the opposition to the court. When on 9 November 1678 the king promised MPs he would pass any bills that would make them safe in the reign of his successor, so long as they did not impeach the right of the succession, his speech was mistakenly reported as a resolution in favour of a protestant successor or the duke of Monmouth, prompting celebratory bonfires throughout the capital where crowds 'drank healths to the King, the Duke of Monmouth, and Earl of Shaftesbury, as the only three pillars of all safety' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 4.473). The citizens held Shaftesbury in such esteem that, fearing a Catholic plot against his life, they paid for a special guard to protect him. 
Shaftesbury emerged as one of the leading figures in the whig campaign to exclude the duke of York from the succession in the three successive parliaments which met between 1679 and 1681. It would be wrong, however, to see him as the leader of a coherent and well-organized whig party. The whig movement was never that cohesive, and Shaftesbury's control over it was far from complete; indeed, he often found himself at odds with other prominent figures in the political opposition to Charles II and the duke of York. Although he tried to use his patronage to influence elections where possible, he did not have a strong enough regional power base to secure the return of a large clientele of compliant MPs. Shaftesbury's precise role in co-ordinating the activities of the whig press is also unclear. Danby was informed that Shaftesbury 'could have what he pleased printed, and that in a night's time' (Haley, 499); Shaftesbury certainly had close contacts with a number of whig printers, though he did not have his own printing press in Thanet House, as Danby thought, and the older view that he was the guiding spirit behind much of the whig propaganda that poured forth from the presses undoubtedly exaggerates his influence. Shaftesbury was not even a member of the famous Green Ribbon Club that met at the King's Head tavern in Chancery Lane, which is known to have played some role in co-ordinating the whig propaganda campaign (though it should be noted that a number of his relatives and dependants were, including his trusty steward, Thomas Stringer). Shaftesbury kept his own clubs at the Swan in Fish Street, the Angel tavern near the Old Exchange, the Queen's Arms, and the Nag's Head. It has even been claimed that the term 'exclusion crisis' is a misnomer, since the battle lines were not drawn solely over whether or not to pass an exclusion bill: some whigs were willing to entertain other expedients to resolve the problem of the Catholic succession; Shaftesbury himself continued to push for a royal divorce and even tried to persuade Charles to make Monmouth his heir, though both schemes, it should be recognized, were attempts to exclude York from the succession by other means. 
Before the meeting of the new parliament on 6 March 1679 Shaftesbury drew up another list of lay peers and MPs predicting how they would align themselves politically. He estimated that in the Commons the court could count on 32 per cent of the members, the opposition 61 per cent, with the remaining 7 per cent being doubtful. He also produced a document, 'The present state of the kingdom', in which he voiced his concern over the power of France, the Popish Plot, and the evil influence exercised on the king's affairs by Danby, the duchess of Portsmouth (the royal mistress), and York, who Shaftesbury claimed designed 'to introduce a military and arbitrary government in his brother's time' (Christie, 2.314). The paper, probably intended as a pamphlet, was never published, though Shaftesbury did deliver a dramatic speech on the state of the nation in the Lords on 25 March, in which he warned of the double threat of popery and arbitrary government to the three kingdoms and castigated the record of the royal administration in Scotland under Lauderdale and in Ireland under Ormond. Shaftesbury supported the efforts of the Commons to bring Danby to account and voted for the 'Bill of Attainder' when it passed the Lords on 14 April by the narrow margin of thirty-nine to thirty-six votes. He subsequently tried to neutralize Danby's allies on the episcopal bench by moving that the bishops should not be allowed to sit in the Lords in capital trials. 
Charles thought that Shaftesbury 'was only angry in revenge, because he was not employed' ('Burnet's History', 302), and so, on 21 April 1679, decided to appoint him lord president of a reconstructed privy council, with a salary of $4000 a year. Shaftesbury soon made it clear, however, that he was not being bought off. A few days later, when he unsuccessfully opposed a motion in the Lords that protestant nonconformists, including Quakers, should be administered the same oaths of allegiance required of Roman Catholics, he protested that he would never have taken office 'if he had thought he could not succeed in a matter of such consequence' and 'that he desired his post in the Council only that he might.. take care of the safety and interests of the whole nation' (Christie, 2.328). He pressed the case in council for excluding York and 'making the succession to go on, as if he was dead'; Essex and Halifax urged limiting the powers of a popish successor instead, but Shaftesbury insisted that this was 'much more prejudicial to the crown than the exclusion of one heir', since it 'changed the whole government, and set up a democracy instead of a monarchy' ('Burnet's History', 303). Shaftesbury's right-hand man in the Commons, William, Lord Russell, introduced an 'Exclusion Bill' in the lower house on 11 May, which passed its second reading on 21 May, though to block the bill and to stop any further proceedings against Danby, Charles at first prorogued (27 May) and then dissolved parliament (3 July). On both occasions Shaftesbury is reputed to have said that he would have the heads of those who advised it. The only measure of any note to come out of this parliament was the 'Habeas Corpus Amendment Act', sometimes known as the 'Shaftesbury Act', which aimed to stop up certain loopholes in the traditional habeas corpus procedure; it passed on the last day of the session by fifty-seven votes to fifty-five, but only because Lord Grey of Warke (jokingly at first) decided to count one particularly fat peer as ten, and no one spotted the error. 
Shaftesbury decided to stay on the privy council for the time being, telling his friends that he did so 'only to be a tribune for the people there' (Haley, 530); according to Lord Chancellor Finch, Shaftesbury 'joined with the Duke of Monmouth' on the council to 'obstruct all' until they were 'at the top of all affairs' ('Diary of... Sidney', 2). The earl nevertheless found the duke a frustrating man to deal with. When Monmouth led the government forces against the rebellious Scottish covenanters in June 1679 Shaftesbury was said to be 'ill pleased' with Monmouth's decision to inflict a quick and decisive victory over the covenanter army at Bothwell Bridge, since if the rebellion had been more drawn out it might have forced Charles to recall parliament (Haley, 536). Nevertheless, in early August Shaftesbury and Monmouth were observed to be meeting 'very often' ('Hastings MSS', 2.388), and on one occasion they apparently proposed to the earl of Bath, Danby's ally, that they would help secure Danby's release from the Tower if he would reveal how York had on a number of occasions urged the king to rule through armed force. Nothing came of the suggestion, and on 19 August Shaftesbury left for Dorset. Two days later, however, Charles fell ill; with the king's brother in exile in Brussels, Essex and Halifax feared a coup by Monmouth and advised York to make a speedy return. Charles soon recovered and sent both York and Monmouth out of the country, but in early October he allowed his brother to change his place of exile from Flanders to Scotland. Shaftesbury, now back in London, summoned an extraordinary meeting of the council to discuss the duke's move, acting on his own authority as president while the king was away at Newmarket. This proved the final straw for Charles and on 14 October he informed Shaftesbury that his attendance at the council was no longer required. 
It was about this time that the Meal Tub Plot, an attempt by a group of Catholics to frame Shaftesbury and other opposition leaders for treason, came to light. When revealed as a sham its leading informer, Thomas Dangerfield, changed his story and claimed that the Catholics had offered him money to kill the king and the earl of Shaftesbury. The revelations led to renewed talk on the council about the need to bring forward the meeting of parliament; a new parliament had been due to convene in October 1679, but the elections that summer had gone badly for the court and the king had prorogued it until 26 January. When Charles refused to meet parliament any earlier Essex resigned his commissionership of the Treasury, fuelling speculation that Shaftesbury was his intended replacement. Indeed, in early November the earl of Sunderland did try to broker a reconciliation between Shaftesbury and the king, but Shaftesbury made it clear that he would return to office only if Charles would 'leave to Parliament all that concerned the Queen and the Duke of York' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 4.558). Shaftesbury now decided to launch a petitioning campaign to pressure the king into meeting parliament and held a series of meetings with other whig peers at the Swan tavern in Fleet Street to plot tactics. As a preliminary he wrote to Monmouth urging him to return from exile; the duke arrived back in London late on the night of 27 November, to scenes of widespread celebrating throughout the capital. The first petition was delivered to the king on 7 December, signed by Shaftesbury and fifteen other whig peers, asking that parliament be allowed to meet on 26 January 1680. This was followed by a monster petition in the name of the inhabitants of Westminster and Southwark, signed by some 20,000 people (including Shaftesbury), delivered to the king on 13 January, and several provincial petitions. When the king prorogued parliament again and recalled his brother from Scotland instead, Shaftesbury wrote a letter to his friends on the council (30 January) urging them to resign; four did. 
On 24 March 1680 Shaftesbury told the council of information he had received concerning a planned Catholic uprising in Ireland backed by French aid. The Irish plot was not new -- there had been unsubstantiated rumours to this effect for years -- but these latest revelations afforded Shaftesbury the opportunity to highlight the continuing Catholic threat at a time when popular anxieties over the Popish Plot was beginning to flag. The secretary of state, Henry Coventry, was convinced the Irish stories were a complete fabrication, designed for their effect on public opinion, but although Shaftesbury showed no qualms about exploiting them for this end there is no concrete evidence that he was guilty of subornation of witnesses. The government had no option but to launch an inquiry, and in the end the plot cost the life of Oliver Plunket, the Catholic archbishop of Armagh. 
On 13 May 1680 the king again fell ill, prompting concerns about the security of the protestant religion should he suddenly die. According to a later confession by the Rye House plotter and Monmouth rebel Ford, Lord Grey of Warke, a series of meetings was held at Shaftesbury's house (involving Monmouth, Russell, Grey, and others) where plans were laid for an uprising in the city, although these were abandoned when the king recovered ['see also 'Rye House plotters]. Other whig accounts, however, insist that there was no talk of an uprising prior to the third Exclusion Parliament (in Oxford) of March 1681, and since Grey himself could not remember whether the king's illness was before or after the Oxford parliament, his testimony may not be trustworthy. With the king back to full health Shaftesbury and his allies decided to strike again at the duke of York. On 26 June he and fourteen others (peers and commoners) went to Westminster Hall to present an indictment to the Middlesex grand jury against the duke as a popish recusant; the grand jury also had ready a petition for the calling of parliament, but before they could do anything they were dismissed for interfering in matters of state. Shaftesbury tried again four days later, but was prevented once more by the dismissal of a second grand jury. 
By mid-September 1680 Shaftesbury was holding meetings at Thanet House to prepare for the upcoming parliamentary session, which began on 21 October. He took his seat in the Lords on the 23rd and immediately called for a committee to be set up to investigate the Popish Plot. He spoke passionately in support of the 'Exclusion Bill' on 15 November when it came before the Lords where he became locked in debate with his kinsman Halifax, who favoured limitations. The result was always a foregone conclusion, however, given the number of court peers and the dead weight of the bishops, and the Lords rejected the bill on its second reading by a vote of sixty-three to thirty. The following day Essex proposed a 'Bill of Association', modelled on that of 1585 to protect Queen Elizabeth from assassination by protestants, and Shaftesbury was appointed to a subcommittee to consider it. Halifax suggested banishing York for five years; Shaftesbury replied that the best way of protecting the kingdom had been rejected, and that the only other remedy was for the king to divorce and remarry. The Lords set aside 23 November to discuss the proposal, but Shaftesbury was absent that day due to gout; when he returned on the 24th he surprisingly suggested that all expedients should be tabled for the time being, apparently convinced that financial stringency would eventually force the king to give in to exclusion. Shaftesbury gave a violent speech in the Lords on 23 December reiterating his support for exclusion; in this he attacked York, expressed distrust of the king, and urged that no taxes be voted until 'the King shall satisfie the People, that what we give is not to make us Slaves and Papists' (A. A. Cooper, earl of Shaftesbury, 'A Speech Lately Made by a Noble Peer of the Realm', 1681). With the Commons threatening to impeach some of his judges and actively pursuing the Irish plot Charles decided to prorogue parliament on 10 January; eight days later he dissolved it and announced his intention to call another at Oxford on 21 March. The only bill that was ready to receive the royal assent was that repealing an act of 1593 against sectaries; Charles secretly ordered the clerk not to present it to him, however, and thus even this measure was lost. 
On 25 January 1681 Shaftesbury, Essex, Salisbury, and others presented a petition to the king signed by sixteen peers asking that parliament might sit at Westminster rather than Oxford, though to no avail. According to Grey's later account Shaftesbury, Russell, Monmouth, and others thought about staying in London, ready to raise the City in support of parliament if the king issued another dissolution. If Shaftesbury did ever contemplate this it was not for long, for by the end of January he was making arrangements for his accommodation in Oxford. In the forthcoming parliamentary elections, several constituencies drew up instructions to their newly elected MPs, advising them what measures to support at Oxford, many of them calling explicitly for a commitment to exclusion. The fact that a draft set of instructions survives in the Shaftesbury papers has led some historians to conclude that Shaftesbury was largely responsible for co-ordinating the campaign. This is questionable, however; a comparison between the draft and the actual addresses reveals significant differences, and the constituency instructions, rather than being dictated to the localities by a central whig party machine, appear to have been the result of local initiatives. As a prelude to the meeting at Oxford, Shaftesbury and his supporters brought another indictment against York for recusancy, this time at the Old Bailey, on 26 February. The grand jury found the bill true, but York's defence counsel asked for a delay until Easter week before their client was declared convicted, and in the end the prosecution lapsed. 
In his opening speech to the Oxford parliament Charles insisted that he would not depart from the succession but would listen to any expedient that might 'remove all reasonable Fears that may arise from the Possibility of a Popish Successor coming to the Crown' ('JHL', 13, 1675-81, 745). Shaftesbury's first move was to call for an inquiry into why the bill repealing the act of 1593 had not been passed. Then on 24 March he announced that he had received an anonymous letter containing an 'expedient' which would 'comply with the King's speech, and satisfy the people too'; when shown to the king it turned out to be a proposal for settling the crown on Monmouth. Charles was furious, protesting that this expedient would 'trample over all laws of God and Man'; Shaftesbury replied by asking for 'leave to make it as lawful as we can' (Haley, 634). Later that day Charles asked Shaftesbury 'whether no other expedient could be found out instead of the Exclusion'; Shaftesbury replied 'no, and that the whole nation seemed to be of that opinion' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 6.6-7). The Commons brought in an 'Exclusion Bill' on Saturday the 26th; two days later Charles dissolved the parliament. Much of the short life of the Oxford parliament was taken up discussing whether to impeach Edward Fitzharris, accused initially of a design of trying to fasten upon Shaftesbury a libel he had concocted himself against the king but who was now offering to make startling revelations about York's involvement in the Popish Plot. Charles wanted Fitzharris left to the common law and permanently silenced by being sentenced to death; by initiating impeachment proceedings the Commons hoped to give Fitzharris the opportunity to reveal all he knew before parliament. On the 26th the Lords voted not to agree to the impeachment. Shaftesbury was one of twenty peers who signed a protest. 
Following the dissolution of the Oxford parliament the whigs' hopes fell back on the corporation of London bringing pressure on Charles to call another parliament. To increase his influence in the City, Shaftesbury procured admission as a freeman of the Skinners' Company on 3 May 1681. By now, however, the government was on the offensive; on 2 July Shaftesbury was arrested on suspicion of high treason, the main witnesses against him being the very informants whom Shaftesbury had used in the Irish plot, and was sent to the Tower. The government also ordered his papers to be seized, though nothing particularly incriminating was found, except for an anonymous draft of an association. Monmouth immediately went to visit Shaftesbury in the Tower; the king responded by ordering that Shaftesbury be kept close prisoner and allowed visits only from his wife and children. 
Shaftesbury petitioned the Old Bailey that he be brought to trial or bailed under the terms of the 'Habeas Corpus Act', but the judges declared that they had no jurisdiction over prisoners in the Tower and that he would have to wait until the next term began in the king's bench in October. In late September he offered to retire either to his country estate, beyond seas, or to Carolina if he were released (and if the last, proposing that the king should give him $3000 to meet the cost of transporting himself and his family there). Charles said he would leave Shaftesbury to the law. On 24 October Shaftesbury moved for a writ of habeas corpus at king's bench, whereupon he was told that bail would be granted if there was no prosecution before the end of the term. Shaftesbury's case finally came before a grand jury on 24 November. His indictment accused him of having said, on 18 March 1681, that he and his supporters in parliament would compel the king to accept the 'Exclusion Bill' and the bills for relief of dissenters, that armed men had been prepared, that the king 'deserved to be deposed', and that he (Shaftesbury) would 'never desist, until he had brought this kingdom of England into a commonwealth' ('State trials', 8.777). The first piece of evidence produced was the draft association found among his papers which accused York of complicity in the Popish Plot and engaged subscribers to do all they could to prevent him from coming to the throne. A succession of witnesses then appeared, most of whom had been informants in the Popish and Irish plots, to testify to the treasonable remarks Shaftesbury was supposed to have made. The government's case was not a strong one. There was no convincing proof that Shaftesbury had ever intended to use force against the king; the association was not in the earl's handwriting, and was unsigned and undated; the law required that prosecutions for uttering treasonable words had to be made within six months, making Shaftesbury's alleged words out of date; and the witnesses against him were people whom even the government thought had previously perjured themselves. Yet because jury panels were selected by the London sheriffs, both of whom at this time were whig, there was never much likelihood that the grand jury would find the bill true and send the case to trial; Shaftesbury's grand jury comprised prominent exclusionists and whig merchants, many of them with known dissenting sympathies, and predictably brought in a verdict of ignoramus. The news prompted bonfire celebrations in London, with crowds roaming the streets shouting 'No Popish Successor, No York, A Monmouth' and 'God bless the Earl of Shaftesbury' ('CSP dom.', '1680-81', 583), while there was similar rejoicing in other parts of the kingdom when news of Shaftesbury's deliverance reached the provinces. Shaftesbury was released on bail on 28 November, to commemorate which Shaftesbury's supporters had a medal coined showing the earl on one side and on the other the Tower, with the sun emerging from a cloud and the word 'Laetamur' ('let us rejoice'). When Shaftesbury reappeared in court on 13 February 1682 to answer his bail the prosecution against him was completely dropped. 
Another royal illness that May prompted Shaftesbury to call an emergency meeting at Thanet House, attended by Monmouth, Russell, Grey, Sir Thomas Armstrong, and Major John Manley, to discuss what they should do were Charles to die; the group decided they would raise a rebellion with a view to summoning parliament to determine the succession, though the plan was dropped when Charles recovered. That summer Shaftesbury held talks with the earl of Argyll, the condemned Scottish traitor who had been hiding in London after his escape from Edinburgh Castle, about the possibility of funding a rebellion in Scotland, though nothing materialized since neither trusted the other. So far Shaftesbury and other radical whigs appear to have contemplated only how to act upon the king's unexpected death. They decided to take a more proactive stance following the confirmation of two tories as sheriffs elect that July, which ensured future tory control over the impanelling of London juries. No longer could dissident whigs expect to escape the clutches of the law at the hands of ignoramus juries and Shaftesbury himself faced the prospect of another treason charge on the basis of the draft association found among his papers which had not been mentioned in his previous indictment. Shaftesbury held a series of meetings at Thanet House, where plans were laid for co-ordinated rebellions in different parts of the country to try to force the king to come to terms. As preliminaries Monmouth would make a progress to Cheshire to gauge the level of support in the north-west; Russell would sound out the west country; Grey was to canvass Essex; and Shaftesbury would be responsible for London. Monmouth's progress that September was a great success, though on his return he was seized at Stafford and brought back to London under arrest, where he was released on bail. Shaftesbury wanted Monmouth to return to Cheshire immediately and launch a rebellion, but Russell advised against it and Monmouth declined to go. 
Following the installation of the new tory sheriffs on 28 September 1682 Shaftesbury left Thanet House and went into hiding in the city, staying first in a house in Wood Street belonging to a merchant named Watson, where lodging was arranged for him under the pseudonym Mr Tucker; then at the house of Robert Ferguson, the fiery Scottish nonconformist clergyman, known best for his career as a plotter; and then with a sea captain named Tracy in Wapping. Shaftesbury had another meeting with Monmouth and Russell just before he left Thanet House in late September, and once more argued the case for an immediate insurrection, this time based on London alone, but Russell insisted they should wait for the west country, which would soon be ready. At the beginning of October Shaftesbury had a meeting with Lord Howard of Escrick at Watson's place in Wood Street, in which he said he had 10,000 men ready to fight for him in London (his 'ten thousand brisk boys'; 'State trials', 9.431; Grey, 30), complained of the recalcitrance of Monmouth and Russell, and urged Howard to lead an uprising in Essex, though Howard refused to commit himself until he had consulted the other peers. By now Shaftesbury was beginning to lose patience, and opened discussions with John Wildman and other conspirators about the possibility of assassinating the king and the duke of York on their return from the races at Newmarket later that month. When this project collapsed he turned once more to Monmouth, and finally the conspirators agreed to set a date of 19 November to launch co-ordinated uprisings in London, Cheshire, and the west county. Having had no communication from the south-west, however, it was decided at the last minute -- at a meeting at which Shaftesbury was not present -- to postpone the rebellion. 
Shaftesbury now decided it was time to flee the country. Before he left he made provision for the repayment of his debts and the disposal of his estates to his wife and his eldest grandchild, Anthony Ashley Cooper, the future third earl. The exact date of Shaftesbury's departure is unknown, but it was some time after 20 November and before the 26th when he landed at the Brill; by the 28th he was in Rotterdam and on 2 December he reached his final destination, Amsterdam. There his health quickly deteriorated; by the end of December he was finding it difficult to keep down any food, and on 17 January 1683, realizing he was dying, he made his will, which was witnessed by Thomas Dare. On the night of the 20th, in a last conversation with Robert Ferguson, who had travelled to the Netherlands with him, he apparently declared himself to be a professed Arian. The next day, Sunday 21 January, at about noon, he died in Amsterdam. Since in his will he had expressed a desire to be buried at Wimborne St Giles his body was embalmed before being shipped back to Dorset on 13 February, and was buried at Wimborne on the 26th. According to his steward, Stringer, Shaftesbury's debts in 1683 totalled $9724, including interest owed. The sum was considerable, but the capital value of his estates, which brought in annual rents of over $3000 per annum, must have been considerably more. Interestingly, he borrowed some $7600 from just six individuals between May 1680 and July 1682, which one biographer has interpreted as 'a collusive arrangement designed to guard against the possible confiscation of his estates by nominally mortgaging it all to friends' (Haley, 725), but which equally well might suggest efforts to raise ready cash in order to fund armed resistance. 
Shaftesbury has enjoyed a somewhat tarnished historical reputation. Although Locke's epitaph for the earl praised him as 'a strenuous Defender [and] vigilant Preserver [of] Liberty in both Civil, and Ecclesiastical affairs', who 'most happily consulted [the] Publick Interest' and never allowed 'self-interest [to] influence his Actions' (Locke, 'Epitaph'; 'Works of John Locke', 1812, 9.281), few contemporaries were so generous. His political opponents regarded him as a shallow opportunist who was quick to change sides when it suited his personal ambitions. A satirical catalogue of books of 1666 included a title 'How to look backwards, and forwards, of this side, and that side and every, written by the Lord Ashley' (Seaward, 213). To John Dryden, in his famous character assassination of the whigs, Shaftesbury was 'the false Achitophel', 'A Name to all succeeding Ages Curst', who was '
Restless, unfixt in Principle and Place, 

In Power unpleas'd, impatient of Disgrace. 
(Dryden, 6)' Modern biographies have been more sympathetic, keen to see consistency in Shaftesbury's many volte-faces and to envisage the earl as a man motivated by political principle. It would be wrong to be too naive in an assessment of the earl: Shaftesbury was undoubtedly a wily operator who was not above saying or doing things for calculated political effect or abandoning former friends and allies as he mapped out a new direction for himself. Yet he clearly was a man of principles, who throughout much of his long political career was prepared to make personal sacrifices in pursuit of what he believed to be the public interest. Throughout his life he retained an abiding distrust of clerical authority (particularly the pretensions of the high-church bishops) and was a consistent supporter of toleration for dissent. Although far from being a modern liberal (his views on the role of the Lords as well as his constitution for Carolina betray an aristocratic conception of politics), he was nevertheless a firm believer in the rule of law and the sovereignty of parliament, and a passionate spokesman for the rights of the people against what he sincerely saw as the threat of arbitrary government. None of his changes of side brought him personal gain; indeed, invariably they cost him office (or the promise of an office) and not infrequently the loss of income too. Burnet, who knew Shaftesbury well, says that 'he was not ashamed to reckon up the many turns he had made; and he valued himself upon the doing it at the properest season, and in the best manner' ('Burnet's History', 64). Shaftesbury may not have been the leader of the first whig party, but he undoubtedly was a great political leader -- better 'at opposing, and running things down', than 'in building up' perhaps, but a man who 'had a wonderful faculty in speaking to a popular assembly' and 'a particular talent to make others trust to his judgment', which made him unrivalled among contemporaries, according to Burnet, 'in the art of governing parties, and of making himself the head of them' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 6209


Cooper, Anthony Ashley, third earl of Shaftesbury (1671-1713), philosopher and author, was born on 26 February 1671, at about eight o'clock in the evening, at Exeter House in the Strand, London, and baptized on 7 March at St Clement Danes. He was the first son of Anthony Ashley Cooper, later second earl of Shaftesbury (1651-1699), landowner, and Lady Dorothy Manners (died 1698), third daughter of John Manners, eighth earl of Rutland. Exeter House was the town residence of his grandfather Anthony Ashley Cooper (1621-1683), who was already an important politician and, elevated as first earl of Shaftesbury in 1672, would dominate the next decade as leader of the whig opposition. By contrast Cooper's father was an ailing, reclusive, and somewhat mysterious figure, known, if at all, for the description of him as 'a shapeless Lump' in Dryden's poetic attack on the exclusionists, 'Absalom and Achitophel' (1681). Torn between the active, political model of the first earl and the retiring figure of the second, the third earl found a resolution in writing 'Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times' (1711), which endorsed both the aspiration to virtuous political action and the ideal of aloof self-knowledge and autonomy. 
The first earl of Shaftesbury, disappointed in his own son, looked to his grandson to assure the family's future. In 1674 the first earl prevailed on his son to relinquish guardianship of the future third earl. John Locke, physician and philosopher, who lived in the Shaftesbury household, had earlier watched over the infant's health and, from 1674, was responsible for his education. In the second half of the 1670s Locke entrusted the boy to Elizabeth Birch, a governess, who, fluent herself in Greek and Latin, laid the foundations for his competence in ancient languages. In the early 1680s he seems to have received instruction directly from Locke, who, in the third earl's later account, governed him according to the principles enunciated in 'Some Thoughts on Education' (1693). 
When the first earl died in exile early in 1683 authority over Cooper, to whom the title Lord Ashley now passed, returned to his parents. They promptly sent him to Winchester College, where he was enrolled from 1683 until no later than early 1686. The tory atmosphere of the school was inhospitable to such a scion of whiggism, and the experience contributed to his lifelong antipathy to formal institutions of education. In 1687 he began a continental tour, guided by a Scottish tutor, Daniel Denoune, and accompanied by Sir John Cropley, who remained an intimate throughout his life, and Thomas Sclater Bacon. After a stop in the Netherlands, where they visited the exiled Locke, and an extended stay in Paris, they spent almost a year in Italy, where Ashley devoted himself to acquiring knowledge and taste in the polite arts. Because of the hostilities between Britain and France that became inevitable once James II had been forced to leave England late in 1688 the party returned to England via central Europe, passing through Vienna, Prague, Dresden, Berlin, and Hamburg. Ashley's notes on his time abroad suggest his well-developed whig sensitivities, since they register suspicion of royal courts, Catholicism, clerics, and especially France. He was abroad in 1688 but commented in a letter to his father that he was thankful for: 'our late Purges from those promoters of yt Interest yt was to have Enslavd us to ye Horridest of all Religions, & to ye Service of the Usurpations & treacherys of that Neiboring Crown yt has Aimd so long att ye Subjection of all Europe. (Lord Ashley to the second earl of Shaftesbury, 3 May 1689, TNA: PRO, PRO 30/24/21/229)' 

Lord Ashley returned to England in the spring of 1689 and resisted the encouragement of at least one prominent whig to stand for the Commons in 1690. Rather he spent the early 1690s mixing serious study with the leisured pursuits typical of a young aristocratic gentleman. This is a poorly documented period compared to the last fifteen years of his life, for which hundreds of letters survive along with notebooks on personal, philosophical, and artistic topics. He inherited many acquaintances and friends from his grandfather and Locke. He knew such Locke associates as Edward Clarke, Walter Yonge, and Damaris Masham. He also established a lifelong friendship with John Somers, to whom he wrote or dedicated many of his mature writings. It was also through Locke that he knew Benjamin Furly, the Quaker merchant and intellectual broker in Rotterdam with whom he corresponded extensively. Furly in turn brought him into contact with continental scholars and men of letters, including Jean Le Clerc, Philip von Limborch, and Pierre Bayle, who introduced him to Pierre Des Maizeaux. 
At the same time Ashley associated with Britons of his own generation who shared a principled whiggism that combined aristocratic, classical republican, commonwealth, and country elements into a critique of the whig leadership. His enduring friendship with Robert Molesworth dated from the 1690s. So did his patronage of John Toland, with whom he had an uneasy relationship until in 1703 he concluded that Toland was too unpredictable and irresponsible an ally. His acquaintances also included Charles Davenant, Andrew Fletcher, Walter Moyle, William Stephens, and John Trenchard. 
Lord Ashley pursued his reading of history, philosophy, and the classics during the 1690s. His correspondence with Locke from these years broached philosophical topics but also conveyed his quest for a philosophical identity independent of that of his famous mentor. His earliest publications appeared at the end of the decade, enunciating important themes of his later writing. His introduction to a 1698 edition of sermons by the latitudinarian Benjamin Whichcote gave Ashley the opportunity to criticize both the philosophical egoism of Thomas Hobbes and also the egoistic calculation underpinning Christian teachings about future rewards and punishments. In the next year the first version of 'An Inquiry Concerning Virtue', on which Ashley had been working since the early 1690s, appeared. It is probably true that, as the fourth earl maintained, John Toland published the 'Inquiry' without permission, using the manuscript that Ashley had circulated among his friends. However, the fact that a few years later Ashley, by then third earl of Shaftesbury, encouraged Pierre Des Maizeaux to translate this version casts doubt on the fourth earl's story that Toland's piracy so angered Ashley that he tried to buy up extant copies. Besides, the main ideas of the 'Inquiry' were ones to which the mature Shaftesbury remained committed: that moral norms had an ontological reality independent of religious prescription and that the foundations for human happiness were not in selfishness or pleasure but in virtue itself. 
In 1695 Ashley was finally induced to enter politics. He was elected to the seat for Poole, Dorset, in May 1695, when the incumbent, Sir John Trenchard, died. That parliament was dissolved before Ashley could attend but he stood for the seat again, in the elections for the new parliament that autumn, and took his seat on 21 November. The 1695-8 parliament marked a period of taxing activity for Ashley in the Commons. Although he followed 'court' leadership on some matters he identified with 'country' members and frequently declared his independence of party. He worked to advance legislation associated with the country, most notably raising property qualifications for MPs, protecting the rights of those accused of treason, and disbanding the king's military forces after the signing of the treaty of Ryswick in September 1697. His speech in favour of the 'Treason Bill', which provided legal counsel for those accused of treason (a provision from which his own grandfather would have benefited in the 1680s), gave rise to a noteworthy anecdote. According to Abel Boyer, he: 'rose up in order to speak for it, and having begun his Speech, he industriously feign'd to be so surpriz'd that for a while he could not go on. But having recover'd himself, he took occasion from his very Surprize, to enforce the Necessity of allowing Council to Prisoners, who were to appear before their Judges; since he, who not only was unaccus'd and innocent, but one of their Members, was so dashd when he was to speak before that august Assembly. (Boyer, 3.117)' Whether spontaneous or premeditated his remark was regarded as a forceful rhetorical flourish which carried weight in the bill's passage in January 1696.Ashley rather unexpectedly refused to stand again after this parliament was dissolved in 1698 and instead spent a year in the Netherlands. He returned to England in May 1699 and went to the family home, St Giles's House in Wimborne St Giles, Dorset, where his father died on 2 November, at the age of forty-eight. Two months later the third earl of Shaftesbury appeared for the first time in the House of Lords. For the remaining years of William III's reign he attended parliament assiduously. In the debates about the fate of Spain, the growth of French power, the partition treaties, and the impeachment of the whig lords who had negotiated them Shaftesbury found himself identifying more closely than he had with the whig leadership and relinquishing the oppositional posture that he had earlier adopted. His pamphlet 'Paradoxes of State' (January 1702) argued that the threat of France made obsolete the distinction between court and country and left only one polarity in English politics, between those committed to quashing French ambitions and those not. Shaftesbury worked strenuously on behalf of whig candidates in the west country in the elections for the last two of William's parliaments, with notable success in the election of 1701-2. William recognized Shaftesbury's contributions and may have gone so far as to offer him a ministerial position. However, the political scene was disrupted in March 1702 by William's death. Anne's accession ended Shaftesbury's political prospects; indeed in 1702 she deprived him of the vice-admiralty of Dorset, which his father and grandfather had held before him. Thereafter the political climate, as well as his health, kept Shaftesbury from actively engaging in politics, although he remained a keen observer and at times, such as 1706 when a country amendment to restrict placemen in parliament was attached to the 'Regency Bill', a vigorous adviser. 
Shaftesbury's fitful political career is primarily interesting as an illustration of the tensions within post-1688 whiggism as its fundamental commitment evolved from radicalism to the defence of a standing regime. None the less his political concerns are important in understanding the writings on which his influence rests. These writings were also significantly inflected by Shaftesbury's psychic history. His decision to abandon parliament and the country in 1698 for a year of study and reflection in Rotterdam was symptomatic not just of fatigue and poor physical health but of psychological stress, for which there is remarkable evidence in the notebooks that he began keeping at this time. 
These notebooks were in part a commonplace book, assembling extracts from the Roman stoics Marcus Aurelius and especially Epictetus, and in part a diary of personal rumination and discovery. The notebooks show him struggling for personal autonomy and control in a social world that ineluctably pulled him in diverse directions and often compromised his integrity. His conflicts reflected the tension between, on one side, the social and political expectations imposed on him by his inherited social position and the model of his grandfather and, on the other, his individual temperament, which, borrowing from his father, was oriented toward privacy, contemplation, and study. Shaftesbury wrote extensively in these notebooks during 1698 and 1699, and again in 1703 and 1704, when he resumed residence in Rotterdam at a distance from his social and political obligations. 
Though Shaftesbury endured periodic anxieties until the end of his life he appears to have reached a certain degree of psychological resolution during the first decade of the eighteenth century. He reaffirmed his commitment to a political vocation but recognized that he would fulfil it as a writer of whiggishly disposed works. He also affirmed his identity as a philosopher, but one whose ideas and methods were quite distinct from those of Locke. 
From the early 1700s Shaftesbury was experimenting with genres and subjects situated on the borders of the topical, the political, and the philosophical. However, it was in the second half of the decade that he began publishing pieces, in different genres and of successively increasing length and complexity, that became the components of his chief work, the 'Characteristicks'. 
The first of these was prompted by the appearance in London in 1706 of the so-called 'French prophets', refugees from the remote Cevennes region of the Massif Central, where a millennially inspired protestant revolt against Catholic and royal authority had broken out in 1702. By 1707 the refugees had several English followers and apologists, whose prophetic activities Shaftesbury witnessed that summer. He drafted 'A Letter Concerning Enthusiasm' in the autumn, although it was not published until spring 1708. While the 'Letter' did ridicule the extravagancies of enthusiasts it also offered a positive interpretation of enthusiasm conceived as the morally orienting affective and imaginative capacity of individuals. 
The 'Letter' provoked a number of responses, including pamphlets by Mary Astell and Edward Fowler, bishop of Gloucester. These responses stimulated Shaftesbury to write 'Sensus communis: an Essay on the Freedom of Wit and Humour', published in 1709. 'Sensus communis' defended and elaborated the earlier work by articulating an ideal of free and open public discourse as a programme for human progress and refinement. Shaftesbury grounded this programme on the human potential for solidarity and co-operation, itself founded in natural human sociability. In the same year he published 'The Moralists: a Philosophical Rhapsody'. Organized as a tale of philosophical conversion this dialogue pitted a sceptic against a theist in a discussion vindicating a highly stoic vision of cosmic, social, and human order under the presidence of a supreme intelligence. 
Finally, in 1710, Shaftesbury published 'Soliloquy, or, Advice to an Author', in which he treated the importance of arts and letters in society and the conditions in which they thrive. While apparently remote from his strictly ethical concerns the 'Soliloquy' formulated publicly the sort of self-discursive technique for attaining self-knowledge that Shaftesbury had already explored in his notebooks. Thus the 'Soliloquy' was indirectly related to many of Shaftesbury's chief philosophical concerns. 
It is not clear exactly when Shaftesbury decided to bring together these four publications and the earlier 'Inquiry'. By 1710 he was revising all of them, some significantly. In addition he wrote a set of five miscellanies to accompany and comment on the earlier writings. The result was the first edition of 'Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times', published by John Darby in three volumes in 1711. Over the next two years Shaftesbury polished 'Characteristicks', making many revisions, largely stylistic, in the text. He also commissioned a set of engravings to adorn the new edition and illustrate emblematically the philosophical and political meanings of the text. These were based on drawings which Shaftesbury had commissioned from Henry Trench, an Irish artist based in Rome, and had carried out in London by the distinguished Huguenot engraver Simon Gribelin. These fine graphics, in addition to greater care in the layout and typography, made the second edition of 'Characteristicks' (1714) a splendid piece of book art. 

'Characteristicks' was a complex as well as composite book, a work of philosophy in a polite mode. It aimed centrally to convey a notion of philosophy as a form of ethical training. It mocked scholasticism, which survived, moribund but not quite dead, in the universities. More importantly it criticized those philosophical 'innovators', namely Rene Descartes, Thomas Hobbes, and John Locke, who themselves sought to demolish scholasticism. If they took their inspiration from mathematics and natural philosophy Shaftesbury took his from social and aesthetic experience. If they helped to make epistemology the central task of philosophy, Shaftesbury insisted on philosophy's ethical core. Assigning him paternity for the idea of moral sense, as philosophers have often done, has tended to assimilate him inaccurately to the epistemology-centred project of philosophy that he rejected. He opposed two traits of modern philosophy in particular: first, philosophical egoism, the postulate that the solitary individual was the starting point for social and ethical thinking; and, second, nominalism, the notion that ethical and other standards were largely conventional in character. In addition he found modern philosophy too dry, abstract, and demonstrative to address the moral formation of gentlemen. 
Characterizing modern philosophy as revived epicureanism Shaftesbury aligned his own project with stoicism. He believed humans to be situated in a morally orderly cosmos and, by virtue of their natural sociability, capable of ethical virtue and political solidarity. These commitments were shaped by extensive readings in classical philosophy, where he found Socrates and Xenophon (rather than Plato), Marcus Aurelius and Epictetus, the most potent models. He also absorbed modern influences, especially those of moderate English churchmen such as Jeremy Taylor, Henry More, Richard Cumberland, and Benjamin Whichcote. Since his outlook depended on an orderly cosmos in which an intricate pattern of interdependence supported an ethics of reciprocity, he was highly theistic in his outlook. He did defend freethinking and scepticism as forms of intellectual practice, but he was wary of some kinds of deism. In particular he rejected any hint of materialism or nihilism, which he regarded as conducive to atheism. 
As far as received religious opinion was concerned Shaftesbury was deeply sceptical of many claims made on behalf of the traditional Christian God and especially critical of ecclesiastical institutions. His moral thought aimed to secure the ontological reality of an ethical standard, not only against nominalism but against the position -- closely related to nominalism, in his view -- that ethics had to be founded in revealed religion. He was particularly anxious to show the inadequacy of the doctrine of future rewards and punishments as the ground for human ethical behaviour, since it founded supposedly moral behaviour on an essentially egoistic calculation of future benefit. 
In addition, like anti-clerical writers from James Harrington onwards, Shaftesbury identified priestcraft as a malevolent force in the world, propagating superstition and spiritual subjection to the acquisitive worldliness of priests. He traced the deleterious impacts of priestcraft through world history and assigned high-church Anglicans a pedigree extending back through the Catholic church to classical Rome and even ancient Egypt. Bedevilled by priestcraft, human spiritual history was also marred by enthusiasm. Adapting the critique of enthusiasm, initially used against puritans and others who, it was said, relied too heavily on the spirit to make religious or philosophical claims, Shaftesbury carried it in new directions by suggesting that the high-church clergy were enthusiasts whose delusions authorized fanatic persecution. At the same time he wished to recuperate enthusiasm as that capacity, first limned by Plato, of being genuinely inspired by the divine and, for Shaftesbury, of being moved and drawn to the moral and aesthetic imperatives laced into the very structure of the universe by the supreme intelligence. 
For Shaftesbury, avoiding the poles of superstition and enthusiasm was requisite for a correct philosophical temper. However, his criticism of spiritual perversion also had a political valence. Both superstition and persecuting enthusiasm helped to explain high-church bigotry, which he identified with toryism. He desired a moderate, inclusive, and tolerant religious establishment, controlled by the magistrate. Shaftesbury conspicuously cited such Anglican writers as Jeremy Taylor and John Tillotson, whom he deemed friendly to his own ecclesiology, and, according to the fourth earl, he actually attended Church of England services when his health permitted (fourth earl of Shaftesbury, sketch of the life of the third earl, Shaftesbury papers, TNA: PRO, PRO 30/24/21/226, p. 8). 
This ecclesiastical position was one important element in Shaftesbury's vision of the whig polity that the 1688 revolution had made possible. The other was a patriotic whig libertarianism defined against a toryism that he linked with Stuart and French absolutism. Though deeply concerned with politics, his writings did not use the intellectual equipment that have made the writings of Hobbes and Locke canonical among students of the history of political discourse. In fact he was dismissive of the natural law tradition and its trappings (the state of nature, natural law, contract), and his references to republicanism and British constitutionalism tended to brevity. 
Shaftesbury's main approach to politics was ethical and cultural; he promoted liberty by offering an account of liberty's culture. The heart of this culture was free and open discussion in a public arena. He found a model for such discussion in polite conversation, that is, edifying though pleasant interaction among free and equal gentlemen. Within the elitist terms of a gentlemanly society his version of polite conversation endorsed equality, reciprocity, and scepticism. When he asserted that all politeness was founded in liberty, he extended the reach of polite conversation to a generalization about culture as a whole. Thus he was critical of authoritarianism, whether ecclesiastical or governmental, and any dogmatic claims to certainty that had not been adequately tested. Throughout 'Characteristicks' Shaftesbury used cultural history to explore the intertwined histories of politics and culture and to show how repeatedly in history priestly and royal regimes proved the enemy, and liberty the foundation, of the advancement of arts and letters. 
Shaftesbury elaborated these ideas with persuasive force but without demonstrative rigour throughout the components of 'Characteristicks'. The work's composite organization and discursive style explain why historians of both philosophy and political discourse have tended to neglect it. While 'Characteristicks' was a collection its composite and digressive character was also a matter of design. The miscellanies, written specifically for the collection, were the most digressive of all the components and declared the cognitive value of the lack of system. This lack supported the philosophical, political, and cultural goals of the work by providing a textual embodiment of diversity, open-endedness, and freedom. Thus 'Characteristicks' was meant not just to advertise a cultural model but also to actualize its parameters for the sake of its readership's moral and cultural edification. 
By the time 'Characteristicks' appeared in the spring of 1711 Shaftesbury had already set in motion plans to exit the English scene. He had long deferred marriage, having enunciated repeatedly a strong desire to remain single; he preferred, it seems, to imitate Theocles, the philosophical hero of 'The Moralists', who lived a sober country life, devoted to study and enthusiastic contemplation, punctuated only by the visits and high-minded conversation of select gentlemen. Shaftesbury's sexual orientation has been a matter of some speculation; aside from his undoubted homosocial propensities, one of his letters, recounting an infatuation with a young man, suggests homosexual longings and attachments (Shaftesbury to Maurice Ashley, his brother, written 22 Jan 1705, posted 24 Dec 1705 ['sic'], TNA: PRO, PRO 30/24/20/110). However, he also recognized the obligation imposed by his social station to continue his line. With the assistance of Robert Molesworth in 1708 and 1709 he tried to negotiate an alliance with Lady Anne Vaughan, the daughter of John Vaughan, third earl of Carbery. When that effort failed, he settled quickly on a bride of less conspicuous wealth and status, Jane Ewer (1689?-1751), daughter of Thomas Ewer, squire of Bushy Hall in Hertfordshire. The marriage took place on 29 August 1709 and, on 9 February 1711, achieved its chief objective when the countess gave birth to a son, Anthony Ashley Cooper, who survived to become the fourth earl and assure the line. 
By then, however, Shaftesbury's health was seriously deteriorating and he was about to make a final retreat. At several points during his life doctors diagnosed the particular weakness of his lungs and his tendency to asthma; his papers contain many prescriptions to relieve a variety of ills. These respiratory difficulties had long affected his living arrangements, particularly when he was not staying at St Giles's. In the 1690s, when he was in London, he occupied a residence near Red Lion Square. However, after he assumed his title and his health began to weaken he bought a house in Little Chelsea on what is now the Fulham Road; to the west of London, this site offered relief from London smoke. In 1709 he rid himself of the Chelsea house in favour of one in Reigate, Surrey, which offered greater distance from London air. However by the time that the first edition of 'Characteristicks' was nearing publication he decided he would have to seek an entirely new and more salubrious climate if he was to survive. Giving up the house in Reigate he took one in Kensington, where he lodged his son and, for himself, made arrangements to go to Italy. 
Shaftesbury sailed from Dover with the countess and a small retinue on 2 July 1711. Their route took them through Paris, Dijon, Lyons, Grenoble, Turin, Florence, and Rome to Naples, where they arrived on 15 November 1711 NS. They promptly set up a household in a 'palazzo' in Chiaia, overlooking the Bay of Naples. After recovering from the damage to his health by the long journey Shaftesbury engaged in visiting sites in and around Naples and in socializing with local aristocrats and virtuosi. As noted above, he put considerable effort into preparing the second edition of 'Characteristicks'. 
In Italy, Shaftesbury also turned his attention more intently on the visual arts. He collected prints and paintings and he issued a major commission to Paolo de Mattheis (1662-1728), a prominent Neapolitan painter influenced by Luca Giordano and Carlo Maratta. The result was 'The Judgment of Hercules', a huge canvas which hung in St Giles's House until sold in 1980 to the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. However, the image was well known in the eighteenth century as engraved by Simon Gribelin in 1714. Shaftesbury's commission included elaborate instructions about the nature and meaning of the scene to be represented. These were first published in French in the learned 'Journal des Scavans' in 1712 and then, in English, in 1713 as 'A Notion of the Historical Draught or Tablature of the Judgment of Hercules'. (The 'Notion' also appeared in volume 3 of the second edition of 'Characteristicks'.) Shaftesbury also wrote 'A Letter Concerning the Art, or Science of Design' (included in some copies of the second edition of 'Characteristicks' and in all copies from the fifth edition in 1732), in which he described the promise of British culture under post-1688 conditions. He had a larger project in hand, namely, 'Second Characters', a companion to 'Characteristicks', which would have included both the 'Notion' and the 'Letter', along with a commentary on 'The Picture of Cebes', a Socratic dialogue about painting (dating from the first century AD) and a long new treatment of the arts, notes for which he left in manuscript. 
Shaftesbury's health declined toward the end of 1712 and he died in Chiaia on 15 February 1713 NS. His remains were returned to England and he was buried in the church at Wimborne St Giles; the granite monument there represents a sarcophagus, over which stands a female figure of 'Polite Literature mourning the death of her most distinguished votary'. At his death his landed estate had a rent roll of some $4000 a year; the inventories of his possessions, taken at his death, were $2003 for St Giles's House (excluding paintings, other art works, and the library) and $284 for the house at Kensington. He left little debt, largely because he fretted much about expenses after he inherited his title and sought to live within his means. Yet his papers also record regular benevolence to the needy in the St Giles's neighbourhood, and he extended considerable patronage to a number of young men, including Michael Ainsworth, Pierre Coste, Paul Crell, and Joseph and Thomas Micklethwayte. 
Shaftesbury's writings attracted a number of trenchant critiques in the eighteenth century, most notably those of Bernard Mandeville, George Berkeley, Joseph Butler, and William Warburton and his circle, including John Brown. Shaftesbury was charged with underestimating the power of human selfishness, failing to provide an adequate criterion of virtue, mistaking his aristocratic tastes for an ethical programme, overestimating ridicule as a test of truth, undermining order through his anticlericalism, and proffering a deistic hostility to revelation. 
However, such critiques also suggested the extent to which a Shaftesburian moral and aesthetic tenor shaped the age's intellectual and cultural climate. Before 1800 'Characteristicks' went through twelve English-language editions, and selections of his letters were published six times. Shaftesburian ideas and themes appeared frequently in periodicals and poetry, most notably that of Alexander Pope, James Thomson, and Mark Akenside. In the gentlemanly class Shaftesbury found enthusiastic readers, such as the soldier and statesman James Stanhope, who was the first in a line of Shaftesburians inspired by the pursuit of virtue and taste. Seeking to integrate ethics and aesthetics into the education of the gentleman Shaftesbury belonged to a European lineage of courtesy writers stretching back to Baldassare Castiglione. The broad reach of Shaftesbury's writings influenced taste in painting, architecture, and gardens, deep into the century. 
Shaftesbury's writing also contributed to the shape of contemporary philosophical and social thinking. His enquiries concerning virtue and religion, liberty and order, private autonomy and social cohesion, taste and beauty, were a starting point for writers throughout Britain. His most influential interpreter was Francis Hutcheson, who, settling in Dublin in the 1720s, was befriended by Robert Molesworth and exposed to Shaftesbury's writing. In his publications of the 1720s Hutcheson converted Shaftesbury's insights into a more formal approach to ethics and aesthetics, which he imported to Scotland when appointed professor of moral philosophy at Glasgow University in 1730. Either directly or as mediated by Hutcheson, Shaftesbury inspired William Wishart, George Turnbull, David Fordyce, and James Burnett, Lord Monboddo, among other Scots. While Hutcheson and others responded to Shaftesbury's specifically ethical positions Shaftesbury's more general concern with the nature and growth of politeness shaped the Scottish Enlightenment's attempt to define the norms and operations of a modern commercial and civil society. In England, meanwhile, although defended by Richard Fiddes, Henry Coventry, and Charles Bulkley and echoed by Viscount Bolingbroke, Shaftesbury found his greatest continuator in his nephew James Harris, in whose career scholarship, cultivation, and civic and political activism combined to promote a progressive whiggish culture. Shaftesbury was also eagerly absorbed by a range of North Americans, from Jonathan Edwards and the American Samuel Johnson to Thomas Jefferson and Ezra Stiles. 
Shaftesbury's highly wrought prose style had always been susceptible to criticism and even ridicule, as commentaries by Berkeley, Adam Smith, George Campbell, and Hugh Blair make clear. However in the second half of the eighteenth century such criticisms betokened a decline of Shaftesbury's persuasiveness in general. The highly sympathetic article on Shaftesbury in the 'General Dictionary, Historical and Critical' (1739), signed by Thomas Birch, although largely written by James Harris in co-operation with the fourth earl of Shaftesbury, proclaimed that the essays in 'Characteristicks': 'are not only perfectly finished in themselves, according to the nature and genius of that species of writing to which each belongs, but... all together they form a complete whole, whose parts have a certain order and relation to each other, and which cannot be inverted without the whole's being injured. (Birch, 183)' However Andrew Kippis, in the second edition of the 'Biographia Britannica' of 1789 (which expanded on the 'General Dictionary'), provides evidence of Shaftesbury's declining stature: 'For a considerable time he stood in high reputation as a polite writer, and was regarded by many as a standard of elegant composition. His imitators, as well as admirers, were numerous, and he was esteemed the Head of the School of sentimental Philosophy. Of late years, he has been as much depreciated as he was heretofore applauded. (Kippis, 290)' On the continent Shaftesbury's influence arrived later and lasted longer than in Britain. He became known initially through learned journals, then through the mediation of such writers as Pope and Bolingbroke, and finally through translations of 'Characteristicks' itself. Denis Diderot was deeply impressed by Shaftesbury, translating the 'Inquiry Concerning Virtue' (1745) and then plundering the rest of 'Characteristicks' for his 'Pensees philosophiques' (1746). In the 'Encyclopedie' Diderot juxtaposed Lockean penetration and truthfulness with Shaftesburian genius. Similarly Montesquieu ranked Shaftesbury, with Plato, Montaigne, and Malebranche, as one of the four great poets. It was no doubt this poetic quality that caught the imagination of Shaftesbury's German readers, who included Justus Moser, Johann Gottfried von Herder, and Moses Mendelssohn, who modelled his own philosophical dialogue on 'The Moralists'. Similarly Gotthold Lessing's 'Laokoon' (1766) took off from Shaftesburian aesthetic premises. 
Shaftesbury provided a model for polite gentlemen in his own connoisseurship, which was sparing but highly deliberate. He was intimately involved in designing the two important portraits of him, which conveyed characteristic messages. Both were painted by John Closterman at St Giles's House, in 1700 and 1701. A full-length double portrait of Shaftesbury and his brother Maurice Ashley as philosophers in antique garb affirmed the unity of nature and culture, virtue and taste. Meanwhile a full-length portrait of Shaftesbury, with a servant beckoning from behind a curtain in the background, endorsed the equal claims of action and contemplation, politics and philosophy. 


@@@@@


doc= 6210


Cooper, Anthony Ashley-, seventh earl of Shaftesbury (1801-1885), philanthropist and politician, was born on 28 April 1801 at 24 Grosvenor Square, London, the fourth child and eldest son of Cropley Ashley-Cooper, sixth earl of Shaftesbury (1768-1851) from 1811 and chairman of committees in the House of Lords from 1814, and his wife, Lady Anne Spencer-Churchill (1773-1865), daughter of the fourth duke of Marlborough. He had an unhappy childhood, with parents who were distant and severe, and he also found his first school, Manor House, Chiswick, which he attended from 1809 to 1813, to be uncongenial. He flourished more at Harrow School, where he was educated from 1813 to 1816, and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1819 after a period of two years boarding with a clergyman at Eckington in Derbyshire. He gained a first-class degree in classics in 1822, took his MA in 1832, and was made DCL in 1841. 
Lord Ashley, as he was styled in his father's lifetime, was a handsome, serious-minded, and ambitious young man. In later life he was to trace his religious convictions back to the childhood influence of a family servant, Maria Millis, and his philanthropic zeal to his teenage encounter with a pauper funeral on Harrow Hill. Nevertheless in the 1820s his character and beliefs were by no means fully formed. At Oxford he became a close friend of George Howard, later Viscount Morpeth, an association which gave him, despite his own tory family loyalties, a strong link to the whig circles of Castle Howard and Devonshire House, to whose cultivated and worldly tone he appears to have conformed. He was abroad on an extended grand tour from 1823 to 1825. 
Ashley was first elected to parliament in 1826 as MP for Woodstock, a pocket borough controlled by his uncle, the duke of Marlborough, and he initially identified himself strongly with the duke of Wellington, whom he greatly admired. He accordingly turned down the offer of office from Canning in April 1827, but early in 1828 he accepted from Wellington a commissionership at the India Board of Control. He sought to promote humanitarian and administrative reform in India, and also in 1828 took a leading part in securing legislation to protect lunatics. He was subsequently appointed to the metropolitan commission in lunacy and became its chairman in 1833. 
On 10 June 1830 at St George's, Hanover Square, Ashley married Lady Emily (Minny) Cowper (1810-1872), daughter of Emily, Countess Cowper, an alliance which strengthened his personal ties with the whigs, although it did not subvert his own tory convictions. It is very probable that Minny's natural father was not Earl Cowper but Lord Palmerston, and indeed, after Earl Cowper's death in 1837, her mother married Palmerston in 1839. Ashley's own marriage was a stable and devoted one, and he and Minny had six sons, including (Anthony) Evelyn Melbourne Ashley, politician and biographer, and four daughters, born between 1831 and 1849. 
In the general election of 1830 Ashley was returned for Dorchester. The subsequent fall of the Wellington administration left him out of office, and he turned down the offer from Palmerston of an under-secretaryship in the Foreign Office. He took a prominent part in the opposition to parliamentary reform, most notably through successfully contesting the Dorset by-election in the autumn of 1831. He was to represent the county until 1846. 
In January 1833 Ashley was persuaded to take over from Michael Sadler, who had lost his seat in the general election of 1832, the parliamentary leadership of the campaign for factory reform and shorter hours of work. Ashley proposed to limit to ten hours a day the time worked in factories by children and young people. He met with strong opposition, but, following investigations by a royal commission, the 'Factory Act' of 1833 was passed as a government measure. It provided for higher limits on hours, and a lesser measure of regulation, however, than Ashley and the Ten Hours Movement had advocated. 
In the short-lived Peel administration of 1834-5 Ashley served as a civil lord of the Admiralty. His career, however, was already setting a course towards a stance independent of the expectation of office. This was to enable him to pursue his religious, moral, and social concerns without restriction. In the event, although he accepted a post in the royal household in 1839 when Peel unsuccessfully attempted to form a government, Ashley turned down the offer when it was renewed in 1841, and was never to hold government office again. 
Ashley's growing sense of himself as a lone crusader was undergirded in the course of the 1830s by a deepening of his religious commitment. He had always been a sincere and pious Christian, but his beliefs now assumed an unambiguously evangelical character, sustained in particular by his friendship from 1835 with the leading divine Edward Bickersteth. Ashley became convinced of the imminence of the premillennial second advent of Christ, an expectation which for him engendered a sense not of fatalism, but rather of the urgency of saving souls and of reforming national life so as to mitigate the impact of the coming divine judgment. This conviction remained fundamental to the intensity and passion with which he pursued his numerous concerns. 
Accordingly from the later 1830s Ashley came to take a prominent role in relation to distinctively religious matters, both inside and outside parliament. He supported measures for Sunday observance, and in February 1836 took the chair at the inaugural meeting of the Church Pastoral Aid Society. He was to remain its president for the rest of his life. Meanwhile he became preoccupied with the spiritual condition of the Jews, central as they were to the unfolding of his apocalyptic vision, and he took a leading part in the movement that led to the creation of a protestant bishopric of Jerusalem in 1841. This development, which appalled John Henry Newman, confirmed Ashley's position as a conspicuous opponent of the Oxford Movement, and in 1841-2 he was chairman of the committee that successfully promoted the election to the professorship of poetry of James Garbett against the Tractarian Isaac Williams. He continued to campaign against high-church tendencies within the Church of England, and in 1845 deplored the passing of the 'Maynooth Act' which he perceived as disastrously compromising the nation by committing it to the indefinite support of a Roman Catholic institution. 
Ashley's spiritual fervour reinforced his endeavours for national social and moral improvement. He was concerned to sustain the probity of British policy overseas, being critical of military conduct in Afghanistan, and of the opium trade with China. He opposed the annexation of Sind in 1843 and in the same year regretted government inaction when the French forcibly annexed Tahiti. Meanwhile, in 1840 he strenuously supported legislation to protect children employed as chimney sweeps, and in 1842 he secured the passing of the 'Mines Act'. A further government measure of factory reform was enacted in 1844, although it did not satisfy Ashley, who had unsuccessfully endeavoured to extend its provisions. He took more satisfaction from securing legislation in 1845 to control the employment of children in cotton printworks. Also in 1845 he was responsible for further significant legislation on lunacy, which greatly improved the regulation of treatment. Ashley was subsequently elected permanent chairman of the lunacy commission, which acquired powers covering the whole of England and Wales, and held the office until his death. 
Ashley's sympathy with the oppressed increasingly set him at variance with his constituents, especially following a speech at Sturminster Newton in November 1843 in which he criticized landowners as well as manufacturers for their treatment of their labourers, tenants, and other dependants. His remarks on this occasion also led to a permanent estrangement from his father, with whom his relations had never been easy. In early 1846 his political position in Dorset became untenable when, in full agreement with Sir Robert Peel, he was convinced of the necessity for the repeal of the corn laws. He accordingly resigned his seat. 
The enforced break in Ashley's parliamentary career lasted some eighteen months and reinforced him in a shift of emphasis from political to voluntary philanthropic activity. He became a leading figure in an extensive range of societies. Some, such as the Irish church missions to Roman Catholics and the British and Foreign Bible Society, stemmed from specifically evangelical spiritual imperatives; others, such as the Society for Improving the Condition of the Labouring Classes, reflected a broader social conscience, but for Ashley all were expressions of his Christian zeal to proclaim the gospel and to prepare the ground for it by advances in living and working conditions. He was increasingly concerned with education, primarily for moral and spiritual reasons, and one of his main motives for seeking to limit the hours worked by children was to provide them with more time to receive instruction. He had accordingly been disappointed at the failure in 1843 of an attempt to legislate for the provision of education in factories, but committed himself to voluntary efforts in this sphere, notably from 1844 through his presidency of the Ragged School Union. From the late 1840s he actively promoted schemes for supporting the emigration of young people whose prospects in Britain were poor. 
Ashley by no means abandoned the parliamentary sphere, however. In the spring of 1847 he had the satisfaction of seeing the enactment of a Ten Hours measure, through the agency of John Fielden and others, and at the general election in July he was himself returned to the Commons, as MP for Bath. Factory reform continued to engage his energies, as the implementation of the 1847 act proved problematic, and in 1850 he conceded a compromise which in effect allowed ten and a half hours. Meanwhile in 1848 he was appointed a commissioner of the newly formed Board of Health, in which role he laboured strenuously during the cholera epidemic of 1849. He campaigned for the closure of overcrowded city burial-grounds and for the improvement of water supplies to the metropolis. 
On the death of his father on 2 June 1851 Ashley succeeded to the title, as seventh earl of Shaftesbury, and to the family estates, amounting to over 20,000 acres in Dorset, Hampshire, and Wiltshire. Although he initially felt that the House of Lords was a complete political backwater, Shaftesbury took an active part in its proceedings and used his position there to further his religious and social objectives. He continued to hold himself aloof from government office, although in 1855, under intense personal as well as political pressure, he came close to accepting the chancellorship of the duchy of Lancaster from Palmerston. However, while in the event he did not join the cabinet, his father-in-law's accession to the premiership gave Shaftesbury a significant informal role as an adviser on ecclesiastical appointments, and he obtained a noticeable increase in the proportion of evangelicals on the bench of bishops. In 1861 Palmerston honoured his wider public services with the conferment of the Order of the Garter. 
Despite such recognition and achievement, these were years of painful struggle for Shaftesbury. On a personal level the death of his beloved second son, Francis, in 1849 cast a long shadow over the succeeding decades, and three further children were to predecease their father. The family estates at Wimborne St Giles in Dorset were heavily encumbered with debt and much in need of improvement. Shaftesbury failed for a long time adequately to gain control of the problems he inherited. Eventually he achieved a substantial improvement in the social condition of his tenants and dependants, but his own financial position remained insecure. 
Shaftesbury's evangelical convictions continued to permeate his public life. He was alarmed by the advance of Catholicism in England, and took a prominent role in condemnation of the episcopal hierarchy set up by the pope in 1850, and supported the subsequent activities of the Protestant Alliance. He was also hostile to modern biblical scholarship as promoted by the broad-church party and in 1866 was, notoriously, to condemn J. R. Seeley's 'Ecce homo' as 'the most pestilential book ever vomited from the jaws of Hell' (Hodder, 3.164). More positively, he enjoyed some satisfaction in the later 1850s from the partial success of his efforts to facilitate and promote informal religious services to attract the working classes. His strong sense of national accountability to God led him to be a passionately engaged observer of the Crimean War and the Indian mutiny, on which some of his pronouncements appeared extreme and ill-considered. His protestant sympathies predisposed him to a strong and active identification with the cause of Italian unification. He was a staunch opponent of slavery and accordingly a supporter of the north in the American Civil War. Meanwhile he maintained his strenuous but not always successful efforts to improve social conditions in Britain, seeking to extend the regulation of child labour to other areas of employment, and to improve the conditions of lunatics. 
Palmerston's death in 1865 removed not only Shaftesbury's personal link to real political influence, but also a weighty check to the forces of constitutional change which he feared so much. In 1866 he was again offered the chancellorship of the duchy of Lancaster, this time by Lord Derby, but again refused: although anxious to 'stem the tide of Democracy', he wished to do this in his own way without the constraints of office. The disestablishment of the Church of Ireland in 1869 particularly depressed him, and, while he recognized the necessity for the 'Education Act' of 1870, he was disappointed to feel that the ragged schools he had done so much to build up were being superseded. 
Shaftesbury's wife's death in 1872 reinforced his self-image as a lonely old man left behind by the tide of history. Nevertheless, life and a measure of energy still remained to him, and he laboured on for the causes to which he had committed himself. Through his presidencies of numerous societies he was a central figure in the fabric of evangelical philanthropy and religious life. From the late 1860s he took up the cause of mission to the costermongers (street traders) of London, and also promoted the use of ships for housing and training homeless boys. The legislative initiative in matters of social reform had now passed to others, but he took a keen interest in developments in the regulation of employment, lunacy, and housing. His role was more central in continuing evangelical resistance to the advance of ritualism and rationalism and he was a leading promoter of the 'Public Worship Regulation Act' of 1874. His firm stand against biblical criticism was sustained and he opposed the ecclesiastical and academic preferment of its exponents, but reacted more positively to the increase of scientific knowledge. Even in his seventies he was capable of taking new initiatives, notably in relation to the control of vivisection. 
Shaftesbury suffered from various recurrent minor ailments, but his general health remained good, allowing him to continue a high level of public activity almost to the end of his life. His final illness began in the summer of 1885 and culminated with inflammation of the lungs leading to his death at 12 Clifton Gardens, Folkestone, Kent, on 1 October. His death was followed by widespread expressions of public grief. The funeral was held at Westminster Abbey on 8 October and the large crowds present in the streets and the numerous philanthropic and religious organizations represented were testimony to the esteem with which the 'poor man's earl' had come to be regarded by all social classes and a wide range of interest groups. He was interred on 9 October in the parish church on his estate at Wimborne St Giles in Dorset. 
Shaftesbury was commemorated by J. E. Boehm's statue in Westminster Abbey (1886) and by the 'Eros' monument (Alfred Gilbert, 1893) in Piccadilly Circus. His life and achievements attracted widespread interest, as indicated by the remarkable sales of Edwin Hodder's three-volume memoir (1887). The years following his death also saw the publication of numerous popular and pious biographies confirming his image as a heroic crusader for improving the conditions of the downtrodden and for the proclamation of the Christian gospel. Shaftesbury was held up to late Victorian and Edwardian manhood as a role model of noble Christian endeavour. Twentieth-century accounts of his life, notably that of the Hammonds (1923), by contrast adopted a more secular tone, recognizing his substantial contribution as a social reformer, but playing down his religious motivation. 
Shaftesbury, whose portrait by Watts is in the National Portrait Gallery, had a tall, graceful figure, with blue eyes and dark curly hair, which he retained into old age. In the 1830s he was described as a 'complete 'beau ideal' of aristocracy'. This comment on his appearance might also be applied to his whole outlook and career. He was deeply conscious of rank, and his social engagement was of a fundamentally paternalist kind. He was motivated on the one hand by Christian zeal for human dignity, the salvation of lost souls, and preparation for the millennium, and on the other by an awareness that only through mitigating the worst extremes of oppression and injustice could the class he represented sustain its social and political position. His deepest commitments were to Conservatism in politics and to evangelicalism in religion, but he was too rugged an individualist ever to be a true partisan or the successful leader of a coherent movement. His character was flawed by tendencies to impetuosity and anger and to self-pity and depression, but his outstanding qualities were tremendous integrity, courage, and persistence, and a passionate concern for the welfare of his fellow human beings. He had the ability on occasions to stir the conscience of the nation, and the dedication to back up high-profile public action with unremitting conscientious labour, notably in the spheres of lunacy, education, and public health. Even if his achievements fell short of his own exacting standards, they were very substantial and became a source of enduring inspiration to others. 


@@@@@


doc= 6211


Cooper, Sir Astley Paston, first baronet (1768-1841), surgeon, was born on 23 August 1768 at Brooke Hall, Norfolk, about 7 miles from Norwich, the fourth son and sixth child of the ten children born to the Revd 
As a youth Cooper was a notorious prankster, with little inclination to book learning. He found his early education, mostly at home and locally, a desultory experience, but his thoughts turned towards surgery after a dramatic accident claimed the life, from bleeding, of a foster brother, and his subsequent witnessing of an impressive operation for the stone by a Mr Donnee, surgeon to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital. Cooper's maternal grandfather had been a prosperous surgeon in Norwich, and his uncle William Cooper was senior surgeon at Guy's Hospital in London. Accordingly, in August 1784, Cooper was articled to his uncle, arrangements being made for him to reside in the house of Henry Cline, surgeon at nearby St Thomas's Hospital. A student of John Hunter, Cline quickly became Cooper's patron and the formal apprenticeship was switched to him. Cooper also attended Hunter's lectures and acquired from both his mentors an aptitude for dissection and experimentation that never left him. 
Cooper's London studies were interrupted by a serious attack of fever, requiring convalescence in Great Yarmouth during the summer of 1787, and by a seven-month stay from the autumn in Edinburgh, where he attended the lectures of James Gregory, James Hamilton, William Cullen, and Joseph Black, and actively participated in two debating societies. Back in London for the 1788 academic session Cooper resumed his pupillage with Cline and his attendance at Hunter's lectures. He became Cline's anatomy demonstrator the following year, and in 1791 Cline invited him to share in the lectures of his combined course on anatomy and surgery. In the same year Cooper became engaged to Anne Cock, the only daughter of a wealthy retired merchant then living in Tottenham in north London -- a friend of Cline and an early patient of Cooper. Mr Cock dying on the very day of their proposed marriage, the young couple delayed a month before marrying privately, in December 1791. Although the marriage was by all accounts happy, its subsequent tone was set by the fact that Cooper delivered his anatomy lecture as usual on the evening of his wedding. The Coopers resided for several years in a house in Jefferies Square which his father-in-law had purchased and equipped for them, in addition to providing his daughter with a dowry of $14,000. 
Besides learning anatomy from Cline, Cooper also absorbed some of his republican, democratic principles. These were tried but not obliterated by four months that the Coopers spent in revolutionary Paris from June 1792. They witnessed the atrocities of the reign of terror, and Cooper attended the lectures and operations of the surgeons Desault and Chopart; much later he wrote that revolutions may be good for posterity, but not for the existing generation. They returned to London in September, just two months before the birth of their only child, Anna Maria, who died in March 1794. They subsequently adopted a daughter, Sarah, who was the same age as their dead child, and a son, Astley, who was a nephew of Cooper's. 
Cooper's financial security enabled him to devote the 1790s almost exclusively to his teaching at St Thomas's and to his dissections. He wisely separated the lectures in anatomy from those in surgery, the latter necessitating attendance in the surgical wards of the hospital. It took him some time to distance himself from the philosophical style of Hunter's own surgical lectures, but the latter's death in 1793 left Cooper and John Abernethy of St Bartholomew's Hospital as the main rivals for the Hunterian crown. As Cooper's surgical experience deepened, his lectures became more practical in their orientation, based primarily on his own cases. He was a systematic note-taker, and this, combined with a prodigious memory, enabled him to develop a comprehensive course in surgery. He was a doer rather than a reader, and during three decades his surgical lectures were central educational features for thousands of medical students attracted by the London hospitals and their medical teachers. As was common in an era when student fees constituted an important source of income for teachers, Cooper did not rush to publish a textbook. However, the successive compilations based on his mature lectures, beginning with 'Outlines of Lectures on Surgery' (1820), between them had gone through ten editions by 1839, in addition to four American editions and several German translations. More than many textbooks, these volumes represented print versions of what Cooper actually taught. Despite the print edition of the first of these publications, Thomas Wakley shrewdly chose Cooper's lectures to reproduce in the first issue of his new journal, 'The Lancet', in 1823. 
From 1793 until 1796 Cooper was also lecturer in anatomy at the Company of Surgeons (after 1800 the Royal College of Surgeons). In 1797 he took over the larger house at 12 St Mary Axe, vacated by Cline. This provided more room for both his experimental work and for his comparative and human dissections. He accidentally left behind a live viper in his old house and once dissected an elephant in the front garden of his new one, throwing a carpet over the railings to conceal it from public view. He moved to Broad Street in 1806 and then to New Street in 1815. In 1800 his uncle resigned as surgeon to Guy's Hospital and Cooper applied for the post. Advised by the hospital's secretary that his chances would be much improved were he to renounce his earlier political views and continued association with friends of democratic principles, Cooper decided on reflection that a surgeon should be a man for all parties and discontinued any active involvement in politics. He was comfortably elected to the Guy's post, and the income from his surgical practice almost doubled within the year. 
Although Cooper always took his teaching seriously, he also practised his craft among all classes. Tall and handsome, and with an easy manner, he attracted a large number of wealthy and influential patients, including Lord Liverpool, the duke of York, the duke of Wellington, and the prince of Wales, who, as George IV, created him baronet in 1821 following the successful removal of a painful cyst from the king's scalp. By Cooper's request the baronetcy descended to his adopted nephew, also named Astley Cooper. Much of his practice would now be considered medical rather than surgical, and he was known as a good diagnostician who trusted only a few medicines. His income in his peak years exceeded $20,000, and he was once given 1000 guineas after a successful removal of a bladder stone. His practice was of such legendary profitability that an impostor successfully practised for a time under his name in south London. 
Within the limits of surgery before anaesthesia and antiseptics, Cooper was an outstanding operator, precise and quick. He himself wrote that he was not so good when delicacy was required, as in cataract surgery, but he was prepared to take on most of what was then the surgical repertoire. He could even innovate. Like Hunter before him, Cooper was especially interested in the surgical treatment of arterial aneurysms, and used animals to investigate the development of collateral circulation following the surgical occlusion of an artery. He operated on patients suffering from carotid aneurysms, the second of his patients surviving for thirteen years, though an even more dramatic operation to tie the aorta in a patient with an aortic aneurysm resulted in his patient's death forty hours later. He also successfully ligated the external iliac artery for a patient with a femoral aneurysm. He advocated the use of catgut in arterial surgery, that suturing material having the advantage of being gradually absorbed. 
Cooper's standing was recognized by his surgical colleagues. He was elected professor of comparative anatomy at the Royal College of Surgeons in 1813, a post he resigned two years later. He became a member of the court of examiners of the college in 1822, and he served as president twice, in 1827 and 1836. He was also a vice-president of the Royal Society, to whose fellowship he had been elected in 1802, and won the society's Copley medal. His publications reflected his twin passions of anatomy and surgery, his first monograph, on hernias (published in two parts between 1804 and 1807), being stimulated by his own inguinal hernia which he had noticed while still a student. The description of the anatomy of the inguinal area was especially important. Cooper also produced treatises on fractures and dislocations (1822; sixth edition, 1829), the diseases of the breast (1829) and testis (1830), and the anatomy of the thymus gland (1832) and the breast (1840). He paid particular attention to high-quality illustrations, drawn by a succession of artists that he himself employed. His monographs contain a number of his notable surgical and anatomical observations and are based almost entirely on his own work, done singly or with various of his pupils and associates. 
Cooper was loyal to his articled pupils, and such was his influence that he expected them to land the top jobs. Wakley assaulted this nepotism in the early volumes of 'The Lancet'. Later, when Cooper's nephew Bransby Cooper did not succeed his uncle as anatomy lecturer at St Thomas's Hospital when he retired in 1825, Cooper prevailed on the Guy's secretary to establish a separate school there, with Bransby teaching anatomy and another pupil, Aston Key, becoming the lecturer in surgery. The museum at St Thomas's, which he had built up, stayed behind; instead Cooper helped Guy's to establish its own anatomical and surgical museum. Many of its specimens came from his dissections, often supplied by body snatchers. Cooper was quite open about the inadequate number of bodies for anatomy teaching available through legal means, before the 'Anatomy Act' of 1832. He famously remarked to the House of Commons select committee on anatomy in 1828 that no dead person, however exalted, was safe from the activities of the resurrectionists: 'The law only enhances the price, and does not prevent the exhumation.' 
Cooper began to suffer from occasional dizzy spells in the 1820s, and his wife's death in 1827 prompted him to retire from all his London activities. He had already purchased an estate at Gadesbridge, near Hemel Hempstead, where his wife had lived for several years. He soon tired of farming, however, and after marrying Catherine Jones in 1828 entered into a kind of Indian summer. He became adept at treating farm animals, especially horses, which he acquired lame and nursed and fed back to saleable health. He reopened his London surgical practice, this time in Conduit Street, and went on several continental tours, where he met many leading medical figures. He also received honorary degrees from Oxford and Edinburgh. 
Cooper was a man of enormous energy who generally dissected for two or three hours before breakfast. Temperate in his habits, he was nevertheless sociable and active in several societies, including the Physical Society at Guy's, the Medico-Chirurgical Society, of which he was a founder member, and the Pow-Wow, a medical dining club started by John Hunter. He was a good athlete who valued the role of sport, and he hosted shooting parties at his estate. 
Cooper's health gave way in 1840, and after developing signs of congestive heart failure he died in Conduit Street on 12 February 1841. He had left instructions for a post-mortem examination to be conducted, and he directed his dissectors to pay particular attention to several points associated with his own medical history and to publish the autopsy report. He was buried on 20 February in the chapel of Guy's Hospital. His will endowed an essay competition at Guy's; a memorial statue was erected in St Paul's Cathedral, and his fine portrait by Sir Thomas Lawrence is in the possession of the Royal College of Surgeons. 


@@@@@


doc= 6212


Cooper, Charles Henry (1808-1866), biographer and antiquary, was born at Great Marlow, Buckinghamshire, on 20 March 1808, the eldest of the ten children of Basil Henry Cooper (1783-1823), solicitor, and Harriet (1787-1860), daughter of Charles Shoppee of Uxbridge. He was educated at home until he reached his seventh year, when he was sent to a school kept by a Mr Cannon at Reading. There he remained to the end of 1822. From an early age he evinced a passion for reading, and as his father possessed an extensive library, he was able to lay the foundation of his ample stock of historical and antiquarian knowledge. In 1826 he settled at Cambridge, and applied himself diligently to the study of the law. He married at Ely on 17 September 1834 Jane (1805-1890), third and youngest daughter of John and Elizabeth Thompson of Prickwillow, Cambridgeshire, and they had eight children, of whom only the biographer Thompson Cooper (1837-1904), his brother John William LLD (1845-1906), of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and their sister Harriet Elizabeth survived. 
On 1 January 1836, when the 'Municipal Corporations Act' came into operation, Cooper was elected coroner of the borough, though he was not admitted a solicitor until four years later. In 1849 he was appointed town clerk of Cambridge, which office he held until his death. In 1851 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. A fine speaker, he acquired an extensive practice as a solicitor. In 1855 he was engaged in the Cambridge arbitration which resulted in the 'Award Act' of the following year to settle differences between the university and borough, and he was complimented for his learning and acumen by the arbitrator, Sir John Patteson. In a busy public life he supported liberal and progressive measures, such as the founding of the public library and improvements to Addenbrooke's Hospital. 
Cooper is now better known, however, for his elaborate works relating to the history and topography of Cambridge and the biography of distinguished members of the university. His first book was 'A New Guide to the University and Town of Cambridge', published anonymously in 1831. It was superior to most works of its class, especially in its architectural descriptions. In 1842 the first volume appeared of the 'Annals of Cambridge', which was followed by three other volumes, dated respectively 1843, 1845, and 1852, and by a portion of a fifth (pp. 1-128) in 1853, completed by his son John, and finally published in 1908 with additions, corrections, and an index. 
This work is arranged chronologically, and contains an account of the history of the university and town from the legendary times of Cantaber to 1856. It was brought out in parts by subscription amid great difficulties. Many of the academic authorities opposed its publication, as they mistakenly believed that it would in some way deprive the university of its ancient privileges. In 1858 the first volume appeared of a more ambitious work, 'Athenae Cantabrigienses', written jointly by Cooper and his eldest son, Thompson. The idea of the book was suggested by Anthony Wood's 'Athenae Oxonienses'. It contains carefully written memoirs of the worthies who received their education or were incorporated at Cambridge University, and, like the companion work of Wood, is arranged in chronological order according to the date of death. The first volume dealt with the period 1500-85, and the second, published in 1861, extends to 1609. Part of a third volume, extending to 1611, was printed but not published, though several of the memoirs in this unfinished volume were afterwards reproduced in abbreviated form in Thompson Cooper's 'Biographical Dictionary'. Like the 'Annals', this work, which was at once recognized as a valuable addition to British biographical literature, was published by private subscription. After Cooper's death the university offered to pay for the printing of the remainder of the 'Athenae', but his two sons, after making some further progress with the manuscript, were forced by the pressure of their own work to abandon the undertaking. It was, however, completed and finally published by G. J. Gray in 1913. 
Cooper's last work was 'The Memorials of Cambridge' (3 vols., 1858-66). Cooper originally intended to base it on John Le Keux's work of the same title, but during its progress it was altered so extensively that it may be regarded as substantially a new work. Cooper was a constant contributor to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', the 'East Anglian', 'Notes and Queries', the local press, and the proceedings of the antiquarian societies of London and Cambridge. He always ungrudgingly assisted in any literary undertaking. Thomas Carlyle, in his 'Life and Letters of Cromwell', acknowledged the value of the information given to him by Cooper, as did many other writers. Cooper died at his residence, 29 Jesus Lane, Cambridge, on 21 March 1866 and was buried at Mill Road cemetery, Cambridge, on 26 March. Most of the books in his library were sold by Sotheby between 28 and 30 October 1891. He left in manuscript a 'Memoir of Margaret', about the mother of Henry VII. This work, written in 1839, was edited and published in 1874 by the Revd J. E. B. Mayor 'for the two colleges of her foundation' -- Christ's and St John's. Mayor, who for thirteen years was Cooper's intimate literary friend, described him shortly after his death as 'the town's chief ornament', admired for 'his intelligence, his ready memory, his rare familiarity with English history, topography, and biography, his wide range of reading, his large and statesmanlike view of persons and events', who shared his knowledge generously and whose death left a void that could not be filled (Mayor, 'Cambridge Chronicle', 8). He also predicted that Cooper's historical works would be cited more often than any other Cambridge books of his day. So it has proved to be. 


@@@@@


doc= 6213


Cooper, Charles Purton (1793-1873), lawyer and antiquary, was the son of Charles Cooper, linen draper, of St Dunstan, Kent, and Fleet Street, London. He was educated at Wadham College, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1810 and was a contemporary of Richard Bethell, first Lord Westbury. He graduated BA in 1814 with a double first class in honours, gaining his MA on 5 July 1817. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 18 November 1816, and, after practising with success as an equity draughtsman, was appointed a king's counsel in 1836. He was queen's serjeant for the duchy of Lancaster from 1834 to his death. In 1837 he became a bencher of Lincoln's Inn, and in 1843 presented to the society two thousand volumes of civil and foreign legal works, having previously presented a hundred and fifty volumes of American law reports. He was treasurer of his inn in 1855, and master of the library in 1856. 
Cooper's enthusiasm for the cause of legal reform attracted the attention of Lord Brougham, who introduced him to the Holland House circle and the heads of the whig party and on 12 March 1831 appointed him secretary of the second record commission. During his period of office Cooper bought and printed so many books that the commission's debt, over and above the $400,000 voted by parliament, rose to $24,000. The commission lapsed on 20 June 1837 on the king's death. Lord Holland recommended Cooper for the post of solicitor-general but R. M. Rolfe, later Lord Cranworth, was appointed. 
Cooper played an active part in public affairs in his own county, Kent, where he resided at Denton Court, near Canterbury. He appeared as a whig candidate for Lambeth in 1850, but withdrew from the contest. In 1854 and 1857 he unsuccessfully contested Canterbury. He was proposed as a candidate for West Kent in 1855, but declined to stand. His great knowledge of jurisprudence and legal antiquities procured him a fellowship of the Royal Society on 6 December 1832, and the degree of LLD from the Roman Catholic University of Louvain and from Kiel. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in June 1825 and was a corresponding member of the royal academies of Lisbon, Munich, Berlin, and Brussels. 
Cooper enjoyed a leading practice in the court of Vice-Chancellor Knight-Bruce, but he openly quarrelled with that judge, quitted his court, and lost his practice. As business fell off he endeavoured, without success, to obtain government assistance for a project for digesting and sifting all the law reports down to that date. He eventually retired to Boulogne, where, after unsuccessfully attempting to carry on his projects of legal reform, he died of paralysis and bronchitis on 26 March 1873, aged eighty. 
Cooper was a prolific writer. He published a large number of varied legal works, including 'An Account of the Public Records of the United Kingdom' (2 vols., 1832), three volumes of reports of cases, texts on the court of chancery, conveyancing, solicitors' costs, municipal corporations, and the custody of lunatics. In 1860 he published memoranda of his proposals to classify the law reports and digest the statute book. He also published a letter on the pope's apostolic letters of 1850, a pamphlet on the government and the Irish Roman Catholic members (1851), and a work on freemasonry. 


@@@@@


doc= 6214


Cooper, Daniel (1816/17-1842), naturalist, was born at 82 Blackfriars Road, Lambeth, the second son of John Thomas Cooper (1790-1854), a teacher of chemistry at a private medical school and well known in London scientific circles, and his wife, Elizabeth ('fl'. 1785-1840). He was intended for a medical career like two of his brothers, and was accepted for pupillage by a local physician, James Forbes Young, who shared and fostered his enthusiasm for natural history and for field botany especially. This enthusiasm led to Cooper's precocious authorship in 1836 of 'Flora metropolitana', a guide to the best places round London for botanical rarities (and for land and freshwater molluscs). 
That same summer Cooper was chiefly instrumental in the founding of the Botanical Society of London. A frequent contributor of papers and exhibits to its early meetings, as initial honorary curator it fell to him to realize the society's central function as an agency for the postal exchange of dried specimens for herbaria. From the thousands of these sent in a selection had to be made, after sorting and relabelling, for a return parcel proportionate in size and interest to that sent. Cooper was through inexperience unequal to this very demanding task, and put into currency as a result numerous erroneous records which his successor, H. C. Watson, was to succeed in eliminating with only limited success. 
Seeking to make a living as a naturalist, Cooper had meanwhile taken on numerous lecturing and writing commitments, including editing the short-lived 'Microscopic Journal', an abstracts service which he over-optimistically calculated would be rendered viable by the patronage of the recently founded Microscopical Society of London. A temporary post in the zoology department of the British Museum, assisting with its invertebrate collections, provided a further financial crutch. Having qualified as a surgeon, however, he decided to settle for the more secure and leisured existence offered by medical service in the army. Within just a few months, after joining a cavalry regiment at Leeds, phlebitis brought on by a slight injury led to his death at the barracks, at the age of only twenty-five, on 23 November 1842. He was buried at Quarry Hill church, Leeds, on 28 November. He is not known to have married. 


@@@@@


doc= 6215


Cooper, Edward (d. 1725), print seller, became the most distinguished print publisher of his generation and a leading figure in the art world. Nothing is known of his early life, but he first appeared as publisher of a portrait of Thomas Thynne in an advertisement in the 'True Protestant Mercury' on 21 February 1682. He first began to challenge Alexander Browne's command of the mezzotint publishing business in 1684, and in 1686 he obtained a royal privilege protecting his plates against copies for a term of fourteen years. By this time he was already employing the talented engraver John Smith and cultivating certain leading portrait painters, notably Willem Wissing, Frederic Kerseboom, Godfrey Kneller, and (soon after) Michael Dahl. He also published contemporary landscapes, still lifes, and 'fancies' by Robert Robinson, Bernard Lens the younger, and Jan vander Vaart, and old master paintings, undertaking such important initiatives as a set of mezzotints of the Raphael cartoons (1707). 
Mezzotint was the characteristic staple of Cooper's publishing business, but he also issued some engravings. He was co-publisher with Richard Tompson of Peter Vandrebanc's etchings of the ceilings in the north range at Windsor Castle (1682-6?) and publisher of Dirck Maas's large etching of 'The Battle of the Boyne' (1691). He also reissued some old plates, including a set of twenty-five 'Birds and Beasts', after Francis Barlow, later stolen during the view of the sale that followed his death. As a retailer, Cooper dealt in old master prints, imported Italian prints, and was named in advertisements as a principal distributor of such important English undertakings as Nicolas Dorigny's Raphael cartoons and James Thornhill's prints of his designs for the cupola of St Paul's. 
However, Cooper's business in art was not confined to prints: he also sold paintings and artists' materials and was widely acknowledged as an art expert. In 1703 he valued Robert Hooke's print collection and by 1711 he was distributing catalogues of important auction sales of paintings; it is likely that he was the cataloguer and possibly the auctioneer of many of these sales. One at least, in 1719, was of pictures 'collected by Mr Edward Cooper' ('Daily Courant', 21 Jan 1719). He mixed with the leading connoisseurs in the country. In 1714 he was steward at the feast of the exclusive club the Society of the Virtuosi of St Luke, 'the earliest organized group of art experts and art advisers in this country' (Bignamini, 21). Cooper was a member from at least 1714 to 1720. He was also one of George Vertue's trusted informants about art history. 
Cooper remained at the Three Pigeons in Bedford Street, between Covent Garden and the Strand, until his death. He married Priscilla and they had at least three children, Elizabeth, John, and Priscilla. Portraits of all the family were engraved in mezzotint. Cooper's decision to retire was signalled by the advertisement of a sale of 'the large and curious collection of prints and drawings of Mr Edward Cooper (who is leaving off the business)' in the 'Daily Courant' of 2 February 1723. At this point he published his own portrait, engraved by Pelham after vander Vaart, showing a corpulent man holding a proof mezzotint. John vander Vaart was mentioned as a 'dear friend' in Cooper's will. This document indicated substantial affluence: he left a second house to his wife. He died early in 1725, and his death was followed by another sale, of household goods and shop goods, including a 'four-Wheel'd Chaise' as well 'as Copper-Plates, Paints, Pictures, fine Colours, &c. likewise several sorts of Materials belonging to Painting, Printing, &c.' ('Daily Post', 1 May 1725). Prints published by Cooper may be found in the British Museum, London, and the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut. 
His son 
During his long career Edward Cooper provided employment for most mezzotint engravers of the time. Of his regular employees, Isaac Beckett, John Smith (1652-1743), William Faithorne the younger, Bernard Lens (1659/60-1725), Jan vander Vaart, and Peter Pelham are separately noticed. 


@@@@@


doc= 6216


Cooper, Edward Joshua (1798-1863), landowner and astronomer, was born in May 1798 at St Stephen's Green, Dublin, the eldest of the three sons of Edward Synge Cooper (died 1830), a landowner, and his wife, Anne, the daughter of Harry Verelst, governor of Bengal. He attended school in Armagh, where he became acquainted with the astronomical observatory, and Eton College, and then spent two years from 1816 at Christ Church, Oxford, without taking a degree. His education was completed by ten years of travel. 
By his constant practice of determining with portable instruments the latitudes and longitudes of the places he visited, Cooper accumulated a mass of unpublished geographical data. In the summer of 1820 he met Sir William Drummond at Naples, and, by the latter's interest in ancient zodiacs, was induced to visit Egypt to obtain accurate copies of them. He accordingly ascended the Nile as far as the second cataract in the winter of 1820-21, and brought home with him the materials of a volume entitled 'Views in Egypt and Nubia', printed for private circulation at London in 1824. A set of lithographs from drawings by Bossi, a Roman artist engaged by Cooper for the journey, formed its chief interest. 
Cooper's eastward excursions reached as far as Turkey and Persia, and in 1824-5 he traversed Denmark, Sweden, and Norway, as far as the North Cape. Following his travels he regarded Munich and Nice as the best adapted spots in Europe for astronomical observation. He subsequently undertook important astronomical work in the vicinity of both cities, and at Nice a large refractor was established in the 1890s. 
On his father's death in 1830 Cooper succeeded to his position as manager of the family estates at Markree, Collooney, co. Sligo, Ireland, and decided to erect an observatory there. He visited Cauchoix in Paris in 1829 and by 1831 was able to purchase from him an object-glass 131/3 inches across and 25 feet in focal length, the largest then in existence. Used at first on a wooden stand, it was mounted equatorially by Thomas Grubb of Dublin in 1834. Cast iron was employed for the first time as the material of the tube and stand. A dome of the requisite size was considered then not to be feasible, and the instrument was set up in the open air. A 5 foot transit by Troughton, a meridian circle 3 feet in diameter, fitted with a 7 inch telescope, ordered in 1839 on the occasion of a visit to the works of Ertel in Bavaria, and a comet seeker (a short-focus, wide-angle refracting telescope), likewise by Ertel, acquired in 1842, were successively added to the equipment of what was authoritatively described in 1851 as 'undoubtedly the most richly furnished of private observatories' ('Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society', 11, 1850-51, 104). 
Cooper worked diligently in the observatory himself when at Markree, and obtained in March 1842, in Andrew Graham, an assistant who gave a fresh impulse to its activity. In their joint work in 1842-3 the positions of fifty stars within two degrees of the pole were determined; later the systematic meridian observations of minor planets were set on foot, and on 10-12 August 1847 an experiment was successfully made of determining the difference of longitude between Markree and Killiney, 98 miles distant, by simultaneous observations of shooting stars. A ninth minor planet was discovered by Graham on 25 April 1848 and named Metis, its detection having ensued from the adoption of a plan of work laid down by Cooper. Meteorological registers were continuously kept at Markree for thirty years from 1833, and many of the results were communicated to the Meteorological Society. In 1844-5 Cooper and Graham made together a tour through France, Germany, and Italy. The great refractor formed part of their luggage, and, mounted on a wooden stand with altitude and azimuth movements, was used to sketch the Orion nebula and to detect independently, at Naples on 7 February 1845, a comet already observed in the southern hemisphere. 
From the time that the possibility of further planetary discoveries had been recalled to the attention of astronomers by the finding of Astraea on 8 December 1845, Cooper had it in view to extend the star maps then in progress at Berlin so as to include stars of the twelfth or thirteenth magnitude. A detailed acquaintance with ecliptical stars, however, was indispensable for the facilitation of planetary research -- Cooper's primary object -- and the Berlin maps covered only an equatorial zone of thirty degrees. He accordingly resolved on the construction of a set of ecliptic star charts to twelfth or thirteenth magnitude of four times the linear dimensions of the 'Horae' prepared at Berlin. The intention was to show fainter stars so that fainter minor planets could be detected. Observations for the purpose were begun in August 1848, and continued until Graham's resignation in June 1860. The results were printed at government expense in four volumes with the title 'Catalogue of Stars Near the Ecliptic Observed at Markree' (1851-6). The approximate places were contained in them of 60,066 stars (epoch 1850) within three degrees of the ecliptic, only 8965 of which were already known. A list of seventy-seven stars missing from recent catalogues, or lost in the course of the observations, formed an appendix. The maps corresponding to this extensive catalogue, presented by his daughters after Cooper's death to the University of Cambridge, have remained unpublished. For this notable service to astronomy, in which he took a large personal share, Cooper received in 1858 the Cunningham gold medal of the Royal Irish Academy. He had been a member of that body from 1832, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 2 June 1853. 
The elements and other data relative to 198 cometary bodies, gathered from scattered sources during several years, were arranged and published by Cooper in a volume entitled 'Cometic Orbits, with Copious Notes and Addenda' (1852). Although partially anticipated by Galle's list of 178 sets of elements appended to the 1847 edition of Olbers's 'Abhandlung', the physical and historical information collected in the notes remain of permanent value. The preface contains statistics of the distribution in longitude of the perihelia and nodes of both planetary and cometary orbits, showing what seemed more than a chance aggregation in one semicircle. Communications on the same point were presented by Cooper to the Royal Astronomical Society in 1853, to the Royal Society in 1855, and to the British Association in 1858. 
Cooper succeeded to the proprietorship of the Markree estates on the death in 1837 of his uncle Joshua Cooper. He was Conservative member of parliament for co. Sligo from 1830 to 1841, and again from 1857 to 1859. He was twice married, first to Sophia L'Estrange, of Moystown, King's county, who died having given birth to a son who also died, and second to Sarah Frances (died 1863), the daughter of Owen Wynne of Haslewood, co. Sligo, with whom he had five daughters. Cooper died, shortly after his wife, at Markree Castle on 23 April 1863. 
According to W. Doberck, Cooper was a kind as well as an improving landlord; his private life was blameless, and he united attractiveness of manner to varied accomplishments. He kept up to the last his interest in scientific pursuits, and numerous records of his work in astronomy were printed in the 'Monthly Notices', the 'Astronomische Nachrichten', and other journals. He imparted his observations of the annular eclipse of 15 May 1836 to the Academie Royale des Sciences in Paris. For some years after his death the Markree observatory was completely neglected. It was restored in 1874, when W. Doberck was appointed director, and the refractor began to be employed, according to Cooper's original intention, for the study of double stars. However, little was done in this field, though meteorological observations were continued into the 1890s. In 1927 the 13 inch telescope, then nearly 100 years old, was sold for use in teaching science at a Jesuit seminary in Hong Kong. It was damaged during the Second World War, and the Cauchoix lens is now preserved in good condition at the Manila observatory. At Markree Castle only the observatory walls remain. 


@@@@@


doc= 6217


Cooper, Elizabeth (b. in or before 1698, d. 1761?), playwright and anthologist, was the daughter of Aubrey Price (died 1698) and his wife, Bridget Claypoole ('c'.1674-1738), daughter of John Claypoole, Oliver Cromwell's son-in-law and master of horse, and his second wife. Both her mother and grandmother were unfortunate in choosing the men in whom they placed their trust: though Blanche Claypoole had brought to her marriage perhaps $10,000, Bridget, already an orphan and her parents' only heir, was at or shortly after Elizabeth's birth a widow and a pauper. Where Elizabeth was born, brought up, and educated remains unknown, but both her parents during their brief marriage and she herself after her own marriage inhabited various parishes in Westminster. On 25 February 1722 she married John Cooper (1691-1729), a successful auctioneer in Covent Garden of major art and book collections such as those of the duke of Portland and Dr Woodward. They had six children, including one who died in its first year, before John Cooper's death in 1729 (when she may have been pregnant with a seventh). Their house (cum auction rooms) in the Great Piazza was visited by scholars such as Thomas Birch, and it was presumably through a shared interest in the contents of the books and manuscripts passing through that she came to know the writer and theatrical entrepreneur James Ralph and the antiquary William Oldys. John Cooper's own art collection was sold at auction in 1730, as well as the house, the latter perhaps to the auctioneer Christopher Cock (immortalized by Fielding), with whom Cooper had sometimes been associated. 
In the 1730s Elizabeth Cooper seems to have been seeking a means of financial support. Early in 1734 she acted as a member of the company at Drury Lane in Ralph's 'The Cornish Squire' and a pantomime, 'Cupid and Psyche, or, Columbine Courtezan'. That April she organized a benefit for herself at Lincoln's Inn Fields, Colley Cibber's 'The Careless Husband', with herself playing Lady Easy. Her activities then expanded to playwriting: in 1735 appeared at Covent Garden 'The Rival Widows', in which she played the lead for her two benefits, and the following year at the Haymarket 'The Nobleman', which reached the third night benefit but which was never printed. Fielding's 'Pasquin' was that season the sensational hit at his and Ralph's theatre, the Haymarket, and though Ralph had foregone production of one of his own plays to extend its run, he is said to have urged that Mrs Cooper's play be produced. But then came Walpole's 'Licensing Act', which closed the Haymarket and ended Fielding's dramatic career and incidentally Mrs Cooper's as well. 
Cooper then turned to compiling an anthology of English poetry from the eleventh century (Edward the Confessor) to the sixteenth (Samuel Daniel). For this she borrowed books from William Oldys and sought unpublished manuscripts from poets' families. Cooper added biographical information about the poets and gave brief critical assessments of the works. The volume, called 'The Muses Library', is competent in every respect and remains well worth reading. It has been credited by reputable modern scholars as the model for Samuel Johnson's format in his 'Lives of the Poets' and as the chief inspiration for Thomas Chatterton's antique style. Elizabeth Cooper planned a further volume, of poetic theory, but unhappily the first failed to sell well, and the project collapsed. 
The last record of Cooper, in a letter of disputable date (probably 1742), places her in St James's. J. Yeowell wrote that she died on 5 August 1761, but David Baker wrote in 1764 'Of this Lady, who is still living, and whom we must rank among the Female Geniuses of this Kingdom' (Baker, sig. H1'r'). 


@@@@@


doc= 6218


Cooper, George (1820-1876), organist, was born on 7 July 1820 at Lambeth, London. His father, also named George Cooper (died 1843), was assistant organist at St Paul's Cathedral. Cooper's early proficiency, arising from assiduous practice on an old pedal harpsichord, came to the notice of Thomas Attwood, the chief organist of the cathedral, who on several occasions made him extemporize at the festivals of the Sons of the Clergy. On one such occasion he is said to have earned the praise of Mendelssohn. At the age of eleven the younger George Cooper often took the service instead of his father, and in 1834 he received the appointment of organist of St Benet Paul's Wharf. Two years later he became organist of St Anne and St Agnes, Aldersgate, and on Attwood's death, in March 1838, he succeeded his father as assistant organist of St Paul's Cathedral. His father, who had resigned at that time, died in 1843, on which occasion Cooper also obtained his post at St Sepulchre's. In the same year he was appointed singing master and organist to Christ's Hospital. In September 1856 he became organist of the Chapel Royal, in succession to J. B. Sale, who had just died. This appointment, together with those at St Paul's, St Sepulchre's, and Christ's Hospital, he retained until his death. 
Cooper published a book of 'Organ Arrangements', an 'Organist's Assistant', an 'Introduction to the Organ', and an 'Organist's Manual' (1851). In 1862 he revised the music for W. Windle's 'Church and Home Metrical Psalter and Hymn Book', contributing several tunes of his own. On the death of Henry John Gauntlett in February 1876 he undertook to complete the musical editing of 'Wesley's Hymns'. He had finished the task by the time of his death, but the book appeared posthumously in 1877. Cooper died at his home at 14 Heathcote Street, Mecklenburg Square, London, on 2 October 1876. He was survived by his wife, Eleanor Cooper. 


@@@@@


doc= 6219


Cooper, Grey (c.1726-1801), politician, was the eldest son of William Cooper, physician, of Newcastle upon Tyne, and Mary Grey of Alnwick. He received a legal education at the Middle Temple, London, and was called to the bar in 1751. On 5 October 1753 he married Margaret Grey (died 1755), daughter of Sir Henry Grey, first baronet, of Howick. Following her death he married Elizabeth Kennedy (1733/4-1809) of Newcastle upon Tyne on 19 July 1762; they had two sons and two daughters. In 1775 he assumed the baronetcy of the Coopers of Gogar, supposedly created in 1638, on the grounds that he was the great-grandson of the Revd James Cooper, brother of the second baronet, but both the title and his claim to it are disputed (GEC, 'Baronetage', 2.446-7). 
By 1765, when Cooper entered politics, his legal practice was earning him an estimated $1000 per annum. His advocacy of the duke and duchess of Atholl in their petition to sell their sovereignty of the Isle of Man made a strong impression in the House of Commons. The same year he defended the Rockingham administration in two pamphlets entitled 'A Pair of Spectacles for Short-Sighted Politicians' and 'The Merits of the New Administration Truly Stated' in response to the criticisms levelled in an anonymous pamphlet, 'An Honest Man's Reasons for Declining to Take Any Part on the New Administration', thought to have been written by Charles Lloyd, George Grenville's private secretary. These publications brought him to the attention of the administration and in October 1765 he was appointed secretary to the Treasury after protracted negotiations concerning his pension, for he wished to be fully compensated for the loss of his legal practice which he would have to give up on taking office. Rockingham granted him an annuity of $500 per annum and engineered his election as MP for Rochester. Cooper continued as joint secretary to the Treasury for the next sixteen years under the successive governments of Pitt, the duke of Grafton, and Lord North, but he went out of office on the downfall of the last ministry in 1782. Under North he managed the electoral interests in the Cornish boroughs and the duchy revenues, but on the whole his business was restricted to financial matters. He represented Grampound from 1768 to 1774 and Saltash from 1774 to 1784, both in Cornwall, and he returned to office briefly as a lord of the Treasury in the Fox-North coalition government. He failed to be nominated for the government seat of Saltash at the general election in 1784 and he was out of parliament until February 1786, when he was elected MP for Richmond on the Dundas interest. During the debates in 1787 on the commercial treaty with France he took an active part in the opposition and 'yielded to few in his accurate knowledge of the complicated interests which it included' ('Memoirs of... Wraxall', 4.398). On this and Pitt's other financial measures he directed a keen and searching criticism. At the height of his career in the early 1780s his income from his office and accumulated sinecures earned him over $5500 per annum. In addition he had managed to secure for his sons under a reversionary patent the post of auditor of the land revenue in virtually every county in England, which was worth about $2000 per annum. Cooper did not stand for parliament in 1790 but he continued to be involved in politics and went over to Pitt in 1793. Hoping for return to office, he had to be content with his nomination in 1796 as a privy councillor. A volume of his verse dedicated to his friend the poet William Mason was published in 1780. Cooper died very suddenly at Worlington, Suffolk, on 30 July 1801, and was buried in the church there, where a monument was erected to his memory. His widow died at Worlington on 3 November 1809, aged seventy-five. 


@@@@@


doc= 6220


Cooper, John (1793-1870), actor, was born in Bath, the son of a tradesman. After playing Alonzo in E. Young's 'The Revenge' in a private theatre, he appeared on the Bath stage, on 14 March 1811, as Inkle in 'Inkle and Yarico' and subsequently in two or three other parts. Following a short visit to Cheltenham, he appeared on 15 May 1811 at the Haymarket in London as Count Montalban in John Tobin's 'The Honeymoon', and, besides playing other characters, was the original William Wyndham in W. Dimond's 'Royal Oak' and Hartley in Theodore Hook's 'Darkness Visible'. He then joined Andrew Cherry, the manager of several Welsh theatres, after whose death in 1812 he played in the north of England and Scotland. In Edinburgh he acted Edgar to Edmund Kean's King Lear, and was in Glasgow the original Virginius in Sheridan Knowles's tragedy of that name. In November 1820 he made his first appearance at Drury Lane, as Romeo, and was well received. In the course of the opening season at Drury Lane he played Antony in 'Julius Caesar', Tullus Aufidius in 'Coriolanus', Joseph in 'The School for Scandal', Richmond in 'Richard III', Iago to Kean's Othello, and many other parts. 
Around 1825 Cooper married the widowed actress Mrs Dalton, originally Miss Walton, of Dublin. During the twenty-five years which followed his services were generally in request at Covent Garden, the Haymarket, the English Opera House, and the Surrey. A steady, capable, and eminently conscientious actor, but heavy and mechanical, he played during this period a singularly large number of parts, some of them of leading importance. He was the original Duke of Sheridan Knowles's 'Love' at Covent Garden in 1839. Among his best parts were Iago and the Ghost in 'Hamlet'. Cooper was also a great favourite in the York and Lincoln circuits, which he quitted for Norwich. There he was appointed stage-manager in 1843, in which year his wife died in London. In September 1845 the Norwich circuit passed into the hands of W. J. A. Abingdon, and Cooper joined Charles Gill at Newmarket. Next he was engaged by Knowles, the proprietor of the Theatre Royal, Manchester, and made his debut there as Menenius in 'Coriolanus'. Cooper was also popular in Hull and Leeds, and finally played under Charles Kean at the Princess's Theatre in London, performing such characters as Henry IV in 'Henry IV, Part I', the Duke of York in 'Richard II', and Kent in 'King Lear'. On retirement from the Princess's in 1859 he withdrew from the stage and lived on his savings. At the end of his life he lived at 6 Sandringham Gardens, Ealing, and he died on 13 July 1870 at Tunbridge Wells, where he had gone for his health. 


@@@@@


doc= 6221


Cooper, John Gilbert (1722-1769), writer, was born on 24 August 1722 at Lockington, Leicestershire, the eldest of five children of John Gilbert ('bap'. 1672?, died 1773) and Dorothy ('bap'. 1695, died 1727), daughter of William and Martha Bainbrigge. His father inherited the estate of a relation, John Cooper of Thurgarton Priory in Nottinghamshire, on condition that he took Cooper's name and arms. He therefore introduced a private bill into the House of Lords; this received royal assent on 5 May 1736, after which date father and son both took the name John Gilbert Cooper. 
Gilbert Cooper received his early education in Sutton Coldfield, proceeding to Westminster School in 1733, and to Trinity College, Cambridge, as a fellow-commoner in 1740. He studied at Groningen University for eight months from February 1743, after which he toured the United Provinces and Germany, returning to England in May 1744. 
Gilbert Cooper's poetic career began in 1742, with the anonymous publication of a poem, 'The Temples of Virtue and Pleasure'. 'The Power of Harmony', a philosophical poem heavily influenced by Lord Shaftesbury's 'Characteristicks' and Mark Akenside's 'The Pleasures of Imagination', followed in 1745. Gilbert Cooper also contributed extensively to 'The Museum' (1746-7), a periodical published by Robert Dodsley and edited by Akenside; his contributions were usually signed Philaretes. 
On 22 October 1748 Gilbert Cooper married Susanna (1723x5-1751), the eldest daughter of William Wright, recorder of Leicester. His father now settled on him lands in Nottinghamshire and Lincolnshire, and Gilbert Cooper began extensive works on Thurgarton Priory, to which he and his family moved early in 1751. The marriage produced three children: Henry (1749), who died aged one day, and for whom Gilbert Cooper wrote a Latin epitaph, much criticized for its pomposity and apparent insincerity; Susanna (1750-1802); and John (1751-1822). His wife died on 10 November 1751, seven weeks after the birth of John. 
Gilbert Cooper became embroiled in a literary controversy on the publication of his historical work, 'The Life of Socrates' (1749). In it he showed little respect for established scholarship; and in particular he singled out the works of William Warburton for attack. Warburton retaliated in a note to 'An Essay on Criticism' in his edition of Pope (1751), and Gilbert Cooper swiftly replied in a pamphlet, 'Cursory Remarks on Mr Warburton's New Edition of Mr Pope's Works', complaining that Warburton's comments had been personal. His complaint is undercut by his own, very personal, attack on the future bishop's work as 'nothing but [what] the inflamed Brain of a rank Monk could conceive, or the Oyster-selling Maids near 'London-Bridge' could utter' (p. 5). Dr Johnson was perhaps recalling this controversy when he retorted, on hearing that Gilbert Cooper had called him 'the Caliban of literature', 'I must dub him the Punchinello' (Boswell, 'Life', 2.129). 
Gilbert Cooper's next work, 'Letters Concerning Taste' (1754), was the first book-length contribution in English to the subject. The perspective adopted is both philosophically informed and critically analytic, an approach which was to prove influential. In the later 1750s he turned again to the publication of poetry, including 'Epistles to the Great, from Aristippus in Retirement' (1757); 'The Call of Aristippus' (1758); and a translation of Jean-Baptiste-Louis Gresset's mock-heroic tale of a nunnery parrot, 'Ver-vert' (1759). These three works were in a French metre introduced into English by Gilbert Cooper, in which octosyllabic couplets are interspersed irregularly among octosyllabic lines rhyming on different patterns. He published nothing new after 1759, although a manuscript comedy, 'The Lover's Resolution', dated 1762, survives (Nottinghamshire County RO, M9660), and in 1764 the Dodsleys published a selection of his poetry. 
From November 1755 Gilbert Cooper lived mainly in London, where he became actively involved in the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce; he is said to have resigned when he failed to be elected as the society's vice-president. Gilbert Cooper died at his house in Mayfair on 14 April 1769, having suffered from kidney stones, and was buried on 21 April at Thurgarton. 


@@@@@


doc= 6222


Cooper, Richard, the elder (1701-1764), engraver, was born in London on 26 October 1701, the son of William Cooper (died 1708), bricklayer, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Smith (died 1709). He studied at the Merchant Taylors' School, London, until 1712, and in 1717 was apprenticed to John Clarke, stationer: he may also have trained in London with John Pine, who collaborated with Clarke. In 1722 he travelled to Italy, where he began a collection of prints and drawings; in this period he may also have become an associate of the first St Martin's Lane Academy and of Louis Cheron, who taught drawing there and at Great Queen Street. On his return to Britain about 1725 he moved to Edinburgh, originally at the invitation of a Mr Guthrie whom he had met in Rome, and who was probably either the painter Alexander Guthrie or the Alexander Guthrie who was secretary to the board of trustees. 
Cooper's arrival in Edinburgh precipitated some remarkable developments in the city's cultural life. In 1726 he engraved the music for Allan Ramsay's 'Collection of Scots Songs', and over the next thirty years his studio engraved almost all the music published in Scotland. He was a founder in 1729, and the first treasurer, of the Edinburgh School of St Luke, the earliest academy of artists in Scotland. Other signatories to the founding indenture included the poet Allan Ramsay, the bookseller James Balfour, the art dealer Andrew Hay, the painters John Alexander and Richard Chalmers, the architect William Adam, and the decorator James Norie. The school probably originated through the interaction between Cooper and the academic staff of Edinburgh University, notably Alexander Monro, and from 1731 until at least 1733 the school met at the university. In 1735 Cooper bought a large plot of land in St John Street and established a private academy close to his house. In that year he became first junior and then senior warden of the Canongate lodge of freemasons. He was made a burgess of Edinburgh in 1736 'for good services done and performed to this City' (Watson, 44). Cooper had quickly established a flourishing business as a general engraver of tickets, music, portraits, views, maps, and book illustrations, having more or less a monopoly of engraving business in the city. He made botanical studies for James Justice and anatomical studies for Alexander Monro. He also sold prints and related items such as wallpaper and acted as an interior decorator to various noblemen and institutions. In 1736 he took Robert Strange as a boarding apprentice. Strange was not entirely pleased when Cooper's marriage, on 24 December 1738 to Ann Lind (1708-1775), the youngest daughter of George Lind, an Edinburgh merchant and baillie, brought about changes in the big house in St John Street, and very shortly a son, also Richard Cooper ['see below']. Samuel Taylor was apprenticed to Cooper in August 1738 and Andrew Bell in 1741. A second son, George (1747-1777), became a writer to the signet and may have travelled in Italy with the third earl of Rosebery in 1757. The School of St Luke probably ceased to function in 1745, when most of the members who had not already died came under suspicion of treason, and Cooper's pupil Strange fled to France. 
Cooper, however, remained in Edinburgh. In 1747, after years of determined opposition from the town council and the clerical and university authorities, he completed the building of a theatre on his land in Canongate (which through ancient burgh status was legally outside the jurisdiction of the town council). He leased his theatre for twenty-five years to the managers of the Canongate Concert Hall but took an active part in its operations, employing William Delacour as a scene-painter. He continued to prosper. In September 1749 he bought the house of the Incorporation of Tailors in Canongate and in January 1751 he bought the dean's house in Restalrig village. Here Cooper's third son, William, died in infancy in 1752; in the following year a daughter, Ann, was born. By now he was acting as drawing-master to various noble ladies, while his studio continued to produce anatomical and medical illustrations and most of the maps and prints of any consequence that were produced in Scotland. He made a will in March 1757 leaving all his stock in trade to his son Richard. Cooper died on 20 January 1764 and was buried in Restalrig parish churchyard. 
The younger 
On 11 August 1777 Cooper married Frances Ramsay in Edinburgh; it is not clear whether he took up residence in Edinburgh, but in 1778 he exhibited Italian views at the Royal Academy. About 1787 he settled in Charles Street, in Westminster's fashionable district of St James, and devoted himself to drawing and exhibiting numerous examples of his work at the Royal Academy up to 1809. He taught drawing to Princess Charlotte (1796-1817) and died in 1814. 


@@@@@


doc= 6223


Richard Cooper (1740-1814) was born on 6 February 1740 in Edinburgh and trained under his father before, in 1758, following Robert Strange to Paris to study under the famous French engraver J. P. Le Bas. He moved to London in 1761 and launched a proposal for a print of Van Dyck's 'The Children of Charles I', and he exhibited figure drawings and engravings at the Society of Artists and at the Free Society until 1764. 'The Children of Charles I' was published in 1763 and favourably noticed in the 'Critical Review'. Cooper then travelled in Spain and was the first British engraver to record old masters in Spanish collections. In 1768 he succeeded Alexander Cozens as drawing-master at Eton College, then in 1771 went to Italy, travelling with Thomas Merriman, and visiting Venice, Capua, and Naples, where he was patronized by Sir William Hamilton in 1772-3. The Edinburgh banker Robert Alexander assisted him in getting to Rome, where he became friendly with the Runciman brothers and developed a style of landscape painting close to that of Alexander Runciman. A series of tinted drawings of Rome and its vicinity earned him the nickname the English Poussin. He also became a friend and associate of the painter Jacob More, subsequently acting as More's executor. Cooper painted many Italian views, particularly of Rome, Tivoli, and Naples, some of which were exhibited at the Society of Artists in 1783. 


@@@@@


doc= 6224


Cooper, Robert (1649/50-1732), mathematician and Church of England clergyman, was the second son of the seven children born to Robert Cooper of Kidderminster, Worcestershire, and his wife, Elizabeth. He entered Pembroke College, Oxford, as a servitor in 1666, aged sixteen, graduated BA in 1670, and was elected fellow through the influence of Dr Hall, master of Pembroke. Cooper is credited by Wood (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.749) as the author of the anonymous tract 'Proportions Concerning Optic-Glasses, with their Natural Reasons Drawn from Experiments' (1679), which expounds in simple fashion the laws governing reflection and refraction through glass. Elsewhere this work has been attributed to Obadiah Walker, who had an interest in mathematics but who never put his name to his own works, and also to Abraham Woodhead, who had no scientific interests. The likeliest explanation is that it was found among Walker's papers at his death in 1678, and that Cooper, who was a competent mathematician, edited it and passed it to Woodhead, who was a delegate of the university press, for publication. Five hundred copies were printed. 
The anonymous 'General introduction to geography' which prefaced the first volume, published in 1680, of Moses Pitt's multi-volume but incomplete 'English Atlas' has also been attributed to Cooper. The author of this text includes an explanation of the calculations for latitude and longitude and other aspects of mathematical geography. 
On 8 April 1681 Cooper, who was considered an able preacher, was presented to the rectory of Harlington, Middlesex, where he resided at least part of the time until his death. From 1698 he was also archdeacon of Dorset. Cooper never married. He died in March 1732 and was buried at Harlington, where his tomb bears the incorrect death date of 1722, which is corrected on a memorial inside the church. He left his books to his nephew Robert Pyre, vicar of Heath, and over $1500 in South Sea shares to his sister Rachel and various nieces. He also requested that $100 promised to Pembroke College towards the cost of the chapel then under construction should be paid. 


@@@@@


doc= 6225


Cooper, Robert (fl. 1800-1836), printmaker, flourished in the first part of the nineteenth century, but nothing is known of his parentage, early life, or training. Although he did design a few of his own prints, he was primarily a reproductive engraver of portraits who worked variously in stipple and line engraving as well as in etching. Given the early nineteenth-century fashion for collecting historical portraits, he found much employment contributing prints to illustrated antiquarian publications such as Edmund Lodge's 'Portraits of Illustrious Personages of Great Britain' (1821-34) and Henry Tresham's and William Young Ottley's 'British Gallery of Pictures' (1808-18). While most of these modest historical portraits are formulaic in pose and handling, Cooper was able to provide a level of novelty by employing various engraving techniques such as the delicate stipple effect that can be seen in his series of plates for Sir Robert Naunton's 'Fragmenta regalia' (1824), an anecdotal account of the court of Queen Elizabeth. His plates also embellished the pages of luxury editions of more light-hearted reading material: they can be found in copies of Sir Walter Scott's 'Old Mortality', the fashionable periodical 'La Belle Assemblee', and the picturesque 'Scenery of the Rivers of Norfolk' (1834), after paintings by James Stark. Apart from working to order for publishers, Cooper also executed a number of privately issued plates for the duke of Buckingham, all of which were portraits after artists such as Van Dyck and Velazquez apart from the portrait of the duke of Buckingham himself, which was taken from a modern work by George Lethbridge Saunders. His best-known work for this patron is surely his version of the Chandos portrait of Shakespeare, a subject which was in keeping with Cooper's preference for portraits of contemporary actors and actresses, which were eventually published as a series of hand-coloured etchings entitled 'British Theatrical Gallery' (1822-5). 
Although it is not clear when, it seems that Cooper also went into business as a picture dealer and publisher. However, judging from Southgate's auction of his stock of prints and the sale of his 'capital mahogany press' ('Catalogue') between 31 October and 2 November 1826, it would appear that he was unsuccessful in this venture. Somewhat unscrupulously, this sale also included many impressions from the private plates Cooper had executed, as well as 'reworkings of subjects popularized by other artists' (ibid.), such as West's 'Death of Wolfe' and an unfinished large engraving of 'Christ Bearing the Cross', after Mignard. He is known to have shown work at the Associated Engravers' exhibition in 1821, and is thought to have still been living in 1836. 


@@@@@


doc= 6226


Cooper, Samuel (1607/8-1672), miniature painter, was born probably in Blackfriars, London, the elder child of Richard Cooper ('b'. 1577) and Barbara Hoskins ('b'. 'c'.1590), who were married on 1 September 1607 at the church of St Nicholas Cole Abbey, near Blackfriars. Barbara, the daughter of John Hoskins, at that time an inmate of the Fleet prison although the family was of substance, was the sister of John Hoskins (c.1590-1665), the miniaturist. Richard Cooper was originally from York, where the family retained its geographical base. About 1610 Richard and Barbara seem to have died or otherwise relinquished the charge of their children, so Samuel and his brother, Alexander Cooper (bap. 1609, d. c.1660), were brought up by their uncle John Hoskins, evidently in the neighbourhood of Blackfriars, a district much favoured by artists and craftsmen because of its traditional freedom from the trade restrictions imposed in the rest of the City by the livery companies. There Richard Graham, who knew Cooper and was his earliest biographer, records that Samuel 'derived the most considerable Advantages, from the 'Observations' which he made on the Works of 'Van Dyck'' (Graham, 375-6). His earliest signed miniature, 'c'.1635, is a portrait of Van Dyck's mistress Margaret Lemon, now in the Institut Neerlandais, Paris. 
By 1634 the Hoskins household had moved to Bedford Street, in the fashionable new development of Covent Garden, where Cooper wrote out for the king's physician, Sir Theodore Turquet de Mayerne, who attended Hoskins as his doctor and commissioned his portrait from him, 'tout le secret de lenluminure' (Edmond, 'Limners and picturemakers', 100-01). About 1635 Cooper's hand is evident in miniatures presented as the work of his uncle (see portraits of the earl of Dorset and the earl of Holland in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London) but his own signed 'oeuvre' does not begin until 1642; early biographers state that he 'spent several years of his life abroad' (Graham, 375-6). He was widely accomplished. Samuel Pepys recorded (on 10 July 1668) that he spoke French, and Richard Graham that 'he was reckon'd one of the best 'Lutenists'... in his Time' (ibid.). By 1642 he was certainly in England, living in King Street, Covent Garden. 
In 1642 Cooper married Christiana (1623-1693), daughter of William Turner of Towthorpe, near York, and of his wife, Thomasina. Christiana had a sister, Edith ('b'. 1643), who became the mother of the poet Alexander Pope. In 1650 Cooper moved with his wife to one of the most substantial houses in Henrietta Street, also in Covent Garden, and lived there until his death. There were no children of the marriage. 
Through his uncle Samuel Cooper was introduced from the start to the royal and courtly clientele of miniature painting, but never worked under his own name for Charles I, since Charles and his court left London for Oxford about the time that Cooper arrived. By the mid-1640s he was adapting himself and his style successfully to suit the prevailing conditions of patronage in London during the civil wars and interregnum, building a reputation for good likenesses, brilliant execution, and great personal charm. His 'parliamentary' output -- portraits of men in armour usually against a dark background, and women whose 'tenue' remained relatively unaffected by the circumstances of war -- culminated in the paintings of Oliver Cromwell in the early 1650s: 'Mr Cooper. the painter... desires you to excuse him one month longer, as he has some work to finish for Lord General Cromwell and his family', wrote Miles Woodshaw to Lord Conway on 7 November 1650 (Long, 85). Cooper seems to have taken various likenesses of Cromwell for various purposes, including formal portraiture, for which he made the 'ad vivum' sketch now in the collection of the duke of Buccleuch and on which Lely may have relied for the surviving oil painting (Birmingham City Museum and Art Gallery). There are also images made apparently for use on medals or coins, a good example of which is an 'ad vivum' profile in the National Portrait Gallery. Claimed likenesses of other members of the Cromwell family, including the sons Richard and Henry, are very doubtful but there is a miniature by Cooper, descended from the Claypoles, traditionally identified as Elizabeth Claypole, Cromwell's younger and favourite daughter, dated 1653, in the collection of the duke of Buccleuch, which has been considered by the National Portrait Gallery to provide authority for other possible images of Elizabeth. These might include the small, bright, and highly finished miniatures by Cooper -- also of the mid-1650s -- one of which was given by Lord Lee of Fareham to the Chequers Trust, and the other, finer version of which is now in the Victoria and Albert Museum (Murdoch, cat. no. 74). It is particularly interesting that these miniatures, if they are correctly identified, suggest the extent to which the protector's family (but not he) adopted after 1653 a personal style similar to that of the French royal family and court, where enamel portraits, set in expensive boxes or personal jewels, provided a fashionable means of courtly self-presentation. Arguably, however, for the historian of English visual culture in the revolutionary years it is portraits such as the 'Sir William Palmer' of 1657 (V&A), apparently alluding to Rembrandt in their colouring, that show most vividly Cooper's probing and intelligent engagement with the individuality of his sitters as distinct from their class or official status. A similar ability to characterize as well as portray is occasionally evident in the work of other contemporary English artists such as William Dobson ('bap'. 1611, died 1646). It shows a tendency in the development of English painting and in the understanding of human nature that is surely related to the interest in inductive study of appearances and symptoms characteristic of English seventeenth-century thinking about ways of truly knowing a subject. 
Soon after the Restoration, however, Charles II sat to Cooper for a new likeness used for the production of numerous finished miniatures, most of which were not finished to Cooper's normal high standard, which suggests that Cooper was again so pressed with business that the replication of the new king's image required studio assistance. Of these official portraits the best and largest is probably that of the king in Garter robes at Goodwood House, Sussex. The king also sat to Cooper for a profile for the new coinage. John Evelyn, the diarist and art connoisseur, records for 10 January 1662: 'Being call'd to his Majesty's closet when Mr. Cooper, the rare limner, was crayoning of the King's face and head, to make the stamps by, for the new mill'd money now contriving, I had the honour to hold the candle whilst it was doing, he choosing the night and candle-light for the better finding out the shadows. During this his Majesty discours'd with me on several things relating to painting and graving. (Evelyn, 'Diary', 3.309-10)' Drawings in red and black chalk, now in the Royal Collection, are probably results of this sitting. Such an emphatic chiaroscuro was necessary in designs intended for the low-relief die-maker but normally Cooper painted in the full light of his studio. His portrait of James, duke of York, of 1661 (V&A) is an excellent example of the development in his orthodox miniature portraiture at this period. It is bright and direct in its lighting, and subtly enriched in its representation of the sitter's complexion; it shows also the enlargement of the oval to nearly 31/2 inches, which became increasingly the norm for miniatures until the mid-eighteenth century. 
Cooper's professional pre-eminence was confirmed by his appointment as king's limner in 1663. Such was his charm and perceived eminence that his clients tended to become his friends and willing advocates. His circle of acquaintance seems to have included most of the intellectual and artistic elite of the period; Richard Graham recorded that he was known to 'the greatest Men of 'France', 'Holland', and his 'own country', and by his 'Works' more universally known in all the parts of 'Christendom'' (Graham, 376). When Grand Duke Cosimo III of Tuscany sat to him in 1669 Cooper was described in the official journal of the visit as 'un piccinetto tutto spirito e cortesia. E ancor egli assai ricco, e in casa non sta meno honorabilmente di Lelley, lavora sopra un tavolino coperto di velluto' ('a tiny man, all spirit and courtesy, very well-off and not less honourably set up in his house than Lely, and working on a table covered in velvet'; Crino, 148). The style in which Lely lived was famous. Pepys, as well as Evelyn, watched Cooper at work, the experience of seeing the genius in action being highly valued. Charles Beale, another diarist, recorded his death: 'Sunday, May 5 1672, Mr Samuel Cooper, the most famous limner in the world for a face, died' (Vertue, 'Note Books', 4.169). 
Cooper died thus at the height of his powers, busy with commissions from the king and the duke of York, in his fine house on Henrietta Street. Interestingly he may have converted to Roman Catholicism, for he chose not to be buried in his own parish but in the church of St Pancras, in which many converts were buried at this time. His tomb bears the initials of the pre-Reformation monumental inscription 'Cuius animae propricietur deus' (Edmond, 'Samuel Cooper', 83-5). It also states his age at death as sixty-four. 
As a miniaturist Cooper was the pioneer of a method of painting the human face using a firm hatching stroke applied with the tip of the brush in red and brown, which he developed evidently while still working within the orbit of his uncle John Hoskins. The method requires considerable assurance of hand and is particularly well fitted for a draughtsman capable of seizing a sitter's likeness rapidly. In contrast to the delicate stipples of the earlier tradition of Nicholas Hilliard and Isaac Oliver the hatching style is demonstrative and painterly; its stylistic relationship to the 'new' portraiture of Mytens and Van Dyck has often been observed. Other elements of the composition, such as architectural or landscape backgrounds, are often painted with an almost aggressive or careless breadth. Examples of early exercises in this style are the portrait of the earl of Holland against a stormy sky (Ham House, Richmond, Surrey) and that of the fourth earl of Dorset, after Van Dyck (V&A), which bears the Hoskins monogram but is surely by the young Cooper. The somewhat harsh painterly style of the late 1630s becomes very disciplined in the 1640s, the hatching in the face firm and clear, and subordinated to the need to produce a good characteristic likeness. The backgrounds are neatly painted, often plain dark brown with perhaps a flush of light reflected from the studio window behind the sitter's left shoulder. Sometimes the background is divided, as though the sitter is posed against a window or door to the outside world. This phase, during which the standard Cooper signature is the separate initials SC divided by a colon, gives way progressively to an interest in fine finish, with the brush strokes disappearing into a smooth, illusionistic surface, and, in 1653, a new signature: a loose monogram of the conjoined initials, usually with a date, appears for the first time. 
By the early 1650s Cooper was responding to the French developments in fine enamel portraiture, sometimes reducing the size of his ovals and increasingly aiming at a fine, 'invisible' 'facture', as in the portraits said to be of Elizabeth Claypole. Alongside these, however, there seem to be signs of a division in his 'oeuvre' between the miniatures, which are made according to the rigorous professional discipline of the sittings, and his sketches or graphic work, in which, in common with other draughtsmen of the time, he allowed an interest in brilliant execution to be predominant. They are probably opportunistic or alternative views of sitters, quickly executed as the artist tried his subject in different positions. Many such 'unfinished' works were extant in his studio at his death, variously interpreted as either awaiting the finishing touches or as pattern likenesses, preparatory to the multiplication of finished works. More probably, however, they were always intended to be autonomous, a different kind of art recording the direct experience of the studio, and contrasting with the necessary formality of the finished miniatures. 
In the finished miniatures of the 1660s, as the standard size of the oval was increased to some 31/2 inches and large, rectangular, 'cabinet' miniatures were demanded by the most important sitters, other ways of maintaining the illusionistic surface had to be developed. The brush strokes accordingly begin to be blended together, with considerable amounts of gouache and with a final glaze of red in the cheeks, to create an effect of vividness that sometimes startled contemporaries: 'I must confess I do think the colouring of the flesh to be a little forced', wrote Samuel Pepys, whose eye would have been conditioned by twenty years of looking at the sober, 'sad-coloured' portraiture of the interregnum (Pepys, 136). Unfortunately, however, except in the private collection at Welbeck Abbey, Nottinghamshire, few unfaded Cooper miniatures of any period now survive. 
For all aspects of his 'oeuvre' a full representation of Cooper's stylistic range, including an interesting group of the 'unfinished' works deriving ultimately from the estate of his widow, may be seen in the Victoria and Albert Museum. The most brilliant of the surviving 'sketches' -- of sitters who had been of importance to the king -- were, however, acquired from Christiana Cooper by Charles II in June 1673, when Christiana was granted a pension of $200 a year. They remain in the Royal Collection and include portraits of two royal mistresses -- Barbara Villiers, duchess of Cleveland, and Frances Stuart, duchess of Richmond -- of extraordinary delicacy in representing the different formal properties of the beauty exemplified by these famous women. Cooper's ability thus to analyse, even when the imperatives of flattery might seem to be at their sharpest, extends to the contrasting images of James Scott, duke of Monmouth (equally famous for his personal beauty), and George Monck, duke of Albemarle, the subtle soldier-politician, his gaze resting on something just to the artist's right. Unlike the sober portraiture of the 1640s and 1650s these are not character studies but are more neutral, more a matter of vision and record. Already in the seventeenth century they were understood as the raw material of history, compiled first-hand by an observer of rare sensitivity. Thomas Carlyle considered that 'ad vivum' portraits were among the most valuable of historical documents, and in all these images the fortunes of those caught up in the great events of the seventeenth century become indeed more accessible to the imagination. 
The whole group of unfinished miniatures, presumably including those acquired for the king, was seen soon after Cooper's death by the London agent of Grand Duke Cosimo III, who had been so impressed by the artist's genius and style in 1669 and who persisted in trying to acquire examples of his work until 1683. Cooper's widow, however, did not really need to sell, and the remaining miniatures 'which I shall have by me att the tyme of my decease' were bequeathed by her to John Hoskins, the son of the miniaturist and evidently a miniaturist himself (Edmond, 'Limners and picturemakers', 111-12). Some of them, possibly left in the Henrietta Street house at Christiana's death (24 August 1693), passed to the house's next inhabitant, the goldsmith Michael Rosse, husband of the miniaturist Susannah-Penelope Rosse (daughter of the miniaturist Richard Gibson), where they continued to exercise influence over both the practice and the connoisseurship of art in England. (An incomplete list of those included in the sale of Michael Rosse's collection, 2 April 1723, is printed in D. Foskett, 'Samuel Cooper', 1974, 100-06.) 
Like his predecessors Peter Oliver and John Hoskins and many contemporaries Cooper worked also in 'crayon', as Evelyn called it -- 'dry colour' in Edward Norgate's vocabulary, or 'pastel', as it is now normally known. A drawing in this fragile medium, once believed to be a self-portrait, is in the Victoria and Albert Museum. Its quality, perhaps due to retouching, is unimpressive and it is probably not by Cooper but may be a portrait of him in the late 1650s by his cousin 'Jack's son', the younger Hoskins. The black chalk drawing of Thomas Alcock in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, to which could perhaps be added that of Charles II in the Royal Collection and a famous study of a dead baby from a group of Hoskins family portraits that survive in the Harford Collection (exhibited at the Cooper exhibition, National Portrait Gallery, 1974, nos. 136-9), are on the other hand very beautiful and suggest that, had any genuine Cooper pastels survived in comparable condition, they also would be of beautiful quality. 
Apart from the pastel in the Victoria and Albert Museum the only plausible image of Cooper is the miniature in the Royal Collection, recently rehabilitated as a self-portrait by Graham Reynolds on the grounds of its inscriptions, its long traditional identification, and its iconography (Reynolds, 'Miniatures', no. 106, pp. 129-30). If Reynolds is right it would show Cooper in February 1645, aged about thirty-seven, an exceptionally attractive man with curly dark brown hair and vivid brown eyes, wearing a crisply laundered lace collar over an embroidered silk coat of discreet but luxurious quality. It helps to substantiate his reputation for charm and suggests an astonishing degree of economic self-confidence in a young man who was just beginning to establish himself in a luxury trade against a background of civil war and the puritan critique of conspicuous urban consumption. 


@@@@@


doc= 6227


Samuel Cooper (bap. 1739, d. 1800), and Maria Susanna Bransby (1737-1807) ['see 'Cooper, Maria Susanna], daughter of James Bransby, a gentleman from Shotesham, about 3 miles from Brooke. Both families were solidly middle-class; Samuel Cooper studied at Magdalene College, Cambridge (BA, 1760; DD, 1770), and was ordained a priest in 1763. He was the author of several volumes of sermons, commentaries, and poems, and, from 1781, the incumbent of a large parish in Great Yarmouth. His wife wrote children's books and sentimental novels. Their surviving sons were successful (the eldest, Robert Bransby, was an author and member of parliament), but their five daughters and one son died young from consumption. Astley Cooper later requested that his own post-mortem examination should include particular attention to his lungs, where evidence of old tuberculosis was found. 


@@@@@


doc= 6228


Cooper, Samuel (1780-1848), surgeon and writer, was born on 11 September 1780, the second son of a businessman who had made a fortune in the West Indies, but who died when his three sons were still young. He was trained by Dr Burney at Greenwich Hospital, and in 1800 entered St Bartholomew's Hospital, where he showed great promise. In 1803 he became MRCS, and settled in Golden Square, London. In 1806 he gained the Jacksonian prize at the Royal College of Surgeons for the best essay; his subject was diseases of the joints. In 1807 he published his 'First Lines of Surgery', which went through seven editions. In 1809 the first edition of his great 'Surgical Dictionary' appeared, and it achieved instant popularity. During Cooper's lifetime seven large and carefully revised editions appeared. 
In 1810 Cooper married a Miss Cranstoun (died 1811), but she died in the following year, leaving a daughter, who afterwards married Thomas Morton, surgeon to University College Hospital. After his wife's death Cooper in 1813 entered the army as surgeon, and served at the battle of Waterloo. Afterwards he devoted his attention to editing the successive editions of his two principal works. He also ran a successful surgical practice. In 1827 he became a member of the council of the Royal College of Surgeons, and from 1831 was surgeon at University College Hospital and professor of surgery in the college. In 1845 he was elected president of the Royal College of Surgeons, and in 1846 fellow of the Royal Society. In 1848 he resigned from both his posts in protest at the appointment of James Syme as professor of clinical surgery. Cooper died of gout on 2 December 1848. 
Besides his principal works Cooper wrote a book on 'Cataract' (1805), and edited the third and fourth editions of Mason Good's 'Study of Medicine'. He delivered the Hunterian oration in 1834. The 'Dictionary' was translated into French, German, and Italian, and several times was republished in America. 


@@@@@


doc= 6229


Cooper, Thomas (c.1517-1594), theologian and bishop of Winchester, was born in Catte Street, Oxford, to poor parents; his father is said to have been a tailor. 
Cooper rose from being a menial servant at Magdalen College, Oxford, to admission to the college school as a chorister in 1530-31, when he was over twelve. Nothing is known of his childhood except that it was hard and he was diligent. Taught grammar by Thomas Robertson, he was bright enough to proceed to a training in rhetoric and in 1539 to a probationary fellowship at Magdalen, which, when he graduated BA, became permanent in 1540. By 1543 he had proceeded MA. But fellows were required to be ordained and Cooper was neither in sympathy with the theology of the time nor happy to commit himself to a life of celibacy. Like his friend and near contemporary the martyrologist John Foxe, he resigned his fellowship in 1545 and took on the task, with considerable misgivings, of revising Thomas Elyot's dictionary, which contrived to put into English the words, phrases, and technical terms encountered in classical Latin. Cooper doubted his skill, but Thomas Berthelet, the printer of the dictionary, reassured him that no one else was up to the task. By 1548 he had completed and published his first revision with the addition 'augmented and inriched with above xxxiii thousand words and phrases, very nedeful for the knowlage of the latin tonge' (Starnes, 69). 
About 1546 Cooper married a woman named Amy (possibly Royse) and in 1549 set about completing Thomas Lanquet's unfinished 'Chronicle' -- a universal history from the beginning of the world. At just this moment in his career, when he might have become no more than a hack author, he was offered the mastership of the school at Magdalen which provided a salary and some status. However, Edward VI's privy council raised radical proposals about whether the colleges of the university should support schools. Cooper and thirty-one fellows vigorously resisted these and enlisted the help of Cranmer and the city of Oxford. It was the first of many occasions in Cooper's career on which he had to promote the case for good learning. 
At this time Cooper also faced personal problems which became the gossip of Oxford. His wife seems to have had affairs with at least two men which provoked ribald verses directed at her and a remarkable tribute by Sir John Harington to him. Cooper refused to divorce his wife, and Harington, observing that Amy Cooper was 'too light for his gravitie', added that 'His lyfe in Oxford was very commendable and in some sort saint-lyke; for if it be saintlike to live unreproachable, to bear a cross patientlie, to forgive injuries freely this man's example is sampleless in this age' (Harington, 2.88-9). 
Cooper certainly needed patience. His wife threw into the fire the early drafts of his own dictionary, the 'Thesaurus', eventually published in 1565, and his position as headmaster was also imperilled by the accession of Queen Mary. He recognized that he must either go abroad, as many of his contemporaries had done, or else support his family in other ways. In 1556 he supplicated for the degree of bachelor of medicine and was given leave by the university to practise as a doctor. He thus became part of a small but important group of Elizabethan bishops 'in waiting' who experienced the Tudor church only from within and were not disposed to judge it or reform it to the patterns of the continent. 
Following the accession of Elizabeth, Cooper was reappointed to the headship of Magdalen College School in 1559. His skills as a teacher were praised by William Camden, who acknowledged the debt he owed to Cooper 'in whose school I both confesse and rejoice that I received education' (Camden, 540). His second edition of Lanquet's 'Chronicle', which took the history to the reign of Queen Elizabeth -- now called Cooper's 'Chronicle' -- appeared in 1560. He was probably ordained by this time, but no record survives. Could he now catch the eye of the Elizabethan establishment and move from his native city? 
Cooper wrote in defence of Bishop Jewel on the sacrament in 1562, and published his own 'Thesaurus' in 1565. When the queen visited Oxford in 1566 she heard and enjoyed not only a Latin oration from Cooper but also disputations on theological subjects which he had arranged for her. He recognized her interest in theology, and shortly afterwards himself proceeded to the degrees of BTh and DTh, both on 18 March 1567. In that year he was also elected vice-chancellor (against the wishes of the earl of Leicester, who was chancellor) and introduced popular celebrations, mainly of feasting and bell-ringing, to celebrate the queen's accession day. Also in 1567 he became dean of Christ Church and was tutor to Sir Philip Sidney; surviving accounts show that Sidney lived in his house until midsummer 1570. In 1569 Parker and Grindal recommended Cooper for the deanery of Gloucester, which was 'not so far distant from Oxford, so he may very well have due regard to both charges' ('Pepys MSS', 161). In the event Cooper had hardly been appointed -- there is no record that he was ever installed -- when the see of Lincoln became vacant. His elevation was swift. He was elected on 4 February 1571, and consecrated on the 24th. Installed by proxy in the cathedral in March, he was installed in person on 28 June. 
The diocese of Lincoln was vast, stretching from Lincolnshire to Hertfordshire; Cooper chose to live for most of his tenure of the see at Buckden, near Huntingdon, which was conveniently situated on the Great North Road. The immense task before him was essentially that of converting both priests and people to the peculiarly English form of protestantism and liturgy enacted by statute. This tested his skill as a teacher to the uttermost. Characteristically, he set about his task by preaching both nationally and in his diocese, by publishing easily comprehensible books, and by attempting to organize the clergy into group exercises in scriptural exegesis which were intended to promote better and more obviously biblical preaching. 
Cooper preached at St Paul's Cross in 1572, and was accused by an adversary of maintaining an ignorant ministry, of defending the 'unjust lordship of bishops', of 'magnifying' the prayer book, and of misusing the scriptures by 'wringing' them from 'their natural sense and meaning'. All this was attributed to Cooper's ignorance of the church in Europe because, his critic suggested, 'I have heard you were never yet out of this realm' (Strype, 2.287-302). Undaunted, Cooper forged ahead, publishing in 1573 'A Briefe Exposition of such Chapters of the Old Testament as Usually are Redde in Church' (STC 5684). As the title suggests, the book gives an exposition of the text for each Sunday of the Christian year 'whereby the unlearned reader may not only the sooner attaine to the true sense and meaning of the holy ghost, the author of the scriptures but also learne some godly instruction of the same' (Cooper, 'A Briefe Exposition', preface). Parker wrote to Burghley asking that it be commended by the council: 'It would doe well. The rather for that the simplier ['sic'] the doctrine is to the people the sooner they may be edified and in obedience reposed' (BL, Lansdowne MS 19, no. 9). 
In the wake of his primary visitation of 1574 Cooper ordered the clergy who were not graduates to meet on alternate Thursday mornings for carefully regulated exposition of scripture, keeping closely to the text, with specially selected moderators judging the performance and correcting errors, noting absentees, and inquiring into the lives of participants. His orders were precise and survive for both Hertfordshire and Buckinghamshire. These exercises (often known as 'prophesyings') were later commended by Archbishop Grindal, but were condemned by the queen on the ground that they could move out of the control of the bishops and be used to promote presbyterianism. Instructed to have them repressed in Welwyn, Cooper wrote a very careful reply, pointing out that he had asked the shire gentlemen and those ministers he trusted to report to him about them. Neither they nor the JPs had heard 'of any disorder there but that it was in all parts both moderately and godly us'd' (BL, Add. MS 29546, fol. 41'v'). His remonstrations fell on deaf ears and he was forced to dissolve all exercises in the south of his diocese except at Aylesbury. He was nevertheless apprehensive that reports of disorderly exercises might come from the northern parts of the diocese, not least because those in favour at court 'not only by their well doings but by the discrediting of others well doings' were a hazard. He remained vigilant for those who 'made means to publish fantasticall opinions' (ibid., fol. 42'v'), especially in Leicester, and particularly criticized laity who attended exercises but who would not come to sermons. 
It was Archdeacon John Aylmer who cast doubt on Cooper's sanguine report on prophesyings. The bishop himself was probably all too aware of the indifferent standard of education among his clergy. The battle not just for a passive assent but also for an active understanding of the Elizabethan settlement required all Cooper's energy and pedagogic skills. His injunctions following his visitation in 1577 required records to be kept of the number of sermons preached in every parish, and he insisted on the celebration of communion four times a year. Children over six were to be catechized for an hour before evensong. Ministers were to apply themselves to the study of scripture and to note 'wholesome sentences' for use in preaching (Kennedy, 2.46). 
Cooper had a hard time with his cathedral chapter. It had been reformed under his predecessor, Bullingham, and looked as though it might become a centre of evangelism. John Whitgift was dean, John Aylmer was archdeacon of Lincoln, and Michael Reniger was subdean and chancellor. All three were learned and enthusiastic reformers and were for a time in residence. But Cooper was quick to spot that there was no divinity lecturer as there had been in Bishop Longland's time, and that the senior residentiaries were greedy for the perquisites of residence and the more lucrative prebends: Aylmer received Corringham, Whitgift Nassington, both worth considerably more than that given to Cooper's son-in-law, Dr John Belley, now his vicar-general. Aylmer was also in dispute with the bishop about the share of each in judicial fees which was eventually settled by a return to the practice of the fifteenth century. For Cooper this was just an irksome distraction from the real business: how could he prevent a slipping back to the old ways of the Church of Rome? 
Cooper saw Catholics as those who 'winke with both eyes, and without offence suffer the Clergy of Rome, shameless Simony, incontinence, drunkeness, Dice playing, hunting, Necromancie, ambition, bribery', and much else that he utterly abhorred (Cooper, 'Certaine Sermons', 47; STC 5685). His visitation of his diocese in 1577 uncovered a number of recusants: the women of Bedfordshire were a difficult bunch, and the wife of William Mordaunt he described as 'a verie obstinate woman' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/117, no. 13). In Huntingdonshire a JP had his house in Cooper's diocese but his parish church in that of Peterborough so he could dodge both bishops. In Lincolnshire the bishop was not convinced of the sincerity of another JP who went to church 'starkly and seldom' and used the convenient excuse of sickness (ibid.). In 1580 the council congratulated him on 'how discretlie he hath travaled in discovering the offences of the principall Recusants' ('APC', '1580-81', 106). 
Cooper's vigour in promoting reform and suppressing dissent clearly marked him out for further promotion. Under his rule the diocese of Lincoln saw an increase in ordinations and a marked improvement in the learning of the clergy. In June 1579 he declined translation to Norwich on the ground that such a move would bring him neither an appreciable increase in stipend nor a less demanding cure. A more advantageous translation became a possibility with the death of John Watson of Winchester in 1584. 
Cooper's passage to the diocese of Winchester was unusually speedy: he was translated from Lincoln on 12 March 1584 and confirmed in his new see by Archbishop Whitgift on the 23rd. His were trusted hands, and the state of the Winchester diocese was in need of them. Writing to Lord Burghley in January 1584 Robert Bennet, master of St Thomas's Hospital in Winchester, pleaded that the diocese required: 'a man full of wisdome, faithefulness and spirit in his calling, that maie as in his place soo in giftes of diligence, zeale, wisdome, government, and hospitalitie strive before the rest and that the vacation be not longe, lest the insolence of recusantes growe to too great an height of pride. (BL, Lansdowne MS 40, no. 23)' In April 1584 Cooper became the prelate to the Order of the Garter, a perquisite of the holder of the see, and was invested with the appropriate robes. It was a long way for a poor tailor's son to have come. 
The task facing Cooper was daunting. The diocese, which comprised Hampshire, Surrey, and the Channel Islands, presented problems different from those of Lincoln. The inadequacy of incumbents was common to both sees, but in Winchester the central problem was that of the recusants who could turn traitor with disastrous consequences in a diocese that bordered on the channel. In May 1584 Cooper told Burghley that his archdeacon reported at least 400 obstinate recusants in Hampshire alone, and a single parish had forty or fifty. The slackness of the churchwardens meant that this was an underestimate. Cooper asked for increased powers to deal with them, and suggested names for ecclesiastical commissioners. 
In 1587 Cooper conducted a personal visitation of his diocese: he was at pains to see that preachers who were deemed satisfactory were well deployed and helped by clergy of 'the inferior sort' who were to catechize and read homilies. They were to attend to their 'exercises' with a view to public preaching, and those whose university degree exempted them from exercises were 'to beware of innovation in their ministry' and see that holy communion was celebrated at least three times a year. They were also required to wear the surplice 'not from any holiness therein but for obedience and reverence' (Hants. RO, MS 21 M65/B1/18). The same orders were repeated throughout Hampshire and the Isle of Wight. All ministers were forbidden to frequent fairs, markets, taverns, and ale houses, and were ordered to 'abstain from filthy drunkenness' (ibid.). In 1590 he isolated four sorts of minister for special blame: the ignorant, those whose lives were in contradiction to the gospel, those who were negligent in their duties, and those who executed their duties 'perversely or frowardly' (Hants. RO, MS 21 M65/B1/19). 
What Cooper might find perverse or froward others might not. In 1586 John Udall, the puritan lecturer in Kingston, Surrey, was accused of holding conventicles and was tried and condemned to death, though pardoned in 1592 at Whitgift's request. The sheriff of Surrey, Sir William More of Loseley, brought a petition to parliament from the inhabitants of South Farnham lamenting the failings of the ministry there; yet it was Cooper who complained to More about the vicar of Farnham's insufficiency in 1589 and noted the failure of his parishioners to attend church in 1591. Nor was More above presenting to the parish of Compton a cleric whom the bishop judged to be of insufficient learning and thus no preacher. 
The real anxiety for Cooper, however, was the problem posed by recusants who were by 1585 harbouring priests from Douai and Rome to minister to the Catholics of the land and who were smuggled in along the channel coastline. The Hampshire prisons were full of recusants whom Cooper treated with little mercy. He would not allow them burial in church ground and even suggested that the able should be sent to swell the earl of Leicester's army in the Low Countries. Jesuits were known to avoid Winchester, but neither the death penalty, severe fines, nor imprisonment deterred the Catholics. Cooper, an ecclesiastical commissioner, examined and handed over to the secular authorities for execution two priests from Rheims and a labourer who had assisted them, and others were sent to London for trial. In 1587 there were more than 100 in the common prison for Surrey; Cooper wrote desperately in 1589 'that the people do fall away in Religion by the evil example of such Recusants as have liberty' ('APC', '1589-90', 124). 
Part of Cooper's anxiety lay in the assumption that as the Armada approached, English Catholics would support the Spaniards. In this he was wrong, but that did not stop him pressing hard on his clergy to make sure they all contributed in money or in kind to the defence of the realm. For this he was held up as an example to other diocesans. Behind Cooper's energetic involvement in national defence lay his fervent loyalty to the queen: he was asked to write a prayer for use in the army, while in 1589 he was also engaged in writing 'An Admonition to the People of England'. This, however, was not directed against papists but against the parallel threat, as he saw it, from extreme puritans. 
Though seditious books were under severe penalty after 1586, there were a number of illegal attacks on the church, which senior churchmen attempted to answer. The deaths in 1588 of both John Field and the earl of Leicester goaded a weakened but committed puritan party into producing a series of tracts under the pseudonym of Martin Marprelate, beginning with two of the most important: the 'Epistle' in October 1588 and the 'Epitome' in the following month. It is probable that from the first Cooper intended his 'Admonition' to constitute a broad defence of the Elizabethan settlement, and that he subsequently added a preliminary section to it specifically dealing with the issues raised by the Marprelate tracts. The result was that he became embroiled in a dispute in which his opponent showed all the wit and personal insult of the street-pamphleteer, while Cooper laboured under the self-imposed handicap of neither descending to personal detail nor lowering his tone to match that of his adversary. 
Cooper knew that his 'Admonition', presented as the work of 'T. C.' -- the bishop's own initials but taken by others (who had clearly not read the book) for Thomas Cartwright -- would have little effect against Marprelate's wit: 'The dartes, I confess, of deceitfull and slanderous tongues, are very sharpe, and the burning of woundes made by them, will as hardly in the hearts of many bee quenched, as the coales of juniper' (Cooper, 'Admonition', 4). His primary argument is that the government of the church is not laid down by scripture but is expedient to the government of the land. Contrasting the different arrangements for European protestant churches, he observes: 'I doubt not but... directed by the spirite of God to retain this liberty, that in external government and other outward orders they might choose such as they thought in wisedome and godlinesse to bee most convenient for the state of the Countrey and disposition of the people. (ibid., 64-5)' In England to be without bishops would be 'not just Mar-prelate, but Mar-prince, Mar-state, Mar-law, Mar-magistrate' (ibid., 31). He defends his episcopal colleagues from the charges against them and repeats often that 'Men are fraile, and in danger to sinne though they have otherwise great graces' (ibid., 20). Bishops, however, have no monopoly of frailty, and to bring them into 'contempt' at a time when the enemies of the realm have lately been defeated shows an ingratitude for 'the mightie workes of God and his marvellous mercies' (ibid., 29). He argues that bishops have experience and learning that many of their critics do not, and he condemns 'our hasty divines that in three yeeres study think... to have more learning then all the Bishops in England' (ibid., 54). 
Cooper's argument was moderate. He claimed no divine right through apostolic succession for the bishops, nor did he deny their fallibility. But he was convinced that the church had improved under Elizabeth, and that such improvement was put at risk by extremists who quibbled over details (such as the sign of the cross in baptism) and who refused in consequence to enrich the church with their teaching or other abilities. They also made legitimate reforms seem unwise since they were asking for so many changes at a time when the Spaniards threatened far more decisively the whole fabric of English protestantism, of which both presbyterianism and episcopalianism were a part. Moderation after this fashion was to be reasserted by Richard Hooker, possibly a pupil of Cooper at Magdalen. 
Within three months of the appearance of the 'Admonition' Marprelate replied to it with 'Hay any Worke for Cooper' (published on 23 March 1589). Not only did the pamphleteer revel in the publicity that the bishop had given to his tracts, but he also took the opportunity to hurl personal abuse at the bishop. Cooper was said to be 'very choleric and peevish' (Marprelate, 20); the old matter (though significantly no new matters) of his wife's infidelity was brought to public attention; he was accused of ignorance, and of being addicted to card-playing and gambling. It all pained Cooper. He was an old man by 1590, and by 1592 was beginning to have to absent himself from committees and the House of Lords (which he had previously attended regularly) seemingly on health grounds. Marprelate's taunts were savage precisely because Cooper was a formidable adversary. He was a strong defender of that peculiarly English form of protestantism, eventually to be designated Anglicanism, even before it existed. Writing in 1583, he displayed his heart on his sleeve when he wrote: 'For this I dare saye that synce the very age of the Apostles unto this tyme we lyve in, there was never any Churche upon thearthe that had so perfecte trewthe of doctryne nor so synceare admynystratyon of Sacraments without supersticyon, as thanked be God, the Churche of Engeland now hathe. Thearfore the dangerusnes of these latter daies consydered, we should raythur yelde most hearty thankes to god for the greate blessings that we have, then to murmur at some smale blemyshes or imperfectyons that remayne. (BL, Stowe MS 159, fol. 153'v')' In sum, much of Cooper's support for the English church lay in his conviction that scripture should not be interpreted literally, but rather with a view to restoring the usage of the early church. With this went a profound respect and love for the service of holy communion. As a diocesan he ordered its celebration three or four times a year, as a visitor to his old college he rebuked the fellows for the carelessness and the irreverence shown to it. In his sermons he could write more warmly: 'For in deede wee teach I believe that it is one of the sweetest and most excellent comfortes that Christ at his departure left unto his people' (Cooper, 'Certaine Sermons', 33). In his utter certainty that faith and the fruits of belief were a seamless robe, neither existing without the other, Cooper was at one with his adversaries. 
Marprelate did not, however, confine his attack on Cooper to the 'Admonition'. The bishop was a lexicographer, initially in his adapting Elyot's 'Dictionary', and then in compiling his own 'Thesaurus'. Marprelate accused him of plagiarism, and also implied both that he had failed to acknowledge Elyot's original contribution and that he had lifted much of the 'Thesaurus' from the French dictionary of Robert Stephanus (1552) and the German dictionary of John Frisius (1556). It is certainly true that Cooper borrowed widely and used, for instance, William Turner's herbal dictionary and those of others. It has been observed that Cooper's 'contemporaries and successors were inclined to judge him by a higher standard than they applied to the average' (Starnes, 98). The subtlety of Cooper's English usage and the fact that he gave a large number of English words that might translate the Latin not only served to enrich English, but made for a more accurate understanding of Latin. Thus 'Salve multum' (Plautus) is given by Cooper as 'God speed you heartily, God give you an hundred good tomorrows' (Redhead, 54). 
More telling still was Marprelate's gibe that Cooper was a 'petty pope' (Marprelate, 23). The people of Leicestershire had noticed a certain lordliness in his demeanour and wished that he would come to them without any entourage and pomp. Yet it is difficult to find evidence that before his last years in Winchester Cooper conducted himself like a wealthy man. His wife may have had property and he may have made some money as a physician, but the diocese of Lincoln yielded an income of less than $900. The expenses of servants and travel were heavy, which no doubt explains why the bishop used his son-in-law as his deputy: it kept the money in the family. 
Winchester was two or three times the value of Lincoln. On his translation to Winchester Cooper was granted the temporalities, calculated at $2793, retrospectively from Michaelmas 1583. This was a generous restitution but Cooper claimed that, not being 'riche in myself' and not having any other office 'in commendam', he would 'hardlie be hable to live' unless he was allowed to pay his first fruits over a period of five years at the rate of $500 per annum (BL, Egerton MS 1693, fol. 115'r'- 'v'). His petition was granted, and Cooper also asked for, and received, $530 from the executors of his predecessor, John Watson. By 1587, however, he was at full stretch financially. He evaded the expense and responsibility of a projected queen's progress in 1586. He was complaining as late as 1590 to William More that litigation pending on his estate over fishing and other rights was making a heavy demand on him: 'I could not but make this complaint unto you, being at this time more troubled with quarrelous matters than I have [been] in all my life to stand the charges in all things I shall not be able to beare it, unless I give over housekeeping cleane. (Redhead, 193)' Yet the bishop did not die a pauper; indeed his successor excused his own payments for the defence of the realm on the grounds that he was not as rich as Cooper. Cooper's will shows that by the time of his death he was hardly short of housekeeping money. He had accumulated much silver gilt; his collection of armour (for his contribution to the defence of the realm) included 72 pikes, 6 cases of pistols, 29 daggers, and considerable ammunition. At Farnham he had 12 geldings and 5 'stone' horses, and at Waltham at least 7 other horses. All those may have been the necessary perquisites of an active bishop. More remarkable was Cooper's note 'of such ready money as I have in possession this 9 April 1594'. It included 'one bagge $150; in one other bagge $140, in one other bagge $160', and $480 in further bags (Foster, 'Lincoln Episcopal Records', 343). What he did not have -- and he defended episcopal wealth for this reason -- were estates or even a house for his widow. But there was a little. He mentions 'graunts, assignmentes and assurances' made to himself and his wife by his brother-in-law Robert Royse 'of and in twoe meadowes parcell of the Ferme of Mydly by Oxford' (ibid., 339). 
As he lay dying in 1594 Cooper was careful to double-check his last arrangements, adding codicils to his will: his wife was to enjoy most of his wealth, but the remainder was to go to his grandchildren through his sons-in-law. His will also recognizes the claim of old and infirm servants and gives a glimpse of his love for the son-in-law who had served him so well; Cooper's devotion to learning was apparent in the gift of his books to Winchester Cathedral Library. 
Cooper was one of a number of Elizabethan bishops whose learning, hard work, and pastoral involvement shaped the church in England in the late sixteenth century -- one of those whose 'wainscoted face' (Marprelate, 71) may have expressed the strain of a long life often lived against the grain. He had withstood the onslaughts of Mary's reign, come to terms with a termagant wife, and devoted much of his life to sheer hard work. He served the University of Oxford well, but the church established in England in Elizabeth's reign was his real love. He served it in his writing and by his sermons, but above all by his ability to teach his clergy as he had initially taught his Magdalen pupils. There is a suspicion that his so-called grandeur was the shyness of a man unused to the heights to which he had been raised. He served his country not only by sitting on commissions and in the Lords, but also in the meticulous way in which he answered enquiries, whether about his 'exercises' or about defence or recusants. Though Marprelate sought to smear him, his rigorous pastoral care and the quality of his writings and sermons suggest that the smear was unjustified. 
Cooper died at Winchester on 29 April 1594. He was buried on the south side of the cathedral with an inscription, now removed, but whose words survive and suggest the profound respect in which he was held. His exercise of the office of a bishop commanded superlatives for learning, generosity, and vigilance. The conclusion to his pithy but elegant Latin obituary may be translated as proclaiming that 'the earth has covered his body but his spirit is above the stars, Heavenly souls enjoy a heavenly peace' (Foster, 'Lincoln Episcopal Records', xix). Cooper would have liked that. 


@@@@@


doc= 6230


Cooper, Thomas (b. 1569/70, d. in or after 1626), Church of England clergyman and writer on witchcraft, was born in London and attended Westminster School, apparently with help from the Fishmongers' and Skinners' companies. On 17 December 1586, aged sixteen, he matriculated as a queen's scholar from Christ Church, Oxford, graduating BA on 14 December 1590, and proceeding MA on 19 June 1593 and BD on 14 April 1600. Soon afterwards he was appointed by the mayor and corporation of the city of Chester, probably as a lecturer, to replace William Harrison, recently selected as one of the queen's preachers for Lancashire. On 1 August 1601, on presentation of the dean and chapter of Christ Church Cathedral, Cooper was admitted as vicar of Great Budworth, Cheshire, remaining until 1604; on 8 May he became vicar of Holy Trinity, Coventry. On 28 November 1605 the mayor and Lord Harington wrote from the city to Robert Cecil concerning 'Mr Cowper a minister, who stated in a sermon that the papists had contrived nine plots against the King and state' ('CSP dom.', '1603-10', 263). Cooper repeatedly drew attention to God's deliverance of the nation from the Gunpowder Plot. In his first treatment of this theme, 'A Brand Taken Out of the Fire, or, The Romish Spider..., with his Webbe of Treason' (1606), there appeared dedications to Lady Harington, to Princess Elizabeth (then in the care of Lord and Lady Harington), and to the Coventry authorities. Relations with the city fathers appear to have soured, for later Cecil was in receipt of another missive from Coventry, this time from Cooper, claiming that for three years his sermons there had remained unpaid. He signed 'The Converts First Love Discerned' (1610) from 'my poor house at Coventry, this 10 April 1610', but had resigned by the year's end. 
It seems probable that soon afterwards Cooper moved to London, for 'The Estates of the Hypocrite and Sincere Christian' (1613) and later works were dedicated to city people or institutions. In the preface to 'A Familiar Treatise, Laying Down Cases of Conscience' (1615) the dedicatees, Lady Rumney, Mr Springham, Mr Slaney, Mr Parkhurst, Mr Clarke, Mr Vincent, Mr Mosley, and Mr Thaire, were among Cooper's 'Christian auditors and loving neighbours' and 'the instrument of my settling in the Citie, and exercise of my calling'. In 1615 also appeared 'The Blessing of Japheth', dedicated to Sir Thomas Hayes, mayor of London, the aldermen and sheriffs, and the commissioners for plantations in Ireland and Virginia. There followed 'The Mysterie of the Holy Government of our Affections' (1619), addressed to 'Sir Thomas Smith, most worthie governor of the East Indian Company' and his colleagues. Here as elsewhere Cooper makes plain that for him the material and spiritual ends of trade and colonization meshed perfectly. He acted for another company, the Grocers', in supplying two visitation sermons, published in 1619, at the free school at Oundle, Northamptonshire. 
In 1617 Cooper issued 'The Mystery of Witch-Craft', the book for which he is chiefly known. Against those who saw in astrology a key to the orderliness of the world, he argued on their own scientific terrain: 'The rules of this art have no foundation in experience' (Thomas, 418). But God was the great architect of order; his providence, together with the efforts of Satan, lay behind the unexpected events which sometimes disrupted the world. Cooper rejected the purveyors of traditional magic, the 'good' witches and cunning men of rural England, who sought to achieve results directly by spells and divinations, and thus to assume among the common people the authority of God. He was convinced, however, of the real existence of witchcraft and, like other Calvinists of the new generation, he accepted the widespread European view that witches had made a pact with the devil. Earlier, while at Great Budworth, he had been involved in a case in which a Northwich child had been 'afflicted by the power of sathan, and (as it was conceived) through the confederacie of some witches thereabout' (Cooper, 'Mystery of Witch-Craft', A3'r'). 
In 'The cry and revenge of blood: expressing the nature and haynousnesse of wilfull murther... committed at Halsworth in high Suffolk' (1620) appears a remarkable woodcut depicting the exhumation of bodies and the murderer at work with a large cudgel, urged on by a black, satanic figure, horned and taloned, with wings like those of a bat. Cooper attended the trial at Bury assizes, and the book was based on his notes (a representation of the hanging appears at page 59). A preface to Lord Chief Justice Henry Montagu recalled his 'gratious clemency in releasing a poor distressed neighbour, at my request' who had 'provoked your honour's just displeasure'; the work was signed from 'my house in Whitecrosse street', London, on 24 August 1620. 
After 1622, when he issued 'The Wonderful Mysterie of Spiritual Growth', dedicated to Lionel Cranfield, the flow of Cooper's publications abruptly ceased. Despite all the great names which had appeared in his works, there can be no doubt that the author was the Thomas Cooper, bachelor in divinity, who, having been appointed a preacher to the fleet by Captain Richard Gyffard, was, in September 1626, in the embarrassing position of having to petition the duke of Buckingham for an advance on his wages ($5 a month) for transport to Portsmouth. After this nothing is known of him. 


@@@@@


doc= 6231


Cooper, Thomas (1759-1839), political writer and college head, was born in Westminster on 22 October 1759, the son of Thomas Cooper, who was entitled to bear heraldic arms. He matriculated from University College, Oxford, in February 1779, but did not take a degree; well known in later life as a freethinker, he is said to have refused to sign the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. He attended anatomical lectures in London during the summer of 1780 and subsequently took a clinical course at the Middlesex Hospital. In the same year he entered into a partnership of calico printers at Raikes, near Bolton, and about 10 miles from Manchester. The register of alumni of Oxford states that in 1787 he became a barrister from the Inner Temple, but his name does not occur on its list of graduates. He travelled the northern circuit, which included Lancashire, between 1787 and 1790. By 1785 he was living south of Manchester at Woodheys, Altrincham, Cheshire, but later removed to Lever Hall, Bolton, which placed him nearer the dye works. He was married to Alice Greenwood in St George's parish, Hanover Square, London, several years before settling in Lancashire. They had five children before her death in October 1800. 
In early adulthood Cooper distinguished himself as a humanitarian thinker and a philosophical radical. In 1787 he published 'Letters on the Slave Trade', an essay denouncing slavery as 'the most diabolical exertion of political tyranny, which the annals of oppression can exhibit an instance of' (p. 4). That same year he published 'Propositions Respecting the Foundation of Civil Government', a paper asserting that government had originated in the consent of the people who retained in perpetuity a right to alter the government at their will. As vice-president of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society and a founder member of the Manchester Constitutional Society, he befriended Thomas Walker, Samuel Jackson, James Watt jun., and others who were to join him in the ill-fated parliamentary reform movement. He also carried on a vigorous correspondence with the notorious radical John Horne Tooke. In the spring of 1792, while in Paris on business together with James Watt jun., son of the inventor, he was requested to establish contact with the revolutionary societies of France on behalf of the Manchester Constitutional Society. He and Watt duly paid a visit on Robespierre and the Jacobins, which earned them a rebuke in parliament from Edmund Burke. Upon his return to England Cooper published his 'Reply to Mr. Burke's Invective', a scathing attack on hereditary government in the spirit of Thomas Paine's better-known 'The Rights of Man'. 'Kings and Nobles', Cooper wrote, 'have flourished at the expense of the People, who have been universally regarded merely as the Footstools of their pride, and the means of their gratification'. He went on to prescribe a democratic remedy: 'If the good of the People... is to be the Object of Government, THEY MUST BE THEIR OWN GOVERNORS -- they must adopt, 'in fact', the government of the MANY by the MANY' (Cooper, 'Reply to Mr. Burke's Invective', 13, 28). 
In 1793, discouraged by official repression of reform in England, Cooper paid an initial visit to America with an eye towards possible resettlement. While he was away, his calico-printing firm was forced into bankruptcy by its creditors. In 1794, his fortunes at a low ebb, he and a friend, the renowned scientist Joseph Priestley, quit their native country for Pennsylvania and together settled their families in Northumberland county. Unlike Priestley, who had lost all taste for public controversy, Cooper soon re-entered political life in the service of the Jeffersonian party working in close association with newspaper editor William Duane and lawyer A. J. Dallas, later to be secretary of the treasury under James Madison. A polemical tract targeting President John Adams, head of the rival Federalist Party, resulted in his prosecution for libel under the sedition law in the spring of 1800 and earned him a short stay in the Philadelphia gaol. He was later rewarded by his party with public office, serving first as a land commissioner and after 1804 as president judge of one of the state's common pleas districts. When the state party split over legal reform, he sided against the radical faction that wanted to open the practice of law to persons without formal training and to make judges subject to popular election. In 1811 his opponents succeeded in having him removed from the bench. The experience led him to conclude that popular democracy was 'not quite so perfect in practice as it is beautiful in theory' (Cooper, 'Narrative', 6). He expanded his critique of democracy in a letter dated July 1815 which circulated privately among his friends. 'Experience has taught us all', he lamented, 'that there is a perpetual and almost irresistible inclination among the people to cheat themselves, and to be cajoled and cheated by others'. Contemptuous of the 'aristocracy of talent', popular opinion, he wrote, was 'harsh and violent, as well as unreflecting: prone to sacrifice its friends to its flatterers, and to commit injustice in the wantonness of power, as well as through mistake or resentment' (extract of a letter to a student at law, Madison MSS, 76.4). 
Cooper became professor of chemistry at Carlisle College in 1812. Four years later he moved to the University of Pennsylvania. His friend Thomas Jefferson subsequently invited him to join the faculty at the University of Virginia, but Cooper's philosophical materialism and obvious contempt for religious establishments made him unacceptable to the state legislature. In 1819 he moved to Columbia, South Carolina, as professor of chemistry at South Carolina College. The following year he was named president of the college, and although his tenure was plagued by opposition from the community on account of his controversial religious opinions, he retained the support of the board of trustees until his retirement in 1834. Not long after his arrival in Columbia he was again enmeshed in political controversy. During the Anglo-American War of 1812-14 he had supported a protective tariff; however, in the 1820s he rallied to the defence of 'laissez-faire'. High tariffs on imported goods designed to protect the infant industries of the north were a sore point with the southern states, whose economic well-being depended on agricultural exports to Britain. Adopting the southern point of view, he denounced the tariff as a grave political threat that 'forebode no good to Union'. The protectionists, he wrote, sought unfair advantage: 'Their object is monopoly; to make the farmer sell at the manufacturer's price, and buy at the manufacturer's price.' His condemnation of northern manufacturing interests anticipated the critique of capitalism levelled at a later date by George Fitzhugh, the famous apologist for slavery. Like Fitzhugh, he deplored the effects of factory labour on the working man and complained that it was immoral 'to increase the wealth of a few capitalists, at the expense of the health, life, morals, and happiness of the wretches who labour for them' (Cooper, 'On the Proposed Alteration of the Tariff', 5, 11). In a less polemical vein, he also wrote 'Lectures on the Elements of Political Economy', an influential textbook espousing the doctrine of 'laissez-faire'. The tariff controversy came to a head in 1832 when a special convention in South Carolina declared the new federal import duties null and void within the state. The nullification crisis was ultimately defused by a timely act of congress that lowered the tariff and at the same time affirmed the supremacy of the federal government. Cooper remained dissatisfied, however, and recommended in 1834 that the southern states contemplate secession from the union in order to protect their interests, including black slavery, which he now defended as a just and necessary institution. He is best remembered today as the 'schoolmaster of state's rights' to the generation of South Carolinians that fought the American Civil War. 
Over the course of his life Cooper published numerous books and essays on a wide variety of topics, including (in addition to politics) metaphysics, religion, science, economics, and law. His legal writings include a treatise on the bankruptcy law of America compared with that of England (1801), the first American edition of the 'Institutes of Justinian, with Notes' (1812), 'Tracts on Medical Jurisprudence' (1819), and a 'Treatise on the Law of Libel and the Liberty of the Press' (1830). He devoted his last years to a revision of 'The Statutes at Large of South Carolina' (5 vols., 1836-9). He died in Columbia on 11 May 1839 and was buried in the Guignard plot, Trinity churchyard, Columbia. 


@@@@@


doc= 6232


Cooper, Thomas (1805-1892), Chartist and religious lecturer, was born on 20 March 1805 in Leicester, the illegitimate son of a dyer. His mother continued working as a dyer after the early death of Cooper's father, which indicates that the relationship was more than transitory. Living in Gainsborough with his mother and half-sister Ann, Cooper began, outside his hours at the free school, what became an astonishing programme of self-education. By the age of twenty he could recite thousands of lines of poetry (including the first three books of 'Paradise Lost'), and was conversant with a huge number of historical and theological texts, as well as Latin, Greek, and French. These achievements profoundly shaped him as a man. He was capable, in later life, of being pedantic and autocratic. Whether as the secretary of the Lincoln Choral Society in 1836 or as the compiler of a proposed volume of Chartist hymns in 1845, Cooper was a man who did not like to be challenged. It should be noted, however, that he was also honest and generous; he had a reputation for giving away money. 
Not content with being known as a shoemaker who could recite poetry, Cooper opened, in 1828, a school and continued with this occupation for the next eight years. This was not enough, however, for such an energetic and passionate man. When not in his school, he was preaching in the villages around Gainsborough. He soon quarrelled, however, with his Wesleyan Methodist superiors, who he believed were not working as hard as he was. These arguments led to his departure from Gainsborough for Lincoln and, in due course, to a break with the Methodists. In the cathedral city Cooper embarked on what seemed like a new life. He married and became involved in the mechanics' institute and the choral society. His marriage to Susanna Chaloner (1801-1880) lasted from February 1834 until her death on 1 February 1880, but remained childless. It was also in Lincoln that Cooper began work as a journalist: he gave up schoolmastering and became a bold critic of the cathedral clergy for the 'Lincoln, Rutland and Stamford Mercury'. 
When Cooper left Lincoln for London in 1839, it was to begin a long-desired literary career. He had already published by subscription a small volume of religious verse, but was unable to find a publisher in the capital for his historical novel; when 'Captain Cobler' (1850) eventually appeared, it was from a radical press. Cooper could only return to newspaper work, and, in 1840, accepted employment on the 'Leicestershire Mercury'. In Leicester Cooper embraced ultra-radicalism, became an enthusiastic admirer of Feargus O'Connor, and made the town a Chartist stronghold. The old leaders were no match for Cooper, who established himself as a preacher, the organizer of an adult school, and the editor of a series of Chartist journals, notably the 'Midland Counties Illuminator' and 'The Commonswealthsman'. He was arrested after the riots in the Potteries in 1842, and was sentenced the following year to two years in prison. 
Cooper emerged from Stafford gaol in 1845, a changed man. In London, where he now lived, he remained a firm supporter of the 'six points', but, after quarrelling with O'Connor over money and political strategies, he took on the role of an independent Chartist. In this capacity he became a prominent advocate of religious radicalism, a lecturer for Giuseppe Mazzini's Peoples' International League, and, in the 'Plain Speaker' (1849) and 'Cooper's Journal' (1850), a tenacious campaigner for co-operation between middle- and working-class radicals. Cooper earned his living in the late 1840s and early 1850s by lecturing; he spoke mainly about historical and literary topics. These years did also see a determined attempt to establish himself as a successful writer. 'The Purgatory of Suicides', written in prison and over 900 stanzas long, was published in 1845. Though few read it from beginning to end, its poetic ambition impressed not only the readers of the Chartist press but also Carlyle, Disraeli, and Kingsley. The 'Purgatory' was a vindication of Cooper's radical beliefs, but he was unable to find a publisher for a Chartist novel. He produced instead two innocuous novels, 'Alderman Ralph' (1853) and 'The Family Feud' (1855). A collection of short stories, 'Wise Saws and Modern Instances' (1845), was his best attempt at prose fiction. 
For more than two decades after 1856, when he announced his renunciation of free thought (he was baptized at Friar Lane Baptist Chapel, Leicester, on 12 June 1859), Cooper travelled throughout Britain as a religious lecturer. A well-known figure, he attracted large audiences. He estimated that by 1866, when he fell ill, he had given more than 3300 discourses; by this time his wife had gone to live with relatives and he no longer had a permanent home. The lectures Cooper gave in his later years were accompanied by a series of texts such as 'The Bridge of History over the Gulf of Time' (1871), all of which had good sales. Cooper also brought out his long-contemplated autobiography in 1872. This is generally recognized as the best memoir of a Victorian artisan. With its delightful portrait of the early years of a highly intelligent working-class boy, its informative descriptions of the lower echelons of Victorian literary and intellectual life, and its often neglected sections on the work of a popular itinerant preacher, this brisk and honest book emphasizes that Cooper should be remembered as more than simply 'the Leicester Chartist'. Thomas Cooper died on 15 July 1892 at his home, 13 St Mary Street, Lincoln, having lived in the city since he retired from lecturing. His grave, in Washingborough Road cemetery, Lincoln, was restored in 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 6233


Cooper, Thomas Henry (1813-1881), surgeon and botanist, was born in December 1813 at Lewes, Sussex, the second of four sons of Thomas Cooper, a solicitor in that town, and Lucy Elizabeth Durrant. He probably attended Lewes grammar school and at fifteen was apprenticed to a surgeon in Marylebone, Middlesex. He subsequently studied at the Middlesex Hospital and, from 1832, at University College, London, where he attended the botanical lectures of Lindley. Through the good offices of the latter he was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1834, the year in which he gained his licence to practise. He was married and had two daughters; the surname of his wife, Annie Elizabeth, who outlived him, is unknown. 
Cooper's claim to notice is as the once-supposed author of useful early catalogues of the higher plants of Sussex and Nottinghamshire. The first of these was published as a seventeen page appendix to the second volume of T. W. Horsfield's 'History, Antiquities, and Topography of the County of Sussex' (1835), and was notable for the unusual device of presenting the data in three successive ways: by habitats, topographically, and finally with the plant names arranged in the newly fashionable natural system, which had been ardently embraced by Lindley. A long list of records for the rarer species followed, seemingly on Cooper's own authority. Years later, however, it emerged that these had been lifted almost in their entirety (without clear acknowledgement) from a catalogue provided by William Borrer, a veteran Sussex botanist with a high reputation nationally. 
Cooper treated another local expert, Dr Godfrey Hewitt, in just the same way during a brief spell in Nottingham a few months later. He was at that time seeking to impress his botanical seniors and obtain one of the few academic posts in the subject. He boldly sought to compete against Lindley for the professorship of botany at the Society of Apothecaries in 1835 but the best he was able to achieve, and that after some years, was lecturing at an agricultural school in Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire. 
By that time botany was a mere prop to what had returned to an essentially medical career. That was to prove not undistinguished, culminating in Cooper's appointment as physician to the Great Western and Metropolitan railways and then election as FRCS. Perhaps significantly, though, all mention of his botanical past was suppressed from his entry in the professional directories. He spent his final years in Slough, where he died on 25 December 1881. 


@@@@@


doc= 6234


Cooper, Thomas Thornville (1839-1878), traveller and promoter of trade, the eighth son of John Ibbetson Cooper, coal fitter and shipowner, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Douglas, was born on 13 September 1839, at Bishopwearmouth, co. Durham. He was educated at the Grange School, Bishopwearmouth, and then by a tutor in Sussex. There his health failed, and he was advised to take a voyage to Australia where he decided to remain, making several journeys into the interior of the country. In 1859 he went to India, and worked in Madras for Arbuthnot & Co. In 1861 he threw up the appointment and went to Sind to visit a brother who was resident there. In the following year he visited Bombay and then went by way of Beypore and Madras to Burma, where he studied Burmese. In 1863 he rejoined his brother, who was now in Shanghai; there Cooper joined the Shanghai volunteer corps and took his share in the protection of the city against the Taiping insurgents. After the suppression of the uprising the question of the commercial penetration of China, and particularly the route through to India, became an issue of concern to British merchants, especially as the construction of the Suez Canal drew to a close. Anglo-French rivalry in this area was keenly felt, and all of Cooper's travels must be seen against this background. 
In 1868 Cooper left his position as a solicitor's clerk with Edward Lawrence, and undertook an attempt to penetrate through Tibet to India. He successfully canvassed for funds from the merchants of Shanghai to support his journey, although many believed he was merely seeking a free journey home, with some good shooting on the way. After being thwarted in his original travel arrangements by the French consul in Hankow (Hankou) he left that city on 4 January with a Christian Chinese interpreter known as George Philips, travelling by way of Chungking (Chongqing), Chengtu (Chengdu), Kangding, and Litang to Paan. From this point he had hoped to reach Rima on the Luhit Brahmaputra in eight days, but the Chinese authorities forbade him to continue his journey westward. He therefore decided to take the route to Bhamo via Dali, then the capital of the Muslim rebel state, the Pingnanguo, known to the British as the Panthay kingdom (1855-73). He struck southwards, following the valley of the Lancang Jiang, and reached Zegu on the western bank of that river -- the most westerly point that had then been reached by any traveller from China in the region of the great rivers north of Bhamo. At this point he was within 100 miles of Manchi, on the upper Irrawaddy, which had been visited by Lieutenant Wilcox from India in 1826. Still continuing his journey southward Cooper arrived at Weisi (Weixi), nearly due west of Likiang (Lijiang), where he obtained passports for Dali. At a distance of three days' journey from Weisi, however, he was stopped by a tribal chief who had just switched allegiance from the Muslim rebels and who refused to allow him to proceed. He was compelled, therefore, to return to Weisi, where he was imprisoned and threatened with death by the civil authorities on suspicion that he was in communication with the Panthays. For five weeks he was kept a close prisoner, but was afterwards (6 August) allowed to depart. Finding it impossible to continue his exploration further, he returned to Yaan (Ya'an). Proceeding down the Min River he struck the Yangtze (Yangzi) at Ipin (Yibin), and from there descended the river to Hankow, where he arrived on 11 November 1868. 
Although Cooper had failed to reach India from China, he was lauded in Shanghai, and after he had written an initial report on his trip, published under the title 'Journal of an Overland Journey from China towards India' (1869), he attempted almost immediately to reverse the process, and to enter China from Assam. Again taking Philips with him, he left Sadiya in October 1869, and passing up the line of the Brahmaputra, through the Mishmi country, fighting malaria and fortified by visions of Allsopp's Best India Pale Ale, he reached Prun, a village about 20 miles from Rima. Here he again met with such determined opposition from the authorities that he was obliged to turn back. Almost immediately afterwards he returned to England and published several articles and the accounts of his journeys 'Travels of a Pioneer of Commerce' (1871) and 'The Mishmee Hills' (1873). In 1872 he agitated for the India Office to allow him to accompany a Panthay mission led by Liu Daohang, which had visited London, back to the frontier of Yunnan, where Cooper would in his personal capacity investigate trading possibilities with the rebels. On arriving at Rangoon he learned that the uprising had been crushed, and his mission was therefore at an end; he had, however, made good use of his expenses on the way, a box at the opera in Vienna being deemed vital for the self-styled 'Equerry to His Highness Prince Hassan'. The viceroy, Lord Northbrook, appointed him political agent at Bhamo. Unfortunately ill health obliged Cooper to return almost immediately to England, where he was attached to the political and secret department of the India Office as a copyist, and supported his two unmarried sisters on his salary. 
In 1876 Cooper was sent to India with dispatches to the viceroy and presents for distribution in connection with the imperial durbar at Delhi; he was appointed officiating political agent at Bhamo in April 1877. In November of the same year he received W. J. Gill and William Mesney after the successful termination of their journey from Yunnan. At Bhamo, on 24 April 1878, while reading, Cooper was shot through the heart and lungs by a soldier of his guard, whose enmity he had aroused through the infliction of a series of punishments. He was buried just outside the station compound. His debts were such that little remained of his estate for his sisters. 
Cooper was certainly courageous, and inspired affection among his friends. No mere traveller, he styled himself, even in his will, the 'Pioneer of Commerce', and the vision of opening a market for Assam tea and Manchester goods in Yunnan was a constant in his public and private utterances. He was a successful self-publicist (if a self-important one who habitually acquired official-sounding titles), but at root he was a freelance imperial activist, ever ready to solicit funds for his ventures, whose connections with the India Office were tenuous, and of whom officials were wary. 


@@@@@


doc= 6235


Cooper, William (fl. 1640-1681), clergyman and ejected minister, may have been the man admitted as a sizar at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1628, graduating BA in 1632 and MA in 1635, and there is reason to suppose he may have then spent time in the Netherlands. It is hard to be sure of anything about William Cooper's early life, but he is probably not to be identified with the Oxford BA (1634) from Gloucestershire (who was possibly the man nominated on 1 March 1648 to Long Marston in that county), nor with the lecturer of St Michael the Belfries, York, one of several nominated or recommended by parliament on 1 March 1642. It is scarcely credible that the parliamentarian and future ejected minister can have been the man who in April 1643 was sequestered from the parish of St Thomas the Apostle in London and ordered to be committed to the Fleet because (among other things) he called the troops of the earl of Essex 'rebels and traitors to the king' and 'refused to give the sacraments to his parishioners unless they would come up to the rails' ('JHL', 1643-4, 21-2). 
Ironically, however, the Cooper who is the subject of this article appears to have owed his first English benefice to the patronage of none other than William Laud. In February 1640 he was granted a licence to marry Susannah Le Maire, a native of Amsterdam and daughter of John Le Maire, a painter. Le Maire, if Edmund Calamy is to be believed, having 'given good content to Archbishop Laud, begged the favour of some presentation for his son in law', who was accordingly installed in the vicarage of Ringmere, Sussex. Whatever the reason, Laud certainly did present Cooper to Ringmere during an episcopal vacancy; installed before 20 October 1640, he apparently resigned early in the following year. 
From 1644 to 1648 Cooper served as chaplain to Elizabeth, queen of Bohemia, during her residency at The Hague. It is clear that he was acting during those years in the interest of the parliamentarians. Shortly after his return to England he was requested by the council of state, on 15 May 1649, to preach at the funeral of Dr Isaac Dorislaus whose 'execrable murder' had just occurred ('CSP dom.', '1649-50', 141). On 21 June the council recommended to the revenue committee 'that what remains due to Mr Cooper, late minister to the Queen of Bohemia, may be paid to him, he having done special service in the time of his being there, besides his service in the way of the ministry' (ibid., 201). It seems that this 'special service' may have had to do with Cooper's father-in-law, for some years later, in a letter to Thurloe of August 1655, Cooper indicated that Le Maire was acting as an agent for the protectorate government. In the same letter he also urged Thurloe to press on Cromwell the interests of 'Alderman Searl, Mr Heycocks, and other honest men of the borough of Southwark, relating to their adventure for Ireland, wherein they are disappointed, and none but his highness can relieve them'; Cooper's statement that these men had 'been often here in person' suggests they were using him as a means of access to the corridors of power (Thurloe, 'State papers', 3.705). 
Cooper's connection with the borough of Southwark had originated soon after his return from The Hague. His sermon before parliament on 29 August 1649 celebrated the relief of Dublin and the victory of Michael Jones over Ormond, and appeared as 'Jerusalem Fatall to her Assailants' under the name of 'William Cooper, minister of the gospel at St Olave's Southwark'. For Ireland, Cooper was conventionally anxious that the Rump Parliament remember that firm magistracy be complemented by 'a good ministry', which may 'effectually pluck up every bitter root that beareth gall and wormwood, as Popery and prophaneness'. But for England he had some surprisingly radical aspirations, complaining that 'some cry for bread to feed their bodies, others cry for bread to feed their souls... some grow rich upon others poverty, and some proud by others riches', urging his hearers to 'unload heavy burdens, take off every yoke, and let the oppressed go free' (Cooper, 'Jerusalem', 29-30). 
Cooper went on to play a prominent role in the ecclesiastical politics of the protectorate. He was a morning lecturer at Westminster Abbey in 1654 and appears in its accounts as having been in receipt of $25 for the year 1658. On 20 March 1654 he was named a national commissioner for the approbation of public preachers. Also in that year he served as assistant to the commission of triers for the London ministry, and was named to the Surrey commission on 29 September 1657. The following summer, according to Robert Baillie, he was engaged in high-level discussion of proposals to strengthen the ministry. After the death of Oliver, Richard Cromwell received a letter from General George Monck recommending Cooper as one of 'the gravest sort of moderate presbyterian divines' whom the new protector should hear at Whitehall 'as often as those of other judgements' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 7.387). In early 1659, together with Calamy and other presbyterians, Cooper wrote to Richard Baxter urging him to be active in the struggle against Independency. The last protectorate parliament selected three presbyterians, and only one Independent, to preach at the opening session, and picked 'Cooper, a Presbyterian, to pray every day' (Abernathy, 23). Cooper also acquired an assistant: on 5 May John Cooke of King's College, Cambridge, was ordained for his ministry at St Olave's, Southwark, on the authority of the fourth classis of London. On 14 March 1660, after the return of its secluded members, the Long Parliament named Cooper as one of its ministerial 'Approvers'. 
The Restoration marked no abrupt change in Cooper's fortunes. His living at St Olave's, Southwark, was confirmed by royal grant on 30 July 1660. On 11 December 1661 the denization was granted of Susannah, his wife. Between April and August that year Cooper was one of the presbyterian representatives at the Savoy conference, but the negotiations, aimed to secure their inclusion within the restored Church of England, came to nothing. On 2 June 1662 Secretary Edward Nicholas was informed that William Cooper had presented Lord Chancellor Clarendon with a petition for the king on behalf of the presbyterians 'for a connivance or grace of toleration which they say his Majesty may do by his prerogative', and that he had acted in this matter as spokesman for his co-religionists (Bosher, 258). 
In 1662 Cooper was ejected from St Olave's, Southwark, and moved to Somerset, where he took the Oxford oath in 1666. On 22 July 1672 he was licensed as a presbyterian preacher at Crewkerne, and also at his own house at Long Load, Somerset. Here a close colleague was James Stephenson, ejected minister, of Martock, where Cooper had an estate. Both men were selected as overseers of the poor but successfully cited their episcopal ordination as a reason why they should be granted exemption. Cooper contributed a preface to 'Cases of Conscience Practically Resolved' (1673), by another Somerset minister, John Norman, 'late minister of Bridgwater'. But he had fallen far since the days of his national prominence, and was bitter against the failure of his hopes for a godly commonwealth. In 1677 he wrote angrily against 'churches grown corrupt and degenerate in doctrine and manners' and recalled the old ideal, 'the desire of our souls to have them reduced to their ancient and primitive purity' (Cooper, 'The Good Man Perished', 7). But there was worse to come -- Cooper was one of the dissenting ministers imprisoned during the tory reaction of 1681. The manner and date of his death are not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 6236


Cooper, William Durrant (1812-1875), antiquary, was born on 10 January 1812 in High Street, Lewes, Sussex, the son of Thomas Cooper (1789-1841), solicitor, and his wife, Lucy Elizabeth, 'nee' Durrant (died 1867). He was educated at Lewes grammar school until at the age of fifteen he was articled to his father; he was admitted attorney and solicitor at the Michaelmas term of 1832. 
Cooper's evidence in 1833 to a House of Commons committee on the negligent way in which he had found incumbents keeping parish registers reveals an early interest in archives, albeit to prove title to property. In the following year he published a substantial history of parliamentary elections in all the Sussex constituencies; this reappeared as an appendix to 'The History... of... Sussex' (1835) by T. W. Horsfield (1792-1837). It was followed by a short 'Glossary of the Provincialisms in Use in Sussex' (1836; 2nd edn, 1853). 
The electoral history signalled also active engagement in politics, in the whig cause. After helping John Easthope (1784-1865) in his unsuccessful attempt to win the Lewes seat in 1837, Cooper moved permanently to London and joined the parliamentary staff of the 'Morning Chronicle', of which Easthope was a proprietor. He subsequently worked for 'The Times', but in time abandoned journalism to concentrate on his legal practice, chiefly conveyancing and parliamentary agency. Some of the offices he held may have been in recognition of political support: the duke of Norfolk made him auditor of Skelton Castle, Yorkshire (in 1843), and his steward for the borough of Lewes (in the mid-1860s). He had joined the Reform Club in 1837 and was appointed its solicitor about 1870. His most lucrative office was probably that of solicitor to the vestry of St Pancras, London (1858). 
Cooper's greater love, however, was history and associated literary pursuits, particularly editing documents of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Removal to London permitted active involvement in the national antiquarian societies. In 1841 Cooper was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and not only published four papers in 'Archaeologia' but also gave sterling service on the finance committee. The council of the Camden Society he joined in 1846, and between 1853 and 1862 he edited two volumes and contributed to two of the society's 'Miscellanies'. He edited a volume of plays, 'Ralph Roister Doister... and the Tragedie of Gorbaduc', for the Shakespeare Society (1847) and published privately (1844) seven letters by or associated with Laurence Sterne, which he found in the muniment room at Skelton Castle. 
Cooper contributed six papers to the journals of the London and Middlesex, Kent, and Surrey archaeological societies. Having joined the Sussex Archaeological Society within its first year (1846-7), his contributions were more prolific: one, two, or three articles to all but one of the first twenty-five volumes (1848-73) of the society's 'Collections'. As editor in 1859-65 he was known for the copious notes he added to other authors' contributions. His most sustained piece of work was the 'History of Winchelsea' (1850): his father's family had come from the neighbouring parish of Icklesham. 
In 1872 Cooper was stricken by an attack of paralysis, but he lingered for three years longer, before dying on 28 December 1875 at 81 Guilford Street, Russell Square, London, his home since at latest 1848. He was never married, and latterly lived with his spinster sister. 


@@@@@


doc= 6237


Cooper, William Ricketts (1843-1878), orientalist, was born at 7 Devonshire Buildings, Great Dover Road, Newington, in south London, on 12 March 1843, the son of Daniel Cooper, farmer, and his wife, Anne Pernell Brooks. He began life as a designer of carpet patterns and became a missionary in London. Then, under the influence of Samuel Birch (1813-1885), and Joseph Bonomi the younger (1796-1878), whose assistant he became at the Sir John Soane's Museum, he directed his varied energies to the study of Egyptian antiquities and Assyriology. Without being strictly a scholar, he accomplished a great deal of valuable work. He was one of the principal originators in 1870 of the Society of Biblical Archaeology and was active and enthusiastic as the society's secretary from its foundation. He lived at 5 Richmond Grove, Barnsbury, London, until delicate health compelled him in 1876 to retire to 7 Trinity Terrace, Ventnor, on the Isle of Wight. He inspired the archaic classes conducted by A. H. Sayce (1845-1933) and Sir Peter le Page Renouf (1822-1897), and the publication of the valuable series of translated Assyrian and Egyptian documents, entitled 'Records of the Past'. He was named a fellow of the Royal Asiatic Society in 1875 and was also a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. He published, among other works, 'Serpent Myths of Ancient Egypt' (1873); 'The Resurrection of Assyria' (1875); 'Egypt and the Pentateuch' (1875); 'The Archaic Dictionary' (1876); 'The Horus Myth and Christianity' (1877); and 'A Short History of the Egyptian Obelisks' (1877; 2nd edn, 1878). According to E. A. Wallis Budge, Cooper was tall in stature, but his stoop made him appear of only medium height; he had finely cut features and a large aquiline nose and was nicknamed 'the Etruscan', as he resembled a figure on an Etruscan sarcophagus in the British Museum. Cooper died in Ventnor on 15 November 1878. 


@@@@@


doc= 6238


Cooper, William White (1816-1886), oculist, was born on 17 November 1816 at Holt, Wiltshire, of unknown parentage. Following his arrival in London about 1834, he enrolled as a student at St Bartholomew's Hospital, and at the same time he became a private pupil of Edward Stanley, surgeon at St Bartholomew's. Cooper's notes of the lectures of Professor Richard Owen at the Royal College of Surgeons were so outstanding that Owen awarded him a prize; the notes were published as 'Lectures in the Comparative Anatomy and Physiology of the Invertebrate Animals' (1843). Cooper became MRCS in 1838, and spent a year or two on foreign travel -- his visit to Madeira resulting in his 'Invalid's Guide to Madeira' (1840). 
In 1845 Cooper became FRCS, and in the same year he married on 9 December Mary Elizabeth ('b'. 1823/4), daughter of Samuel Poyser of Derby. He associated with the ophthalmic surgeon John Dalrymple, and gained a large practice. He was one of the original staff of the North London Eye Institution, and was subsequently ophthalmic surgeon to St Mary's Hospital, Paddington. Cooper gained a reputation as a careful, steady, and neat operator, judicious and painstaking in treatment. His book 'On Wounds and Injuries of the Eye' (1859) was the first to treat this subject and was comprehensive for its time. In 1859 Cooper was appointed surgeon-oculist to Queen Victoria, who regularly sought his advice on government matters connected with his specialism. 
In the autumn of 1884 Cooper suffered blocked veins in his leg. Under the best treatment, he appeared to rally but then, on 29 May 1886 -- the day on which his knighthood was announced -- he fell victim to acute pneumonia. He died at his home, 19 Berkeley Square, Westminster, London, on 1 June. He was survived by his wife and his eldest son, who had followed him into the medical profession. 


@@@@@


doc= 6239


Coote, Sir Charles, first baronet (d. 1642), soldier and political administrator, was the elder of the two sons of Sir Nicholas Coote and his second wife, Eleanor Stanhope. Sir Nicholas had been a retainer of the duke of Norfolk, in whose cause he struck the attorney-general, for which he was fined $20,000. He spent some time in prison and at last was obliged (with his son's permission) to sell off part of his estates to pay the fine. 
Charles is said to have been at Cambridge in 1591, and then served as a captain under Charles Blount, Lord Mountjoy, in 1600-03, the concluding three years of the Nine Years' War; in 1605 he was appointed provost-marshal of Connaught for life. His marriage about 1610 to Dorothea, daughter of Hugh Cuffe of Cuffeswood, co. Cork, brought them four sons and a daughter. 
Coote was sworn onto the privy council and promoted vice-president of Connacht in 1620, and created a baronet of Ireland the following year. In 1621, too, Coote was appointed sovereign of the newly created corporation of Jamestown, strategically situated on a crossing of the River Shannon in co. Leitrim. The landmark 1622 commission on the government of Ireland queried why the royal revenue in Connacht was 'strangely lost and reduced to nothing' (Treadwell, 201) and criticized the cost of fortifying the tiny settlement with a large bastioned 'enceinte'. Some commissioners suggested that Coote financed his recent meteoric rise through embezzlement of the composition rent in Connacht; he was, they said, 'a stirring man fuller of wit than judgement, very pragmatical but his own ends so much in his eye as he is become an eye sore to the country who have grievously complained against him for extortion' (Canny, 255). 
Coote, however, was protected by his patron George Villiers, from 1623 duke of Buckingham. Firmly ensconced as James I's favourite, Buckingham was able to ward off Coote's many enemies and he even extended his Jamestown contract to include Charlestown in adjacent co. Roscommon. Coote picked up many properties scattered throughout the midlands as these were planted from 1620 onward. These included Castlecoote on another river crossing on the Roscommon-Galway border and Dowbally in co. Cavan where he built a large ironworks. He set up another ironworks at Drumanlasse in co. Leitrim. Further south he acquired an estate of 500 acres at Castlecuffe and another of 400 acres at Mountrath, both in the north of Queen's county (Laois). In contrast to Jamestown, Mountrath developed into a model plantation nucleated settlement based on the Coote's works for the manufacture of linen, fustian and woollen cloth. Coote was returned for Queen's county in the 1639-41 parliament. 
The usually dominant office-holding faction to which Coote belonged was closely connected through marriage alliances and business interests and was headed by Richard Boyle, earl of Cork; 'all birds of a feather and the earl of Cork's party' (Perceval-Maxwell, 87-8). In 1630 Coote went to London to lobby for a plantation of Ormond and the following year, in concert with Cork, he proposed a plantation of Sligo, Roscommon, and Mayo. Coote's advocacy of plantation was more sympathetically received following the appointment of Lord Deputy Wentworth in 1633. The following year Coote was appointed as one of the commissioners 'to secure defective titles', this being the legal mechanism whereby peacetime land confiscations could be set in train. 
The origins of the October 1641 rising can be traced in part to the instability and resentment provoked by these plantations. Despite his advanced age -- he was described in 1627 as being 'old and infirm' ('CSP Ire.', '1625-32', 220) -- Coote was appointed as governor of Dublin in November 1641 and commissioned to raise a regiment. He led successful attacks on insurgent positions surrounding the city, south towards Wicklow in November 1641 and north towards Swords and Kilsallaghan in January and February 1642. However, his killing of innocent civilians on the Wicklow expedition came at a politically inopportune time when the Old English palesmen were debating whether to join the insurgents. If Bellings, a normally restrained Irish commentator, is to be believed, one such incident involved 'his calling a simple country fellow from the plow to have him blow his pistoll, which the simple man, in obedience to Sir Charles Coote's command, performs readily, he shootes him in the mouth and kills him' ('Irish Confederation', ed. Gilbert, 1.35). Reports of such alleged atrocities gave credence, in Irish Catholic eyes, to rumours that the government planned to massacre them. 
Otherwise, Coote proved to be an active and successful military commander, most notably in leading a cavalry detachment to relieve the midland garrisons of Birr, Borris, and Knocknamease in April 1642, 'after surmounting incredible difficulties and a march of forty eight hours without the intermission of more than three hours rest' (Carte, 3.314), in the teeth of stiff insurgent resistance. On rejoining the main army he participated in a follow-up victory at Kilrush when an insurgent army tried to block the return of Ormond's army to Dublin. Ormond left Coote to garrison Naas. Subsequently Coote helped to capture Philipstown (Daingean) and Trim. On 7 May 1642 he was shot dead while repelling an insurgent counter-attack on Trim, 'whether by the enemy or by one of his own troopers, was variously reported' (Archdall, 2.67). His eldest son, Charles Coote (c.1610-1661), succeeded him as second baronet and in 1660 was created first earl of Mountrath. 


@@@@@


doc= 6240


Coote, Charles, first earl of Mountrath (c.1610-1661), army officer and politician, was the eldest son of Sir Charles Coote, first baronet (d. 1642), of Castle Coote, co. Roscommon, and Dorothea, daughter of Hugh Cuffe, of Cuffe's Wood or Cuffeswood, co. Cork. Little is known of his early years, but he was knighted in 1626 and in the 1630s he supported his father's work as provost-marshal of Connaught, and was returned as MP for Leitrim in the Irish parliament of 1640. Before 1630 he married Mary (died in or before 1645), daughter of Sir Francis Ruish. He married second, before May 1645, Jane (died 1684), daughter of Sir Robert Hannay, baronet. 
At the outbreak of the Irish rising of 1641 Coote was left to defend the family estates in Connaught, while his father joined the main army at Dublin. When his father was killed in May 1642 Coote was nominated to succeed him as provost-marshal, and in February 1643 he joined a delegation to Oxford which tried to persuade Charles I to send supplies to the west of Ireland. The subsequent cessation of arms agreed between the king and the confederate Irish, and the appointment of lords Wilmot and Dillon as joint presidents of Connaught, seem to have confirmed Coote's doubts about royalist intentions. In April 1644 he was one of the protestant agents who attended the king once again, demanding that he repudiate the cessation of arms, condemn popery, confiscate rebel estates, and impose further plantation in Ireland. Their proposals caused consternation at Oxford, and Coote and his colleagues were accused of intending 'only scandal upon the king and his ministers' (Lord Digby to Ormond, 6 May 1644, Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 10, fol. 532). The agents received a warmer reception in London, and by August Coote had declared his support for the parliamentarian cause. 
In October 1644 Coote was nominated by parliament as their lord president of Connaught, and the post was confirmed in February 1645. In the interim he joined Sir Robert King, Sir John Temple, and other Irish protestants in advising parliament on its Irish policy. In May 1645 he was finally given leave to return to Ireland, and joined forces with the 'Laggan' army in western Ulster, with whom he recaptured Sligo, and advanced into Connaught, capturing eighteen towns by the end of the year. In the spring of 1646 Coote and his allies persuaded Viscount Ranelagh to defect to parliament, and narrowly failed to arrange a mutiny at Athlone. In May he besieged the earl of Clanricarde in Portumna Castle in southern Galway. Coote's successes were soon shattered by the defeat of the Ulster Scots at Benburb in June 1646. He withdrew to Belfast, and begged parliament to send effective support to northern Ireland. The independents, who now controlled Irish affairs through the new lord lieutenant, Viscount Lisle, tried to conciliate Coote, but they were more concerned to send reinforcements to Dublin and the Munster garrisons. In March 1647 Coote sent agents to parliament to bring the 'very sad condition' of Connaught to their notice, and to 'prevent that torrent which carrieth all to Munster' ('Egmont Diary', 1.366, 379). After Lisle's commission ended in April, Coote received more help from Westminster. In July $8000 was allocated to Connaught, and in October Coote was appointed vice-admiral of the province. The threat of Irish intervention in the second civil war prompted parliament to send further supplies, and Coote was made governor of Londonderry. 
The trial and execution of Charles I seem to have made little impact on Coote. During the winter of 1648-9 he joined the Ulster commander George Monck in a purge of the British officer corps, and he imposed the engagement on Londonderry soon afterwards. These moves did not go unchallenged, however, and in May 1649 Coote was besieged in Londonderry by his former allies in the Laggan regiments. Relief was slow in arriving, and when he was eventually reinforced the immediate danger had passed. From early 1650 Coote played a crucial role in bringing northern Ireland under parliament's control. He defeated an Irish army at Scarrifhollis in July 1650, and, working with the New Model brigade under Robert Venables, ravaged Ulster, before invading Connaught in 1651, capturing Athlone and Portumna, and, after a long siege, taking the surrender of Galway in April 1652. Despite his victories, Coote was criticized by the parliamentary commissioners, who thought the Galway articles too lenient. They were also suspicious of his continuing association with the Ulster Scots and with former royalists. It was not a surprise when most of Coote's northern regiments (including those under the command of his three brothers) were disbanded in the reduction of the Irish army in 1653. 
Coote retained the presidency of Connaught, however, and during the later 1650s he was able to extend his political influence over much of Connaught and western Ulster. In the elections for the protectorate parliaments of 1654, 1656, and 1659 he was able to return his own candidates to at least six seats in each parliament. He himself was elected for Galway and Mayo, although he only took his seat in 1659. During this period he also became allied to a number of men of national importance, including Lord Broghill (Roger Boyle), Sir Hardress Waller, and William Jephson. Of particular importance was his friendship with Henry Cromwell, who governed Ireland from the summer of 1655. In October 1656, for example, Henry Cromwell supported Coote's efforts to secure the renewal of his patent as lord president; a year later he recommended Coote for a peerage and a seat in the 'other house', although without success. Coote soon returned the favour: in 1658 he acted as Henry Cromwell's agent in the settlement of his newly acquired estates in Galway, and in the 1659 parliament he was a staunch supporter of the protectorate, and acted as teller in favour of recognizing the other house. 
The fall of the protectorate in May 1659 left Coote vulnerable. He was reappointed as colonel of foot by the republican regime in July 1659, but he did not support the new government, and was involved in the coup of December 1659, capturing Galway for the Irish officers. In January 1660 he was appointed one of five commissioners to govern Ireland for parliament, and he was a central figure in the Dublin Convention. It was during the meeting of the convention that Coote began to support the restoration of the monarchy as the best option for stability in Ireland. As early as the summer of 1659 he had been accused of 'declaring for the Scot's king's interest' (Warner, 'Nicholas Papers', 4.156), and he worked closely with his former colleague George Monck during the winter of 1659-60, but his first direct contact with the court in exile came only in February 1660, when he sent Sir Arthur Forbes to wait on Charles II in the Netherlands. A reply, acknowledging his support, was penned by the king in March. 
After the Restoration, Coote was well rewarded. In July 1660 he was reappointed president of Connaught; in August his estates were confirmed; and in September he was created Baron Coote of Castle Cuffe, Viscount Coote of Castle Coote, and earl of Mountrath. As lord justice of Ireland from October 1660, he governed Ireland with Lord Broghill (now earl of Orrery) and Sir Maurice Eustace. During 1661 he proved an effective manager of the Irish parliament, influencing elections and steering proceedings to ensure that (in his own words) 'all things are now fully restored to their ancient order' (BL, Egerton MS 2537, fol. 345). His death in Dublin from smallpox on 18 December 1661 was (according to Orrery), 'a great blow to this kingdom' ('CSP Ire.', '1660-62', 479). This was not an exaggeration. In the following months, the rule of the lords justices gave way to the lieutenancy of the duke of Ormond, and the Irish protestants found their ambitions increasingly frustrated. Mountrath was buried on 6 February 1662 at St Patrick's Cathedral; he was succeeded by his eldest son, Charles, from his first marriage. He was survived by his wife, who afterwards married Sir Robert Reading, bt. 


@@@@@


doc= 6241


Coote, Charles (bap. 1760, d. 1835), historian and biographer, was the son of John Coote (bap. 1733, d. 1808), a bookseller of Paternoster Row, London, and the author of several dramatic pieces, who died in 1808; his mother was Jane, 'nee' Weaver (died in or before 1808). He went to St Paul's School in 1773, matriculated from Pembroke College, Oxford, in 1778, took the degree of BA in 1782, and on 30 December 1784 was elected a scholar on the Benet or Ossulstone foundation in that society. He proceeded MA in 1785, BCL by commutation on 10 July 1789, DCL on 14 July following, and was admitted a member of the College of Advocates on 3 November in the same year. He devoted his attention to literature rather than to law, and was for some time editor of the 'Critical Review'. To adopt his own words, 'even after his enrolment among the associated advocates he for some years did not dwell within the circuit of the college, and when he became a resident member he rather patiently awaited employment than eagerly sought it' (Coote, 133). Coote was 'of a retired disposition, with much of that eccentricity and indolence which often accompany literary merit, he passed through his profession with credit and respect, but without that emolument which was perhaps due to his abilities, had they been much exerted. ('GM')' Not being an able speaker he was rarely employed as an advocate, but he frequently acted as a judge in the court of delegates.Coote's first work was 'Elements of the Grammar of the English Language' (1788; 2nd edn, 1806), a work of some interest; he then wrote 'The History of England from the Earliest Dawn of Record to the Peace of 1783' (9 vols., 1791-8), to which he added in 1803 another volume, bringing down the history to the peace of Amiens in 1802. He then published two classical histories (1794 and 1796), followed by a 'History of the union of the kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland: with an introductory survey of Hibernian affairs traced from the times of Celtic colonisation' (1802), which sold poorly. His most distinctive work was 'Sketches of the lives and characters of eminent English civilians, with an historical introduction relative to the College of Advocates' (1804), in which he included himself. He added six volumes to Mosheim's ecclesiastical history in 1811, and published a history of ancient Europe (3 vols., 1815), and various other updatings of other authors' historical works. 
Coote had been married, but was for many years a widower. He died at Islington, London, on 19 November 1835, survived by two daughters and three sons, one of whom was the historian Henry Charles Coote. 


@@@@@


doc= 6242


Coote, Edmund (d. 1609), schoolmaster and author, was the son of Thomas Coote of Steeple Bumstead, Essex, and his wife, Anne Cole. Admitted pensioner at Peterhouse, Cambridge, on 24 March 1576, he graduated BA in 1580 and proceeded MA in 1583. On 8 October 1592 he married Barbara Cooke in the church of St Mary-the-Less which adjoined his college. The couple had a daughter, Hester, baptized there in 1594. 
On 5 June 1596 Coote was appointed master of the King Edward VI Free School in Bury St Edmunds, but on 18 May the following year he resigned, for reasons which the governors' register does not reveal. During his brief tenure he published his pedagogical manual 'The Englishe Scholemaister' (1596), whose thoroughly practical approach to the teaching of English explains its ensuing popularity. Coote's elaborate title-page summarizes his purpose -- to assist the teacher of the elementary literacy skills in 'the distinct reading and true writing of our English tongue'. The text opens with a fourteen-point statement of 'The Schoole-maister his profession', followed by a 'Preface for the direction of the reader', among whom he included 'men and women of trades (as tailors, weavers, shopkeepers, seamsters and such other) as have undertaken the charge of teaching others' (sig. A3'r'). Coote then proceeds via the letters of the alphabet, syllables, and two- and three-syllable words to offer a mode of spelling lesson, with an older pupil 'opposing' a younger. The importance of pronunciation is emphasized by objecting to such habits as pronouncing 'my naunt for mine aunt and thy nuncle for thine uncle', together with the injunction 'Take heed also you put not id for ed as unitid for united' and 'ignorantly writing a cup a wine for a cup of wine, and other like absurdities' (ibid., 31). A seven-page catechism with proof texts in the margin is followed by 'Sundry Necessarie Observations for a Christian' in the form of a series of moral maxims, a set of prayers for use at various times of the day, and a group of versified psalms. A half-page introduction to numbers is cut short in order to leave space for a 22-page list of 'hard words (especially from the Latin and French)' (ibid., 72-94). Coote's was not the first such book to be published. It was, however, by far the most popular, and continued to be printed throughout the seventeenth century, reaching a fifty-fourth edition in 1737. 
After leaving Bury St Edmunds, Coote taught at Hunsdon, Hertfordshire, although the circumstances of his appointment are unknown. A son, Samuel, was baptized there in 1607. Coote died in 1609, and was buried on the same day as his wife, 13 February 1609, at St Mary's Church in the adjacent parish of Sawbridgeworth. 


@@@@@


doc= 6243


Coote, Sir Eyre (1726-1783), army officer, was the fourth son of the Revd Chidley Coote of Ash Hill, Kilmallock, in co. Limerick, and Jane, daughter of George Evans of Bulgaden Hall, co. Limerick, and sister of the first Lord Carberry. 
It is assumed that he was brought up in Ireland, but nothing is known until the eighteen-year-old Coote was appointed ensign in Blakeney's or the 27th foot, the Inniskilling regiment, on 8 June 1744. Coote's military career began most inauspiciously when he took part as regimental colour bearer in the action near Falkirk on 17 January 1746 against the forces of Charles Edward Stuart. The ill-led, inexperienced regiment was routed in this battle; Coote was swept along in the panic retreat and reached Edinburgh ahead of his comrades still clutching the colour. In the ensuing court martial Coote was one of the four officers who underwent an exemplary trial for cowardice. Rather than being cashiered, he suffered the lesser penalty of suspension from the service, and his reappearance in the 'Army List' of 1748 as a half pay cornet in the earl of Rothe's dragoons, with his commission still dated 1744, indicates that he was eventually forgiven for his conduct at Falkirk and subsequently. He may have seen service with the dragoons in Germany at the tail-end of the War of the Austrian Succession. On 18 April 1749 the half pay Coote transferred back on to the active list as a lieutenant by exchanging into the 37th foot under orders for Minorca. The regiment returned to England in 1755; Coote had received his captaincy in June that year and transferred again, this time to Adlercron's 39th foot, currently serving in India. He sailed in November 1755 in command of a reinforcement for the 39th, and joined the regiment at Madras in the late summer of 1756. 
Coote had arrived at an opportune moment to distinguish himself. The opening of the Seven Years' War entailed renewed Anglo-French conflict in India, primarily in the Carnatic around Madras and Pondicherry. In addition, Coote found himself immediately pitchforked into a crisis in Bengal, where the Calcutta council of the East India Company had provoked the local Mughal governor (nawab), Siraj ud-Daula, to attack the settlement and to throw the British out of the province. Madras decided to send a naval-military expedition under Admiral Charles Watson and Colonel Robert Clive to recover the situation. Captain Coote commanded one of the three companies detached from the 39th to join the company's troops and marines, which left Madras on 17 October, arriving at the mouth of the Ganges on 30 November. The force met little resistance in its progress up the river, retaking Fort William, Calcutta, without a fight on 2 January 1757. Belatedly, Siraj ud-Daula arrived outside Calcutta early in February with 40,000 men, apparently to cow the presumptuous British. But a daring, if ill-managed, march in the early morning mist right through the nawab's camp by a force of 2000 men led by Clive, with Coote in command of the Europeans, sufficiently alarmed Siraj to come to terms, restoring the company's position and paying damages. 
The nawab, still hostile to the British, would have done well to protect their rivals the French, but he weakly allowed Watson and Clive to take the French base of Chandernagore early in March. Clive put Coote in command of the French fort. Then, when Clive joined a conspiracy brewing in Siraj's army against him led by Mir Jafar, his leading general, he promoted Coote temporary major and appointed him to command the advance guard in the march to the nawab's capital, Murshidabad, to supplant Siraj ud-Daula with Mir Jafar. Forty miles short of the capital, on the field of Plassey, Clive's 3000-strong force, which was supposed to have been joined by Mir Jafar's host, was confronted by the nawab with 50,000 men (including Mir Jafar) and fifty guns served by French artillery men. Coote was the most forceful and in a minority in Clive's council of war in arguing to accept battle; after reflection Clive was persuaded to agree. Siraj ud-Daula, destabilized by his justified fear of treachery in his own ranks, lost the battle of Plassey on 23 June 1757 in his own mind before ever a shot was fired, and not many had to be fired in an action later often celebrated as the beginning of the raj. Coote commanded one of the European divisions that pursued the retreating Mughal army. Clive later installed the grateful Mir Jafar as the new nawab and gave Coote his first independent command with orders to capture a fleeing French unit up the Ganges. Although the French eventually evaded him by escaping into the next province (Oudh), Coote had demonstrated his nerve, persistence, and leadership in keeping a small mixed force (750 men and 2 guns) of Europeans and Indians to a vigorous pursuit for 200 miles through alien and fairly hostile country at the height of the monsoon. 
Like other veterans of Plassey, Coote had made a small fortune due to the largess of Mir Jafar, and the gloss of the victory gave his career a great boost. Back in England before Clive at the end of 1758, Coote was feted in polite society and consulted as an India expert by William Pitt the elder, the leading figure in the coalition government. A year later the East India Company made Coote the next commander-in-chief of their forces in India to succeed Clive, and the king made him a lieutenant-colonel and gave him a new regiment (the 84th foot). Coote arrived back at Madras on 27 October 1759 and, finding the Anglo-French War was still in progress, took the field at the head of the Madras army. He was lucky, in his first major independent command, that he came to the conflict at a point where, after years of material inferiority in men and money, the British had a superiority at sea as well as on land and were now backed up by the resources of Bengal, while having deprived the French of theirs from the Northern Circars, a small territory, nominally owned by the nizam of Hyderabad, abutting the northern Carnatic. None the less, the arduous campaign Coote conducted between November 1759 and January 1761, when the starving garrison in the French headquarters at Pondicherry finally surrendered to him after a prolonged blockade and siege, marked him out as a highly competent tactician who led from the front (the sepoys titled him Coote Bahadur, Coote the Hero). His crowning victory over the French at Wandiwash (22 January 1760) was the biggest battle fought between the Europeans in India. He was, however, criticized at the time by the Madras council and later by his French opponent, the comte de Lally, for his lack of strategic vision when he failed to follow up his victory with an immediate march on Pondicherry while the French were demoralized and ill prepared to resist him. He preferred to spend another year reducing other forts in the Carnatic before finally closing in on the French capital. 
On 9 March 1761, exercising his right as commander-in-chief of British forces in India, Coote sailed to Bengal with his regiment. He found that the council, Mir Jafar not having proved to their taste, had replaced him with his son-in-law Mir Kasim as nawab. Shortly after, Coote was sent up country to mediate in a dispute between Mir Kasim and his provincial chief at Patna. He failed in this, instead quarrelling with Mir Kasim over who should guard Patna's gates; diplomacy was never Coote's strong suit. Coote sailed for home in June 1762 and on the way married, on 8 July 1763, Susannah Hutchinson (died 1812), universally admired daughter of the governor of St Helena. Back home in England, he bought an estate near Fordingbridge in Hampshire. In January 1764 a grateful East India Company presented him with a sword studded with diamonds and worth 700 guineas for his services in India, and in 1765 he was made a full colonel by the king. In 1768, in eighteenth-century fashion, he 'bought' himself one of the Leicester parliamentary seats, sitting for the constituency until 1774, when he transferred to Poole, nearer home, until 1780. He appears to have played little part in parliamentary affairs, presumably seeing his seat simply as a status symbol and patronage asset. He sided with the Laurence Sulivan clique against Clive's friends in the house in the great feud which raged among the East India Company's directors in these years. 
In 1769 the directors reappointed Coote as their commander-in-chief in the east and to be associated with the three commissioners they hoped would reform their corrupt administrations in India. This visit was brief and unhappy for all concerned. With no wars to fight, Coote, his ego in high gear, created political mayhem at Madras and Calcutta. His three commissioner colleagues were lost on the voyage out, throwing Coote's surviving independent powers into question; his loosely worded commission as commander-in-chief led him to claim military independence from the civilian governors who traditionally held the same titles in their presidencies to assert ultimate civil control over the army. Outfaced by the civilians, Coote returned home overland via Aleppo in summer 1771. Warren Hastings wrote feelingly of Coote to the chairman of directors after this sorry episode: 'May success and Honor attend him in any other part of the world, but God forbid that he should ever return to any part of India' (Hastings to Laurence Sulivan, 10 Feb 1772, BL, Add. MS 29126, fol. 125). Coote, none the less, found favour in Britain when he was knighted on his return. 
For five years (1773-8) Coote, with his new regiment the 27th foot, acted as commandant of Fort George in Scotland, where James Boswell and Samuel Johnson visited him on their famous tour and Boswell characterized him as a 'most gentleman-like man' (Sheppard, 103). Further promotions made him major-general in 1775 and lieutenant-general two years later. In 1778, with war in America and possibly with the French in India, Coote once again was given the command-in-chief of the king's and company's forces there. He arrived at Madras with his wife in the last week of 1778 and, after reviewing the military establishment, in March 1779 he sailed on to Bengal to join the company's new supreme government in the east. He was immediately plunged into an intense political conflict at Calcutta, where Hastings was now governor-general, but could not get his way on policy owing to a hostile majority of non-company British government appointees on the council led by Philip Francis. But Hastings still held considerable executive authority and ensured that Coote was given all the independence in the military department (with considerable patronage) he could desire. Hastings was probably pleasantly surprised that Coote, who had resolved to stay out of politics, restored Hastings's power by falling in with all his non-military proposals. The chagrined Francis bitterly railed: 'Coote is despised by all parties; his faculties -- if he ever had any are gone' (ibid., 115). 
A year later (October 1780) Coote was drawn down to the Carnatic once more to take command of the Madras army after the disaster it had suffered in August at the hands of Haidar Ali, the dynamic ruler of Mysore. He had invaded the province with a reputed 100,000 men the previous month and destroyed a large company detachment, while the main British force nearby disintegrated due to logistical collapse. Haidar was not able to take the major British-held forts in the province, but most of the smaller ones, garrisoned only by the nawab's troops, fell easily to him, and he asserted a stranglehold on the central Carnatic. Coote inherited a highly demoralized and greatly outnumbered army. His inadequate bullock supply for logistical support and lack of effective cavalry made it very difficult for him to venture far from the coast, where food was brought to him by sea. Even this supply route was unreliable owing to monsoon storms and with the arrival of a hostile French fleet which contested command of the coastal waters with a Royal Navy squadron. 
In the circumstances it would have been remarkable if Coote, with a field force of 8500 men at first, had just managed to survive in the field, occasionally relieving the few British-held blockaded forts in the interior. These were, in fact, of no use to him as magazines for an extended campaign because they were too far apart to sustain his marches; they still had to be maintained, however, to ensure the political credibility of the nawab as effective ruler of the Carnatic and the military credibility of his British backer. And Coote did more. Haidar, despite having a much larger army but one much inferior in discipline and tactical control, had wisely adopted a policy of logistical attrition. His tens of thousands of light cavalry stripped the country of food around the British garrisons, threatened any supply columns which were not heavily protected, and made a desert around Coote's army when he tried to move it around. None the less, on four occasions Haidar allowed himself to be drawn into battle with Coote and was worsted each time. Arguably the action Coote fought at Porto Novo on 1 July 1781 was his finest. His army was in a very tight position, hemmed in on the coast, almost bereft of supplies and outnumbered ten to one. After carefully reconnoitring the ground, under fire, Coote coolly marched across Haidar's front behind some low sandhills, pinned his centre with well-placed artillery on one of the hills, and launched an infantry assault on his left flank which drove the Mysorean host from the field. It was a manoeuvre reminiscent of, perhaps inspired by, Frederick the Great's outstanding battle at Leuthen in 1757. However, as on other occasions, Coote for want of cavalry and sufficient transport was unable to exploit Haidar's withdrawal by inflicting a destructive rout on him. Nevertheless, by simply remaining undefeated in the field, he denied Haidar any claim to be in control of the Carnatic. 
Coote's inability to drive Haidar out of the Carnatic occasioned a prolonged and bitter dispute with the civilian governor of Madras, Lord Macartney, which, as in 1760, calls into question Coote's strategic judgement. Macartney was critical of his alleged indulgence to his officers and men in allowing them so many followers that they outnumbered the fighting men four to one, making his army difficult to sustain in the field. The governor went on to suggest a far bolder strategy than the soldier was willing to entertain, to wit to draw Haidar out of the Carnatic by attacking his supply bases as Haidar was theirs. Macartney wanted to split Coote's army into two, ignore Haidar's forces in the Carnatic, and attack Mysore from the east at two points, while an amphibious Bombay force landed on Haidar's Malabar Coast in the west. Dividing his force in the face of a vastly larger and fleeter enemy army was anathema to Coote. Besides, as a king's officer (Coote, unlike some of his other British army colleagues such as the great Stringer Lawrence, never switched to the company's service), he put a higher priority on destroying the small French force (but with possibly more to come) which had established itself with strong naval support on the Coromandel Coast, south of Pondicherry. Coote's imperious character, bolstered by powers given him by the supreme council at Calcutta to have a wide independence in conducting military operations, ensured that he had his way. His relations with the civilian Madras government were as bad as they had ever been with the company's authorities. He hardly ever freely consulted them, and railed at Madras constantly for its failure to keep him adequately supplied, even though, for a variety of political reasons and Haidar's effective strategy, it was impossible to do so. 
The strategic dispute was never properly resolved because Coote, after a sojourn at Calcutta during the monsoon of 1782-3, trying to recover his health, shattered by dedicated toil in the field, died on 27 April 1783, shortly after his return to Madras. The war with France ended a few months later, Coote's dilatory successor, General James Stewart, having failed to take the French stronghold at Cuddalore before a truce intervened. And Macartney, now free of Coote, was able to bring Tipu Sultan, Haidar's successor, to terms later that year by carrying out his converging strategy of squeezing Mysore from two directions and because the Mysoreans were being threatened by their inveterate Indian enemy the Maratha confederation. 
Coote's qualities as a general were considerable: brave and cool on the battlefield and a great tactician. His strategic ability may have been over-cautious and unimaginative, though critics probably underplayed the stress under which Coote and his armies, always ill supplied and outnumbered, laboured. Several observers believed his powers were in decline in the last two years of his life. Macartney characterized him at this period as 'soured by disappointment, grown old, impaired in health, jealous and fractious' (Wylly, 276). Beloved of his sepoys, Coote was exceptional in his time in his care for ordinary soldiers and his concern to mention them in dispatches when merited; his presence always significantly raised the army's morale. Coote's unflagging commitment to his duty to the end, as well as his choleric temperament, probably brought on the stroke which killed him. He hardly ever got on with his civilian colleagues, and he was certainly venal, though this was common at the time in British India. After his death he was buried in Madras, but later his wife took his body back to England for interment in the parish church of Rockbourne, near his estate, on 14 September 1784. The couple had no children, and on Lady Coote's death in 1812 the estate passed to his nephew, also Sir Eyre Coote. Coote's portraits (one is in the National Portrait Gallery) depict in full life a tall, robust man with strong but ill-proportioned features. There is a monument to him symbolizing a winged victory figure in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 6244


Coote, Eyre (bap. 1759, d. 1823), army officer and colonial administrator, was baptized on 20 May 1759, the second son of Dr Charles Coote (died 1796), of Shaen Castle, Queen's county, dean of Kilfenora, and his first wife, Grace (died 1767), the daughter of Thomas Tilson and the widow of Thomas Cuffe. His elder brother, Charles Henry Coote (1754-1823), was MP in the Irish parliament for Queen's county from 1776 to 1783 and from 1797 to 1801, and for Maryborough from 1783 to 1797, and sat for Queen's county at Westminster from 1801 to 1802, when he succeeded a distant cousin as second Baron Castle Coote; he was an ardent campaigner for the union of Great Britain and Ireland and a supporter of administration. His uncle was the army officer Sir Eyre Coote (1726-1783). The family had substantial property in Queen's county. 
Educated at Eton College between 1767 and 1771, Coote matriculated at Trinity College, Dublin, on 1 November 1774, but did not take a degree. He was commissioned ensign and lieutenant in the 37th regiment of foot in 1776, and immediately embarked for service in the American War of Independence, first participating in the battle of Brooklyn, in August 1776. He served through the subsequent middle colonies campaigns, and saw action at the battles of Brandywine (11 September 1777), Germantown (4 October 1777), and Monmouth Court House (28 June 1778) and expeditions to the Chesapeake and Rhode Island. He was promoted captain on 10 August 1778. Commanding a company of the 37th, he participated in the southern campaign (1780-81) under Charles Cornwallis, second Earl Cornwallis. Having been captured at Yorktown, Virginia (October 1781), he returned to Britain and advanced rapidly, becoming major of the 47th foot (1783) and lieutenant-colonel of the 70th (1788). On 9 November 1786, at St Marylebone, Coote married Sarah (died 1795), the daughter of John Rodbard; they had three daughters, all of whom died before their father. In 1790 he became MP for Ballinakill and in 1797 he moved to Maryborough, but his military career was always his priority. 
Coote's advance through the army was helped by his family's wealth, including the fortune amassed by his uncle Sir Eyre Coote, of whom he was the eventual heir, but it was his natural leadership ability, professional military skill, and tactical acumen that resulted in commands of increasing responsibility and complexity. As war with revolutionary France unfolded, Britain took advantage of French inability to defend her West Indian sugar islands. Under General Sir Charles Grey, Coote, promoted colonel on 24 January 1794, commanded the light infantry battalion. After arriving off Barbados on 6 January 1794, Grey commenced operations against French islands, among them Barbados and Martinique. Coote particularly distinguished himself in the assault on St Lucia on 2 April 1794. Assigned to storm a redoubt and two artillery batteries adjacent to the island's main fortification, Morne Fortune, Coote's battalion took the French garrison by surprise using only bayonets, killing thirty enemy defenders with no British losses. 
As a consequence of his service in the West Indies, Coote advanced rapidly. While participating in the disastrous allied Netherlands campaign of 1794-5, his brigade effectively covered the retreat from the Waal River, thus reducing potential allied losses in the face of a vigorous French counter-attack (10 January 1795). Coote was appointed aide-de-camp to King George III following a second West Indies expedition under Sir Ralph Abercromby in 1795; the following year he was promoted brigadier-general and took command of the camp at Bandon, Ireland. On 1 January 1798 he was raised to major-general, and soon afterwards he was given command of Dover camp, the primary staging point for the British army's continental operations. 
In 1798 Coote was placed in command of a 1400 man operational force with the task of destroying the locks at Saas in the Netherlands, thereby closing a new canal between Bruges and Ostend, through which troops and supplies intended for an invasion of Britain could easily move. Despite Admiralty concerns that led to minimal co-operation from the navy, the expedition accomplished the mission, but bad weather delayed re-embarkation as the troops gathered on the beach. Overwhelming French forces assaulted their defensive position. With Coote severely wounded, the second in command surrendered. 
Following his exchange, Coote returned to Dover, but soon he commanded a brigade in the Helder expedition (August 1799). Despite his brigade's excellent performance at the battle of Bergen (19 September 1799), the enterprise ultimately failed. Commanding a brigade in Sir Ralph Abercromby's Egyptian expedition, Coote took part in the successful landing at Abu Qir (8 March 1801). Between April and August he besieged Alexandria with 6000 troops while the bulk of the army marched on Cairo. Though severely depleted by disease, Coote's force captured Fort Marabout (21 August), which led to the city's eventual capitulation. 
Coote appears to have been a popular commander and highly successful in a subordinate role; however, Abercromby regarded him as ill-suited for overall field command. None the less, Coote received a knighthood of the Bath for his Egyptian service (19 May 1802) as well as the newly created order of the Crescent from the Turkish sultan, Selim III. The peace of Amiens in 1802 halted his plans for a military expedition to South America. The same year he succeeded his brother as MP for Queen's county in the Westminster parliament. In the Commons he supported Henry Addington's administration, but advocated preparations for renewed conflict with France. He continued to support the ministry following Pitt the younger's return to power in 1804, but voted for the censure of Henry Dundas, Viscount Melville, in April 1805. On 25 October 1805 he married Katherine (died 1821?), the daughter of John Bagwell, MP for co. Tipperary. They had one son. 
That same year, promoted lieutenant-general, Coote commanded 7000 troops staged at Cork to reinforce either the West Indies or England, depending on French operations. Once the invasion threat subsided, in 1806 he was appointed lieutenant-governor and commander-in-chief in Jamaica, but he resigned in April 1808 because of deteriorating health. During this period he is said to have had a child with one of his slaves, Sally. The relationship was publicized in 1995 and again in 2001 when a descendant, United States army officer Colin Powell, became secretary of state. Assigned as second in command to John Pitt, second earl of Chatham, for the Walcheren Island campaign commencing in July 1809, with tactical command of the army's left wing, Coote commanded the siege of Flushing while Chatham advanced on Antwerp. He was relieved in October, his troubling erratic, eccentric behaviour (credited to a tropical malady from his West Indian service) prevented any further military command, even though he was promoted general in 1814. That year he applied for a peerage in recognition of his and his uncle's military services, but he received only a GCB, on 2 January 1815. 
Coote served as MP for Barnstaple from 1812 -- an opponent accused him of 'the most open bribery' (Fisher) -- until the 1818 parliamentary dissolution. He spoke where he could apply his military experience, praising the contribution of Irish Catholic soldiers to Grey's expedition to the West Indies during the debates on Catholic relief in 1813, and opposing any attempt to reduce the authority of the East India Company in India. His political career was ended by controversy. On 25 November 1815 he was charged with indecent conduct before the lord mayor of London, having allegedly paid boys from Christ's Hospital to be flogged. The lord mayor dismissed the case, but the army commander-in-chief, Frederick, duke of York, convened a military inquiry on 18 April 1816. His friends argued that Coote was suffering from mental illness, the consequence of the Jamaican sun, the premature deaths of his daughters, and heredity, but the inquiry concluded that his eccentric behaviour had been unworthy of an officer and a gentleman, and not caused by mental illness. Coote was dismissed from the army despite the protestations of many prominent officers and degraded from the Order of the Bath in spite of his previous excellent service. No longer a knight or an officer, Coote continued to decline physically and mentally. He did not stand for parliament again, and lived abroad and at West Park, Hampshire, which he inherited in 1812, until his death, on 10 December 1823. Despite the sad disgrace of the general, the Coote family continued the tradition of parliamentary service; his only son, also Sir Eyre Coote (1806-1834), eventually served as MP for Clonmel. Coote's estate, according to the codicil to his will dated 17 September 1817, stood at more than $16,000, the bulk of which went to his son and heir. 


@@@@@


doc= 6245


Coote, Henry Charles (1815-1885), historian, was the son of Charles Coote (bap. 1760, d. 1835), historian. He was admitted a proctor in Doctors' Commons in 1840, practised in the probate court for seventeen years, and, when that court was thrown open to the whole legal profession in 1857, became a solicitor. He wrote several books on professional legal subjects, including 'Practices of the Ecclesiastical Courts' (1846) and 'Practice of the High Court of Admiralty' (1860). He was best-known as a historian, however, and devoted much of his leisure to the study of early English history, folklore, and foreign literature. He frequently travelled to Italy, and was an accomplished linguist. He was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, a founder of the Folklore Society, and an industrious contributor to learned periodicals. 
Coote's name was chiefly associated with his attempts to prove that the Roman settlers in Britain were not wiped out by the Germanic migrations of the fifth century, and that the laws and customs observed in Anglo-Saxon England were mainly of Roman origin. This theory was first advanced by Coote in articles published in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', and in 1864 the material was expanded into a small volume entitled 'A Neglected Fact in English History'. Little attention was paid to Coote's researches until 1870, when E. A. Freeman fiercely attacked them in 'Macmillan's Magazine'. Coote was stimulated to revise his work, and in 1878 he published a larger volume entitled 'The Romans in Britain'. The importance of Coote's conclusions were acknowledged by Frederic Seebohm in his 'English Village Community' (1883). Several papers on the same subject were contributed by Coote to the 'Transactions of the London and Middlesex Archaeological Society'. Coote's interpretation of the fall of Roman Britain and the creation of the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms was a small counterpoise to the then prevailing whig historiography, itself driven in part by contemporary liberal politics. The notion of continuity of institutions and ideas between the Roman and Germanic eras, though put in an extreme and over-simplified form by Coote, became one of the key concerns of research in the field in the later twentieth century. 
Coote's last published work was a paper in the January 1885 issue of the 'Folklore Quarterly Journal', to which he was a very frequent contributor. Stricken with paralysis about 1882, he owed his partial recovery to the devoted nursing of his wife, Fanny Coote, but then died suddenly at his home, 13 Westgate Terrace, Redcliffe Square, West Brompton, London, on 4 January 1885. He was buried at Kensal Green on 10 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 6246


Coote, Holmes (1817-1872), surgeon, was born in London on 10 November 1817, the second son of Richard Holmes Coote, a barrister of the court of chancery. He was educated at Westminster School, and at the age of sixteen was apprenticed to Sir William Lawrence, surgeon to St Bartholomew's Hospital. In 1845 Coote won a prize at the Royal College of Surgeons for his essay, 'On the anatomy of the fibres of the human brain, illustrated by the anatomy of the same parts in the lower vertebrata'. His first book, 'The Homologies of the Human Skeleton' (1849), placed human anatomy in the context of the archetype skeleton of the naturalist Richard Owen. It was not a significant contribution. 
As demonstrator of anatomy at St Bartholomew's medical school, Coote taught in the dissecting room until elected assistant surgeon in 1854. In 1863 he was elected full surgeon to the hospital. In 1855 the governors agreed to allow him to serve in the Crimean War as civil surgeon in charge of casualties at Smyrna. After returning from the war he published 'A Report on some of the More Important Points in the Treatment of Syphilis' (1857). His experience in the Crimean War formed the basis for his interest in the problems of bones and the treatment of wounds, and he published several papers on bone and joint diseases and on the importance of careful management in the treatment of wounds in 'St Bartholomew's Hospital Reports'. In 1867 he published a volume entitled 'On Joint Diseases'. His published work did not break new ground and he was not an investigator of any calibre. His strengths were as a teacher and interpreter. 
Tall and strongly built, Coote was reportedly kind to both colleagues and patients and enjoyed good food and company. He was married twice: first, on 15 August 1848, to Jessie Blanche (died 1849), daughter of John Herbert Koe, barrister and county court judge; and secondly, on 14 September 1852, to Georgina Gordon, daughter of Gordon Lorimer, gentleman. Coote never succeeded in establishing a very extensive practice and consequently was not well off. While only in his fifties he looked older than his years, and suffered from mental problems, including delusions of boundless wealth. He died from 'general paralysis of the insane' (syphilis) on 21 December 1872, while an in-patient of Blacklands House private lunatic asylum, Chelsea, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 6247


Coote, Richard, first earl of Bellamont (1636-1701), politician and colonial governor, was the only son of Richard Coote, Baron Coloony (1620-1683), landowner and Irish peer, and his wife, Mary (died 1701), daughter of Sir George St George of Carrickdrumruske, co. Leitrim, and sister of the first Baron St George. Little is known of his early life. On 19 August 1680 Coote was licensed to marry Catherine (1665?-1738), daughter of Bridges Nanfan of Birtsmorton, Worcestershire. Upon the death of his father on 10 July 1683 Coote succeeded to the barony. 
In 1687 Coote fled to the Netherlands and sought the patronage of William of Orange. For fleeing to William, King James had him attainted by the Irish parliament in May 1689. But he had cast his fortune well, and after the revolution of 1688 he was rewarded with the office of treasurer for Queen Mary II, the governorship of co. Leitrim, and 77,000 acres of forfeited land, and was made first earl of Bellamont on 2 November 1689. He had also become a friend of the whig junto, who were happy to see him installed in the House of Commons representing Droitwich in 1689. An ardent whig, he got into trouble in 1693 for attacking Lord Coningsby for corruption. Coningsby was a particular favourite of King William, so Bellamont lost his position in the royal household. 
Coote was always in need of funds and preferment, and in 1695 the whig lords finally got William to assent to his being named governor of Massachusetts. When the salary was deemed insufficient, he was made governor of New York and New Hampshire as well. His financial condition also involved him in what proved to be a dangerous scheme. Robert Livingston, a New York merchant, and William Kidd, a celebrated pirate, put forward a scheme in 1695 that would be financed by Bellamont, Livingston, and the whig lords Shrewsbury, Somers, Orford, and Romney, and with the king a secret partner. The scheme was to have Kidd go out and capture the pirates who were bedevilling English trade and return with their booty to be processed outside the Admiralty courts to the benefit of the partners. Meanwhile, Bellamont immediately fell into the partisan politics of New York. The rebellion of Jacob Leisler at the time of the revolution of 1688 lingered, with vicious political infighting between the Leislerians and the anti-Leislerians. Bellamont tried to remain a friend to both sides but found himself allied with the Leislerians. Massachusetts offered no relief as he fought with the colony's leaders about trade regulation, his salary (which the legislature cut), and a new law against piracy. 
The real danger to Bellamont's career, however, came from his relationship with Kidd. The latter had gone off to the Indian Ocean, where he committed piracy and consorted with pirates on the island of St Maries, just off Madagascar. His progress had enraged the East India Company, which conducted a campaign against him in England. What made this dangerous was that the whigs had lost power and the tories saw Kidd's actions as a way of embarrassing the whig junto that had supported him. The government sent out notices to the colonies in November 1698 ordering the arrest of Kidd, who was on his way back to North America. Bellamont was in Boston when Kidd gingerly sailed into New York, where his partner Robert Livingston brought him up to date. Kidd started to negotiate with Bellamont while sailing off Connecticut. Bellamont had to balance the fact that he was still in partnership with the whig lords and Kidd, versus his orders from the government to arrest him. Kidd arrived in Boston, where, after talking to him, Bellamont had him arrested. He then went on the hunt for the money and goods Kidd had been leaving with friends and relatives. Kidd and his recovered loot were sent to England, where he testified in the Commons about the partnership. He never gave the tories the evidence they wanted, and he was hanged for piracy after trial. Before Kidd was put to death Bellamont had died in Bowling Green, New York, on 5 March 1701. He was buried in New York; in 1790 his casket was placed in St Paul's churchyard, New York. 


@@@@@


doc= 6248


Copcot, John (d. 1590), college head, is said to have been born in Calais, a report given colour by the occasional appearance of his name in French forms, such as Copequot. He matriculated as a pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 16 November 1562, took up a scholarship there the following year, and was admitted to a fellowship in 1567. Copcot graduated BA in 1567 and MA in 1570. He was appointed a university preacher in 1576, and was awarded his BTh in 1577 and his doctorate in 1582. He acquired several ecclesiastical livings, including the rectory of St Dunstan-in-the-East in 1580 and that of Orwell, Cambridgeshire, in 1586; in that year also, on 4 August, he was installed as prebendary of Sidlesham, in the diocese of Chichester. 
Copcot was a determined defender of the Church of England, preaching at Paul's Cross in 1584 against criticism of its liturgy and government which had appeared in Dudley Fenner's 'Counter-Poyson'. In a published extract from this sermon, he is said to have cited the epistle to the 'Corinthians' to prove that 'For lack of discipline, no man ought to depart from the church' (Fenner, no pagination). In 1586-7 he served as vice-chancellor of Cambridge University, despite his not holding a college mastership. Opposition to his forthright views undoubtedly reinforced the resentment occasioned by this breach of tradition. His appointment gave rise to an anomaly: within his own college Copcot was subject, as a fellow, to the discipline of its master, John Still, but outside its walls Still, like the other college heads, had to defer to the authority of the vice-chancellor. 
Copcot proved eager to use his powers. Mutual jealousies and jurisdictional disputes had increasingly soured relations between town and university. When John Edmunds (alias Mere), the mayor of Cambridge, impounded some hogs belonging to the bailiff of Jesus College, the vice-chancellor and college heads acted to ban all dealings between him and members of the university. Copcot also sought to stem the tide of puritan radicalism, flowing strongly at this time, which had given rise to some alarming manifestations. In July 1587 he wrote to Lord Burghley, the chancellor of the university, about one Ralph Durdon of Pembroke College, whom he had imprisoned in the Tolbooth the previous November, and who remained there still, for he had circulated papers 'interpreting the 'Revelation' of St John the Divine after his own fancy', and had 'named himself Elias, and being at liberty would be preaching very disorderly whither he could come' ('Masters' History', 141). While vice-chancellor Copcot also became embroiled with the fellows of Christ's College in disputes arising from efforts to reform its lax finances, and to discipline the radical puritan Sampson Sheffield. Copcot sought to use the visitorial powers of the vice-chancellor to confront both problems, but the delaying powers of the fellows proved too strong. His attempt to continue his efforts beyond the tenure of his vice-chancellorship was in breach of the statutes, and led to a successful appeal to the chancellor, Lord Burghley. 
It was nevertheless on the recommendation of Burghley that on 6 November 1587, Copcot was elected master of Corpus Christi College. His was a turbulent tenure, fully in keeping with his character and record, though other factors certainly contributed to the contentious atmosphere in Cambridge in the late 1580s. Perhaps the most notable dispute concerned Anthony Hickman, expelled in 1588 by the master and five of the eight fellows on the grounds that he was 'proud, idle, contentious, studied not, and condemned those that did'; but it was also reported that Copcot and his party 'bore an ill will indeed to him, occasioned by his opposing the election of the said master this year' (Strype, 'Annals', 3/2.113). The legal case for expulsion seems to have been weak, for Hickman's appeal to Secretary Walsingham won the support of three college heads and several prominent civil lawyers. When enquiry was made as to the grounds of the expulsion, Copcot refused all explanation, asserting the right of the college to act independently in such matters. The case was then passed to Archbishop Whitgift, whose rejection of Hickman's case may have owed something to the fact that Copcot was then his chaplain. A further appeal, to Lord Burghley, was batted back to Whitgift, who remained obdurate. So did Copcot, for Hickman was not restored until 1591, under the new mastership of Jegon. 
Despite his taste for political contention Copcot is said to have been 'not only a great proficient in and lover of literature himself, but an encourager of it in others' ('Masters' History', 136), and 'a great critic in the Latin language' (Cooper, 'Annals', 2.94). To the library of Corpus Christi College he presented an edition of the works of Bellarmine. Copcot corresponded often with John Drusius, the scholar in classical languages, who recorded that he became emaciated through long hours of study. He died, probably in Cambridge, in early August 1590. 


@@@@@


doc= 6249


Cope, Alan (d. 1578), Roman Catholic ecclesiastic, gave his origin as the diocese of London. He was educated at Magdalen College, Oxford; he matriculated in 1549, he received the degree of MA in 1552, and was unanimously chosen senior proctor of the university in 1558. He then studied civil law and graduated BCL in 1560, being 'esteemed for his great erudition' (Gillow, 'Lit. biog. hist.', 1.561). Some time after this, realizing that he would no longer be permitted to practise his Roman Catholic faith openly, he resigned his preferments and fled to Flanders. In 1561 his name appears, annotated as 'late scholar of Oxford', in a list of 'Recusants which are abroad and bounde to certayne places' signed by Bishop Grindal of London and others. He entered the university at Louvain, where he matriculated in 1563, and he was still known to be in Flanders in February 1570. In 1566 he allowed his name to appear as author of the Antwerp-published 'Dialogi sex contra summi pontificatus', an attack on Bishop Jewel and others that had, in fact, been written by Nicholas Harpsfield during his imprisonment in the Tower of London. This subterfuge was to avoid further aggravation of Harpsfield's situation in England. 
By 1570 Cope was in Rome and was ordained to the diaconate in the Lateran basilica by Bishop Goldwell on 23 December. There remains no record of his priestly ordination. He continued his studies, gaining doctorates in divinity and canon law and in 1572 published at Louvain his 'Syntax historiae evangelicae' -- a life of Christ taken from the accounts of the evangelists. In 1576 he is listed for the first time as having rooms in the English Hospice, which was three years later to become the English College. In 1577 and 1578 he is also listed as one of the two 'camerarii' ('councillors') of the hospice. Pope Gregory XIII appointed him a canon of St Peter's and his finances were further augmented by a pension of 40 florins a year provided by Jane, the English-born duchess of Feria. He died at Rome in 1578 and was buried in the chapel of the English Hospice. The exact date of his death is uncertain. The college celebrated his anniversary with an annual mass on 16 June, while the Douai diaries record receiving news of his death on 14 October. He left his books to the English Hospice in Rome, and a number of volumes inscribed with his name are still to be found on the shelves of the college's library. He is recorded as 'leaving behind him a most admirable exemplar of virtue, which many did endeavour to follow, but could not accomplish their desires' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.456). 


@@@@@


doc= 6250


Cope, Sir Anthony (1486/7-1551), landowner and courtier, was the second recorded son of William Cope ('c'.1440-1513), cofferer to Henry VII, of Bedhampton, Hampshire, and Hanwell, Oxfordshire, and an unknown second wife. His father married three times, and Anthony had at least one elder half-brother, Stephen, one brother, and four younger stepsisters (one of whom became Stephen's wife) who were the daughters of William Cope's third wife, Johane Spencer. Anthony Cope was educated at Oxford, according to Wood, who speculates that he attended Oriel College; he does not appear to have graduated. He then travelled in Germany, France, and Italy, visiting various universities, acquiring considerable learning, and writing several books there. These may have included the translation of writings by Galen and Hippocrates that Erasmus refers to in 1516 as made by Cope. 
Aged twenty-six on his father's death in 1513, Cope inherited the manor of Hanwell, near Banbury, and other property near by. He completed Hanwell Hall, the mansion that his father had begun there. Much of it was demolished in the late eighteenth century, but surviving portions and earlier drawings show that it was brick-built in the latest court style, two storeys high around a central courtyard, with towers at the corners. At an unknown date he married Jane, daughter of Matthew Crews, of Pynne, in Stoke English parish in Devon, and left one known son, Edward, and one daughter, Anne. 
By 1530 Cope had prospered sufficiently, probably from extensive cattle farming, to secure from his elder half-brother Stephen renunciation of his remaining interest in the manor of Hardwick and other property in and around Banbury, and near by in Northamptonshire, and was able to establish himself as a significant gentleman in Oxfordshire. By 1531 he was on the commission of the peace there, and served on it regularly, as well as on the commission for gaol delivery. By about 1530 he was also escheator for Oxfordshire and Berkshire, and in that capacity was soon courting Thomas Cromwell in his correspondence, urging that the king had few friends in the shire, and offering to keep Cromwell's hawks for him. This led in June 1534 to the grant to himself and three others of the wardship of Sir William Spencer's heir, an undoubted source of profit. Later he vainly tried to gain the bishop of Lincoln's fee farm of Banbury by reporting the escape of convicts from the bishop's custody. However, he was one of the Oxfordshire commissioners for the 'valor ecclesiasticus' in 1535, and in 1537 was summoned to bring twenty troops for suppressing the northern rising. His loyalty was undoubted, and had already been rewarded with the estates of Brooke Priory, Rutland, at the dissolution of the smaller monasteries: in 1538 he was recorded as having been receiving a fee from Kenilworth Abbey. Meanwhile he enclosed land. Bishop John Longland of Lincoln protested to Cromwell in 1539 that his tenants were wronged thus, and that Cope would not meet him privately to settle their dispute. He was able and willing to lend money and foreclose on the security, as the courtier Sir Ralph Langford lamented in 1543, apparently from the Fleet prison. He continued to rise in service and status in the shire, taking twelve foot soldiers in the vanguard to France in 1544. 
By 1540 Cope was probably adopting protestant views. On 2 September he confronted the vicar of Banbury, John Pitt, before the privy council, and was commended for doing so. As the council told Cope to use his learning at the appropriate time and place, it would appear that the dispute had been theological, and his views somewhat reformed. He had become a courtier, and was one of the esquires in attendance at the magnificent gathering on Blackheath where Henry VIII met Anne of Cleves on 3 January 1541. When the king married Katherine Parr in July 1543, Cope became part of her household, as, successively, keeper of her hawks, vice-chamberlain, and ultimately chamberlain, in charge of thirty-eight people, a position he held until her death in September 1548. In 1544 he published 'The Historie of Two of the Moste Noble Capitaines of the Worlde', English lives of Hannibal and Scipio Africanus based on Livy and other Latin writers. Several times reprinted, it is dedicated to Henry VIII, and no doubt there is an element of flattery in the praise lavished on the king for his having subdued the Roman hydra. But 'A Godly Meditacion upon XX Select... Psalms' of 1547, a new year's present written for the queen, shows a knowledge of the work of Calvin and Luther, referring to God's elect and just reprobation, and to Katherine's 'godly purpose in the reading and study of holy Scripture and the advancement of the true Word of God' (Cope, xxvii). Of sin he writes that 'remedy have we none, but to fly from Thy wrath into the bosom of Thy most dearly beloved SON JESUS CHRIST, making him a bulwark and a shield of defence between thine anger and our offences' (ibid., 12-13). Such language sounds truly evangelical, though since Edward VI was clearly about to succeed a degree of opportunism may also have been present. 
Probably knighted at Edward's coronation Cope became a commissioner under the 'Chantries Act', and was sheriff of Oxfordshire and Berkshire for 1547-8. Thus in July 1547 he was deeply involved in the repression of the Oxfordshire revolt against enclosures and the more protestant policies of the new government, led by both craftsmen and conservative priests. He oversaw the hanging of some of the ringleaders, and the setting of their heads atop the highest buildings in their communities. He died, probably at Hanwell Hall, on 5 January 1551, and was buried in the chancel of Hanwell church. His wife, to whom he bequeathed $100 and an annuity of 100 marks, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 6251


Cope, Sir Anthony, first baronet (1548x50-1614), politician, was probably born at Hardwick Manor, near Banbury, Oxfordshire, the son of Edward Cope (died 1557), gentleman farmer, and Elizabeth, his wife (died 1587), daughter of Walter Mohun of Overstone and Wollaston, Northamptonshire. He was the second of four sons and three daughters who survived their father's early death. All were then under the joint guardianship of their mother and her father. 
Beginning with Cope's grandfather and namesake, Sir Anthony Cope, the family had been convinced protestants. On Elizabeth Cope's marriage in 1561 to her second husband, George Carleton, a new and radical protestant influence affected Anthony. By 1571 he had inherited the family seat of Hanwell, Oxfordshire, from his elder brother, William, and, with business acumen, persuaded his two younger brothers to consider parting with their shares of property in Banbury in return for annuities, when of age. This was an early step in building up substantial property and lands in and around Banbury, and elsewhere in Oxfordshire, besides estates in Northamptonshire, Lincolnshire, and Surrey. At an unknown date he married Frances (died 1599/1600), daughter of Rowland Lytton of Knebworth, Hertfordshire, with whom he had four sons and three daughters who survived until adulthood. The marriage of his daughter Elizabeth in 1603 to Richard Cecil, second son of the marquess of Exeter, shows his rise in status; and Cope played host to the earl of Leicester at Hanwell in August 1585. 
In 1571 Cope began a parliamentary career which excluded only one parliament up to his death, at first as the MP for Banbury. In it he worked with a group of radical protestants including Peter Wentworth and George Carleton, combining defence of freedom of debate in the Commons (in 1581) with advocacy of further church reform. By 1586 he was deeply committed to presbyterianism, as is attested by his choice of John Dod as rector of Hanwell. Dod was invited to preach, and approved by the people and neighbouring ministers, in Presbyterian fashion, before settling as their minister. He often invited the presbyterian Thomas Cartwright to preach there. Cope was linked to the puritan synod held in early 1587 to further church reform. On 27 February, defying Elizabeth I's ban on parliament's discussing this, he proffered a bill to presbyterianize the Church of England, with a revised Geneva prayer book attached. The queen had both bill and book seized, and on 2 March Cope and other puritan MPs were imprisoned in the Tower of London. This marks the end of his conspicuous parliamentary activity in her reign. 
However, Cope's friendships and political alliances were unaffected by his imprisonment. In August 1591 the privy council ordered Hanwell Hall to be searched for material which might have been intended to be moved in parliament, especially over the succession, because Peter Wentworth had been staying there. When the latter hoped for release from a consequent sojourn in the Tower, he named Cope as a friend he would like to dwell with. Cope continued to work locally for 'further reformation'. In 1589 he supported prominent Banbury puritans in suppressing May games in the hundred. He presented Robert Cleaver, a radical puritan, to the neighbouring parish of Drayton, and, as Cleaver stayed there after being deprived for non-subscription to the three articles of 1604, may have supported him. Cope resisted recognizing Dod's similar deprivation from Hanwell, so that he also remained in place. Robert Harris, unordained, came as preacher, and eventually succeeded Dod as rector, suggesting he was 'called' by the congregation like his predecessor. Cope probably found a niche for Dod with his cousin Sir Edward Cope at Canons Ashby, but ensured him a house in his will should he be driven out of his ministry. 
Cope was increasingly involved in county affairs, serving as sheriff three times. He became a JP, and received special commissions from Elizabeth I. He was among those ordered to examine Lady Babington and others who had received the Jesuit Edmund Campion, and to search their homes for Roman Catholic material. In August 1592 he became the gaoler of those influential local recusants imprisoned in Banbury Castle. He guarded them vigilantly, but humanely. In 1596, when many were re-arrested, he economized by charging them board and lodging to pay their guards rather than paying it himself, leading to a prolonged rent strike. He was knighted late in 1592 or early 1593, and henceforth was periodically appointed a deputy lieutenant of Oxfordshire. By 1600 his standing was such that he was one of only seven Oxfordshire gentry selected by the queen to provide one armed horseman each to serve in Ireland, as 'of best abilitie [wealth] and of speciall note for their good mind and forwardnes to do her service' ('APC', '1599-1600', 434-5, 438-9). On the death of his first wife he married, on 7 April 1600, Anne, 'nee' Paston ('bap'. 1553, died 1637), widow first of Sir George Chaworth and then of Sir Nicholas Le Strange. His son and heir, William, subsequently married Elizabeth Chaworth, her daughter, thus consolidating both lands and relationships, as Anne had no children with Sir Anthony. 
Cope was sufficiently wealthy and influential to entertain James I and Queen Anne for a night at Hanwell Hall in 1605, and the king arranged to return in August 1612. On 29 May 1611 Sir Anthony was created baronet. This meant he had a clear income of $1000 a year, and, according to John Chamberlain, cost $10,000. On Prince Henry's death in 1612 he was one of ten baronets chosen to carry black bannerols around the 'chariot' bearing the coffin. Since baronets were created to defend and better Ulster, Sir Anthony was granted 2000 acres at Dirribarde and Killarie, and acquired a further holding in co. Tyrone. A son built houses and a bawn for defence, but the buildings lacked settlers in Sir Anthony's lifetime. On a further 3000 acres at Derrycrevy and Dromullie, in co. Armagh, he had a fine castle built, apparently by English workmen who settled there; and a further 'plantation' was soon established. Thus he played an effective part in the protestantization of Ulster. Since he left all his Irish estates to his second son, Anthony, a Cope dynasty settled there. 
As knight of the shire from 1604, in the 1606-7 session of James I's parliament Cope resumed campaigning on church matters -- for the restoration of ministers deprived for non-subscription, for a preaching ministry, and for the reduction of the powers of the court of high commission. He argued that only legislation should control church practice. He helped draw up a petition to the king on ecclesiastical grievances, and was one of those who presented it. One of his last speeches, in May 1614, was on clerical non-residence, which he denounced with fire: 'Popery hath hatched up this Monster, which will eat out the very Bowels of the Church... A Soul-murthering Non-resident is as dangerous to the Soul, as a Murtherer of the Body to it... If we were upon our sick Bed, we would do otherwise than now. -- Not to be satisfied with the Bill; but to petition the King that the Soules of his Subjects might be precious with him: and that the Parliament might not be dissolved till some Course [was] taken about this. ('JHC', 482-3)' Cope was generally an active and respected MP, sitting on many committees for revising bills, and representing the Commons in learning the Lords' views on the union of England and Scotland in 1607. Then he also joined the senior committee of privileges. His radicalism led him to argue repeatedly that redress of grievances should precede voting of subsidies, as on 9 May 1606, when widespread support for this delayed the presentation of the subsidy bill to the Lords. He vigorously attacked Cowell's 'Interpreter' on 24 February 1610, darkly suggesting that confederates, perhaps from overseas, were involved. Thus he advocated the rule of law against use of the royal prerogative. 
Cope fell ill in June 1614 and died on 6 July, probably at Cope Castle, his brother Walter Cope's mansion in Kensington, Middlesex. He was buried at Hanwell, Oxfordshire. The reputed portrait of him at Knole, Sevenoaks, Kent, postdates his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 6252


Cope, Charles West (1811-1890), history painter, was born on 28 July 1811 in Park Square, Leeds. His father, Charles Cope (died 1827), painted landscapes in watercolour; his mother was said to be a gifted amateur in the same medium. They named their children after eminent artists whom the father knew personally: Ellen Turner after J. M. W. Turner; Charles West, about a year younger, after Benjamin West. Charles's mother died soon after his birth, and the boy was sent for two or three years to foster parents at Woodhouse Moor and then to London. He attended a boarding-school in Camberwell Grove and lived with an aunt during the holidays. 
From 1818 to 1827, Cope passed through a painful period. Bullies at Mr Terry's school in Great Marlow subjected him to a prank that broke his elbow and left him with a permanently crooked left arm; in the grammar school at Leeds a severe master treated all the boys as hopeless dunces. The widowed father encouraged his son as best he could: he took him on an excursion to Teesdale, where the boy picked up a lifelong passion for fly-fishing; and he urged him to develop his artistic talent. At sixteen, with his father's support, Cope entered Henry Sass's academy of art in Bloomsbury. In 1827 his father died after a stagecoach accident, and Sass consented to administer the estate and act as guardian to Charles and Ellen. 
Cope worked hard at drawing and in 1828 gained admittance to the Royal Academy Schools. He won a silver medal (1829) at the Society of Arts and a second medal (1831) at the academy's life school. With awakening inquisitiveness, he read widely and in 1832 travelled to Paris, where he studied the paintings in the Louvre. In 1833 he exhibited for the first time at the Royal Academy 'The Golden Age', which was not sold. On the advice of William Hilton, then keeper of the schools, he set out in September 1833 for Italy; he stayed for nearly two years, examining the pictures in galleries and churches. He spent six months at Rome and as many at Florence; he travelled widely, as far south as Naples looking with special attention at frescoes and observing at close hand an eruption of Vesuvius. Of his many new acquaintances -- Italian, German, English -- one, the painter William Boxall, became a good friend. 
On returning to London, Cope lodged in Russell Place, Fitzroy Square, and painted 'Paolo and Francesca' (exh. RA, 1837), which was sold to the Art Union, and 'Osteria di campagna between Rome and Ancona' (exh. RA, 1838), sold for 150 guineas and given in 1878 to the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool. The 'Osteria', with about twenty figures -- 'vettura' travellers at their repast and German students in the background -- attracted attention to a 'new man'. Cope joined the Etching Club as an original member; the etchers, most of them future Royal Academicians, experimented with the medium, discussed their plates, sold a few, and enjoyed simple suppers together. Cope and Richard Redgrave formed a close friendship; other particular friends -- non-members of the club -- included John Sheepshanks, known to Cope since boyhood as a benevolent patron of living artists, and the portrait painter George Richmond. Cope moved from Russell Place to a spacious room built for B. R. Haydon off Lisson Grove and painted there a large altarpiece (exh. RA, 1840) for presentation to the new St George's Church at Little Woodhouse, Leeds. This work won a prize of 50 guineas at Liverpool. 
On a fishing expedition to Greta Bridge and the valley of the Tees, Cope met at a friend's house a young lady named Charlotte Benning (died 1868): the two fell in love. Her father, a busy country surgeon, showed sympathetic understanding; her stepmother insisted, however, on evidence that the young artist was respectable. In spite of her misgivings, the Bennings made plans for the wedding; on 1 September 1840 Charles and Charlotte were married, with Richard Redgrave as best man. There was a last-minute contretemps: the bridegroom forgot to bring the ring to church, and Redgrave had to run and fetch it from the inn. The happy couple drove away 'amid acclamations'; but Mrs Benning, tearfully hugging the bride, exclaimed, 'Oh, you poor victim!' (Cope, 143). 
The couple proceeded first to London and then to the house of friends near Staines. Cope attended a meeting of the local Board of Guardians, of which their host was chairman, and began a painting entitled 'Poor Law Guardians, Board-Day Application for Bread' (exh. RA, 1841). The contemporary subject drew attention, notably in 'The Times'; but the picture was not sold: 'Abundant praise', Cope recalled, 'but no solid pudding' (Cope, 143). Two years later it went for 100 guineas to the holder of an Art Union prize. In 1841 Cope repeated for Lord Lansdowne a 'Mother and Child' first painted at Florence in 1834 and sold to William Beckford; and the Copes, with their own first child, a son named Charles, moved into a new house in Hyde Park Gate, next door to Richard Redgrave. 
The year 1841 was marked also by an event that affected Cope's career for the ensuing twenty-five years: the establishment of the Royal Fine Arts Commission, with Prince Albert as president and Charles Lock Eastlake, later Sir Charles, as secretary. Sir Robert Peel, the initiating force, stated the purpose: 'Investigation whether the Construction of the new Houses of Parliament can be taken advantage of for the encouragement of British Art' (Peel to Queen Victoria, 12 Oct 1841, BL, Add. MS 40432). In April 1842 the commission announced its first competition for artists, inviting cartoons in chalk or the like, uncoloured, for frescoes based upon subjects chosen from English history or from the works of Spenser, Shakespeare, or Milton. Cope submitted 'The First Trial by Jury', one of 141 cartoons in the Westminster Hall exhibition of 1843; and the judges awarded to him one of the three highest premiums of $300. In this year he was elected an associate of the Royal Academy. 
To the competition in 1844, for painters in fresco, with free choice of subject matter, Cope sent 'The Meeting of Jacob and Rachel', and he was one of the six artists selected to prepare designs for six arched compartments in the House of Lords. His subject, announced in July, was 'Edward the Black Prince Receiving the Order of the Garter from Edward III'. Cope began his sketches, but on 30 September informed Eastlake of a worrying predicament: Sir Harris Nicolas, historian of the orders of knighthood, declared 'positively that no such thing ever did occur, and that it is an historical absurdity' (BL, Add. MS 40452). Eastlake circulated copies of Cope's letter. Peel hardly knew what to say, at first; he would see the prince, and meanwhile recommended consultation with the three historian-commissioners -- Henry Hallam, T. B. Macaulay, and Lord Mahon -- who failed to respond promptly. Eastlake nudged Peel, and Peel came to a decision: the investiture 'might' have occurred. Prince Albert agreed that it was not 'an historical absurdity'. Cope resumed his sketching, and the finished work was eventually ready for the opening of parliament in 1847. The artist was elected a Royal Academician in 1848 and a member of the Athenaeum in 1849. When Redgrave's sketches for another compartment were judged unacceptable, the subject was reassigned to Cope, who completed 'Prince Henry, Later Henry V, Acknowledging the Authority of Chief Justice Gascoigne' in 1849. 
Cope now took up an assignment in the Upper Waiting Hall. The commission had announced the plan in 1845: at $400 each, eight frescoes based on works by English poets. The first list included Chaucer, Spenser, Shakespeare, Milton, Dryden, and Pope. Chaucer was assigned to Cope; Milton, to John Callcott Horsley. Both artists saw the need for further knowledge of fresco-painting; and in 1849 they spent about three months on the continent, studying works by Giotto and other 'frescanti', ancient and modern. At Florence, Cope met William Dyce, travelling with the same purpose. At Munich he admired the frescoes of Heinrich Hess in the new basilica of St Boniface and conferred twice about the technique of fresco with Hess himself, professor of painting and director of all the art collections in the city. 
For the 'Poets' Hall', Cope chose to execute in fresco 'Griselda's First Trial of Patience', based on the Clerk's Tale and completed in 1852. The commission added Scott and Byron to the list of poets and offered the Byronic subject to Cope; he finished 'The Death of Lara' in 1854. By that time the poetical frescoes had begun to suffer ruinously from blisters caused by damp and dirt; the colours were dropping away as dust. 'I feel how much of life', Cope said in his 'Reminiscences', 'has been wasted in, as it were, writing in the sand' (Cope, 257). 
Cope faced yet another assignment: by 1847 the commission had planned for the peers' corridor eight illustrations of 'the virtues and heroism of some of the actors in the great Civil War, four of them on the Royalist side, and four on that of the Parliament' (Cope, 255). By 1853, however, none of the several aspirants had produced acceptable sketches. Eastlake enquired whether Cope would submit a sketch, with the understanding that, if it proved satisfactory, he might be employed to paint the whole series. Cope sketched 'The Embarkation of a Puritan Family for New England'. The commissioners approved, and Cope agreed to terms paralleling those for E. M. Ward's complementary series in the commons' corridor: $600 for each of eight frescoes in portable slate-backed frames. The Copes saw 'The Embarkation' safely installed in October 1856 before going on a celebratory shopping spree. His work for the peers' corridor continued for a decade: in 1857 he finished 'The Burial of Charles I'; in 1859 'The Parting of Lord and Lady William Russell'; in 1861 'Charles I Erecting his Standard at Nottingham'; in 1862 'Basing House Defended by the Cavaliers'; in 1864 'The Expulsion of the Fellows of a College at Oxford for Refusing to Sign the Covenant'; in 1865 'The Setting out of the Train Bands to Raise the Siege of Gloucester'; and finally, in 1866, 'Speaker Lenthall Asserting the Privileges of the Commons Against Charles I'. They have been described as 'supreme achievements of the Victorian vision of the British past, brilliant recreations of lost moments of time within the Artist-Antiquarian tradition' (Strong, 141). 
'I had little time left for oil-painting', Cope wrote in his 'Reminiscences', 'and what I did execute consisted mostly of small pictures of a domestic character, done from my own children, so that Mr Tom Taylor in his criticisms dubbed me 'Poet Laureate of the Nursery'' (Cope, 157). The numerous examples of such works include 'The Young Mother' (exh. RA, 1846) and 'Mother and Child' (exh. RA, 1853), both bought by Sheepshanks and now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. But Cope still painted historical scenes, including the reception of Cardinal Wolsey in 1530 at Leicester Abbey (exh. RA, 1848), commissioned by the prince consort and placed in Osborne House; the martyrdom of Laurence Saunders in 1555 (exh. RA, 1851); and Princess Elizabeth lying dead in 1650 at Carisbrooke Castle (exh. RA, 1855). 
Cope also showed two oil versions of his fresco subjects: 'The Embarkation' (exh. RA, 1856), sold in 1864 to the National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne, and 'Lord and Lady William Russell' (exh. RA, 1861). From Shakespeare he drew several subjects: 'King Lear and Cordelia' (exh. RA, 1850), for I. K. Brunel's Shakespeare room; 'Othello Relating his Adventures' (exh. RA, 1851) and 'Cordelia Receiving the News of her Father's Ill-Treatment' (exh. RA, 1859). Five Copes, including three from the Sheepshanks collection, went to Paris for the Universal Exhibition in 1855, and five reappeared among the art treasures at Manchester in 1857. 
Cope found time to go fishing with Mark Pattison, but he was increasingly busy at the academy. He had served on the council and the committee of arrangement. In 1863 he appeared as a witness before the Royal Academy commission; in 1866 he was elected to the professorship of painting, a post which he held until 1875. On 28 July 1868 he suffered a grievous blow, the death of his beloved Charlotte, mother of his ten children. With his son, Charles, and his wife, he made a brief trip to Belgium for a change of scene, but 'Work alone', he recalled, 'could divert my thoughts' (Cope, 269). He sent three pictures to the academy in 1869, and he accepted appointment in 1870 as examiner in painting at the schools of art in South Kensington. 
During the 1870s Cope completed two paintings destined for institutions: 'Mr Guy and Dr Mead Considering the Architect's Plans for the Proposed New Hospital' (exh. RA, 1871), presented to Guy's Hospital; and 'The Council of the Royal Academy -- Selection of Pictures' (exh. RA, 1876), placed in the academy. In 1876 he travelled to the United States to represent the academy at the centennial exposition in Philadelphia, and chaired the international committee that judged paintings and awarded medals. In 1879 he left his house in Hyde Park Gate and stayed first with his daughter, Margaret, in Herefordshire. Then he went to Charles and his wife at Maplestead, Essex, and there met Eleanor Smart, an old family friend and sister of a former pupil. 'She took pity', Cope said, 'on my solitude' (Cope, 335). They were married on 19 November 1879 at Barnet, with Charles and the bride's brother officiating, and soon settled in a house at Maidenhead. 
Cope sent his last pictures to the Royal Academy in 1882 and became in 1883 an honorary retired member; but he continued to go up to London for varnishing days and liked to arrange large family gatherings, with lunch, for the private views. At Maidenhead he amused himself by painting, bicycling about the countryside with a sketchbook, and going on the river. After a brief illness he died on 21 August 1890 at Bournemouth, with his wife and four of his children at his side. Several of the ten children had predeceased him. The eldest survivor, the Revd Charles Henry Cope, edited and completed 'Reminiscences of Charles West Cope' (1891), adding a chronological list of paintings, some letters (1843-4) about work on 'Edward the Black Prince', the evidence given before the Royal Academy commission (1863), and a version of his father's report to the Royal Academy (1876) on his experiences at Philadelphia. The third son, Arthur Stockdale Cope, followed his father into the Royal Academy and the Athenaeum. 
Charles West Cope was a highly proficient artist and a worthy academician: he had a good eye, drew well, and learned all that he then could about various techniques, especially fresco. The critics generally, although at times impressed by his accomplishments or touched by his tender domestic scenes, discerned no remarkable flair and no compelling reason to extol him. John Ruskin, for example, had little more to say about Cope's picture of Princess Elizabeth lying dead than that it was a 'very beautiful and well-chosen subject, not ill painted' (Ruskin, 20). On the other hand, Prince Albert and Sir Charles Eastlake recognized Cope's strengths -- his talent for dramatic narrative in a lucid and monumental style which was virtually an English reinvention of Italian Renaissance fresco -- and many artists had warm professional and personal regard for him. Daniel Maclise, fellow painter of frescoes in the new houses of parliament, wrote in 1849 that Cope's cartoon of Prince Henry and Chief Justice Gascoigne was 'learnedly drawn and practically designed, and suited admirably for the monumental character of fresco art' (O'Driscoll, 98). The words come close to predicting why, in the national memory, Cope's most important works would be his frescoes in the House of Lords and the peers' corridor. 


@@@@@


doc= 6253


Cope, Edward Meredith (1818-1873), classical scholar, was born on 28 July 1818 in Birmingham. He first went to school in Ludlow, but then moved to Shrewsbury, where his headmasters were Samuel Butler and B. H. Kennedy. Cope entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1837. He was elected a scholar in 1839 and won the Porson prize in the same year. He graduated BA (first classic) in 1841 and MA in 1844. In 1842 he was elected a fellow of Trinity, becoming a tutor and lecturer in Greek in 1845. He was a proctor in 1859. He was ordained deacon in 1848 and priest in 1850, but although he regularly assisted various Cambridge contemporaries with their parish duties, he found the work of the educational clergy more congenial than that of the parochial. 
At Trinity, Cope was a conscientious and respected lecturer. His main subjects were the Greek tragedians, historians, and orators, although in later years he lectured regularly on Plato and Aristotle. His learning and industry were notable, but, as he confessed to friends, he found it impossible to rewrite material once he had made up his mind on a topic, and this led to a certain diffuseness and lack of clarity in his work. 
In the vacations Cope was an indefatigable traveller with an excellent knowledge of European languages. He regularly spent the summer walking in the Alps, and kept extensive and detailed vacation journals which remain unpublished. 
In 1854 and 1855 Cope contributed articles to the first two volumes of the 'Journal of Philology' criticizing Grote's views on the sophists in his 'History of Greece'. Notes and corrections by Cope were included by Grote in a later volume. In 1864 he published a literal translation of Plato's 'Gorgias', and a similar version of the 'Phaedo' was edited after his death by H. Jackson. 
Cope's most important works were on Aristotle's 'Rhetoric'. He published an introduction in 1867, and an edition with an extensive commentary was completed by J. E. Sandys and published in 1877. This edition is unusual for its time in the detail of its explanatory notes, which include frequent translations. Cope carefully relates the ideas of the 'Rhetoric' to other passages in Aristotle and to later writers on the subject, from whom he quotes extensively. His work remains one of the chief sources of information on ancient rhetoric after more than a century. 
In 1867 Cope was a candidate for the professorship of Greek at Cambridge; the votes of the electors were divided and as the vice-chancellor and the master of Trinity, on whom the election then devolved, differed, the appointment lapsed to the chancellor, who gave the chair to B. H. Kennedy. There is no doubt that his disappointment on this occasion preyed on Cope's mind, and was one of the causes of the acute mental illness which led to his retirement in 1869. His mind gave way and he died, unmarried, at Ticehurst, Sussex, on 4 August 1873, and was buried on 14 August in Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 6254


Cope, Sir John (1690-1760), army officer, was the only son of Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Cope ('b'. 1645), of Icomb, Gloucestershire, a retired army officer, and Dorothy Waller, the widow of an excise man. John (or Jonathan) Cope was disinherited owing to the disapproval of his grandfather William Cope of Henry Cope's choice of wife; after attending Westminster School he was therefore obliged to make his own way in the world. Cope responded to this challenge with spectacular success. In 1706, during the War of the Spanish Succession, he was appointed page to Thomas Wentworth, third Baron Raby, Queen Anne's ambassador at Berlin. Raby was colonel of the Royal regiment of dragoons, in which he obtained Cope a cornet's commission on 14 March 1707. Upon joining his regiment in Spain, Cope made a favourable impression and in June 1708 was invited to serve as aide-de-camp to Major-General James Stanhope, the commander-in-chief. Stanhope's patronage ensured that Cope thereafter enjoyed accelerated promotion. In October 1710 Cope secured a captaincy in the 3rd foot guards -- an appointment that carried the army rank of lieutenant-colonel. By the war's close in 1713 Cope was brevet colonel of Wynne's foot, outranking many officers with longer service. 
On 16 December 1712, at St Anne and St Agnes, Aldersgate, London, Cope cemented his social position by marrying Jane Duncombe, sister of Anthony Duncombe, later first Baron Feversham, and niece of the former lord mayor of London Sir Charles Duncombe. In 1722 Cope entered parliament as MP for Queenborough. He later represented Liskeard (1727-34) and Orford (1738-41), voting consistently in support of Walpole's administration. He may have been the John Cope who married Elizabeth Waple at St Anne and St Agnes on 31 August 1736; if so, his first wife was dead by this date. 
During these years of peace Cope's army career continued to prosper. In June 1737 he secured the colonelcy of the regiment that subsequently became the 9th dragoons; he was colonel of the 7th dragoons from 1741 until his death. He was promoted to brigadier-general in 1735; appointment to major-general followed four years later. By 1743, after Britain intervened in the War of the Austrian Succession, Cope ranked as lieutenant-general. Despite his enduring reputation as a cowardly incompetent, described by one critic as 'a little, dressy, finical man' ('Memoirs', 179), Cope played a creditable role in the ensuing German campaign. That June he prevented the capture of the British contingent's commander, John Dalrymple, second earl of Stair, after his escort was surprised by enemy hussars. Cope's gallant conduct was noted by James Wolfe, the future conqueror of Quebec, in a letter to his father of 21 June 1743. Cope participated in the defeat of the French at Dettingen, and in the subsequent mood of euphoria was created a knight of the Bath. 
Upon the outbreak of the 1745 rising, Cope commanded in Scotland. Although his regular troops were scarce and of poor quality, he was persuaded to advance into the highlands and confront Charles Edward Stuart without delay. Having concentrated his forces at Stirling, he marched for Fort Augustus. On hearing that the Jacobites intended to defend the perilous Corrieyairack Pass, on 26 August Cope called a council of war and accepted its recommendation to head for Inverness instead. Though understandable, Cope's decision was heavily criticized as it allowed the Jacobites to capture Edinburgh. It was reported that this 'false step' led the delighted Young Pretender to drink Cope's health and exclaim: 'if all the Usurper's Generals follow his Example, I shall soon be at St. James's' (Henderson, 34-5). Naval transports rendezvoused with Cope's troops at Aberdeen and ferried them down the coast to Dunbar. His force disembarked on 18 September, and on the following day marched towards Edinburgh. The Jacobite army advanced to meet him. 
On 20 September the two armies made contact near Prestonpans, where Cope arrayed his troops in a strong defensive position. That night a local Jacobite sympathizer indicated a route by which Cope's flank could be turned. The Jacobite approach was detected by Cope's outposts, so allowing time to organize a line of battle. However, when the highlanders launched their broadsword charge at daybreak on 21 September, Cope's redcoats bolted with scarcely a show of resistance. Cope struggled to rally them, exclaiming 'For Shame, Gentlemen; don't let us be beat by such a set of Banditti' ('Report of the Proceedings', 61). Collecting 450 dragoons, Cope retreated to Berwick. News of Prestonpans caused consternation in London and Cope became the scapegoat for the government's dismal showing during the opening phase of the 'Forty-Five. The public clamour against him was so great that, when a court of inquiry was held in September 1746, it was predicted that he would 'meet with the justice he deserved' (ibid., iv). However, after examining more than forty witnesses, the generals composing the court were unanimous in their opinion that Cope was blameless. As Horace Walpole observed in a letter to Sir Horace Mann of 14 October 1746, 'Cope is come off most gloriously, his courage ascertained, and even his conduct, which everybody had given up, justified' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 19.320). Yet it was Cope's supposed incompetence that passed into legend: the 'Dictionary of National Biography' described his part in the campaign against the Jacobites as 'ludicrous', and cited the rousing Jacobite song 'Hey, Johnnie Cope! are ye waukin yet?' Thus Cope's nearly four decades of distinguished service were eclipsed by one incident that condemned him to lasting (and undeserved) ridicule. 
Plagued by gout, Cope never again held a field command; in 1751 he was appointed to the staff in Ireland. After Prestonpans, according to gossip, Cope wagered that his successor would share his fate, and collected $10,000 when Lieutenant-General Henry Hawley was duly beaten at Falkirk in January 1746. Cope died in London on 28 July 1760 and was survived by his second wife, Elizabeth, executor of his will. His only son, James Cope, MP for the Duncombe family borough of Downton from 1754, and a career diplomat, had died in 1756. 


@@@@@


doc= 6255


Cop, Michel (c.1501-1566), religious author, mistakenly known as Michael Cope, was conjectured without conviction by Anthony Wood, who describes him as 'a zealous Calvinist of Geneva' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.192), to have been a member of the Oxfordshire family of Cope of Hanwell. The undoubted fact that two of his works, both of them religious and evangelical in character, were published in English in the mid-sixteenth century subsequently led to the understandable assumption that Cop must have been one of the colony of English protestants who sought refuge in Calvin's city during the reign of Mary Tudor. In fact Cop was the second of three sons of the distinguished physician Guillaume Cop, a native of Basel who migrated to France, where he obtained the prestigious position of king's physician. Two of Cop's sons, Michel and Nicolas, were soon drawn into the humanist-evangelical circle which flourished in the capital in the early 1530s. In 1534 Nicolas Cop, who had obtained the prestigious position of rector of the University of Paris, attained notoriety as the preacher of the famous sermon which, by injudicious support for views propounded by the reformers, caused a conservative backlash which engulfed many of the Paris evangelicals. Many were forced to flee, including Calvin and both the brothers Cop. Michel Cop repaired first to Basel, before moving, in 1545, to Geneva, where he was swiftly promoted to the ministry. He served as a minister, and a firm supporter of Calvin, until his death in 1566. An accomplished and urbane author, in 1556 he published his 'Exposition sur les proverbes de Salomon', and the following year his master work, 'Le livre de l'Ecclesiaste, autrement dit le Prescheur', swiftly also published in English translation as 'A Faithful and Familiar Exposition of Ecclesiastes' (1557). The 'Salomon' also enjoyed an English life, the printer Luke Harrison being licensed to print 'An Exposition upon the Fyrste Chap. of the Proverbis of Salomon by Mygchell Coope' in 1564. In Geneva, Cop married one Ayma Waremberg; he was created a 'bourgeois' of the city on 25 October 1554. He died on 18 September 1566. 


@@@@@


doc= 6256


Cope, Richard (1776-1856), Independent minister, was born near Craven Chapel, Regent Street, London, on 23 August 1776, the son of James Cope and his wife, Martha. Before he was twelve he began work as a clerk in the excise, and subsequently served in various establishments until he became a student at the theological college, Hoxton Academy, in March 1798. After remaining there for more than two years, he received an invitation from the Independent congregation at Launceston in Cornwall. He preached his first sermon there on 28 June 1800 and was ordained in the church on 21 October 1801. He married Anne Davies at St James's Church, Piccadilly, on 30 June 1801; they had five sons and two daughters. Cope remained in the post at Launceston until 1820, having concurrently kept a boarding-school with great success. In June 1819 he helped to form the Home Missionary Society with his colleague Ingram Cobbin. 
From 1820 to 1822 Cope filled the post of tutor in the Irish Evangelical College, Manor Street, Dublin, and also preached in many towns in the north of Ireland on behalf of the Irish Evangelical and London Missionary societies. After this brief change of occupation, he returned to England as minister of Salem Chapel, Wakefield, where he served from 1822 to 1829; following some unspecified dispute, twenty-six members of that congregation followed him to Quebec Chapel, Wakefield, where he was minister from 1829 to 1836. He next became minister of New Street Independent Chapel at Penryn, in Cornwall, from April 1836 until his death. He died at Penryn on 26 October 1856, and was buried on 31 October. 
The degree of MA was conferred upon Cope at Marischal College, Aberdeen, on 12 March 1819, and the degree of LLD in 1826. He was elected FSA on 13 February 1824. His 'Autobiography and Select Remains' (1857) was edited by his son. Cope also published several sermons and other works including 'Adventures of a Religious Tract' (1820) and 'Entertaining Anecdotes' (1828). 


@@@@@


doc= 6257


Cope, Sir Walter (1553?-1614), administrator, was probably born at Hardwick Manor, near Banbury, Oxfordshire. His father was Edward Cope (died 1557), a gentleman farmer, and his mother, Elizabeth (died 1587), daughter of Walter Mohun of Overstone and Wollaston, Northamptonshire. On their father's early death he was the third son of a family consisting of four sons and three daughters. He was entered at Gray's Inn in 1570. With no resources except a $12 annuity, he became gentleman usher to William Cecil, and an official of the court of wards in 1574, doubtless through Burghley's influence as master. He was concerned with its financial aspects. Additionally, in 1580 he became the court's feodary for Oxfordshire, though he left to his deputy much of the work of ensuring that the crown received its dues from tenants-in-chief who were minors. He held this post at least until Elizabeth's death, and in 1601 became also the feodary for the city of London and Middlesex, a post he continued to hold under James I. The latter was especially lucrative as feodaries were paid a percentage of the revenue they brought to court. At an unknown date Cope married Dorothy (died 1638), daughter of Richard Grenville of Wotton Underwood, Buckinghamshire, and Mary, 'nee' Gifford. 
Having the gift of making himself indispensable, Cope continued to serve Lord Burghley, for by 1593 he was described as his secretary and was thus known as a great person in England by Magistrate Valladares of Lisbon. Both positions made him a person well worth cultivating, and led to gifts in addition to his wards fees. He was also able to buy wardships and thus gain from managing wards' lands, as in the case of Thomas Hoardson of Folkestone. He acquired an estate in Dunsden, Oxfordshire, which he sold to his brother Anthony Cope in 1591, buying West Town Manor in Kensington, Middlesex, in 1592, and subsequently all the other manors there, helped by a share in Overstone from his mother. He had also become the trusted friend of Sir Robert Cecil, and continued to be involved in national administration as Burghley sickened and died in 1598. He accompanied Cecil on a diplomatic mission to France, examined suspects in Essex's rebellion, and gave advice on emergency finance when customs collection was behindhand in 1601. He was also involved in personal errands for Cecil, including oversight of the improvements to the Theobalds water supply. 
On James I's accession in 1603 Cope journeyed north to welcome him, and was thus knighted at Worksop. He continued to combine national affairs with his work as Cecil's factotum: he arranged for Burbage's company to revive 'Love's Labours Lost' to entertain Queen Anne at Cecil's house; advised James I on the most acceptable way of establishing a lottery, by raising money for charity; and went on a diplomatic mission to Brussels and Holland. He was so influential that Dudley Carleton pleaded with him for help when suspected of involvement in the Gunpowder Plot, and later in gaining an embassy. He began building Cope Castle (later Holland House), an imbroglio of Dutch gables and Italianate ornament, in Kensington in 1605, with an extensive park containing exotic trees imported by John Tradescant. He repeatedly entertained the king and queen there. John Chamberlain complained in 1608 that he was not allowed to touch even a cherry because the queen was expected. He was on sufficiently close terms that, after Prince Henry died in 1612, James I spent the night there, and Prince Charles, Princess Elizabeth, and the elector palatine came next day to join him. 
Cope continued to advance in favour under James I. In June 1609 he was made chamberlain of the exchequer, a virtual sinecure, for life; in October he was granted a sixth of all fines given the king in the next twenty-one years; and in 1611 or 1612 he was made public registrar-general of commerce, and keeper of Hyde Park with Cecil, from 1605 earl of Salisbury, further profitable offices. Thus he was able to marry his only known child and heiress, Isabel, to Sir Henry Rich, later earl of Holland. But the death of his patron, Salisbury, in 1612, left Cope isolated; perhaps the more so as he and his fellow executor disputed the validity of his will. As his dead friend and master was vilified, Sir Walter's career faced eclipse. Courageously, he wrote a vindication to present to the king, 'An Apology for the Late Lord Treasurer', in resonant prose: 'I held it base to flatter him in his life: I will not now begin to flatter him in his grave. To offer such incense to the dead, I account the basest kind of sacrifice' (Gutch, 119-20). Perhaps Chamberlain was right to suggest that Cope was also putting forward his own qualifications to become master of the court of wards. In November 1612 the king granted him the office. This gave him precedence over all officials except privy councillors, and probably an income of about $5000 a year. He increased the annual revenue from the sale of wards and marriages, which stood at $12,491 in his second year. He purposed to act honestly, and was concerned to raise revenue. This was his zenith. 
Cope was an MP in at least two Elizabethan parliaments, and those of 1604 and 1614, sometimes clearly through the Cecil interest. He was an active member, especially in matters of religion and also of finance. In 1604 he suggested that composition for the feudal right of purveyance should be set at $30,000 p.a., strongly backing the rule of law: 'Cords bind Beasts, Words bind Men, Treaties bind Kings abroad, and Laws at home' ('JHC', 1.984). He opposed impositions by prerogative on merchants, and resisted pressure in 1611 to consider subsidies before discussing redress of grievances. He was involved in considering what to do with the 1604 'Form of Apology', and thus must have favoured it. He acted with independence of mind despite his closeness to Salisbury and desire for advancement from James I. Yet, as an influential figure, he was consulted before the speaker agreed to answer a question about Bate's case. The Addled Parliament ended his membership of the house ingloriously. Sir Thomas Parry, chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, had offered one of the Stockbridge seats to him, and fraudulently altered the return when the electors refused to accept his nominees. Thus his election was annulled. 
Cope invested in a number of overseas trading companies, including the Virginia and East India companies. Of the former he was a director, and persuaded others to invest in it. Another excursion into business was to prove disastrous. In May 1607, with his brother Sir Anthony, Arthur Ingram, Sir Thomas Lake, and others, he joined a syndicate to buy former church property in crown hands for $37,333 6's'. 8died A further contract was undertaken in November; another in May 1608 for rectories worth $75,000; and yet others in 1611, 1612, and 1613. Clearly, from Ingram's shady financial reputation, this was not a noble attempt to re-endow plundered livings: it was speculation, in a market which, by 1613, was glutted. Cope's involvement in Ingram's alum monopoly and the crown commission investigating it was dubious, and unprofitable. The probable portrait of him in 1612 shows an elegant, dignified, but anxious man. 
Less than a month after Sir Anthony's death Sir Walter Cope was suddenly taken ill. According to Chamberlain, his brother's loss, rumours of losing the mastership of the wards, and his financial commitments after Sir Anthony's death had combined to break his heart. His will reflects anxiety about paying all his debts; and on 30 July 1614 he died at Cope Castle, reputedly with over $26,000 to settle. He was buried at Kensington parish church on 1 August. His probable portrait, perhaps by John de Critz the elder, hangs at Hatfield House. 


@@@@@


doc= 6258


Copeland, Thomas (1781-1855), surgeon, son of William Copeland (1747-1787), curate of Byfield, Northamptonshire, was born in May 1781. He studied under Mr Denham at Chigwell in Essex, and in London under Edward Ford, his maternal uncle, before attending medical classes in Great Windmill Street and at St Bartholomew's Hospital. On 6 July 1804 he was admitted a member of the Royal College of Surgeons, and on the 14th of the same month was appointed an assistant surgeon in the 1st foot guards. He embarked with his regiment for Spain under Sir John Moore, and was present at the battle of Corunna in 1809. 
On his return to England and retirement from the army, Copeland succeeded to his uncle's practice following the latter's death in September that year. Copeland also inherited his residence, 4 Golden Square, London, and having been appointed surgeon to the Westminster General Dispensary he soon made some influential connections, chiefly among the aristocracy. In 1810 he brought out 'Observations on the disease of the hip-joint, by E. Ford; edited and revised with additions, by T. Copeland'. In the same year he published 'Observations on some of the Principal Diseases of the Rectum', a work which ran to three editions. His new and scientific treatment of these diseases established his reputation and justly earned him the distinction of being the founder of rectum surgery; as a consulting surgeon his opinion was in great demand in the West End of London. Copeland was the first to suggest the removal of the septum narium by means of an ingeniously contrived pair of forceps, in cases where its oblique position obstructed the passage of air through the nostrils. 
Copeland was elected FRS on 6 February 1834, and in 1843 he became honorary FRCS. For a time he was a member of the council of the Royal College of Surgeons, and he became surgeon-extraordinary to Queen Victoria in 1837. He moved to 17 Cavendish Square, London, in 1842, but his failing health caused him to reduce his practice. Copeland was also the author of 'Observations on the symptoms and treatment of the diseased spine, more particularly relating to the incipient stages', published in 1815; a second edition appeared in 1818 and the work was translated into several European languages. Among his contributions to professional journals was a paper entitled 'History of a case in which a calculus was voided from a tumour in the groin' ('Transactions of the Medico-Chirurgical Society', 3.191). Copeland's career was marked by a keen observance of professional etiquette, and by courtesy and friendship towards his fellow practitioners. Copeland died from an attack of jaundice at Brighton on 19 November 1855. His wife died on 5 December 1855. He left $180,000, bequeathing $5000 both to the Asylum for Poor Orphans of the Clergy and to the Society for the Relief of Widows and Orphans of Medical Men. 


@@@@@


doc= 6259


Copeland, William John (1804-1885), historian and Church of England clergyman, was born at Chigwell, Essex, on 1 September 1804, the elder son of William Copeland, a surgeon. He entered St Paul's School, London, in 1815 and Trinity College, Oxford, in 1824, where he held a scholarship but was prevented by ill health from entering for honours and, like J. H. Newman, did not obtain the expected first-class degree. He took his BA in 1829, MA in 1831, and BD in 1840. In 1829 he was ordained to the title of St Olave Jewry but soon moved to Hackney, where he came into contact with the Hackney Phalanx of traditional high-churchmen, which included John James Watson, Watson's brother Joshua, Henry Handley Norris, and Thomas Sikes. 
Elected a fellow of Trinity in 1832, Copeland threw himself into the circle that produced the 'Tracts for the Times', which included another fellow of the college, his close friend Isaac Williams. Copeland filled many college posts -- tutor, rhetorical lecturer, and vice-president -- being, in addition, curate of St Mary Magdalen, Oxford (1835-7), and Begbroke (1838-9), and helping Newman in an unofficial capacity at St Mary's. He became an authority on the Anglican divines of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, publishing an article on the non-jurors ('British Critic', 21, Jan 1837, 39-75), the edition of Bishop Cosin in the 'Library of Anglo-Catholic Theology' (of which he was an increasingly disillusioned superintending editor from 1840 to 1843), and the historical appendix to the published edition of Pusey's condemned sermon (1843). A respected classicist, he translated the 'Homilies of S. John Chrysostom on the Epistle to the Ephesians' for the 'Library of the Fathers' (1840). 
In March 1840 Copeland became curate at Littlemore, without giving up his rooms in Trinity, spending much of his time there following Newman's resignation of St Mary's and remaining alone after the secessions of 1845. Despite many doubts at the time, he devoted himself to parish work at Garsington and the college living of Farnham, Essex, of which he was rector between 1849, when he resigned his fellowship, and his death there on 26 August 1885. He was buried on 29 August. He left his estate to his nephew, William Copeland Borlase MP. 
A celibate priest of great humour and sympathy, of wide-ranging and deep friendships, Copeland was quite content in parish life. A small man in the side-whiskers and clerical dress of an earlier age, he judged the later ritualists kindly, looking beyond controversial dress and ceremonial to their missionary activity. A chance meeting with Newman on 3 June 1862 led to the resumption of their friendship and correspondence, Copeland editing Newman's Anglican sermons as 'Parochial and Plain Sermons' (8 vols., 1868) and 'Selection Adapted to the Seasons' (1878). 
Copeland's reserve, perfectionism, and lack of ambition meant that he published little, to the exasperation of his friends. From 1860 until his death, Pusey, Newman, and Edward Churton urged him to write a history of the Oxford Movement. Pusey felt that Copeland alone could do justice to its context, origins, and early history (Pusey to Copeland, 28 March 1866, Liddon Bound Volumes, 79/89). He possessed a formidable memory and gathered a large number of sources, from which he provided much of the historical material for Pusey's reprinted edition of 'Tract 90' (1865). However, only fragments of the proposed 'Narrative of the Oxford Movement' were dictated before his prolonged final illness left him paralysed and confused. The historiography of the movement might have been very different had it been completed. The young men involved in the disputes in Oxford in the 1830s and 1840s would have been placed in the context of an older generation working largely outside the university by one who was among the last surviving witnesses. Newman's dating the start of the movement to 1833 might not have gained such unqualified acceptance, and a more nuanced picture of the Church of England in the first third of the nineteenth century would have emerged. Copeland's library was sold, but his invaluable collection of Tractarian papers was put at the disposal of H. P. Liddon and R. W. Church and was later given to Pusey House. 


@@@@@


doc= 6260


Copeland, William Taylor (1797-1868), pottery manufacturer, was born on 24 March 1797 at Lincoln's Inn Fields, London, the son of William Copeland (1765-1826), partner of the potter Josiah Spode II, and his wife, Mary (died 1837), 'nee' Fowler. He was brought up in the family home in Leyton, Essex, where he continued to reside for many years. On 29 April 1826 he married Sarah (1799-1860), daughter of John Yates, a potter. They had ten children, of whom a daughter and four sons, William Fowler Mountford (1828-1908), Edward Capper (1835-1875), Alfred James (1837-1921), and Richard Pirie (1841-1913), survived Copeland. 
Copeland entered the Spode-Copeland business on 19 July 1824 and was taken into partnership when his father died. Following the death of Josiah Spode in 1827 he became sole owner of the London business, and in 1833, owner also of the pottery at Stoke-on-Trent. In that year he went into partnership with Thomas Garrett, manager of the Stoke pottery, the firm being known as Copeland and Garrett. This partnership was dissolved in 1847 and the firm then traded as W. T. Copeland, late Spode. In 1867 his sons joined him in partnership as W. T. Copeland & Sons. 
Although he did not achieve the aesthetic eminence of Wedgwood, Copeland produced wares whose artistic quality raised the standard of ceramic manufacture. With the aid of his art director Thomas Battam (1810-1864), one of a family of ceramic artists, he gained worldwide renown. Copeland's artistic triumph came with the production of the refined statuary porcelain, or parian, introduced about 1842, and his reputation was further enhanced when this product was shown at international exhibitions. He employed eminent sculptors including John Gibson, whose 'Narcissus' was commissioned by the 'Art Union Magazine' in 1846. 1859 saw the appointment of the remarkable flower painter Charles Hurten. In 1866 Copeland was appointed china and glass manufacturer to the prince of Wales. 
Copeland was active in the promotion of machinery. His attempt in 1847 to introduce a mechanized 'Jolley' (a device to shape the interior of cups and deep bowls) was thwarted, but he was the first to install the newly patented Needham and Kite filter press in 1856. Copeland was the only manufacturer willing to undertake the exacting commission to tile the cupola of the Imperial Library, Paris, which opened in 1868. He also supported the formation of the schools of design in London and Stoke, the latter opening in 1847. 
Copeland was also active in local and national politics. He was elected alderman for Bishopsgate ward in 1828 and immediately served as sheriff of London and Middlesex in 1828-9. In 1835 he was elected lord mayor, the third youngest man to hold that office. He was a member of the Goldsmiths' Company and its master in 1837-8. He was for seven years president of the royal hospitals of Bridewell and Bethlem; he was a member of the Irish Society, which managed the City's Irish estates, president of the Honourable Artillery Company, a director of the London and Birmingham Railway Company, and a major investor in Fenton Park colliery. He was widely recognized as a generous man, supportive of charitable institutions, and upright in his dealings. 
Copeland contested the borough of Coleraine in 1831 and 1833 as a Liberal and was seated on petition in both years. He retained the seat until the general election of 1837 when he joined the Conservatives and was returned for Stoke-on-Trent. He was defeated in 1852 but held the seat once more from 1857 to 1865. He was never an active debater in the house. 
A keen sportsman, Copeland kept a stud of racehorses at his country residence, Russell Farm, Watford, Hertfordshire. He had another house at Cliffe Bank, Stoke, but spent much of his time in London. His health failed in the early months of 1868, and although he recovered enough for his doctors to consider him out of danger, he suffered a relapse. He died at Russell Farm on 12 April 1868, and was buried in the new cemetery in Watford six days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 6261


Coprario, John (d. 1626), composer and musician, was, despite his name, evidently of English descent. Nothing is known for certain of his early life. Possibly he was the John Cowper who was installed as a chorister at Chichester Cathedral in 1575 (Dart). Anthony Wood's 'Notes on the lives of musicians' (Bodl. Oxf., Wood, D.19[4]) describes Coprario as 'an English man borne, who having spent much of his time in Italy was there called Coprario, which name he kept when he returned into England' (no specific evidence in confirmation of Wood's assertion is known, however). He was described by the late seventeenth-century writer Roger North as 'Coperario, who by the way was plain Cooper but affected an Itallian termination'. 
In 1602 William Petre paid Coprario 10's'. for 'lessons hee brought mee'. Sir Robert Cecil paid Coprario $3 in connection with travel to the Low Countries in April 1603, and following his elevation to an earldom in 1605 (and subsequently to the position of lord treasurer) he became Coprario's regular patron. Cecil's musicians performed before Queen Anne on 31 October 1605, for which Coprario was paid $5. During the next few years frequent payments were made by the earl of Salisbury to Coprario for a range of musical tasks, including the teaching of a boy, George Mason, repair and maintenance of stringed instruments, and 'setting of musick'; there were several one-off payments (of $20 in 1610, and $10 in 1613) and fees were paid for hired musicians at entertainments (Charteris, 'Jacobean Musicians'). In 1613 Coprario attended Elector Frederick and Princess Caroline on their journey to Heidelberg, following their marriage (he had composed some music for Thomas Campion's 'The Lord's Masque', performed on 14 February that year, for which he was paid $20). Later patrons of Coprario were Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford, and Francis Clifford, earl of Cumberland. Thomas Fuller's 'The History of the Worthies of England' (1662) claims that the composer William Lawes received his musical instruction under Coprario while the latter was in the employ of the earl of Hertford. The earl of Cumberland paid Coprario $11 in January 1617 following his return from Dubrovnik, for which records show that he was granted a permission 'to goe unto forraigne partes for one yeare about dispatch of his private occasions'; later that same year, Coprario was granted another pass enabling him to undertake a year-long journey to Germany (Hulse). 
Chief among Coprario's patrons, however, was Charles, prince of Wales (later Charles I). According to Sir John Hawkins's 'A General History of the Science and Practice of Music' (1776) he was the music teacher of the children of James I; Charles Burney's 'A General History of Music' (1776) specifies that he taught the future Charles I to play the viol. This much is speculative, though in 1618 Coprario received of Charles the sum of $50, evidently in recognition of musical services rendered, and on 25 March 1622 there began a series of annual stipendiary payments to Coprario as one of the 'musicians-in-ordinary' to the prince of Wales. In the same year, a small group known as 'Coprario's music' was established within Charles's household, probably for the express purpose of performing Coprario's consort fantasias. When he became king in 1625, Charles made Coprario his composer-in-ordinary, but this appointment, the climax of his career, was short-lived. He was replaced by Alfonso Ferrabosco the younger in July 1626 'in the place of John Copreario deceased' (Charteris, 'John Coprario'): his death, in London, must have occurred about June of that year. 
Coprario's output for string consort consists in the main of fantasias, a genre of composition akin to the fugue or canon (in which the separate strands of the polyphony imitate each other) which Thomas Morley, writing in his 'Plain and Easy Introduction to Practical Music' (1597), had termed 'the chiefest kind of musicke which is made without a dittie'. Coprario left examples in two, three, four, five, and six parts. If these works are traditional in idiom, his 'fantasia-suites' break new ground. Here, the fantasia is followed by several dance pieces (to which it is connected in mode). Moreover, these works include prominent parts for the violin (rather than the older viol) and organ, tending at times towards a texture not dissimilar to that associated with the continuo bass, which had recently emerged in Italy, but elsewhere granting the keyboard part an essential, rather than merely subsidiary, accompanimental function. There are also works for the lyra viol (a special kind of consort bass viol, capable of playing melody and chordal accompaniment textures simultaneously). Anthony Wood (Bodl. Oxf., Wood, D.19[4] no. 106) later described Coprario as 'one of the first authors that set lessons to the viol lyra-way, and composed lessons not only to play alone, but for two or three lyra-viols in consert, which hath been approved by many excellent masters'. 
While Coprario will always be best-known as a composer of instrumental consort music, he also produced many secular vocal pieces. He was clearly familiar with a good deal of published Italian madrigal repertory from the end of the sixteenth century (including works by Marenzio, Anerio, Vecchi, and others), for he appropriated a large number of titles from such works in his forty-nine five-part instrumental settings for viol consort known today as 'instrumental madrigals'; some of these pieces are actually based on the madrigals from which the titles are borrowed. Eight other similar works survive (for six viols), in three of which text is underlaid throughout, suggesting that they may have originated as vocal rather than instrumental pieces. There survive twenty-one genuinely vocal three-part villanellas, settings of Italian texts extracted in the main from Gorzani's 'Primo libro di napolitane' (1570); three madrigals of rather more elevated pretensions (including one to a text by Petrarch); a lute song, 'Send home my long strayd eyes to mee' (words by Donne); and three songs contributed to Thomas Campion's 'Masque of Squires' ('The Earle of Somerset's Masque'), presented in December 1613. Coprario's 'Funeral Teares' (1606) was written in memory of Charles Blount, earl of Devonshire, and contains seven settings of melancholic verse, possibly of Coprario's own composition, for solo voice or duet with the accompaniment of lute and bass viol. He could also capture the elegiac mood, as shown by the items written for Campion's 'Songs of Mourning: Bewailing the Untimely Death of Prince Henry' (1613). More devotional in intent are the settings 'Ile lie me downe' and 'O Lord how doe my woes encrease' included in Sir William Leighton's 'Teares or Lamentations of a Sorrowful Soule' (1614). 
Coprario wrote a short musical treatise, 'Rules how to compose', possibly about 1617. It was compiled to instruct the young William Lawes, whom the earl of Hertford had taken 'from his Father, and bred him of his own cost... under his Master Giovanni Coperario' (Ashbee and Lasocki). This was never published (the holograph survives in the Huntington Library, San Marino, California), but was evidently quite widely circulated in copies; it was clearly still influential in the 1650s and 1660s, when Christopher Simpson based some examples in his 'The Principles of Practical Musick' (1665) on Coprario's. There is a strong similarity between Coprario's 'Rules' and Campion's 'A New Way of Making Fowre Parts in Counter-Point' (1613-14), though which had the priority is unclear. 


@@@@@


doc= 6262


Copinger, William (d. 1416), clerk and supposed theologian, was a member of a family settled at Buxhall, Suffolk, where he was himself buried. His will is dated 20 January 1412, and was proved on 2 March 1416. Bale attributes to Copinger, whom he describes as 'doctor', a treatise 'De vitiis et virtutibus', with incipit 'Vani sunt omnes homines in quibus non est scientia dei', and a 'sacramentale', both of which he found in a manuscript at Balliol College, Oxford. In this he was followed by Pits, who dubs Copinger a 'magister insignis', and by Tanner. The volume Bale saw was Balliol College, Oxford, MS 83, which contains an abbreviation of 'De vitiis et virtutibus' by the mid-thirteenth-century French Dominican Guillaume Peyraut, and also the 'sacramentale' of Guillaume de Mont Lauzun. The colophon of the former is signed Toppynger (or perhaps Toppyng), who, however, was clearly the transcriber, not the author, of the work in question, and whose name Bale misread, replacing its capital letter 'T' with a 'C'. Bale also endowed his inadvertent creation with a first name, William, perhaps through a confusion with the William Copinger who was successively a scholar of Winchester College and New College, Oxford, and who proceeded BCL in 1542. 


@@@@@


doc= 6263


Copland, James (1791-1870), physician, was born in November 1791 in the Orkney Isles. The eldest of nine children, he went to school at Lerwick, and in November 1807 entered the University of Edinburgh. His studies were at first directed towards theology, but after a time he changed to medicine, and graduated MD in 1815. He went to London in August of that year, and spent eighteen months going round the London hospitals, to study the surgical practices. Being offered an appointment as medical officer to the settlements of the Royal African Company, he sailed early in 1817 for the French trading fort of Goree, and then continued to Senegal, the Gambia, and Sierra Leone, learning all he could of the diseases of the country. Soon after leaving Sierra Leone he was able to make use of his newly acquired knowledge, for three-quarters of the crew fell ill with fever, and in the midst of the epidemic a gale carried away the masts of the ship. Following the storm Copland landed and by various means made his way along the coast to the British fort of Cape Coast, where he lived for some months; he returned to England in 1818. He then travelled through France and Germany, again looking at medical practice, and was back in England by 1820. In the same year he took a house at Walworth and became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians. He wrote on the medical topography of west Africa for the 'Quarterly Journal of Foreign Medicine' (1820), on human rumination, on yellow fever, on hydrophobia, and on cholera for the 'London Medical Repository' (1821); he then engaged in a discussion on chronic peritonitis in the 'London Medical and Physical Journal', about whether the disease was caused by tubercle or merely by chronic inflammation. 
In 1822 Copland took a house in Jermyn Street and became editor of the 'London Medical Repository', to which he also continued to contribute. In 1825 he issued a prospectus for an encyclopaedia of medicine. At the same time he lectured on medicine at a medical school then existing in Little Dean Street; somewhat later he took up a similar post at the Middlesex Hospital. His further proposals for an encyclopaedia were ultimately successful; the first part was issued in 1832, and Copland's 'Dictionary of Practical Medicine', in three volumes, and covering every part of medicine, was completed in 1858. It earned him $4000. The advances in medical techniques had been so great that the publishers then urged him to prepare a supplement, for which he was paid $1000. His achievement earned Copland the epithet of 'the Johnson of medicine' (Clarke, 410), whom, it was said, he to some degree resembled (ibid., 420). 
In 1832, following an outbreak of cholera in Britain, Copland's earlier article on cholera was published as a separate book, 'Pestilential Cholera, its Nature, Prevention, and Curative Treatment'; cholera was a disease which Copland believed to be spread by contagion. Copland was elected FRS in 1833, and fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1837. He built up a considerable practice and wrote more on medicine than any fellow of the college, in his own day or previously. He was respected in the college and was Croonian lecturer in 1844, 1845, and 1846; Lumleian lecturer in 1854 and 1855, and Harveian orator in 1857. He was president of the Pathological Society, but did not obtain the respect of the practical morbid anatomists who attended its meetings, and who were often led to smile when the president claimed as his own numerous modern discoveries in pathology. Copland gave up practice about a year before his death. He died at Hertford House, Brondesbury Road, Kilburn, London, on 12 July 1870. Nothing is known of his wife, but a son and a daughter were named as executors to his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 6264


Copland, Patrick (1748-1822), natural philosopher and university teacher, was born early in 1748 in the parish of Fintray, Aberdeenshire, and baptized there on 22 March 1748. He was the first of three children and the only son of Samuel Copland ('c'.1716-1795), minister of the parish of Fintray, originally from nearby Tough, and his wife, Jean ('nee' Copland), a distant relative from Aberdeen. 
Copland entered Marischal College, Aberdeen, with a minor bursary in 1762. There he was taught natural philosophy by George Skene and moral philosophy by James Beattie; both were members of the philosophical society of Aberdeen that was responsible for the common-sense school of philosophy. After graduating AM in 1766, Copland went back home to pursue natural philosophy, in particular mechanical science. In 1774 he was asked by Skene to return as his assistant. Skene resigned six months later, and on 25 February 1775 Copland was appointed regent and professor of philosophy at Marischal College. He remained a professor there until a month before his death in 1822; though from 1779 until 1817 he held the title of professor of mathematics. 
Professor Copland was a tall, handsome man, and when young was regarded as the principal beau in Aberdeen. Nevertheless, he remained a bachelor until he was thirty-nine. On 27 September 1787 he married Elizabeth Ogilvie (1767-1852), almost twenty years his junior, the eldest daughter of Dr David Ogilvie, a surgeon in the Royal Navy. The Coplands had three sons: Alexander ('b'. 1788), John ('b'. 1789), and Charles ('b'. 1791), followed eight years later by Mary ('b'. 1799), who married Dr Alexander Murchison in 1821. In 1803 Copland purchased Fountainhall House, Aberdeen, from the estate of George Skene. Copland was a mild and unassuming man. He had a taste for pictures, a love of the theatre, and an ear for music that led him to build his own large pipe organ in 1789. Above all, he was devoted to natural philosophy. For services to Marischal College he was awarded an honorary LLD in 1817. 
Copland introduced into university education the large-scale use of demonstration apparatus in teaching natural philosophy, a trend that lasted for almost 200 years. He gave extensive education to tradesmen, especially in mechanics, and he acted as an academic consultant to the municipality, to industrial contacts, and to members of the aristocracy. In 1782 he was elected a corresponding member of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. In 1785 he was one of the non-resident founding members of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and in 1807 was elected a member of the Linnean Society. These interests remained peripheral: Copland was exceptional for specializing in mechanical science. He built up in the college his own workshop, which he equipped with lathes and many hand tools, including taps and dies by Ramsden, whom he knew personally. There Copland himself made to a high professional standard a great many pieces of demonstration equipment in wood and metals. Just before his death his collection and his tools were sold to Marischal College, and a number of items survive there. In 1783 Copland obtained a grant to employ a mechanic, John King, to make models of machinery; he may be the earliest university technician in the country. King stayed at Marischal for about eight years before returning to clock making. 
Copland was acknowledged to be the best teacher in the university in his day. About 2000 students benefited from his lectures, which were planned around his exceptional collection of demonstration equipment covering almost all of the disciplines within natural philosophy. Among his students was James Stephen, grandfather of Leslie Stephen, the founder of the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. Copland's demonstration equipment was also the basis for his extramural adult education classes. These preceded by many years and were deeper in content than those of better-known 'pioneers' such as George Birkbeck and others who promoted the rise of mechanics institutions in the 1820s. Copland's classes began in 1785 and continued for twenty-eight years, being given approximately biennially. Each course consisted of about eighty lectures of one and a half to two hours. The success of these efforts to educate tradesmen has been considered a significant influence in the founding of London's Royal Institution in 1800. Partly for this initiative and partly for his consultative work he received a royal pension in 1803. 
Copland raised a public subscription in 1780 to construct the first publicly funded astronomical observatory in Scotland equipped with modern instruments. The observatory was situated on the Castlehill, near Marischal College, and was furnished with instruments by Dollond, Ramsden, and Troughton. Copland excited popular imagination when at the observatory site he released hydrogen balloons as early as March 1784. With John King he constructed to an unusual design by James Ferguson an elaborate astronomical clock, which survives at the university. He appointed as assistant keeper Andrew Mackay, who became a notable teacher and writer on navigation. 
Copland's interests in applied natural philosophy led him to become an early example of what would now be called a consultant physicist. He advised the town on obtaining improved fresh water supplies, and in 1804 put forward proposals for what would have been one of the very first municipal sand and gravel slow filtration beds, had it been implemented. He also gave advice on standards of length, weight, and volume measure, and made accurate comparative determinations for them. He advised town and county on matters of surveying, and made the earliest measurements of the height of the Deeside hills by barometric means. He probably introduced the process of liquid chlorine bleaching into Britain. After seeing the process demonstrated by Saussure in his laboratory in Geneva in May 1787, Copland explained it to Aberdeen industrial chemists. They developed the process into a commercially viable technique, which prevented the grant of a restrictive patent to a Liverpool company in 1788 and thereby aided the spread of modern bleaching methods. 
Copland achieved a national reputation. Although he left no scientific papers or patents as tangible records of his work, in his own way he influenced many contemporaries through his actions and his teaching. He died on 10 November 1822 at his home, Fountainhall House, from a large growth, probably throat cancer. He was buried in St Nicholas's churchyard, Aberdeen, on 20 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 6265


Copland, Robert (fl. 1505-1547), translator and printer, began his career in Wynkyn de Worde's shop. Because in his poem 'Hye Way' one of the beggars tells 'Copland' that he is: '
And lyke your maystershyp 

of the north 

' Francis suggested a northern origin for the printer (Francis, 9), but Hazlitt's reading 'If it please your mastership, of the north' is more likely ('Remains of the Early Popular Poetry', 4 vols., 1864-6, 1.336). It has been suggested that Copland was Caxton's apprentice, because of Copland's statement in his preface to 'Kynge Appolyn of Thyre' (before 1510) that he was 'gladly folowynge the trace of my mayster Caxton begynnyng wyth small storyes and pamfletes and so to other'. In addition, about 1505 Copland had called his translation 'A Complaynt of them that be to Soone Maryed' his 'fyrst werke'. If he were between twenty and twenty-four in this year, however, Copland's birth date would lie between 1485 and 1481 -- too late for him to have been Caxton's apprentice before the latter's death in 1491. Hence Copland's reference to 'my mayster' probably indicates only his respect for the patron and employer of his own undoubted master, Wynkyn de Worde. Anthony Wood's belief that 'R. Copland and E. More had as it seems spent some time in Oxon, in the condition of poor scholars' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.249-50) is refuted by Copland's own statement that 'in scole nor countre / I never take effect' ('The Castell of Pleasure', C6v). The will of Cecilye Clowgh, 'wedow of the parisshe of Seynt Bride the Virgin', tentatively dated 28 January 1543, provides a bequest to 'my ostis Coplonde' (Darlington, 84), who was perhaps the printer's wife, in view of the date and the parish, since Copland's sign of the Rose Garland faced on Fleet Street, near Fleet Bridge, in that large extramural parish ('The Tryumphant Vyctory', 1532, colophon). 
For about a decade before he began work as a printer Copland translated French light reading which de Worde published. First, about 1505, he produced a pair of 'mal-marie' laments, 'A Complaynt of them that be to Soone Maryed' and 'The Complaynte of them that ben to Late Maryed', the latter certainly, the former possibly, by Pierre Gringore. To each of these he attached an acrostic verse envoi displaying his own name, ROBERTE (-US) COPLAND(E), imitating a French authorial fashion. In 1508 he revised, partly retranslated, and wrote verse for the popular compendium of physical and spiritual advice, 'The Kalender of Shepeherdes'. Some time before 1510 he produced his translation 'Kynge Appolyn of Thyre', and on 6 February 1512 his translation 'The Knyght of the Swanne', or 'Helyas', appeared; for both of these romances he supplied prose prefaces. After he began work as a printer, in 1514, he continued to produce translations: his version of a French dance manual, 'The Maner of Dauncynge of Bace Daunces after the Use of Fraunce', was published on 22 March 1521. Later, in 1524, he brought out 'The Begynnynge and Foundacyon of the... Knyghtes Hospytallers', a translation of the account by Guillaume de Caorsin ('c'.1430-1501), together with the 'Syege of Rodes', from the eyewitness account of 1522 by Jacques de Bourbon, both commissioned by the grand prior of the knights of Malta in England. On 7 August 1528 'The Secrete of Secretes' appeared, his translation of the medieval encyclopaedic compilation, and in the same year Copland produced the first English printed navigational route book, 'The Rutter of the See' (1528). The next year saw the appearance of a short guide to daily living: 'The Maner to Lyve Well' was printed in thirty-six editions of books of hours between 1529 and 1556, and thus played a considerable part in the emergence of English in this popular devotional manual. His later translations included a 1532 news dispatch on the current fighting in Styria, 'The Tryumphant Vyctory of the Imperyall Mageste agaynst the Turkes'; a compendium of four surgical tracts (among them the first printing of Galen in English, 'The Questyonary of Cyrurgyens', 1542); and, about 1545, a version of the popular memory treatise by Pietro Tommai (Peter of Ravenna), 'Fenix' (1491). Copland's translation, 'The Art of Memory' ('c'.1545), was the first complete text devoted to classical mnemonic theory to appear in English. This list of his translations demonstrates Copland's centrality as a conduit for French popular literature; at the same time it suggests the utility of his translated works of information. 
Copland's first printing was also for de Worde, with whom he shared the printing of two previously published and successful texts, one religious ('The Deyenge Creature', 1514), the other legal ('The Justices of Peas', 1515). It may be that the older printer here planned a large edition and commissioned part of it from his employee, as the younger man's introduction to the craft. Copland printed in all thirty-five editions (disregarding ephemera like indulgences and images of pity), and of this number several items which bear his colophon were probably printed for de Worde. After the latter's death in 1534 or 1535, ten books, almost a third of Copland's output, were printed for other men, a record which indicates a continuing lack of capital. 
Copland many times showed himself acutely aware of early printing's technical concerns as it attempted to accommodate its inheritance from a manuscript tradition. He served as de Worde's corrector for 'Ipomydon' in 1518 ('Syth that no wryter / wolde take it to amende'), and, as William Herbert noted, he was the first printer to use the comma in addition to the virgule (early January 1534, in Erasmus's 'Funus' and John Colet's 'A Ryght Fruteful Monycion'). He warns printers against overzealous changes: '
Correccyon 

I agre 

but there a pause, Folowe your copy 

and lette thamendynge alone. 
('Guystarde and Sygysmonde', 1532, D2v)' The criticisms he put into Quidam's mouth in the preface to 'The Seven Sorowes' ('c'.1526) demonstrate his sensitivity to the accurate transmission of text. 'By my soule the prynters make such englyshe, so yll spelled, so yll poynted, and so pevyshe, that scantly one cane rede lynes tow, But to fynde sentence, he hath ynough to do' (A3). Most tellingly, he printed Chaucer's 'Parliament of Fowls' from manuscript (Bodl. Oxf., MS 638) rather than depending primarily on an earlier edition, claiming that in so doing he had 'losed' the text from 'ruynous domage', amended the poetry to 'thylke same langage that Chaucer to the gave', and thus made it possible for lovers of Chaucer to 'his mynde avewe'. 
In his writing Copland's personal voice registers strongly, even in the ephemeral verses which preface many of his publications and in the 'go little book' envois which conclude them. In 1518, for instance, he apologized to 'The Castell of Pleasure''s author for adding his own 'verses incorrect': '
Without your lycence 

yf I dyde them impresse, Pardon I praye you 

of this my homelynesse. 

' In this editorial verse he several times commented on the decay of reading: 'Bokes be not set by theyr tymes is past I gesse' ('Castell', 'Assemble of Foules', 'Guystarde and Sygysmonde'). But it is in his three longer poems that his skill in the creation of dramatic situation and character through dialogue is best displayed. 'The Seven Sorowes that Women have when Theyr Husbandes be Deade' (written about 1526) provides a parody of religious meditation on the seven sorrows of the Virgin, but the conventionally lascivious widow's emotions and thoughts are presented sympathetically, with an interior focus rare for the period. The tone shifts somewhat uneasily between psychological realism and conventional misogynist fun. The short, amusing 'jeu d'esprit' 'Jyl of Braintfords Testament' ('c'.1535) might be labelled a very late English fabliau owing to its scatological jokes and bequest of farts theme. 'The Hye Way to the Spyttell Hous', written between 1529 and 1534, is a depiction of the life of the (often criminal) poor who went to London's St Bartholomew's Hospital, and makes a central contribution to the early modern English discussion of poverty as a social problem. It contains the first printed version of thieves' cant in England and thus anticipates the later sixteenth-century work of Thomas Harman, John Awdely, and Thomas Dekker. The poem is indebted in its second section to Robert de Balsac's 'Le chemin de l'ospital' (1502), a catalogue of fools. 
Copland worked in a period for which almost no Stationers' Company records survive, but he is glimpsed as one of a group of colleagues when, on 25 October 1526, the bishop of London, Cuthbert Tunstall, warned thirty-one members of the book trade against printing Lutheran books. Copland's lifelong connection with de Worde is further shown by his appointment as one of two overseers for the latter's will and by a bequest of 10 marks in books, perhaps equivalent to a year's income. The lay subsidy assessment taken in the printer's ward of Farringdon Without on 4 April 1544 records his worth as 20's'., a low figure, though these assessments were sometimes suspect. Near the end of his life Andrew Boorde's 'Breviary of Helthe', dated 15 July 1547, refers to another book of Boorde's, his 'Introduction of Knowledge', 'whiche hath been longe a pryntynge for lacke of money and paper and it is in pryntynge with pyctures at Roberte Coplande prynter' (Duff, 30). In his 'Pryncyples of Astronamye', which Copland printed (1547?), Boorde refers again to this work: 'Introduction of knowledg a boke of my makyng the whiche ys aprintyng at old Robert Coplands the eldist printer of Ingland the which doeth print thes yere mi pronosticacions'. This evidence, combined with the 'Short-Title Catalogue''s assignment of a Copland-printed herbal to the same probable date, suggests that Copland was still active in this year. He perhaps died before its end, however, since in 1547 his successor, William Copland (d. 1569), printed 'A Fruteful... Instruction' for Richard Kele (the 'STC' lists an additional group of four books which may be assigned to 1548 and to either Robert or William Copland). 


@@@@@


doc= 6266


Copland, William (d. 1569), printer, was believed by Dibdin (Ames, Dibdin, and Herbert, 3.127) to have been the younger brother of Robert Copland (fl. 1505-1547); he is more likely to have been Robert's son. After Robert's death, probably in 1547, William continued as printer in the same house. On 24 November 1546 he had received a licence to marry Joanne Tyddeswell of St Bride's. Though he may have begun printing as early as 1545 his earliest dated book, 'A Fruteful and a Very Christen Instruction for Children', printed for Richard Kele, appeared in 1547. An original member of the Stationers' Company, Copland was named in the charter of 1557. On 12 March of the same year he was brought before the privy council and ordered to deliver to the printer J. Cawood for burning all the copies which he had printed of Cranmer's 'Recantation'. The Stationers' register, which covers only the second decade of his career, records that he was fined four times -- Herbert calls his behaviour 'as regular as most of his associates' (Ames, Dibdin, and Herbert, 1.128) -- and that he took an apprentice, Robert Jonnes, in May or June 1562. Copland's career falls into three periods: he first printed at Robert Copland's old shop, the Rose Garland in Fleet Street, from 1547 to early 1558; he then printed at the Three Crane Wharf in the Vintry, in the parish of St Martin, from some time before October 1558 to possibly 1562; and he was in Lothbury, opposite St Margaret's Church, from about 1563 to 1567. 
During his twenty-year career Copland produced over 150 books, many of them for other printers. His work includes a remarkable number of popular items, romances in particular, which had been first published by Wynkyn de Worde and even by Caxton. Among them are 'The Four Sons of Aymon', which Caxton had translated and published in 1490, de Worde about 1505, Notary about 1510, and William Copland (three editions for other printers) in 1554; 'Sir Bevis of Hampton', first printed by de Worde in 1500 and then five more times before William Copland printed two editions in the 1560s; 'Valentine and Orson' (de Worde 'c'.1510; William Copland 'c'.1555 and 'c'.1565); and 'The Seven Wise Masters of Rome' (Pynson 1493; de Worde 1506?; William Copland 'c'.1555). The list of popular books owned by the sixteenth-century Coventry collector Captain Cox includes many of Copland's titles and it is likely that Cox possessed Copland's actual editions. What may have been Copland's last project, 'A Dyaloge betweene ij Beggers', was registered to him between 22 July 1567 and 22 July 1568, but no copy survives. 
Because of his connection with Robert Copland, and Robert's with Caxton's heir, Wynkyn de Worde, William Copland represents the fourth in a direct line of succession from England's first printer. He provided a connection between popular reading taste of the late fifteenth century and that of the seventeenth, continuing to make available works such as Caxton's translation of Le Fevre's 'Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye' (1475?) which first appeared at Bruges and which saw seven more editions, including Copland's, before 1636. The date of his death is not known, but he was buried on 30 May 1569 in the parish of St Margaret, Lothbury, London. Shortly afterwards the wardens of the Stationers' Company 'Payd for the buryall of coplande vjs' (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 1.392). Whether this payment indicates impoverishment or merely recognition of an original member has been disputed; the former may be more likely since only one other contemporary burial payment is printed by the register's editor. 


@@@@@


doc= 6267


Copleston, Edward (1776-1849), bishop of Llandaff and moral philosopher, was born on 2 February 1776 at Offwell in Devon, where his father, John Bradford Copleston, was rector. He was educated at home until the age of fifteen when, in 1791, he won a scholarship to Corpus Christi College, Oxford. Further meritocratic progress ensued: the chancellor's prize for Latin in 1793, a fellowship (by invitation) at Oriel College in 1795, the English essay prize in 1796, a college tutorship in 1799. He was destined for a traditional career as an Oxford don, albeit an educationally reforming one: he was one of six Oriel fellows who gratuitously conducted the first examinations under the examination statute of 1800. Ordination followed in 1800 and the vicarage of St Mary the Virgin, Oxford, usually held by an Oriel fellow, together with further college and university preferment. He became professor of poetry in 1802, and as senior treasurer of Oriel for six years from 1806 substantially improved the college's finances. His genealogical hobbies led to his election as a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1804. He never married. 
In his thirties Copleston entered a wider public stage. This was principally due to his successful support in 1809 for the candidacy for the office of university chancellor of the pro-Catholic politician Lord Grenville. As a result, not only did he gain prominence in the university (he was elected unopposed provost of Oriel in 1814, succeeding Provost Eveleigh, one of the sponsors of the examination statute) but also entry to the liberal tory political world. He became a frequent visitor to Dropmore, Grenville's country house, and to Althorp, the home of the second Earl Spencer. In the 1820s he was consulted by Robert Peel and William Huskisson on financial questions. It was also in this period that he wrote his most important publications: on education (the 'Three Replies to the Calumnies of the Edinburgh Review', 1810-11), economics (the letters to Sir Robert Peel on the currency and pauperism, 1819), and theology (the 'Inquiry into the Doctrines of Necessity and Predestination', 1821). 
Copleston's promotion of educational reform, political economy, and Christian apologetics all served an essentially conservative enterprise: to ensure the continued existence of an Anglican ruling elite and the dominance of Anglican institutions. Thus his 'Three Replies' were a defence of Oxford University and a classical education against the charges of the Edinburgh Reviewers (contained in a series of articles by John Playfair, Richard Payne Knight, and Sydney Smith) that the university neglected, to the detriment of the country, the new social sciences as well as the physical sciences. In political economy he was a champion of the gold standard, and attacked the inflationary speculation of the wartime years. He sought to return the economy to the order of nature. In his theological writings he attacked the external threats to Anglican orthodoxy, in particular the Calvinist doctrine of predestination. However, his methods were liberal: he utilized new means for conservative ends. 
Copleston recognized that a university education served a national purpose and that the English universities were answerable to public opinion. He was not, therefore, averse to reform in order, as he wrote in the 'Three Replies', that 'the lifeblood of England' might be 'invigorated by healthy food'. Not only did he support the introduction of the new examination statute, as noted above, he also supported the abolition of closed scholarships and fellowships, and developed the tutorial system which made Oriel famous. Through his teaching he sought to develop an Anglican meritocracy. This involved changes to the curriculum; he almost singlehandedly promoted the teaching of logic at Oxford, albeit deductive Aristotelian logic rather than the Baconian inductive reasoning favoured by the Edinburgh Reviewers, as well as reviving the analogical reasoning of Joseph Butler (1692-1752). Although he believed that the Oxford trinity of logic, divinity, and mathematics should exclusively form the basis of a degree, he supported the teaching of the new natural and social sciences outside the colleges by means of university professors. Paradoxically, in view of the attacks of the Edinburgh Reviewers, through his admiration for the work of Dugald Stewart and in particular his 'Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind', Copleston introduced the work of the late Scottish Enlightenment to Oxford, and so too, it is generally considered, to the first Oxford political economists: Nassau Senior (1790-1864) and Richard Whately (1787-1863). 
In his 'Letters to Robert Peel' on the gold standard and the poor laws, Copleston characteristically began with the assertion that it was only by reference to the first principles of the science of political economy that it was possible to sustain an argument about practical measures. By clearing away the undergrowth of false reasoning and by applying the deductive method to a few axiomatic truths it was possible to reach certain conclusions. In this way, despite the existence of the evils of unemployment and poverty, it was possible to see the divinely created order even in the current economic chaos. Thus, he argued, political economy was emphatically not a secular science. In his 'First Letter' he attributed the economic dislocation of post-Napoleonic war England to the depreciation of the currency, and urged the government to remove such obstacles as it was able to the self-correcting mechanism of nature. In his 'Second Letter', although he agreed with the evangelical John Bird Sumner (1780-1862) that economic life was one of the trials of man, and thus that governments should not effect by human laws what God had provided by the laws of nature, he did not concede that misery was the necessary consequence. He argued that it was possible to provide by law for the preservation, but not the propagation, of life. He thus tempered the apparent 'evil' of Malthus's natural check to population growth. The object of the poor laws was not radically inconsistent with the principle of population where it embodied the Christian duty of charity but did not usurp the natural order by encouraging population growth. Moreover, as the state of society improved, so would the standard of poor relief. However, Copleston's liberality in the face of demands for the abolition of poor-law relief should not be exaggerated: he opposed public works programmes and the purchase of land for cultivation by the poor, and approved of checks being imposed on the administration of relief by justices of the peace. The purpose of his support for relief was better to punish vagrancy and mendicity. 
In theological matters Copleston applied the principles of natural theology to the interpretation of revealed religion in order to demonstrate the reasonableness of revelation. He argued, invoking the aid of the eighteenth-century Bishop Butler, that if the difficulties of revealed religion were no greater than those of nature, and the divine creation of the latter were acknowledged, those difficulties should not be regarded as objections to the credibility of revelation but as evidence of its truth. Thus in his 'Enquiry into the Doctrines of Necessity and Predestination' (1821) he argued that just as in the natural world free will is compatible with divine order, by analogy in the revealed world the existence of divine foreknowledge is compatible with man's exercise of choice and the punishments and rewards which God administers as a result. The Calvinist error in construing the biblical passages on divine foreknowledge as evidence of predestination was, according to Copleston, to place too human a construction on them. The Calvinist forgot that God's attributes are described imperfectly, in human terms only, since it is impossible for man to know the true nature of the divine. Indeed this was not the purpose of the 'Bible' -- which was to teach man how to feel and act towards God, not to explain his nature. However, by restoring 'the pure substance of the Gospel' in this way, Copleston arguably diminished its strength in the long run by opening it to the critical scrutiny of the natural sciences. 
Copleston's writings were chiefly ephemeral in nature and do not reflect his breadth of interests nor do justice to his importance in the intellectual life of the country. His principal intellectual legacy, in the best Oxford tradition, was his students, who wrote the substantial works which his occasional pieces anticipated. Copleston was the leader of the early Noetic school at Oxford, centred around Oriel College, and so called from the Greek 'noesis', meaning reason ['see 'Noetics]. This school was responsible to a large degree both for the intellectual revival of the university and a distinctive Anglican apologetic which, in the 1820s, combined a 'high' view of the church, as an externally visible, divinely appointed society, with a rational defence of the Christian creed. His main disciple was Richard Whately (1787-1863), fellow of Oriel and archbishop of Dublin. His books on logic and rhetoric in particular owed much to Copleston, who at one stage had contemplated writing a treatise on logic and who, in his pamphlet published in 1809, 'The Examiner Examined, or, Logic Vindicated', a review of Henry Kett's 'Logic Made Easy' (1809), had declared that logic was 'the guide for Reason'. Whately also wrote an introductory treatise on political economy which Copleston was equipped, but failed, to provide. Another student was Baden Powell (1796-1860), also a fellow of Oriel, whom he recommended for the Savilian chair of geometry. His controversial views on the non-divinely ordained nature of the sabbath (also shared with Whately) Copleston foreshadowed in a book review of William Buckland's 'Reliquiae diluvianae' (1823). Renn Dickson Hampden (1793-1868), fellow of Oriel, regius professor of divinity, and bishop of Hereford, was a third pupil, whose Bampton lectures for 1833 continued Copleston's revival at Oxford of the works of Bishop Joseph Butler. 
At the height of his Oxford dominance Copleston is said to have been of august and commanding presence: he was physically fit, a noted equestrian, and tireless walker (he once walked all the way from Oxford to Offwell). He had the air and polish of a man of fashion, rather than of a university don, as befitted a member of the Alfred, a London club much patronized by senior clergy and superior lawyers, and a guest of society drawing-rooms. His sonorous voice was much imitated by undergraduates. He was also capable of rudeness and irritation when his quickness of mind was not followed by others. Above all, he was noted for his precision of thought, a characteristic trait of the Oriel common room at that time, which attributed much intellectual error to incorrect definitions and loose reasoning. 
With such talents and connections, it is perhaps surprising that Copleston did not achieve greater ecclesiastical preferment. He became dean of Chester in 1826, and in 1827 dean of St Paul's and bishop of Llandaff, one of the poorest sees, with no episcopal residence and a net income in 1828 of only $924; he resigned the provostship of Oriel in January 1828. Part of the explanation may be that in the 1820s he was caught in the cross-fire between the Canningites (with whom he was associated and whom he praised in his publications) and the ultra-tories, with the result that he was passed over for the see of Oxford in 1826 which instead went to Peel's candidate and former tutor, Charles Lloyd. It may also have been the result of his anti-sabbatarian views, with which William Howley, then bishop of London and subsequently archbishop of Canterbury, who was consulted by the king on the Oxford bishopric, was not in sympathy. From the 1820s onwards he also began to suffer from the depression which in his later years is said to have clouded his intellect. 
As bishop of Llandaff, Copleston participated in the conference at Lambeth which determined the form of declaration which was to replace the sacramental test abolished by the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts' in 1828. He also amended the declaration in the House of Lords by inserting the words 'upon the faith of a Christian', turning it into a religious test designed to exclude non-Christians from office and provoking the protests of the whigs Lord Holland and Henry Brougham. He supported Catholic emancipation in 1829, but this, however, was the limit of his liberalism. Although much consulted by the whig governments of the 1830s on ecclesiastical appointments, he was never truly in sympathy with their politics. He voted against the 'Reform Bill' on its second reading in the Lords in October 1831, although he subsequently changed his mind; he opposed the abolition of church rates in the 1830s, and was not in favour of substituting a payment out of the consolidated fund; he disapproved of non-denominational Christian education; he opposed repeal of the corn laws and the 'Jew Declaration Bill', and voted against the increase in the grant to Maynooth College in 1845. His friend and former pupil, Richard Whately, was right to term him in the context of post-Reform politics 'a most decided tory'. 
Copleston's diocese, which had been predominantly rural, had a rapidly expanding population due to the development of the south Wales coalfields and the coal ports of Newport and, subsequently, Cardiff. In response he encouraged the construction of both parsonage houses, to encourage a resident clergy, and churches. Between 1827 and 1853 the number of cures without a resident minister fell by approximately 60 per cent. He also promoted parochial schools and reformed the administrative structure of the diocese: a deanery was created in 1840 and a second archdeacon appointed in 1844. On average he personally expended in occasional donations and subscriptions connected with his diocese, both public and private, sums greater than his annual episcopal income. Such activities, however, were unequal to the task of stemming the growth of Welsh dissent. Nor did they exempt him from the charge that, by failing to present Welsh speakers to Wesh benefices, he had weakened the church. However, as much of the population growth was due to English immigration, and as he only had twelve livings in his personal gift, such a failure (denied by his biographer), if true, can scarcely have had the consequence alleged. 
Copleston's theological and economic views in the 1840s were unaltered from those he expressed in the 1820s. He opposed the 'mysticism' of the Tractarians and their opposition to science and literature. He saw the Irish famine of 1846 as a providential message of the truth of Malthusianism. In his later years he became increasingly irritable and oversensitive as his health deteriorated: he gave up horse-riding in 1844. Copleston died on Sunday 14 October 1849 at Hardwick House, near Chepstow, and was buried on 23 October in the lady chapel of Llandaff Cathedral, the first bishop to be buried there since 1674. 
Copleston's life exemplified the transitional position which he occupied in early nineteenth-century England. By comparison with many of his contemporaries he was a liberal reformer, promoting both the revival of learning and liberal politics at Oxford. But he chose not to pursue the consequences of the liberal speculations which he encouraged in his pupils. He had no desire to see either the natural or social sciences displace classical learning at Oxford, nor reason undermine Anglican doctrinal truth. He wished only for a revivified English establishment, which, instead of retreating into reaction, was capable of fighting new heresies on their own territory. This, however, was a task principally undertaken by his students. 


@@@@@


doc= 6268


Copley, Anthony (b. 1567, d. in or after 1609), writer and conspirator, was the third son of Thomas Copley (1532-1584) and his wife, Catherine Luttrell (died in or after 1590). John Copley (c.1577-1662) was his younger brother. When his father went abroad, he remained in England. In 1582, however, 'being a yonge student of Furneval's Inne under the charge of a kinsman... Mr T[homas] Southwell, who is now himselfe beyond sea, him unwitting, I stole away' (BL, Lansdowne MSS, vol. 66, no. 47). He joined his parents in Rouen, where he stayed for two years. A kinsman, the Jesuit Robert Southwell, procured him a pension of $10 from Pope Gregory XIII, and he was sent to Rome. There he spent two years until, in 1585, Gregory died and the pension was not renewed. Copley returned to Flanders, where Hugh Owen obtained him a pension of 20 crowns from the duke of Parma. As he admitted on his return to England in 1590, 'since that time till now... I have served the king of Spaine in his warres in Flanders' (ibid.). Copley was arrested shortly after his arrival in England, and it was from prison, on 6 January 1591, that he wrote this to William Waad, clerk of the privy council. In the same letter he sought the queen's pardon and employment, swearing loyalty 'to my prince and country' (ibid.). He proved his loyalty in a series of letters detailing the whereabouts and activities of English Catholic fugitives and the unscrupulous, harsh conduct of his former patron, Parma. In a dramatic role reversal the former Spanish pensioner besought God to favour queen and kingdom against Philip II, who 'sware... he would utterly ruine her Majestie and Ingland' (ibid., nos. 25, 47). 
During the 1590s Copley, who was entitled to a $30 annuity by his father's will, married and lived with his wife at Roughay, Horsham parish, in Surrey; by 1604 they had children. Here, according to Richard Topcliffe's report to the queen, on 26 June 1592, he early manifested his volatility and unreliability: 'Anto[ny] Coplaye, the most desperayte yowthe that lyvethe... Bee most familiare with [Robert] Southewell. Coplay did shoote at a gentilman the Last summer, and killed an Oxe with a muskett and in Horsham Churche threwe his dagger at the parishe Clarke... There lyvethe not the lyke I think in England for sudden attemptes. (BL, Lansdowne MSS, vol. 72, no. 39)' He also remained under suspicion 'because he doth avouch himself to be a papist' ('APC', 22.168). In December 1591 he was committed a close prisoner to the Fleet prison and questioned about certain speeches to which he had confessed. 
Despite such suspicions, during Elizabeth's reign Copley was a moderate Catholic loyalist, hostile to the Jesuits and in search of toleration. In 1595 and again (this time without his name but with many 'late, true, and wittie accidents') in 1614 appeared 'Wits, Fittes and Fancies Fronted and Entermedled with Presidentes of Honour and Wisdom'. This piece of prose consisted of jests, tales, and sayings mostly translated from a Spanish work, 'La floretta spagnola'. The 1595 edition included 'Love's Owl', a poetic dialogue between 'Love and an Olde Man', and in the following year he published a poem entitled 'A Fig for Fortune'. Both works were of little artistic merit but politically revealing about Copley's position. He dedicated the latter to another loyalist Catholic, Anthony Browne, Viscount Montague, and, at the same time, this 'Elizian out-cast of Fortune' sang the praises of his protestant 'soveraigne Ladie Eliza' ('A Fig for Fortune', sigs. A4-A4'v'). This 'versified allegory... is a barely concealed plea for Catholic toleration, couched in terms of hyperbolic praise, with an argument at once elaborate and transparent' (Shell, 134). Then, in 1601, he took the side of secular priests in their controversy with the Jesuits. In particular Copley supported one of them, his friend William Watson, who had already appeared in print, with his pamphlet 'An answere to a letter of a Jesuited gentleman, by his cosin, Maister A.C., concerning the appeale [against the archpriest George Blackwell], state, Jesuits'. In it Copley identified 'Jesuitisme and Spaine' and defended the 'Seminarie-Bees' of 'our English hive'. Next year appeared 'Another Letter of Mr. A. C. to his Disjesuited Kinseman Concerning the Appeale, State, Jesuits'. This was followed by a 'Letter of his apologeticall for himself against the calumnies contained against him in a certain Jesuiticall libel intituled 'A manifestation of folly and bad spirit''. There is, however, no record of the publication of his promised 'forthcoming Manifestation of the Jesuit's Commonwealth'. 
In 1603 Copley became involved with Watson and others in the Bye plot. Its purpose was to seize the new king, James I, and compel him to grant toleration to the Catholics. Implementation of the plan on 24 June was frustrated by lack of Catholic armed support due, Copley claimed, to the Jesuits, who also informed the government. On 2 July a proclamation denounced the 'wicked purpose' of 'so ungracious and traiterous a minde' and ordered Copley's arrest. When his sister refused to harbour him he surrendered and made, in the bishop of London's words, 'so ample and full' confession ('Salisbury MSS', 15.187). At the conspirators' trial at Winchester, on 15 November 1603, it was variously reported that 'Copley did deal more ingenuously' than the rest (Kempe, 375) and that he was 'a man of a whining speech, but a shrewd invention and resolution' ('State trials', 2.64). His confession, also used against Sir Walter Ralegh at his trial, helped to secure the conviction of most of the Bye conspirators who were duly sentenced to death. Copley was pardoned, possibly because he provided further information. He was, however, banished from the realm. On 6 July 1604 he bade farewell to Robert Cecil, to whom he felt bound 'for his life and goods'. He added that 'The little he has of his own is necessarily left to his wife and children' ('Salisbury MSS', 16.165). When Copley went into exile, he journeyed to Jerusalem with Ambrose Vaux. He was later in Brussels (1605), the English College at Rome (January-April 1606 or 1607), and The Hague (1608). He was still alive in 1609. It is not known if his wife or any of his children survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 6269


Copley, Sir Godfrey, second baronet (c.1653-1709), politician, was the eldest son of Sir Godfrey Copley, first baronet (1623-1678), of Sprotborough, Yorkshire, and his first wife, Eleanor (died 1659), daughter of Sir Thomas Walmesley of Dunkenhalgh, Lancashire. Although nothing is known of Copley's early education, he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1674 and to the Inner Temple in 1681. In 1678 he succeeded his father as the second baronet. Thereafter his place of residence alternated between Sprotborough and his London residence at Red Lion Square. He was married twice, first, on 14 October 1681, to Catherine Purcell ('b'. 'c'.1657), daughter and coheir of John Purcell of Nantriba, Montgomeryshire -- they had three sons and daughters, though only a daughter survived him -- and second, in 1700, to Gertrude Carew ('bap'. 1682, died 1736), daughter of Sir John Carew of Antony, Cornwall. The second marriage remained childless. 
Copley was an active member of the Royal Society, of which he became a fellow in 1691, and served on the society's council on several occasions. His interest in science and antiquities was accommodated by healthy financial circumstances. He also regularly attended the London taverns that served as meeting-places for politicians. These two interests provided him with a wide circle of acquaintances that included many leading politicians as well as men of letters such as Dr Hans Sloane and Ralph Thoresby. 
Politically, Copley was a country tory back-bencher, who on occasion expressed his independence in relation to party politics. His early parliamentary career was uneventful, though after his election for Aldborough, Yorkshire, in 1679 a rumour was spread that he was a Roman Catholic, owing to his connection through his maternal grandfather with Catholic interests in Lancashire. Having represented Aldborough until 1681, Copley did not return to parliament until 1695, when he was elected for Thirsk, another Yorkshire constituency, which he represented for the remainder of his life. From 1695 onwards he was a very active MP, taking a particular interest in financial affairs. His legal training was also evident in his parliamentary activity, especially in the debates surrounding the attainder of the Jacobite conspirator Sir John Fenwick in 1696. Copley spoke on several occasions, warning of the consequences of dispensing with the legal requirement of evidence from two witnesses, emphasizing the danger of setting precedents in the method of the attainder, and pointing out that parliament could not ignore 'the eternal rules' of equity, justice, reason, and conscience (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 1116). In keeping with these sentiments, Copley attended Fenwick to the scaffold. Copley also spoke in several debates relating to the Anglican church, of which he was a member, and which he believed was in less danger than was believed by many of his contemporaries. 
In 1701 Copley was elected as one of the commissioners to be named in the bill of accounts. This new parliamentary commission was included in the bill on the instigation of tory back-benchers, including Copley, who hoped to prove the charges that millions of pounds, granted for the war with France, remained unaccounted for. In the following year he was again elected to the commission, which he proceeded to serve on until 1704. During Copley's time as a commissioner Ralph Thoresby visited him at Sprotborough and noted that although Copley received him kindly he had to return to London in a few days, owing to the commission's heavy workload. However, Copley did find time to show Thoresby his new canal, his house, his many paintings by great masters, and certain mathematical instruments of which Copley had a good understanding. In 1704 Copley precluded himself from any further service on the commission by accepting the office of comptroller of army accounts, which he held until his death. After 1704 he was less active in parliament, probably due to his closer association with the government, although he continued to adhere to his country principles on occasion. 
Copley died at Red Lion Square, London, on 9 April 1709 of a 'quinsy', or inflammation of the throat, which was considered to be a rare ailment, and was buried at Sprotborough on 23 April. In his will of 14 October 1704 he made substantial financial provision for his second wife and his daughter, Catherine, as well as leaving $100 to the Royal Society for the benefit of scientific knowledge. Although the first financial award was not made until 1731, in 1736 the society decided to use the bequest to fund an annual gold medal award, named after Copley. In time the Copley medal became regarded as the highest scientific distinction bestowed by the society, and is still awarded to this day. Copley's estates were put in trust for his cousin, Lionel Copley, though they were eventually inherited by Copley's grandson Joseph Moyle, the son of Catherine, who took his grandfather's surname by act of parliament. 


@@@@@


doc= 6270


Copley, John (c.1577-1662), protestant convert and Church of England clergyman, was born at Louvain in the Spanish Netherlands, the fourth and youngest surviving son of Thomas Copley (1532-1584) of Gatton, Surrey, and Roughay, Sussex, a coheir of Lord Hoo and Hastings, whose title he used, and of his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Luttrell (died in or after 1590), whose family had lands in East Anglia; Anthony Copley was his elder brother. His family had fled England as recusants but John was taken back there at nine days old to be nursed and educated. He stayed with a conformist uncle named Southwell, worshipping as an Anglican, but from his seventh year was also taught the Roman Catholic faith. When he was nine he and his mother went to Liege. The following year he started at King's College, Douai; then he continued his education successively at Valenciennes, the English College, Douai, and the Jesuit English College at St Omer, where he was one of the first to enter in 1593 and remained until about 1595. His mother returned to England, where in May 1596 she conformed. 
About this time, while on a voyage, Copley and five fellow students were captured by an English ship near Calais and taken to London, where his relation Lord Howard of Effingham, as lord admiral, and Archbishop Whitgift entertained them. Copley was handed over to Bishop Aylmer and instructed in Anglican doctrine, but was soon freed on his friends' surety, and described himself as indulging in worldly pleasures while continuing to receive the Roman Catholic sacraments. However, in October 1599 he was admitted to the English College in Rome, and ordained sub-deacon, deacon, and priest in 1602. In September he left for England via Douai. He worked diligently as a seminary priest, sometimes under the name Luttrell, in the Roman Catholic London district, befriending many and initially with a strong conviction that he was serving God. 
The Gunpowder Plot was a watershed for Copley. Convinced that the priests connected with it, whose guilt he assumed, would not have acted without papal authority, he was deeply disillusioned, considering that the pope would rather be the vicar of hell than the vicegerent of Christ. In July 1606 he was banished, with twenty-three other priests, and arrived at Douai. He was shocked by the acquiescence of the Jesuits abroad in the plot, regarding Roman Catholic teaching on the pope's power to depose rulers as totally unacceptable. He soon returned to England, but in May 1607 was arrested at Flushing; in October was indicted for hearing mass in Newgate gaol. 
By this time Copley had read extensively in protestant polemic, the better to refute it. This stirred up doubts, fuelled by his reading of Bellarmine's 'Controversies'. Some protestants challenged him to satisfy them on disputed points from scripture, the early fathers, or natural reason, which he was unable to do: his studies convinced him that the Anglican position was right. This led to a spiritual crisis in which 'my poore soule [was] environed with perplexed assaults of flesh and bloud' (Copley, 10). His struggle 'to overcome these conflicts between truth and falsehood' was aggravated by ties with numerous friends and recusant relatives, and by the thought of the distress apostasy would cause his converts. Once released from prison he became a chaplain to his kin the Cottons, but had to leave in 1610 owing to friction within the household. In 1611 his inner turmoil led to a spiritual Damascus experience, and Anglicanism. He was then chaplain to the Sussex-based Anthony Maria Browne, Viscount Montague. While in his service Copley fell in love with his future wife, Rebecca Moone, and they were married in St Margaret's, Westminster, on 10 December 1611. Commentators as different as John Chamberlain and archpresbyter George Birkhead concluded that it was a woman's love which had enticed Copley from Catholicism. 
In 'Doctrinall and Morall Observations Concerning Religion' (1612) Copley argued his new theological position moderately, with much reference to Roman Catholic works and those of the early fathers supporting his view, as well as personal testimony. In July, James I pardoned him for activities regarded as treasonable under the 1586 'Act against Seminary Priests'. Birkhead had already concluded four months previously that Copley had betrayed to the government all he knew of the activities of Catholic missionaries. Although he averred he would not inform against priests, it seems that Copley did subsequently inform against lay Catholics. In October, Archbishop Abbot, on whom he had attended following his conformity, presented him to Bethersden vicarage in Kent, which he resigned when Abbot collated him to the rectory of neighbouring Pluckley in 1616. Rebecca Copley died, and was buried there on 10 March 1623. Copley married again, on 9 February 1624 at St Mary Abbots, Kensington, Alyce Boucher, a widow, who died in 1638: on his death he left a third wife, Martha. All marriages were apparently childless. 
In the 1630s Copley repeatedly conflicted with Sir Edward Dering at Pluckley over alleged wrongful appropriation of tithes and other rectorial matters. Dering's petition to Archbishop Laud in 1637 that Copley be removed to another living was fruitless, apparently owing to Copley's own obstruction. On 29 March 1642, together with Dr Richard Sheldon and Mr Higgins, Copley was summoned to the House of Commons accused of supporting a Kentish petition initiated by Dering which favoured the prayer book, royal control over the militia, and a synod of divines, but he denied any connection, and the Commons took no further action in the case. However, in September 1643 his benefice was sequestrated. Copley was restored to Pluckley in 1660, but may never have returned there as he died in Ashford, Kent, where he was buried on 3 June 1662. By his will, dated 19 September 1658, he left what he termed his 'small estate' (valued at $91 8's'., including debts) to his wife, Martha (Canterbury Cathedral Archives and Library, DC6/PRC 17/71/246). 


@@@@@


doc= 6271


Copley, John Singleton (1738-1815), portrait and history painter, was born in Boston, Massachusetts, on 3 July 1738 at Long Wharf, the first and only child of Mary Singleton ('c'.1710-1789) and Richard Copley, shopkeepers who emigrated from Ireland some time in the mid-1730s. Richard Copley died some time in the mid-1740s, but his widow and son continued the family business of cutting and selling tobacco until 1748. 
Copley's formal education during his childhood remains a mystery. But his home on Long Wharf, the centre of Boston's thriving merchant economy, which accounted for 40 per cent of the total volume of colonial American shipping, was a 'de facto' classroom that taught Copley market lessons that he would later apply to his artistic career. 
In 1748 Copley's widowed mother married Peter Pelham (1695-1751), an emigre English artist and schoolteacher who had arrived in America in 1727. Pelham had been married twice before and had four sons and a daughter of his own. Ten-year-old Copley and his mother moved into Pelham's house on Lindel's Row, which was in a district of artisans near the centre of Boston. A half-brother, Henry Pelham (1749-1806), born the next year, would become a miniaturist, printmaker, and map maker of some reputation. 
Copley's artistic education must have begun at about this time. He learned to mezzotint, a print technique that generates form in tonal areas rather than in lines, from his stepfather, who had achieved prominence in London and Boston for his work in that medium. Copley's first artistic effort, a mezzotint of the Revd William Welsteed, was printed in 1753 from the rescraped plate his stepfather had used to produce his own portrait of the Revd William Cooper ten years earlier. Peter Pelham also opened his library of English prints to his stepson and probably arranged to have Copley visit the studio of John Smibert (1688-1751), the leading artist of Boston during Copley's childhood. The ambitious late baroque pictures (241 painted in Boston) of this Scottish emigre, who arrived in Boston in 1729 after pursuing a moderately distinguished career in London, had established a new standard of excellence for many American colonial artists. Smibert's studio also offered Copley a look at English and European prints, theoretical treatises on art, and plaster casts from the antique. As a result, Copley's first paintings, of 1754, were mythological works: 'The Forge of Vulcan' (priv. coll.), 'Galatea' (Museum of Fine Arts, Boston), and 'The Return of Neptune' (Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York), all based on European prints and more consistent with baroque English taste than the traditional American taste for portraits. 
Pelham also passed entrepreneurial skills on to his stepson. Like most household producers in Boston, Pelham, and later Copley, had to be marketing tacticians capable of identifying, satisfying, and at times creating the desire to own works of fine art. Copley in particular was at the forefront of the process of Anglicization, in which the newly wealthy merchant elite of Boston began to covet and consume luxury English goods, or facsimiles of them, including portraits in the formal English style. Even in his early twenties, the marketwise Copley competed with the English rococo artist Joseph Blackburn, then resident in Boston, for commissions. He imitated Blackburn's technique so successfully that the English artist was forced to return home in 1763, leaving the 25-year-old Copley in control of the burgeoning market for paintings in Boston. 
Without the benefit of an art academy or further instruction from Pelham, who died in 1751, Copley taught himself, often by imitating the English prints that could be bought or viewed in Boston. He studied prints after paintings by Sir Godfrey Kneller, Thomas Hudson, and Sir Joshua Reynolds. For example, his 'Mrs Daniel Hubbard' (1764; Art Institute of Chicago), is explicitly based on John Faber's print after a Hudson portrait of Mary Finch, Viscountess Andover ('c'.1746). The prints were of twofold importance in Copley's self-improvement: first for teaching him contemporary compositional patterns, and second for providing knowledge of current English imagery that allowed his upmarket Anglophile clients to be persuasively portrayed as sophisticated English ladies and gentlemen. 
In the late 1750s and early 1760s, Copley developed his signature style, which was descriptive and marked by meticulous detail, crisp lines and edges, strong colour, and dramatic tonal contrasts. His portraits of 'Mary and Elizabeth Royall' ('c'.1758; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston), 'Moses Gill' (1764; Rhode Island School of Design, Providence, Rhode Island), and 'Nathaniel Sparhawk' (1764; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston) are exemplary. He was so fastidious in his technique that Gilbert Stuart once commented on a realistic passage in Copley's 'Epes Sargent' (1760; National Gallery of Art, Washington): 'Prick that hand and blood will spurt out' (S. Benjamin, 'Art in America', 1880, 20). Copley's sitters often mentioned the numerous sittings he required, one recalling the twenty visits needed for 'Mr and Mrs Thomas Mifflin' (1773; Philadelphia Museum of Art). Though he often based his compositions on English prints, he could not learn English brush technique from them, and as a result his paintings veered away from the fluid effects of the artists of London, such as Reynolds and Thomas Gainsborough, who preferred painterly brushwork and atmospheric veiling. In that way he was like other artists, such as Joseph Wright of Derby and Tilly Kettle, who were working in provincial areas of Britain. 
In an effort to improve his art and to acquire an English metropolitan manner in his early career, he shipped his portrait of his half-brother Henry Pelham, 'Boy with a Squirrel' (1765; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston), to London for exhibition at the Society of Artists the following year. Reynolds said it was 'a very wonderfull Performance', but noted 'a little Hardness in the Drawing, Coldness in the Shades, An over minuteness' (Jones, 41-2). Benjamin West also praised Copley's painting, but thought it 'too liney, which was judged to have arose from there being so much neetness in the lines' (ibid., 44). Reynolds and West agreed that Copley must leave America to study in Europe and London before, as the former phrased it, 'your Manner and Taste were corrupted or fixed by working in your little way at Boston' (ibid.). 
The exhibition, however, did result in Copley's election as a member of the Society of Artists in London. In 1767 Copley sent to London a second picture, 'Young Lady with a Bird and Dog' (Toledo Museum of Art, Ohio), but to English academic eyes he again missed the mark. Citing first the overall detailing and the opacity and brightness of colour, West added that 'Each Part being... Equell in Strength of Coulering and finishing, Each Making too much a Picture of its silf, without that Due Subordanation to the Principle parts, viz they head and hands' (Jones, 56-7). He repeated the admonition to come 'home' to London 'before it may be too late for much Improvement' (ibid., 60). 
Though Copley wrote back to lament a situation in America in which he had to paint pictures in a place where 'the people regard it no more than any other usefull trade... like that of a Carpenter, tailor or shew maker, not as one of the most noble Arts in the World' (Jones, 65-6), he was, none the less, extremely popular in the late 1760s, producing some of colonial America's most memorable images. Among them are the merchants 'John Hancock' (1765; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston), 'Nicholas Boylston' (1767; Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts), and 'Jeremiah Lee' (1769; Wadsworth Athenaeum, Hartford, Connecticut); the ladies 'Mrs Samuel Quincy' ('c'.1761; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston), 'Mrs Thomas Boylston' (1766; Harvard University), and 'Rebecca Boylston' (1767; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston); the ministers 'Myles Cooper' (1768; Columbia University, New York) and 'Nathaniel Appleton' (1761; Harvard University); and the artisans 'Paul Revere' (1768; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston) and 'Nathaniel Hurd' ('c'.1765; Cleveland Museum of Art, Ohio). 
In the 1760s Copley also pioneered miniature and pastel painting in America, in both of which he was self-trained. His experimental oil on copper miniatures of the late 1750s were superseded about 1762 by a more delicate watercolour on ivory technique (for example, 'Jeremiah Lee', 'c'.1769; Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York). Copley drew about fifty-five pastels in America, beginning in 1758 (for example, his 'Self-Portrait', 1769; Winterthur Museum, Winterthur, Delaware). 
By 1771 Copley had become so renowned in New England and along the Atlantic seaboard that he was invited to New York city, where he spent six months and reached the pinnacle of his American fame with portraits so powerful and austere that they bear more resemblance to the French neo-classical art of Jacques-Louis David than to contemporary English painting. His portraits of 'Mrs Thomas Gage' (1771; Putnam Foundation, Timken Museum, San Diego) and 'Samuel Adams' ('c'.1770-72; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston), painted in Boston, are among the most arresting pictures painted in colonial America. 
In 1769 Copley married Susannah Farnham Clarke (1745-1836), the daughter of Richard Clarke, the official agent of the British East India Company in Boston, and purchased a 20 acre farm on Beacon Hill, next to the estate of John Hancock. Political events, especially the 'Stamp Act' of 1765, the 'Townshend Acts' of 1767, the non-importation movements that they provoked, and the Boston massacre of 1770, led to the destabilization and polarization of Boston society. Copley had friends and clients in both tory and whig factions. On the one hand he counted radical whigs such as Samuel Adams, John Hancock, and Paul Revere as his friends, actually painting Adams as a political firebrand. On the other hand, he had married into a prominent tory family and painted many tories, including Thomas Gage, the British commander in North America and the colonial governor of Massachusetts from 1774 to 1775. Copley, however, never labelled himself politically and rarely expressed a clear political position. But he did have a political opinion, namely that he felt threatened, both personally and professionally, by the growing crisis, and wished the clock could be turned back a decade or two to when America was under the invisible benefaction of English rule. He claimed to dissociate himself from partisan politics in the higher name of art, and began, as early as 1766, to imagine himself emigrating, breaking the 'shackels' of relentless portrait painting, and abandoning the comforts of his annual income of 300 guineas. 
The defining event in Copley's decision to emigrate was the Boston Tea Party of 1773. Because his father-in-law had been importing tea under an exclusive contract with the East India Company, a situation that was emblematic of British control of American markets, he was under ferocious whig attacks led by Samuel Adams. Copley attempted to forestall political action against the Clarkes, but after Adams exhorted 8000 Bostonians at South Church in November of that year, a group of activists disguised as Mohawks boarded Richard Clarke's tea ship and dumped all 342 casks in the harbour. That and other pre-Revolutionary events traumatized the Copley and Clarke families. Copley himself was threatened by marauding whigs; the retaliatory 'Coercive Acts' and 'Boston Port Bill' ruined the economy; British warships began filling the harbour; and Copley knew he had to leave the city, which he did on 10 June 1774, lamenting the inevitable 'Civil War', as he called it. In May of 1775, war having broken out, his wife, three children, and the Clarkes left for England. His mother, Mary, half-brother, Henry Pelham, and sickly infant son, Clarke, remained in Boston. 
After a 21-year career in America, Copley moved on to a fourteen-month tour of the continent, largely in Italy, and then to a highly successful second career of some forty years as a portrait and history painter in London. Though John Adams had lauded him as 'the greatest Master that ever was in America' (L. H. Butterfield, ed., 'Adams Family Correspondence', 1963, 2.103), he was known in London only as the author of two exhibition pictures and as a correspondent with Benjamin West; on the continent he was unknown entirely. In order to adapt to and succeed in his new cultural environment he embarked on a study of antiquity and the old masters, long beyond the age at which English artists had done so. Travelling with the English artist George Carter, he set off late in 1774 for Rome via Rouen, Paris, Lyons, Marseilles, Toulon, Antibes, Genoa, Pisa, and Florence. He studied the work of Raphael in particular, unapologetically basing his first European painting, 'The Ascension' (1775; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston) on the Italian's late 'Transfiguration'. Late in 1775 he travelled via Parma, Venice, the Tyrol, Mannheim, and Cologne to London, where he joined his wife and three eldest children: Elizabeth ('b'. 1770); John Singleton Copley, later Baron Lyndhurst (b. 1772); and Mary ('b'. 1773). His son Clarke died in Boston, and a third daughter, Susanna, was born. 
In 1776, at the age of thirty-eight, Copley settled into a house on Leicester Fields, was elected associate of the Royal Academy, and submitted his portrait 'Mr and Mrs Ralph Izard' (1775; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston) to the Royal Academy's annual exhibition. Ever ambitious, he submitted four more pictures to the Royal Academy in 1777, including the large 'Copley Family' (1776-7; National Gallery of Art, Washington) which was attacked in the London press. His English portrait style was a modification of his American style, keeping many of the poses, the sharp light and dark contrasts, and bright colouring he was accustomed to, but now loosening the brushwork somewhat, reducing the details, attempting more group portraits, and concerning himself more with the representation of social rank. Exemplary works are 'Sir William Pepperell and his Family' (1778; North Carolina Museum of Art, Raleigh), 'Clark Gayton, Admiral of the White' (1779; NMM), 'Henry Laurens' (1782; National Portrait Gallery, Washington), 'William Murray, First Earl of Mansfield' (1783; NPG), 'The Three Youngest Daughters of George III' (1785; Royal Collection), 'Richard, Earl Howe, Admiral of the Fleet' ('c'.1791-1794; NMM), 'Baron Graham' ('c'.1804; National Gallery of Art, Washington). During this period Copley was elected a Royal Academician (1779); saw the birth (1782) and death (1785) of his third son, Jonathan; and the death of his daughter Susanna (1785). He moved to George Street near Hanover Square, London (1783), visited Ghent, Flanders, Brussels, and Antwerp (1787), and lost the election for the presidency of the Royal Academy to Benjamin West (1792). It was remarkable that Copley, whose artistic education had taken place thousands of miles from London, would vie for the president's chair of the Royal Academy. But it was equally understandable that he would lose, for he thought of himself, more so than his peers at the Royal Academy, as an autonomous professional with a style of his own. Decades of self-reliant work in Boston, without the company of professional colleagues, had set him on that path, as had his innately independent thinking. 
Copley's primary artistic goal in London was to paint historical subjects, which Reynolds and others considered the highest branch of painting. He painted seven religious subjects. Prominent among them were 'The Tribute Money' (1782; RA), which was his belated diploma picture for the Royal Academy; 'Samuel Relating to Eli the Judgements of God on Eli's House' (1780; Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford, Connecticut); and 'Saul Reproved by Samuel for not Obeying the Commandments of God' (1798; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston). He once painted a subject from literature, 'The Red Cross Knight' (1793; National Gallery of Art, Washington), from Edmund Spenser's 'The Faerie Queen'. 
Copley's primary focus, however, was on contemporary history painting, on which he intended to build his artistic reputation. His first, and most spectacular and novel, was 'Watson and the Shark' (1778; National Gallery of Art, Washington), which the London press favourably reviewed. Unlike most contemporary history paintings that depicted heroic subjects of national magnitude, for example, Benjamin West's 'The Death of General James Wolfe' (National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa; replica, Royal Collection), Copley's picture was commissioned by Brooke Watson, a merchant and, later, lord mayor of London, and is concerned with a macabre and wholly personal episode in Watson's young adulthood. In 1749 the fourteen-year-old Watson, who was then a crewman on a British ship, went for a swim in Havana harbour, where he was attacked by a shark that mutilated his right leg below the knee. Copley's picture depicts the climactic moment of the shark wildly pursuing its already injured prey moments before a group of fellow crewmen drive it away and pull Watson from the waters. Despite the idiosyncratic and biographical nature of the subject, Copley based passages of the picture on old master paintings, according to the theoretical dictates for history painting advocated by Reynolds and practised by West. For example, the man in the prow who is about to jab the shark with a boat hook suggests traditional pictures of St Michael casting out Satan; the crewmen reaching out of the boat towards Watson are based on figures in Raphael's 'Miraculous Draught of Fish'; and the wild-eyed figure of Watson flailing in the water is adapted from another in Raphael's 'Transfiguration'. 
As a tale of physical trial and emotional trauma, followed by salvation, the subject of 'Watson and the Shark' was more in the literary tradition of Daniel Defoe's 'The Life and Strange Surprizing Adventures of Robinson Crusoe' (1719) than it was in the pictorial tradition of English history painting. The theme of triumph over adversity must have been on Watson's mind when he commissioned the picture, however, for he bequeathed it to Christ's Hospital, London, with the hope that it would 'hold out a most usefull Lesson to Youth' (will of Brooke Watson, 1807, TNA: PRO). 
Copley's next historical subject, the 'Death of the Earl of Chatham' (1779-81; Tate collection), incorporated portraits of fifty-five of England's noblemen. It shows William Pitt, first earl of Chatham, collapsing in the House of Lords on 7 April 1778 during his reply to the duke of Richmond's speech in favour of American independence. Not only did Copley break with tradition by combining history painting with portraiture, he also marketed his picture in a novel way, by renting a private venue for its exhibition, which was in direct competition with the Royal Academy's annual exhibition of 1781. He charged for admission and earned more money from prints made after the painting and marketed for him by the print publisher John Boydell. 
Boydell commissioned and eventually paid Copley $800 for 'The Death of Major Peirson' (1782-4; Tate collection), which was again exhibited privately and for profit at 28 Haymarket. Boydell also arranged for the accompanying print sale. A highly dramatic picture, painted at the peak of Copley's powers, it depicts the events of 6 January 1781 when Peirson valiantly died leading his troops during the French invasion of the island of Jersey. Copley carefully researched the details of the town's appearance and correctly recorded the uniforms, but in accord with Reynolds's theory of history painting he also idealized Peirson's death, turning him into a modern Patroclus. The picture's composition was based on the tripartite structure of Benjamin West's 'The Death of General James Wolfe' (1771) but now made more densely populated and physically animated. 
The 'Peirson' attracted the interest of George III, who reportedly devoted three hours to study of its 'various excellencies, in point of design, character, composition, and colouring' ('Morning Herald and Daily Advertiser', 22 May 1784). The picture, with its brilliant reds and whites, theatrical lighting, and sophisticated composition, all put to the service of glorifying English heroics, captured the patriotic imagination of viewers who eagerly looked to military events, such as the defence of Jersey in 1781 and the defence of Gibraltar in 1782, that would ease their sense of the impending loss of America. The corporation of London rewarded Copley for the 'Peirson' with a commission for a huge picture, 'The Siege of Gibraltar' (1783-91; Guildhall Art Gallery, London), for a final sum of $1100. The picture glorifies British magnanimity in the midst of battle as officers risk their lives in the aftermath of victory to rescue the enemy from their exploding ships. General George Augustus Eliott (later Lord Heathfield) is depicted large on a white horse, directing the rescue. 
To display the picture, which took eight years to paint, Copley had to erect a tent in Green Park, London. He said that 60,000 came to see it, paying the 1's'. admission price ('Anecdotes of artists of the last fifty years', 'Library of the Fine Arts', 4, July 1832, 25). Four years later Copley exhibited at Spring Gardens 'Charles I Demanding in the House of Commons the Five Impeached Members' (Boston Public Library). Earlier in subject than his previous history paintings, the exhibition of the picture was not well attended. In 1799 Copley attempted a last private showing of a historical picture, 'The Victory of Lord Duncan' (1798-9; Dundee Art Galleries and Museums), which depicts the surrender at the battle of Camperdown of the Dutch Admiral DeWinter to Admiral Duncan on 11 October 1797. 
After 1800 the quality of Copley's work was in decline. One version of 'The Offer of the Crown to Lady Jane Grey' (1807-8; Somerset Club, Boston) was well received at the Royal Academy. But his 'George IV' (1804-10; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston), an equestrian portrait, was poorly composed and highly criticized. In the early nineteenth century he became preoccupied with petty squabbles with clients and fellow artists. He went into debt. Commissions became scarce. His half-brother Henry Pelham drowned in Boston in 1806. Finally, his health deteriorated and he became feeble in both mind and body. His 'Battle of the Pyrenees' (1812-15; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston) and 'The Siege of Dunkirk' (1814-15; College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia) were inept. When the young American artist Samuel F. B. Morse visited Copley in 1811, he wrote: 'He is very old and infirm... His powers of mind have almost entirely left him; his late paintings are miserable; it is really a lamentable thing that a man should outlive his faculties. He has been a first-rate painter, as you well know. I saw at his room some exquisite pieces which he painted twenty or thirty years ago, but his paintings of the last four or five years are very bad. He was pleasant, however, and agreeable in his manners. (E. L. Morse, ed., 'Samuel F. B. Morse: his Letters and Journals', 1914, 1.47)' Copley suffered a stroke at dinner on 11 August 1815. He was left paralysed and incapable of speaking. He died at his home in George Street, London on 9 September 1815, and was buried in Croydon, Surrey. After his death, the family was supported by John Singleton Copley junior, a lawyer, who was elected to parliament in 1818, made Baron Lyndhurst in 1827, and was the first lord chancellor to have been born outside Britain. 
Copley was the greatest and most influential painter in colonial America, producing about 350 works of art. With his startling likenesses of persons and things, he came to define a realist art tradition in America. His visual legacy extended throughout the nineteenth century in the American taste for the work of artists as diverse as Fitz Hugh Lane and William Michael Harnett. In Britain, while he continued to paint portraits for the elite, his great achievement was the development of contemporary history painting, which was a combination of reportage, idealism, and theatre. He was also one of the pioneers of the private exhibition, orchestrating shows and marketing prints of his own work to mass audiences that might otherwise attend exhibitions only at the Royal Academy, or who previously had not gone to exhibitions at all. 


@@@@@


doc= 6272


Copley, John Singleton, Baron Lyndhurst (1772-1863), politician and lord chancellor, was born at Beacon Hill, Boston, Massachusetts, before the American War of Independence and died in London after the outbreak of the American Civil War. 
Copley was born on 21 May 1772, the elder son of the distinguished portrait painter John Singleton Copley (1738-1815) and Susannah Farnham (1745-1836), the daughter of Richard Clarke, a loyalist and principal agent of the East India Company in Boston. As a result of the increasing political turmoil of the early 1770s his father's income dwindled. In June 1774 Copley sen. left for England and Italy, to 'enjoy a long-denied visit and return after the tempest [of colonial unrest] had blown itself out' (Prown, 1.87). His wife and three of his four children went to England in May of the following year. Neither Copley sen. nor his wife ever returned to America. In 1783 the family moved to 25 George Street, Hanover Square, London. No. 25, later enlarged with the purchase of no. 24, was to be the younger Copley's London home for the remainder of his life. 
Educated at a private school, Manor House, in Chiswick, Copley entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1790. His academic career was distinguished: a first-class classicist and second wrangler in the mathematical tripos (1794), 'having adopted the subject within these nine months, whereas several of my opponents have been labouring for years', he was elected, by examination, to a fellowship of his college, which he held from 1795 to 1804. His affection for Trinity and the university remained undiminished and he regarded his election as high steward (1840) as one of the chief honours of his life. 
As an undergraduate it was said that he became a 'mighty Jacobin' and a fervent supporter of the French Revolution. But in his account, to the vice-chancellor, of his travels in the United States he professed himself a 'fierce aristocrat' and extolled that country as the 'country to cure your Jacobins. Send them over and they will return quite converted' (Amory, 145). His contemporaries at the bar, such as Sir Thomas Denman, then a friend, would have been surprised to read this protestation. Viscount Althorp was present during the debate on the second 'Reform Bill' and heard Lyndhurst's vehement protest that he 'never was a Whig': '[the Attorney-General (Denman)], who stood next to me, pressed my arm tightly, saying, Villain! No he was a Democrat. When I was a young man, he took me to a dinner of the friends of the people. The violence of the speeches startled me, and I could not help observing that I thought his friends went too far, for there must be some honest Tories. 'No', he (Lord Lyndhurst) answered, 'it is impossible; an honest Tory is a contradiction in terms'. (Le Marchant, 350-51)' Copley was welcomed in Boston by relatives and friends. But the visit was tinged with disappointment for he vainly sought to recover the family lands on Beacon Hill; he was advised to compromise his father's claims and did so, accepting a sum of about $4200. On his return from the United States he decided to become a barrister, but his limited means compelled him to spend the next seven years learning the mysteries of special pleading in the chambers of the immortal William Tidd. It was only a loan of $1000 from Gardiner Greene, a Boston merchant, married to his eldest sister, Elizabeth, which enabled him to be called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in 1804. He then joined the midland circuit. 
Copley appeared to have all the talents for immediate success: he was distinguished in appearance, clever, articulate, and 'among his many natural gifts, the rich melodious tone of his voice was not the least' (Le Marchant, 351). But his progress was relatively slow. By 1807 his mother, to whom he was devoted, could write that: 'his prospects are satisfactory, and remove our anxious concern on that score... He has made a great advance and says, he must style himself, as others do, 'a lucky dog'' (Amory, 284-5). His income was, however, only 'satisfactory' for some years thereafter. 
Copley came into prominence in 1812 with his defence of one of the leading Luddites, John Ingham, who was indicted at the Nottingham assizes and charged with the capital offences of rioting and the destruction of machinery. The acquittal, which was hugely popular, was on a technicality since the indictment misdescribed the trade of Ingham's employers. In the following year Copley became a serjeant-at-law, a recognition of his growing professional reputation. 'Bovill v. Moore', in 1816, was a particularly important landmark. In that case, he mastered the specifications of the patent which his client's machine had allegedly infringed. His command of the facts and law persuaded the jury to reject the plaintiff's claim. Thereafter he was the acknowledged leader of his circuit. The increased income was particularly welcome after the death of his father in 1815. The burden of supporting the London family fell upon him, as did the moral obligation, which he gradually discharged, of paying off his father's many creditors. 
It was the trial in 1817 for high treason of Watson and Thistlewood, two of the Spa Fields rioters, which brought Copley to the attention of tory ministers. His address to the jury, ridiculing the indictment that they had levied war against the king, helped to secure their acquittal. Lord Campbell, who vilified Lyndhurst in his 'Lives of the Lord Chancellors', described his address as 'one of the ablest and most effective ever delivered in a court of justice' (Campbell, 8.17). Henry Crabbe Robinson was equally impressed: 'He said nothing that was not to the purpose. There was no idle or superfluous passages in his speech' (H. C. Robinson, 'Diary, Reminiscences and Correspondence', 1869-70, 2.361). 
Such successes led to the crown retaining Copley in a number of state trials for treason. The tories had few able lawyers in the House of Commons, and Lord Castlereagh, who had sat through Watson's trial, realized that Copley was an obvious candidate. In March 1818 he accepted Lord Liverpool's invitation to enter the house, and became a member for the rotten borough of Yarmouth in the Isle of Wight, before being returned for Ashburton at the general election later the same year. In October 1819 he was knighted, and switched seats again in 1826 to the University of Cambridge. Denman and other whigs never forgave his 'dereliction of principle' (Arnould, 63); 'he had no more formed opinion that Toryism was true than he had that Mahometanism was true' (Bagehot, 3.232, 236). 
Copley may have given no pledge to Liverpool; but he consistently supported the government. His political advancement was swift. In February 1819 he became chief justice of Chester and king's serjeant and, in June of that year, solicitor-general, succeeding Sir Robert Gifford. In the house he defended Castlereagh's six bills but did not otherwise take an active part in debates. He was one of the counsel who led the prosecution of the Cato Street conspirators for high treason (1819) and in the same year supported the bill of pains and penalties against Queen Caroline, earning the praise of her counsel, Denman, for his able cross-examination. In January 1824 he succeeded Gifford as attorney-general. 
In September 1826 Copley succeeded Gifford as master of the rolls, a judicial office which he could hold while retaining his seat in the house. On Lord Eldon's resignation in the following year he was appointed lord chancellor and was raised to the peerage as Baron Lyndhurst of Lyndhurst. He served successively under Canning, Goderich, and Wellington. The tory government fell in 1830 and Earl Grey took office. With Lord Brougham's support, Grey surprisingly offered Lyndhurst the office of chief baron of the exchequer. After consulting the duke of Wellington, Sir Robert Peel, and Lord Aberdeen, he decided to accept the offer, knowing that he 'should be subjected to so much obloquy and abuse' (Lyndhurst MSS, Trinity College, Cambridge); 'a judicial office, wholly unconnected with politics' (Martin, 295) was his apologia. He took his seat in January 1831. $7000 p.a. was more attractive than a pension of $4000 to a man who spent too freely. Wellington well knew that 'he cannot live without place, as he has no property and he has already expended 'three years' beforehand his salary' (A. Aspinall, ed., 'Three Early Nineteenth Century Diaries', 1952, 4 n. 2). Lady Lyndhurst's influence over Grey, who even toyed with the possibility of keeping Lyndhurst as lord chancellor, may have been instrumental in securing Lyndhurst's appointment; indeed Arbuthnot suspected that Lyndhurst was already intriguing with the whigs. Possibly Lyndhurst had led Grey to believe that he would not actively oppose government bills and, in return, may have been offered the reversion to the office of lord chief justice. But if any bargain was made, it was soon to be broken. 
Greville predicted that 'the public will gain by the transaction, because they will get a good judge' ('Greville Memoirs', 2.89). That prediction proved to be true, for Lyndhurst's brief tenure as chief baron (1830-34) earned even Campbell's praise. He revived a moribund court which became popular with suitors. Whitwell Elwin records he had the 'power of summing up evidence with such terseness, completeness and exactness from memory alone' (Martin, 283). 
Nowhere were these skills better demonstrated than in 'Small v. Attwood' in 1832, a dispute which centred on the sale, allegedly induced by the seller's fraudulent misrepresentations, of coal and iron mines in Staffordshire. At the trial, which lasted twenty-one days, Lyndhurst was confronted with a web of tangled facts, complex calculations, and voluminous documents and depositions. But his judgment 'was entirely oral, and without even referring to any notes... Never once did he falter or hesitate, and never once was he mistaken in a name, a figure, or a date' (Campbell, 8.73). It was 'one of the ablest judgments ever delivered' ('Greville Memoirs', 2.330). 
Lyndhurst was not a judge who revelled in the niceties of fine legal argument. His judgments do not contain an 'ample exposition of the principles applicable to other disputes'. He was one of those judges: 'who always decide on the particular case before them rightly, who have a nice insight into all that concerns it, are acute discerners of fact, accurate weighers of testimony, just discriminators of argument. Lord Lyndhurst is perhaps as great a judge in this kind as it is easy to fancy. If a wise man had a good cause, he would prefer its being tried before Lyndhurst to its being tried before anyone else. (Bagehot, 3.159, 180-81)' Lyndhurst never pretended to be a 'chancery man'. Unlike Eldon he was not concerned to establish himself as a master of equitable doctrines. As chief baron, he assigned most of the equity business to Baron Alderson, and from the woolsack he delivered few memorable legal speeches. 
Lyndhurst became very influential in the House of Lords. Disraeli said he was a 'pleader rather than an orator, and never a debater' (Monypenny, 1.330). Sir Denis Le Marchant commented that he was: 'always a complete master of his argument, his premises being so skilfully laid that his conclusions were almost irresistible: nothing could be more clear, distinct and logical than his handling of a subject -- at least according to his view of it; but he grappled with no difficulties he was not sure to overcome. (Le Marchant, 351)' His mind was a lawyer's mind. Hence, Wellington's comment: '[you are] not only the first speaker in the House of Lords, but... the first in your own profession' (Amory, 371-2). Lyndhurst rarely appealed to the emotions. Irony and sarcasm were his telling weapons. So, he looked upon 'what proceeded from [Wetherell on the 'Catholic Relief Bill', 1829] rather as the ravings of a disordered imagination, than as emanations from an enlightened and sagacious understanding' ('Hansard 2', 21, 1829, col. 192). 
As solicitor-general and lord chancellor Lyndhurst spoke against Catholic emancipation in 1827 and in its favour in 1829. In 1827 he argued that concessions should be granted only if the Catholic community offered 'security' that civil liberties would not be usurped, the authority of the church would not be endangered, and there would be no 'foreign interference' ('Hansard 2', 16, 1827, col. 905ff.) -- an argument which Denman dismissed as 'bad -- politically, morally, and intellectually' (Arnould, 1.201). In 1829 Lyndhurst's defence of the government's volte-face was equally vigorous. Change, consistent with 'security', was necessary if Ireland was to be governed without coercion; and that security had now been offered and accepted. These were higher considerations than personal consistency. The ultras were not mollified. They combined with the whigs to bring down Wellington's government. 
The 1831 and 1832 debates on the first and second reform bills were passionate. Lyndhurst was condemned for viewing '[questions] only through the medium of party' (Le Marchant, 351); the interventions of this 'unblushing lawyer' (Kriegel, 178) were sneering, factious, mischievous, and imprudent. In his speeches on the 'Reform Bill', in language reminiscent of Burke, he cautioned against change. 'Our constitution is not the work of a day.' The 'Reform Bill' would destroy the 'nice balance' of the constitution. There would be an 'entire change in the persons who are to elect and, consequently, an entire change in the persons elected'; and the rights and privileges of the monarchy and the church would be endangered ('Hansard 3', 8, 1831, col. 283 ff.). It was his wrecking amendment to the 1832 bill, to postpone discussion of the disfranchising clauses until the enfranchising clauses had been disposed of, which made a collision between the two houses inevitable (Le Marchant, 418-19). His confident assertion, that 'we are no less representative of the nation than the House of Commons' ('Hansard 3', 34, 1832, col. 888ff.), was particularly galling. The amendment was passed, and Grey resigned. On the tories failing to form a government, he resumed office. A constitutional crisis was only averted when, confronted with the threat to create enough peers to secure its enactment, the tory peers withdrew their opposition. 
After his brief sojourn as lord chancellor in Peel's 100 days' administration in 1834, Lyndhurst was once more in opposition. The sessions of 1835 and 1836 were almost as tumultuous as those of 1831 and 1832. In 1835 Lyndhurst confided to Disraeli that the movement, which sought the radical reform of the country's institutions, could be stopped. He opposed any reform of municipal government, possibly in the hope of bringing down the government; so the tory-dominated House of Lords, encouraged by his speeches, drastically amended the 'Municipal Corporations Bill' of 1835, which had won the broad support of Peel in the lower house. When the bill was once more debated in that chamber, Lord John Russell accepted some of its amendments, as did Peel who was anxious to reach a compromise. The House of Lords passed the bill in its amended form. 
The debate on the 'Irish Municipal Corporations Bill' of 1836, which Peel had unsuccessfully sought to amend, was even more heated. Lyndhurst infuriated O'Connell by saying that the Irish protestants 'had to contend with a population alien to Englishmen, speaking, many of them, a different language, professing a different religion, regarding the English as invaders, and ready to upset them on the first opportunity' ('Hansard 3', 33, 1836, 734). Once again he invoked the independence of the House of Lords as the justification for its intervention. The government abandoned the bill after a conference failed to reach agreement. 
On Disraeli's suggestion, in the same year Lyndhurst gave his first 'summary of the session'; it was a telling catalogue of ill-considered bills, subsequently withdrawn. It was more restrained than his earlier speeches, and even praised by Holland as one of the 'best speeches he had ever heard in Parliament' ('Greville Memoirs', 3.362). But his acerbic attack on the government, in 'language reflecting on the Commons' (ibid.), was bound to be resented by his opponents. 
Lyndhurst's combative speeches, praised by Disraeli in his 'Vindication of the English Constitution' and in the 'Morning Post', won him parliamentary admirers. In 1835 and 1836 there was talk that the king wanted him as prime minister. But the king knew that he was 'inextricably bound' to Peel (Monypenny, 1.329); and a number of tory peers had second thoughts about the proposal to desert Peel for Lyndhurst. It is doubtful whether Lyndhurst sought, except momentarily, the burdens of the highest office. Disraeli may have exaggerated Lyndhurst's political support; three years earlier Holland had described the notion of his leadership of the tories as 'absurd' (Kriegel, 235), but Disraeli perceived that Lyndhurst's 'own disinclination [to become prime minister] alone stands in the way' (Monypenny, 1.304). The source of that 'disinclination' was, not only his lack of high political ambition, but also the legacy of the fiery exchanges in the house during these years. In January 1837 he told Greville, on his return from a delightful four months in Paris: 'I suppose the Government will get on; I'm sure that I shall not go on in the House of Lords this year as I did the last. I was induced by circumstances and some little excitement to take a more prominent part than usual last session; but I don't see what I got by it except abuse. ('Greville Memoirs', 3.378)' Lord Holland and Viscount Melbourne vociferously complained about the bitterness of Lyndhurst's invective. But he chose to ignore their taunts of want of principle, which culminated in the prolonged hoots which greeted his appearance under the gallery of the House of Commons during its debate on the 'Irish Bill' in 1837. Holland was told that he felt these insults 'most acutely' (Kriegel, 356); but, commented Greville, he 'neither attempted to stir, nor changed a muscle of his countenance' ('Greville Memoirs', 3.389). 
Lyndhurst was true to his words. After the furore of the 'Irish Bill', the years 1838-40 were quieter years. He was more active in the judicial business of the house, although his 'summary of the session' of 1839 was enlivened by his description of a discredited government, clinging to office. 
In 1841 Lyndhurst became lord chancellor for the third time, in Peel's administration. Lyndhurst and Peel were never intimates. Disraeli wrote that Lyndhurst was jealous of Peel (Monypenny, 1.301-2). There is little evidence to support that view and their formal exchange of letters was invariably cordial. But Lyndhurst was not alone in thinking that Peel was an austere colleague. It may be that he was less influential in the cabinet, which Peel dominated, than he was in the House of Lords. But even in the house he played, politically, a more muted role. His interventions were generally confined to matters of legal reform, such as the 'Copyright Bill' of 1843 and the ill-fated 'Charitable Trusts Bill' of 1845. Not surprisingly, the attacks of his political opponents now became less vituperative. 
Peel resigned in July 1846, leaving a party bitterly divided over the repeal of the corn laws. Lyndhurst's attempt to reunite it failed dismally. By the end of that decade Lyndhurst was totally blind; in 1850 a cataract operation partially restored his sight and a second was to follow. Nevertheless a year later he was on his feet in the House of Lords. He refused to take office in the first Derby administration of 1852. Lyndhurst enjoyed being an elder statesman, denouncing Russian aggrandizement (1853) and speaking passionately in 1859 and 1860 on the state of the national defences. These speeches of an octogenarian were admired for their undiminished force and clarity. 
Lyndhurst did not welcome political change. But he earned praise as a law reformer. In the debate on the 'Juvenile Offenders Bill' of 1838 Lyndhurst had drawn a dramatic picture of the horrific treatment of young children in reformatories; and in the following year he proposed the modification of the common law which gave a wife, separated from her husband, access to the children only with his permission. In 1853 and 1858 he supported the admission of Jews into parliament, demonstrating that the words of the oath, 'without mental reservation and on the true faith of a Christian', were inserted to exclude, not Jews, but Roman Catholics. In 1857, in the debate on the amendment of the divorce laws, his study of the church fathers enabled him to refute the bishop of Oxford, who had invoked St Augustine as authority for the dogma of the indissolubility of marriage. The previous year he had mocked Campbell's bill prohibiting the sale of obscene books, paintings, and prints. Correggio's 'Jupiter and Antigone' would be confiscated, as well as Ovid's 'Art of Love'; and Dryden's poem 'Sigismonda and Guiscerdo' 'must be placed in [Lord Campbell's] 'Index Expurgatorius'' ('Hansard 3', 146, 1856, col. 330ff.). The last time he spoke in the house was in 1861 in the debate on Lord Kingsdown's act for the establishment of the validity of wills of personal estate. 
On 13 March 1819 Lyndhurst married Sarah Garay Thomas, daughter of Charles Brunsden and niece of his friend Sir Samuel Shepherd, whose marriage of six weeks to Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Thomas of the Coldstream Guards ended with his death at Waterloo. She was then aged twenty-four or twenty-five, Lyndhurst forty-seven. Three of their five children died in infancy. Two daughters survived. Sarah Elizabeth (1821-1865) married Henry Selwin-Ibbetson, later Lord Rookwood. Sophia Clarence (1828-1911) married Hamilton Beckett; they had one son and two daughters. 
Lady Lyndhurst was a handsome, striking woman, with intelligent black eyes, 'so like one of Leonardo da Vinci's pictures' (A. F. Stewart, 'The Diary of a Lady in Waiting: Lady Charlotte Bury', 1835, 200), whose 'passion leads her to the universe of clever men only' (Lady Dorchester, 'Recollections of a Long Life: Lord Broughton (John Cam Hobhouse)', 1910, 3.107). Indeed her various 'affairs' with the powerful and the wealthy, including the duke of Devonshire (J. Lees-Milne, 'The Bachelor Duke, 1790-1858', 1991, 88, 91-2, 102, 110) and Lord Dudley (J. Gore, 'Creevey's Life and Times, 1768-1838', 1934, 253-4, 363), and her attempted 'rape' by the king's brother, the duke of Cumberland, intrigued the London salons (ibid., 307-9). Mrs Arbuthnot, a high tory, found her 'a singularly vulgar woman' ('The Journal of Harriet, Mrs Charles Arbuthnot, 1822-1832', 1950, 2.258-9). Lady Holland, a whig, was somewhat kinder; she was 'good hearted' and 'good natured' but 'with odd sallies... from coming into the 'beau monde' when her ways were formed for another class' (earl of Ilchester, ed., 'Elizabeth, Lady Holland to her Son, 1821-1845', 1946, 91). Even Lyndhurst's adoring sister, Mary, admitted that 'perhaps she had too high an opinion of the attractions of the world' (Amory, 351). She was quite manipulative. 'Having known what poverty is' (earl of Ilchester, ed., 'The Journal of the Honourable Henry Edward Fox, 1818-1830', 1923, 359), she set out to charm whig grandees to secure her husband's advancement and her security. In turn they vainly hoped that her pro-reform views would persuade her husband not to oppose political change. 
Lady Lyndhurst died, suddenly, in Paris on 15 January 1834. Mary wrote to her sister Mrs Greene that 'her brother was heartbroken'. 'What a melancholy change have a few short months made in the family! Then all was bustle, gayety, and happiness, but now, alas! quite the reverse' (Amory, 351). But the less charitable doubted Lyndhurst's faithful devotion to 'Dolly', as she was affectionately called. 
In many quarters Lyndhurst's personal reputation was no higher than that of his deceased wife. In 1840 William Whewell, soon to be master of Trinity, opposed Lyndhurst's election as high steward of the university, not only on the ground that he was a 'political adventurer', but also because of the many scandalous rumours about his private life which made him 'quite unfitted to hold academic office' (D. A. Winstanley, 'Early Victorian Cambridge', 1940, 100). Lyndhurst was quickly comforted after his wife's death. Within months he met Lady Henrietta Sykes, Disraeli's lover, who introduced him to Disraeli; so began a long friendship between the two men. For a short time Henrietta may well have been Lyndhurst's kept mistress. Disraeli and others agreed with her judgement that 'where women are concerned never was there a greater fool' (Blake, 118). 
George Street was one of the centres of London fashion. The licence and ribaldry of Lyndhurst's conversation attracted adverse comment, as did his appearance which was more that of a cavalry colonel than a lord chancellor, dressing as he did in 'white Russia duck trousers, strapped under his boots of polished leather and in a becoming frock coat' (Lee, 124). At a great fancy ball in June 1835 he appeared as a marshall of France, and his guests were eighty of the 'supremist ton and beauty'. Disraeli wrote to his sister: 'you can conceive nothing more splendid and brilliant than his house illuminated, with a banquet to a company so fancifully dressed' (Disraeli, 'Letters', 2, no. 408). 
Paris was Lyndhurst's second home. He loved the company of its politicians and men of letters. On his return from Paris in January 1837 he told Greville that: 'he had never passed such an agreeable time as the last four months; not a moment of 'ennui'; had become acquainted with a host of remarkable people of all sorts, political characters of all parties, and the 'litterateurs', such as Victor Hugo, Balzac, &c., the latter of whom... is a very agreeable man. ('Greville Memoirs', 3.378)' Lyndhurst visited Paris almost every year, and was just as much at ease in the Parisian as in the London 'haut monde'. On one such visit, in 1835, he dined with Louis Philippe, and twenty years later he met Louis Napoleon and the empress, remaining in 'active conversation, no other person present, for more than an hour' (Lee, 244). One of the Parisian 'political characters' was Lewis Goldsmith, whose daughter Georgiana (1807?-1901) Lyndhurst was to marry on 5 August 1837, much to the surprise of family and friends. Disraeli found her very different from Sarah: 'Without being absolutely pretty, her appearance is highly interesting... She is very little, but her appearance is elegant and delicate. She is not all national in the vulgar sense, her features being very small... Her manner calm and assured, yet tinged with a certain degree of reserve not unbecoming. (Disraeli, 'Letters', 3, no. 733)' It proved a very happy marriage. The couple spent their leisure time in Turville Park, near Henley-on-Thames, which Lyndhurst leased, and its small farm gave him much pleasure. Their one daughter, Georgiana Susan (1838-1926), married Sir Charles Du Cane MP; they had two sons and three daughters. 
Historians have described Lyndhurst as a 'somewhat enigmatic figure' (Blake, 115). He died in the determination that this should be so, for he burnt nearly all his private papers. Condemned for his 'conversion' to tory principles, a Proteus whose 'path to power was through the wreck of all political consistency' (Arnould, 1.408), once he entered the house as a tory he became an unswervingly loyal party man. He would not have gone to the stake for a principle his party had abjured. So it was that he was first against and then for the defendant's right to counsel in felony trials; against and within two years for Catholic emancipation; against any reform of the franchise, and within a year for some reform; for the corn laws, and shortly afterwards against the corn laws: 'He took up the opinions of the existing Government and advocated them, and to the end of his life would have thought it 'nonsense and rubbish' to act otherwise' (Bagehot, 3.232, 236). 
For many Lyndhurst appeared a paid advocate, who could not be trusted to be true to a principle. Campbell contemptuously accused him of repudiating 'all the opinions and sentiments which he had before entertained and expressed' and castigated him, as solicitor-general, for piloting the detested 'Six Acts' through the House of Commons. In a bitter and splenetic passage, he remarked that Lyndhurst's conduct had been compared to that of 'the mercenary soldier ready to obey every command of his superior officer' (Campbell, 8.30-31). Campbell then went on to quote three lines from Lucan's 'The Civil War (Pharsalia)': '
Pectore si fratris gladium iuguloque parentis 

Condore me jubeas... 

... invita peragam tamen omnia dextra. 
(Tell me to plunge my sword into my brother's breast 

Or in my father's throat... 

And I shall do it all with this right hand, 

Though it go against the grain.) (ibid., 1.376-8)' Lyndhurst did have some political convictions. He firmly believed that the House of Lords was a vital part of the constitution; he opposed the creation of life peers because he feared that governments would create them for political purposes, thereby further eroding its authority and independence. But he came to perceive, as he did not in the 1830s, that there were limits to its powers. In 1858 he described its role in these words: 'it is also a most important part of our duty to check against the rash, inconsiderate, hasty, and undigested legislation of the other House, to give time for consideration and for consulting and perhaps modifying the opinions of the constituencies, but I never understand, nor could such a principle be acted upon, that we were to make a firm, determined and persevering stand against the opinion of the other House of Parliament, when that opinion is backed by the opinion of the people, and least of all, on questions affecting, in a certain degree, the constitution of that House and popular rights. ('Hansard 3', 149, 1858, cols. 1754-6)' Lyndhurst's intellectual pre-eminence was widely recognized. Disraeli said his mind was not original. But Disraeli judged him as a politician and, as a politician, he did not seek to originate; but he 'corrected, perfected, or improved much' ('QR', 126, 1869, 29). He never ceased to be intellectually curious. After he had entered his ninetieth year, he went through the problems of Euclid to ascertain whether he was still capable of effort in mathematics. The posthumous sale of his library included classical, English, and French authors, although it was said that he read little before his retirement. At a later sale there were Old Master engravings and drawings, and paintings by his father, Titian, Van Dyck, Tintoretto, Canaletto, and Paulus Potter. 
Lyndhurst 'both looked, and was, a great man' (Bagehot, 3.232). Disraeli described his brow as 'majestic'; his deep-set eyes, gleaming 'with penetrating fire'; he was a 'high-bred falcon'. 'Indeed nothing could be finer than the upper part of his countenance... Nothing could be more beautiful. It was that of the Olympian Jove.' But 'the lower part of his countenance betrayed the deficiencies of his character; a want of high purpose, and some sensual attributes' (Monypenny, 1.333). It was commonly said that 'the soubriquet of 'Mephistopheles' admirably suited him; the mocking sneer was quickly followed by the genial smile'. 
Lyndhurst was condemned for his lack of 'gravitas', yet it was this very lack of 'gravitas' which even political opponents could find endearing. Only the most salacious claimed that he was corrupt; in 1829 he successfully initiated criminal libel indictments against newspapers which alleged that he had sold church appointments and trafficked in political offices. A formidable political opponent, he was, in Brougham's view, 'free from all jealousy or petty spite' (Martin, 507). He took pains to placate Eldon; he enjoyed the company of radicals like Robert Wilson and Roebuck; he and Edward Ellice, a passionate Liberal, were 'great friends here [in Paris]' (C. C. F. Greville, 'Journals of the Reigns of George IV and William IV', 3.379); Brougham attacked him in the 'Edinburgh Review' and became his closest friend; Sydney Smith and Macaulay, loyal whigs, gratefully acknowledged his patronage. Nor did Lyndhurst, a devout Anglican, at least in later life, bear any religious grudges; he supported, it is true because it was expedient to do so, the 'Catholic Relief Bill', and, from conviction, the admission of Jews to parliament. Such a man would never sacrifice a colleague or friend for political or legal advancement. 
Lyndhurst was content with the honours he enjoyed and the influence he exercised in the House of Lords; he was, lamented Henrietta Sykes, 'too unambitious' (Blake, 118). His love of society never left him; and society welcomed him for his gaiety and kindness. Granville, no tory, affirmed that he was totally without intellectual or social vanity. At Turville Park and George Street, surrounded by family, he entertained artists, authors, scientists, and beautiful and gifted women as well as politicians. Never bored, cosseted by a devoted wife, sister, and three daughters, supported by his friends, he was in 1863, as he was in 1791, 'naturally a friend to gaiety', continuing despite infirmity to 'love to see what is to be seen' (Amory, 116-18). Lyndhurst died peacefully on 12 October 1863 at his house, 25 George Street, Hanover Square, London. He was buried on 17 October in Highgate cemetery and later, in 1865, reinterred in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 6273


Copley, Thomas (1532-1584), landowner and Roman Catholic exile, was born between February and May 1532, eldest son of Sir Roger Copley (died 1549), landowner and member of the Mercers' Company, and his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1559/60), daughter of Sir William Shelley of Michelgrove, Sussex, judge of common pleas. He was related to Elizabeth I by common descent from Thomas, last Lord Hoo and Hastings, and he was a kinsman of both William Cecil Lord Burghley and Francis Walsingham. In 1547 he was admitted to the Inner Temple where, in 1561, he served as marshal for its 'grand and solemn Christmas' (Inderwick, 219). His father had settled the manor and parliamentary borough of Gatton, Surrey, on his mother. She controlled elections and returned Thomas to the Marian parliaments of April and November 1554, and the parliament of 1558. After her death he returned himself to the Elizabethan parliaments of 1559 and 1563-7. 
To his inheritance, which included Gatton, the Maze (Southwark), and estates in Sussex and Lincolnshire, Copley added the Surrey manors of Chipstead, Colley, and Merstham. He was extravagant as he acknowledged, spending on 'costly building, chargeable music, horses, and such like vanities' ('CSP dom.', '1580-1625', vol. 27, no. 55). He was also impulsive. During the Inner Temple reader's dinner in 1556, when London's lord mayor was present, Copley and others made off with the mayoral sword of honour. They were imprisoned and expelled from the society. He was readmitted only after his 'humble suit and submission' (Inderwick, 187). When, on 5 March 1558, during the childless Catholic Mary's last parliament, he spoke out as an ardent protestant in defence of Princess Elizabeth's right to succeed her, he was imprisoned, although he pleaded his youth as a mitigating circumstance. Instead of contracting the expected marriage alliance with his powerful neighbours, the Howards of Effingham, later that year, about July, he married Catherine (died in or after 1590), the Catholic daughter and coheir of Sir John Luttrell of Dunster, Somerset. 
When Princess Elizabeth became queen Copley enjoyed royal favour. He was appointed commissioner of the peace for Surrey (1559-68) and in 1561 Elizabeth was godmother to his heir, Henry. However, about 1563, according to the Spanish ambassador, he converted to Roman Catholicism. Robert Persons ('Relation of a Trial between the Bishop of Evreux and the Lord Plessis Mornay', 1604) attributed his conversion to the errors which he detected in Bishop Jewel's 'Apology' (1562 in Latin, 1564 in English). Copley was fined and imprisoned for recusancy. In 1569 he advised his fellow justices that he could not subscribe to the supremacy and uniformity acts and in 1570 he went abroad without royal licence. By then his translations from the church fathers entitled 'Certaine Treaties... Touching the Doctrine of Good Workes' (1569) and 'A Treatise of Justification' (1569) had been published in Louvain. Copley's stated intention was to achieve religious unity; his 'Certain Treaties' was a defence of justification by faith and good works rather than a vituperative attack on protestants. 
Copley remained abroad, moving between the Low Countries, France, and Spain, until his death. During that time he frequently corresponded with the queen, Burghley, Walsingham, and others about his dilemma: although a devout Catholic he was a loyal subject whose unauthorized absence made him liable to statutory forfeiture of property for life. Necessity, he protested, obliged him to serve foreign princes. His integrity and loyalty, however, were widely doubted. 'A prime man among the English Fugitives' (Camden, 372), he was paid a Spanish pension, ennobled by Philip II as grand master of the Maes (Maze in Southwark) and lord of Gatton, made a baron and knight by the French king, and granted Spanish letters of marque against the Dutch rebels. Meanwhile the Howards benefited from his property and he received no income from it. He died on 25 September 1584 at the Spanish military camp near Antwerp. As his eldest son had died young he named his son William as his heir in his will (1576), and bequests were made to his daughters, Margaret, Helen, and Mary. In a codicil of 1577 provision was also made for his youngest sons, Anthony Copley and John Copley. 


Copley's life in Maryland was one of contrasts. He transported forty-eight men which enabled him to claim and receive 10,000 acres of land. As a Jesuit father he was prominent in establishing stations such as St Inigoes, St Thomas Manor, and Mattapony, in the new colony, ministering to settlers and providing spiritual counsel. At the same time, contrary to proprietary instructions to keep religion a private matter, he was active in worldly affairs on behalf of the Society of Jesus, importing goods to exchange with Indians for pelts, bringing out 'servants' and taking up more land, owning houses, suing and being sued in the lawcourts, and claiming cash and chattels at the death of men whose transportation he had funded. The proprietor, Lord Baltimore, approved of proposed laws, presented to the Maryland assembly in 1637-8 and 1638-9, to limit the Jesuits' political and economic activities. Copley appears to have been actively involved in marshalling resistance to them. Late in his life (August 1650) he demanded 20,000 acres of land for transporting sixty men to Maryland and in 1651 he was defendant in a lawsuit. He was unsuccessful in both. In November 1652 he bound himself to pay the debts of one Paul Simpson. He died in Maryland, though his date of death is uncertain and his burial place is unknown. 
The alias Philip Fisher has been ascribed to Thomas Copley by Foley, McCoog, Land, and others, but it was not accepted by Copley's biographer, Katherine Dorsey. 


@@@@@


doc= 6274


Thomas Copley (b. 1594, d. in or after 1652), Jesuit and colonist in America, was born in Madrid, eldest son of William Copley (1565-1643) and Magdalen Pickering (died 1610), and grandson of Thomas Copley, the Roman Catholic exile. His family returned to Gatton in 1603, but eight years later he left for Louvain, where John Gerard had become rector of the Jesuits there. Copley made his noviceship at Liege and was admitted to the society; perhaps at that point, he surrendered his rights as heir to his younger brother William. By 1623 or 1624 'Father Copley [who] hath newly taken orders and come from beyond seas' was recorded as living in London (Dorsey, 41). Thereafter nothing is known of him until the 1630s. He was still in London in December 1634, when he petitioned Charles I that he was 'an alien born' and therefore should not be molested or arrested for his religion 'whilst following occasions which concern his father and his own estate' ('CSP dom.', '1634-5', vol. 278, no. 1). The king granted a warrant which afforded him personal protection until, in 1637, he sailed for the Maryland settlement, which had been established four years earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 6275


Coppe, Abiezer (1619-1672?), Baptist preacher and Ranter, was born on Sunday 30 May 1619, and baptized on 1 June at St Mary's, Warwick, the eldest known child of Walter Coppe ('b'. 1593, died in or after 1667), who was probably a literate artisan, perhaps working with animal hides. After the Restoration Walter Coppe secured a seat in the middle aisle of his parish church and was rated at three hearths in Jury Street ward, Warwick. 
If his later confession is to be believed Abiezer Coppe's youth was marked by a godly litany of zealous devotion: fervent prayer 'by heart', memorizing 'much of the Scripture'; frequent and 'most secret' fasting; and abasement before God. At thirteen he began to 'take and keep' a daily register of his sins, setting them down in a book. To prevent his tongue from speaking sinful words he bridled his mouth, writing upon 'Scrouls of Parchment' the inscription ''Yea yea, nay, nay'' ('Matthew' 5: 37), which he 'sewed about' his wrists (Smith, 134-5). As a native of Warwick, Coppe was able to attend the town's free school. At fifteen it appears that Coppe began taking lessons given by the recently appointed master of Warwick School, Thomas Dugard. In his diary entry for 18 October 1634 Dugard noted that Coppe and two other boys had received instruction from a Greek 'New Testament' and Homer; further entries in this diary indicate Coppe's progress. Some of Dugard's pupils went on to attend university and it may have been through Dugard's connections that Coppe secured a place at Oxford. 
At an unknown date Abiezer Coppe was admitted at All Souls College, Oxford. He matriculated on 20 May 1636, but according to the antiquary Anthony Wood, Coppe continued at All Souls 'but for a short time' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.959) before becoming one of the postmasters (a class of poor scholars) of Merton College; Wood thought Coppe's tutor at Merton was Ralph Button (1611/12-1680). Button was, in Wood's estimation, a 'rigid presbyterian' but also a 'good scholar' and a 'noted Tutor' (ibid., 3.381; Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 2.158). Coppe's studies at Oxford, however, were curtailed and he left the university without a degree. He returned to Warwick with his ties to Dugard intact and his eyes no doubt set on the ministry. In 1641 Dugard recorded that his former protege, though probably unlicensed, was permitted to preach on Palm Sunday and at five Tuesday lectures. 
On 9 June 1644, after heavy fighting the two previous days, the royalist stronghold of Compton House in Warwickshire fell to local parliamentary forces under the command of Colonel William Purefoy. It seems that by this date Coppe, perhaps through Dugard's influence, had been appointed a chaplain under the command of Major George Purefoy. Coppe was to be stationed with the garrison at Compton House, receiving an initial payment of $35 for thirty-five weeks' service in February 1645. He was present at the muster of the garrison on 23 April 1646, but may have left the army in June 1646 when parliament's troops were removed from Compton House. Richard Baxter, who was at that period preacher to the garrison at Coventry, recalled 'I heard of no opinion that he vented or held, but, the Necessity of Re-baptizing, and Independency, and was a sharp Reproacher of the Ministry' (Baxter, 148). 
This deprecating image of Coppe as a fiery, sectarian preacher is seemingly confirmed by apparent autobiographical allusions in Coppe's later prophetic writings. Recounting the spiritual tribulations of a young man 'void of understanding', Coppe describes his bewitchment by the whore of Babylon ('Revelation' 17: 5), a flattering, deceitful figure that hunts after him, following him 'from street to street, from corner to corner, from grosse Protestantisme to Puritanisme, & c. at length from crosse in baptisme, and Common-Prayer-Book to Presbyterianisme'. Accounting the 'eating of a bit of bread, and drinking a sip of wine perhaps once a moneth' a vain form of religion, the young man quickly passes to 'Independency, and from thence perhaps to Anabaptisme' (Coppe, 'A Second Fiery Flying Roule', 19-21). 
Baxter reckoned that Coppe 'continued a most zealous Re-baptizer many years, and re-baptized more then any one man that ever I heard of in the Countrey, witnesse 'Warwickshire', 'Oxfordshire', part of 'Worcestershire', & c.' (Baxter, 148). Although this may be an exaggeration -- perhaps stemming from Coppe's alleged boast that he had 'baptized seven thousand people' -- it is clear that Coppe was a 'leading man' and his standing within the Baptist churches was confirmed by his association with Hanserd Knollys and William Kiffin (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.960; Smith, 147). When Knollys and Kiffin travelled from London to Coventry in the autumn of 1646 to engage in a public disputation with two local ministers, it was Coppe who acted as their scribe. Coppe, moreover, was to revel in the impending day of judgement that he believed awaited those who had maltreated 'the Lords Servants; (who come from a farr and strange countrey,)' (Smith, 54). He recalled that they had subjected one servant to stoning, the 'Old Testament' penalty prescribed for blasphemy ('Leviticus' 24: 16) and Coppe's reworking here of a parable in the gospels ('Mark' 12: 1-9) resonates with the punishment meted out to Knollys who, by his own testimony, had been driven by this means from the pulpit. Coppe, too, suffered at the hands of persecutors and was imprisoned in Coventry gaol for his 're-baptizing'. Such was the significance of his case that on 28 November 1646 the governor and committee at Coventry wrote to the House of Commons concerning him. Afterwards Coppe claimed that he 'sustained a 14 weeks close imprisonment' without 'bail or mainprize' -- suggesting that he was detained without charge (Smith, 129; Coppe, 'A Second Fiery Flying Roule', 20). 
In his twenty-eighth year Coppe underwent a profound transformation, an experience that he came to represent as a spiritual passage from death to life. Reflecting upon his former sanctity, his 'prayers tears, sighs, groans, watchings, fastings, humiliations', Coppe recalled his 'self-seeking' in first observing and then scorning 'carnall' gospel ordinances (Smith, 135; Coppe, 'A Second Fiery Flying Roule', 21-2). Hinting at the necessity of having a contrite, 'soft heart', Coppe recounted how 'God in his infinite wisdome' had laid low his vanity and levelled his pride -- which is the 'true and pure levelling' (Smith, 74, 141; Coppe, 'A Second Fiery Flying Roule', 22). Reading Obadiah's prophecy of the burning of the house of Jacob ('Obadiah' 1: 18) as an allegory of the incendiary appearance of the Lord of hosts upon his 'fierce, rugged flesh', Coppe narrated how his 'hatred, strife, envy, malice, evil surmizing' was utterly consumed by the ''Coelestiall' Fire' of God's love: 'First, all my strength, my forces were utterly routed, my house I dwelt in fired; my father and mother forsook me, the wife of my bosome loathed me, mine old name was rotted, perished; and I was utterly plagued, consumed, damned, rammed, and sunke into nothing, into the bowels of the still Eternity (my mothers wombe) out of which I came naked, and whereto I returned again naked.(Smith, 78, 45; Coppe, 'A Fiery Flying Roll', preface)' Coppe lay a while 'rapt up in silence'. At length he heard with his 'outward care' a most 'terrible thunder-clap, and after that a second'. Upon the second thunderclap 'I saw a great body of light, like the light of the Sun, and red as fire', which infused him with great awe and joy. And so he lay 'trembling, sweating, and smoaking (for the space of half an houre)' before the immanent presence of the Lord. He was finally reassured that God would take him to heaven, but not before he had drunk a 'bitter cup; whereupon (being filled with exceeding amazement) I was throwne into the belly of hell' (Coppe, 'A Fiery Flying Roll', preface). Later he recovered, and in a further vision a 'most strong, glorious voyce uttered these words, 'The Spirits of just men made perfect''. Coppe professed that the 'visions and revelations of God' were 'stretched' out before him and within him 'for the space of foure dayes and nights, without intermission' (ibid.). Baxter, however, considered that he 'was in a long trance & hath seene strange Satanicall delusions' (DWL, Baxter MS, 'Treatises', 3.67, fol. 302'r'). 
Coppe emerged from these experiences a resurrected man, with a new name. The 'day 'star'' was risen in his heart ('2 Peter' 1: 19), and as his erotic coupling of ''love'' and ''dove'' suggests ('Song of Solomon' 5: 2) Coppe imagined that the 'day of the Lord' was at hand ('Isaiah' 13: 6) (Smith, 52, 47). In the manner of John in the book of 'Revelation', Coppe presented a powerful vision of the impending apocalypse; similarly he reworked the story of the 'filthy blinde Sodomites' who failed to recognize two angels in their midst ('Genesis' 19: 11) into a prophecy that ''Sodome' must be burnt, 'Lot' must be saved, 'flesh' must die & be crucified, and the 'Spirit' live and dwell in the Saints' (Coppe, 'A Fiery Flying Roll'; Smith, 63). Already 'There are Angels... come downe from Heaven, in the shapes and formes of men, who are full of the vengeance of the Lord; and are to poure out the plagues of God upon the Earth, and to torment the Inhabitants thereof. (Coppe, 'A Fiery Flying Roll', 8)' Coppe claimed that he himself had been 'plagued and tormented beyond expression' and he affirmed that he had 'rather behold one of these Angels pouring out the plagues of God, cursing; and teaching others to curse bitterly'. Adopting the mantle of an angel (in the form of a man), he inveighed against the hypocrisy of carnal religious observance, announcing that 'To the pure all things are pure' (Coppe, 'A Fiery Flying Roll', 8). 
Supposing that he had undergone instantaneous transformation Coppe reportedly set about enacting his new principles. It was to be said of him that thinking he was 'above Ordinances' and that he was 'a childe of God' he began to live 'very loosley', cursing and swearing, 'spreading blasphemies, and committing base lewd sins' ('Severall Proceedings in Parliament', 16, 11-18 Jan 1650, 213). Baxter likewise charged Coppe with unnamed 'filthy lascivious practices', amazed that 'such a man should have any followers' and that professedly God fearing men and women should join him in 'roaring, drinking, whoring, open full-mouthed swearing ordinarily by the Wounds and Bloud of God, and the fearfullest Cursing that hath been heard, as if they were all possessed with Divels' (Baxter, 148). Many of these allegations echo, and in some instances perhaps derive from, pronouncements in Coppe's writings. Coppe maintained 'It's meat and drink to an Angel [who knows none evill, no sin] to sweare a full mouth'd oath' (Coppe, 'A Second Fiery Flying Roule', 13). In a similar tone he noted that there was a time 'to be merry' ('Ecclesiastes' 8: 15), a time to partake of the spiritual feast: 'To the fatted calfe, ring, shoes, mirth, and Musicke, & c. which is the 'Lords Supper indeed'' (Smith, 62, 66). 
Coppe pointed to the fact that Michal had clearly adopted an inappropriate stance in disapproving of her husband King David's dancing uncovered before the ark of the covenant in celebration of its return to Jerusalem ('2 Samuel' 6: 16), a reference which is significant in this context, for it partly anticipates the allegation that it was usual for Coppe to preach 'stark naked' by day and to lie drunk with a wench 'stark naked' at night (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.960). This association of nudity with sexual licence, though itself familiar from hostile accounts of adult baptism rituals, is suggestive in its depiction of Coppe as an adulterer, for Coppe delighted in citing the scriptural precedent of Hosea, 'who went in to a whore' ('Hosea' 1: 2). 
On 12 November 1648 Coppe received a fraternal letter from Mistress T. P., probably Thomasine Pendarves ('bap'. 1618, died in or after 1671), daughter of Thomas Newcomen of Dartmouth and wife of John Pendarves, minister of St Helen's, Abingdon. Coppe responded in a work published as 'Some Sweet Sips, of Some Spirituall Wine' (1649) with an epistle to his 'Deare Sister, in the best fellowship' and with a ''Preparatory'' epistle intended 'only, and primely for that precious 'Princesse'... another late converted 'Jew', and for the Saints at 'Abingdon'' (Coppe, 'Some Sweet Sips', 45, 10). These modes of address, together with Coppe's rendering of the initials T. P. into Hebrew, indicate Coppe's identification of the heirs of Abraham born to him by 'a 'freewoman', 'Jerusalem' which is above' ('Galatians' 4: 26) with 'the Israel of God, the seed of the Lord' (Smith, 55). This adoption of ''Spiritual' 'Israel'' as an emblem for ''the Land of the living'' is a recurring feature of Coppe's 'Some Sweet Sips'. As its title implied, Abiezer Coppe (his name spelled in Hebrew) 'A late converted JEW', sought to offer the ''bewildered Israelites'' who read this book a taste of liberty and happiness 'from spirituall Canaan'. For like the two Israelite spies of his title ('Numbers' 13: 23), Coppe believed that he had returned from the Holy Land bearing spiritual grapes of 'great worth, and weight' (ibid., 42, 60, 68-9). 
Perhaps shortly after Christmas day 1648 Coppe believed that the ''word of the Lord'' came expressly to him, commanding him to 'Go up to 'London', to 'London', that great City, write, write, write'. This he revealed in 'A Fiery Flying Roll' (1649). As he began to write Coppe beheld a hand with 'a roll of a book' therein ('Ezekiel' 2: 9), 'which this fleshly hand would have put wings to, before the time'. Immediately the roll was snatched out of his hand and thrust into his mouth. Like the prophet Ezekiel Coppe was forced to eat the roll -- though whereas for Ezekiel the roll was 'in my mouth as honey for sweetness' ('Ezekiel' 3: 2), for Coppe the roll tasted 'as bitter as worm-wood'. There it lay 'broiling' and 'burning' in his stomach. When Coppe arrived in London about the beginning of January 1649, the 'most excellent Majesty' within him unexpectedly set his 'forme' in many 'strange' postures: this, on his account, received a mixed reception. Imagining that he had been set as 'no small signe and wonder in fleshly 'Israel'' ('Isaiah' 8: 18), Coppe recalled how he fell down before the feet of cripples, beggars, and lepers, kissing their feet and 'resigning up' his money to them (Coppe, 'A Fiery Flying Roll', preface, 1, 13). In 'A Second Fiery Flying Roule' (1649) Coppe remembered how at the prison in Southwark he sat, ate, and drank with gypsies, hugging and kissing them, putting his hand 'in their bosomes, loving the she Gipsies dearly' (Coppe, 'A Second Fiery Flying Roule', 11). Contrasting with this demeanour was Coppe's ''strange and lofty carriage towards great ones''. In the open streets of London and Southwark, with his hand 'fiercely' stretched out, his hat 'cockt up', his eyes set 'as if they would sparkle out', sometimes 'gnashing' his teeth and with a 'mighty loud' voice he charged the coaches of 'men and women of the greater ranke', proclaiming the 'notable day of the Lord' to them. Thus he acted, day and night, 'for the space of 12. or 13. dayes', without a finger lifted against him, a hair of his head touched, or a hand laid on his clothes (Coppe, 'A Fiery Flying Roll', Contents, 14-15). 
While in London, Coppe was said to have 'appeared in a most dreadful manner' before a group calling itself 'My one flesh' (Clarkson, 25). Suggestively, this conventicle was known to Giles Calvert, a publisher and bookseller, who issued Coppe's 'Some Sweet Sips'. About this time Coppe read and transcribed 'John the Divine's Divinity', probably by John File. It was printed for Calvert with a preface by Coppe dated 13 January 1649. Two or three days later Coppe preached an inflammatory sermon in the church at St Helen, Bishopsgate. Before a large assembled congregation he caused an uproar by blaspheming and cursing for an hour, allegedly saying 'a pox of God take al your prayers hearing, reading, fasting'. Although 'guarded by a party of his own', it seems that Coppe was jostled in the pulpit by some angry Baptists ('The Ranters Ranting', 1650, 6). Rather than face charges of blasphemy before a magistrate (a felonous and capital offence under the provisions of an ordinance of May 1648) he probably fled into hiding the next day. 
In spring or summer 1649 Coppe may have visited John Pordage, rector of Bradfield, Berkshire. Another of Pordage's guests was Richard Coppin, to whose allegedly blasphemous book 'Divine Teachings' (1649) Coppe contributed a preface. Some time after 7 June, when a lavish thanksgiving dinner was consumed at Grocers' Hall while 'hundreds of poor wretches dyed of hunger' (Coppe, 'A Fiery Flying Roll', 12), Coppe completed the writing of 'A Fiery Flying Roll'. The roll had been broiling and burning in Coppe's stomach, but now it was spewed forth as a blazing text, proclaimed on the title page as 'A Word from the Lord to all the Great Ones of the Earth.' (ibid., title page) and 'the last WARNING PIECE at the dreadfull day of JUDGEMENT' (ibid.). Revelling in the reversal of the old order, in the passing of episcopacy, monarchy, and the House of Lords, the 'excellent Majesty' dwelling in Coppe proclaimed that, as in 'Ezekiel' 21: 27, ''I overturn, overturn, overturn''. Disavowing both 'sword levelling' and 'digging-levelling', he inveighed against all blood shed in the name of honour, rank, and propriety. The blood of the righteous, the blood of the 'hellishly murdered' Levellers 'shot to death' in Burford churchyard on 17 May 1649, would be avenged. For the Levellers who had died 'Martyrs for God and their Countrey' were but 'shadows of most terrible, yet glorious good things' to come. God himself was the 'mighty Leveller', whose coming was imminent (Coppe, 'A Fiery Flying Roll', 1, 2, 4, 11). 
On Sunday 30 September 1649, while riding through an open field, Coppe recounted that he met a poor, deformed man. Moved by the beggar's plight, Coppe was tempted to give him 6died Having only a shilling coin, he asked the beggar for change, but when the beggar replied that he had none, Coppe rode away without giving him anything. But then, by God's judgement he 'was struck down dead' and 'my money perisht with me'. The tale, which Coppe claimed was a 'true story', illustrates that he believed he was living in the 'last daies' ('James' 5: 3) when cankered gold and silver would rise up like fire in judgement against those that forbore from casting all into 'the Treasury' ('Mark' 12: 43). For only those who accounted nothing their own, who had 'ALL THINGS common' ('Acts' 2: 44), would have ''treasure in heaven'' ('Matthew' 19: 21) (Coppe, 'A Second Fiery Flying Roule', 4, 6, 16, 22, 4). Towards the end of the year Coppe completed the writing of 'A Second Fiery Flying Roule: to All the Inhabitants of the Earth; Specially to the Rich Ones'. As with 'A Fiery Flying Roll' he believed that the word of the Lord came expressly to him. The two rolls were printed in London, probably by the same printer though at different times, and issued together by an anonymous publisher 'in the beginning of that notable day, wherein the secrets of all hearts are laid open; and wherein the worst and foulest of villanies, are discovered, under the best and fairest outsides' (Coppe, 'A Fiery Flying Roll', title-page). 
On 18 December 1649 the council of state issued warrants for the apprehension of Coppe and the seizure of his 'Mad, and Blasphemous Bookes, called the 'fyery flyinge Role'' (TNA: PRO, SP 25/63, 408). By 8 January 1650 he had been taken into custody and imprisoned in Warwick. On 10 January a party of soldiers hurried ''the great Anabaptist'' from Warwick to Coventry gaol ('A Perfect Diurnall of some Passages and Proceedings', no. 6, 14-21 Jan 1650, 42). On 1 February the House of Commons ordered that all printed copies of 'A Fiery Flying Roll' 'be burnt by the Hand of the Hangman, at the 'New Palace Yard', at 'Westminster'; the 'Exchange', in 'Cheapside'; and at the 'Market Place', in 'Southwark'' ('JHC', 6.354). The next day the council of state ordered that Coppe be brought to London, but he seems to have languished in the noxious conditions of his confinement and 'being not well, desired he might not take the journey as yet, least it should cost him his life' ('A Perfect Diurnall of some Passages and Proceedings', no. 9, 4-11 Feb 1650, 76). By late March several denunciations of Coppe's professed doctrines had appeared. Gerrard Winstanley condemned 'the Ranting Practise' as a 'Kingdome that lies in objects; As in the outward enjoyment of meat, drinke, pleasures, and women' ('The Works of Gerrard Winstanley', ed. G. Sabine, 1941, 399), while the London Baptist churches were likewise quick to issue a collective epistle censuring the abominations espoused by their former co-religionist and his associates. 
On 6 March Andrew Wyke, a Baptist preacher and possibly pastor to a Baptist congregation at Colchester, arrived in Coventry with his kinswoman. He may have brought money with him, collected by provincial Baptist churches, to help pay for Coppe's prison debts. He was soon joined by Joseph Salmon, formerly chaplain to Commissary-General Henry Ireton's regiment of horse and a comrade of Coppe's. Both were swiftly committed to Coventry gaol for the misdemeanour of swearing and for defying an order prohibiting the visiting of Coppe. On 19 March Coppe was transferred to Newgate on the instructions of the council of state. Under suspicion of blasphemy and treason against the state, Coppe wrote to Salmon and Wyke assuring them that: 'Newgate... is noe prison to mee while I am inthroned in my Triple heart wch is but one & triangular, which is as firme as a stone, when I my selfe (&Dagger; heere & there X and everywhere) raise uppe my selfe... (Smith, 117)' An act of 10 May for suppressing incest, adultery, and fornication was followed on 28 June by an act against profane swearing and cursing and on 9 August by an act against blasphemy that prescribed six months' imprisonment without bail or mainprize for a first offence -- a more lenient sentence than the death penalty decreed by Mosaic Law and an ordinance of 2 May 1648. Although this legislation can be seen as part of a wider programme designed to further the cause of godly reformation in doctrine and manners, it is also evident that the impetus for these measures came from a parliamentary majority's desire to extinguish 'the several abominable Practices of a Sect called Ranters' ('JHC', 6.427). Coppe was still more specific, claiming he had been informed that the acts against adultery and blasphemy 'were put out because of me; thereby secretly intimating that I was guilty of the breach of them' (Coppe, 'Remonstrance of the Severe and Zealous Protestation of Abiezer Coppe', 1). 
On 27 September Lawrence Clarkson, author of an 'impious and blasphemous' book called 'A Single Eye All Light, No Darkness', was brought before a parliamentary committee 'for suppressing licentious and impious Practices, under pretence of Religion, Liberty, & c.' ('JHC', 6.474). In his published spiritual autobiography Clarkson was to write disingenuously how, during his examination, he confessed to knowing Coppe, 'and that is all, for I have not seen him above two or three times' (Clarkson, 31). On 1 October, seventy-four days after parliament had ordered the MP for Warwick to convey to the council of state their concern that Coppe be 'speedily' brought to trial, Coppe, again described as 'the great Ranter', was brought before the same committee that had examined Clarkson ('JHC', 6.444; 'The Weekly Intelligencer of the Common-Wealth', 2, 1-8 Oct 1650, 16). It was said that when Coppe appeared he refused to remove his hat in deference. In the manner of David before Achish, the king of Gath (1 'Samuel' 21: 10-15), Coppe 'disguised himself into a madnesse'. When questioned he seemed to talk to himself, 'which some thought to be Gods just judgement upon him' (ibid.; 'The Routing of the Ranters', 1650, 2). At other times he flung apples, pears, and nutshells about the room. The committee sent him back to Newgate: there was to be no public trial. 
By 3 January 1651 Coppe had completed, not so much for his 'own sake (for my pure innocence supports me)', but for the 'sakes of others' 'A Remonstrance of the Sincere and Zealous Protestation of Abiezer Coppe' (1651). Written as 'a Preamble to a farther future Declaration', this brief yet defiant pamphlet was Coppe's unrepentant response to the 'Blasphemy Act' (Coppe, 'Remonstrance', 1651, title-page, 1). On 30 May he penned a 'humble Petition' to the parliament and council of state. Lamenting his ''sore, tedious, and long continued imprisonment'', an apologetic Coppe emotively recounted the misfortunes his ''poor disconsolate wife'' and ''small innocent children'' had suffered on his account. Appended to this supplicatory epistle was a tract entitled 'Truth asserted against, and triumphing over error'. Here Coppe presented a refutation of the 'several blasphemous opinions' hinted at in 'the 'Fiery flying role''. Yet rather than acknowledge authorship of this work, Coppe contented himself with a catalogue of 'severall Errors' (some of which he denied having been 'tackt or tainted' with 'in the least degree') and a casuistical assertion of the several 'contrary Truths' (Smith, 125, 127, 128, 137, 151, 155, 157). 
On 22 June, John Durie and some unnamed persons conferred with Coppe. They found him to be 'ingenuously open' in what he said and 'truly penitent' for what he had done. The next day Durie wrote to Coppe inviting him to explain his views on matters such as sin, God's law, resurrection, and judgement. Mindful that Coppe might profess repentance outwardly only to gain his liberty, Durie warned him not to dissemble. In response Coppe sought to convince Durie of the sincerity of his repentance, remarking that he had been persuaded that never had any man 'lien more under the wrath and heavy displeasure of God for sin, then I have done'. That same day Coppe also replied to the proposals of the Commonwealth propagandist Marchamont Nedham. Coppe assured Nedham that he had made the necessary changes to his recantation 'by deleating what might prove offensive', 'altering, correcting, and amending other things', and by 'explicating some other things that might appear dubious, or difficult' (Smith, 146-7, 152, 156-7). Some time after 28 June, perhaps through the intervention of Durie and Nedham, Coppe was finally released from Newgate. 
On Sunday 21 September 1651 Coppe preached near Witney, Oxfordshire. His text, apparently, was 'There is a time to sing, and a time to dance' ('Ecclesiastes' 3: 4). Some who heard him thought he said 'that the whole Scripture from the beginning of 'genesis' to the end of the 'Revelations' was to be understood allegorically' (Tickell, 80). On 23 September he preached a recantation sermon on 'Isaiah' 42: 24 at Burford church from the very pulpit where in 1649 Cornet Henry Denne had preached obedience to the Commonwealth after witnessing the execution of three of his fellow mutineers in the churchyard. Before Coppe was able to ascend the pulpit, however, he found his place usurped by John Tickell, minister of St Helen's, Abingdon. Preaching what appears to have been a prepared sermon on 'Galatians' 1: 8-9, Tickell took the opportunity to insinuate that Coppe was accused for having preached a false gospel, and when his own address appeared as 'The Bottomless Pit Smoaking in Familisme' (1651) he observed that in his sermon Coppe 'againe and againe' made 'assertions of divine truth under execrations'. While he suspected Coppe's conversion, Tickell contented himself with the thought that 'God is his judge and knowes his heart' (Tickell, 32, 34, and 'To the reader'). 
Towards the end of February 1655, while lodging at The Mermaid by the Mews at Charing Cross, George Fox recalled that Colonel Packer and his officers came in with Coppe and 'a great company of ranters', who having ordered drink and tobacco 'bowed & scraped on to another' ('Journal of George Fox', 1.165). This portrayal of Coppe as an obsequious man who indulged his carnal appetite is typical of Fox and his censorious accounts of Ranter behaviour. The reference to William Packer, however, a Baptist army officer and preacher, may suggest that by this date Coppe had been re-embraced by some within the Baptist fold. 
In January 1657 there appeared a broadside, 'Divine Fire-works, or, Some Sparkles from the Spirit of Burning in this Dead Letter'. This warning was delivered 'In 'ABH'I'AM'', perhaps a contraction for 'In Ab(iezer ?) I am' 'cf'. 'Exodus' 3: 14, ('I AM THAT I AM'). The author prophesied the coming that year of the 'roaring ramping Lyon, with the sharp two-edged Sword' ('Revelation' 5: 5, 19: 15) and the 'consuming fire' ('Hebrews' 12: 29). The proclamation of this message, given by one who with fear and trembling claimed to have seen 'the Lord the King', may have coincided with Coppe's assumption of the prophetic name Hiam. 
After this Coppe is lost to view, until, on 13 February 1667, Abiezer Hiam, alias Coppe of the city of London, having subscribed to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion', was granted licence to practise medicine and surgery. Of the four physicians who provided Coppe with letters testimonial, two were prominent Baptists. It may be that for the remainder of his life Coppe practised medicine under the name Hiam. On 23 August 1672 one Hiam was buried at St Mary's, Barnes, Surrey. Although no one named Hiam is recorded either as a tenant of the manor of Barnes, or in the surviving hearth tax returns for the parish, there seems little reason to doubt that the dead man was Coppe. 
In 1680 there appeared a broadside, 'A Character of a True Christian', the purported author of which was 'Abiezar Copp'. Its style, however, conforms to no known work by Coppe. Some years later Anthony Wood compiled a brief biography of Coppe as part of his monumental 'Athenae Oxonienses', 2 vols. (1691-2). Drawing on manuscripts, printed texts, and oral testimony of sometimes questionable veracity, Wood's depiction of Coppe as a lascivious blasphemer has exercised a lasting influence. Some anecdotes, notably the tales of Coppe's misdeeds as an undergraduate and later as a Ranter, appear little more than prurient gossip. Other statements, such as the remark that, after the Restoration, Coppe preached in conventicles, though as yet unsubstantiated, seem more credible. Wood brought Coppe's life to an end by surmizing that he was 'brought low by certain infirmities which he had contracted in his rambles by drinking and whoring'. He mentioned Coppe's burial as 'Dr Higham on the south side of the body of the church' at Barnes, 'under the seats' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.961-2). This church was largely destroyed by fire in 1978, however, and Coppe's bones may now lie under the Langton chapel in the rebuilt church. 


@@@@@


doc= 6276


Copping, John (d. 1583), shoemaker and religious radical, is of unknown origins. By 1576 he was living in Bury St Edmunds where, with his companions Elias Thacker, a tailor, and one Tyler, he proved a thorn in the side of the ecclesiastical authorities in the diocese of Norwich. Well before the radical separatist Robert Browne came to Bury, and as early as 1576, Thacker had been imprisoned by the bishop's commissary, John Dey, for 'his disobedyence to the ecclesiasticall lawes of this royalme' (BL, Lansdowne MS 27, fols. 52'r'-53'v'). He refused to allow his child born in August 1578 to be baptized by any minister 'except he be a preacher and then also without godfathers and godmothers' (ibid.) and was reported to the privy council for asserting that the queen was perjured. Copping appears to have been in and out of Bury gaol from 1576 until his execution in 1583. Sir Robert Jermyn and Sir John Heigham confessed that they had sought to have Copping and his associates released from prison so long as there was some hope of persuading them out of their radical opinions, but once they realized that this policy had failed they 'gave them up to their froward wylls' and became 'ernest suters' to Edmund Freake, bishop of Norwich, and the assize judges to have them removed from the gaol in Bury 'for feare of infectyng others' (BL, Lansdowne MS 37, fol. 59'r'). 
Given the increasingly antagonistic relationship between Bishop Freake and the godly Suffolk gentry, the presence and radical critique by such laymen of the established church proved an acute embarrassment for the close alliance of godly magistracy and ministry within Bury St Edmunds, already sensitive to the charge levelled at them by their conformist opponents that they had truncated the required services to little more than Genevan psalms and sermons. The presence and preaching of Robert Browne in Bury by the summer of 1581 undoubtedly made this critique more pointed and powerful. Between 1581 and 1583 there appears to have been considerable support for the Brownist cause in Bury St Edmunds. In 1581 Freake reported that some inhabitants gathered 'to the number of an hundred at a tyme in privat howses and conventicles' to hear Browne preach, 'not without danger of some ill event' (BL, Lansdowne MS 33, fol. 26'r'). Freake's fears were realized in the following year when, thanks to some careful detective work by Richard Bancroft, the future archbishop, it was discovered that some of the more radical inhabitants had organized the effort to paint the first part of the scriptural warning of the angel to the church at Thyatira ('Revelation' 2: 19) around the queen's arms in the parish church of St Mary, with its covert implication that, for all Elizabeth's works and love and service and faith, she was a Jezebel who caused her servants to commit fornication and eat meat sacrificed to idols. 
This scandalous caption seems to have proved the last straw for the authorities and matters came to a head at the summer assizes held in Bury in 1583. On 30 June Elizabeth issued a proclamation declaring 'sundry seditious, schismatical and erroneous printed books... set forth by Robert Browne and Richard [Robert] Harrison' to be called in and 'burned or utterly defaced' and that those that were 'so hardy as to put in print or writing, sell, set forth, receive, give out, or distribute any more of the same or such like seditious books it libels' would 'answer for the contrary at their uttermost perils' (Hughes and Larkin, 2.501-2). The exemplary punishments meted out at the assizes held in Bury over the next few days followed swiftly. Both Copping and Thacker were indicted and convicted for 'dispersinge of Browne's bookes and Harrisons bookes' (BL, Lansdowne MS 38, fols. 162'r'-163'v'), and while the assizes were still in session both men were executed, Thacker on Thursday 4 July and Copping on Friday 5 July. Small bonfires to the number of forty books were made at both executions. The severity of the penalties was entirely in keeping with the fierce temper of Sir Edward Anderson, chief justice of the common pleas, who saved a copy of one of Robert Harrison's 'Three Formes of Catechismes' (1583) from the flames and presented the same to Bancroft, who attended the assizes and had been instrumental in revealing the extent of radical sentiment in the town. The other assize judge, Lord Chief Justice Sir Christopher Wray, wrote a full account to Lord Burghley of the proceedings in Bury in which he apologized for troubling 'your Lordship with a tedious matter' and expressed the hope that the 'example of this assizes' would bring an end to the separatist movement in and around Bury (BL, Lansdowne MS 38, fols. 162'r'-163'v'). However, probate evidence, and in particular a number of bequests to the widows Copping, Thacker, and Tyler made by some Bury testators as late as 1589, seems to indicate that the movement managed to survive in some form. 


@@@@@


doc= 6277


Coppin, Richard (fl. c.1645-1659), nonconformist preacher and writer, about whom little is known except what he recounts in 'Truths Testimony' (1655), was probably from Kent, and grew up to be an unexceptional pious believer within the established church. He was probably a student at Oxford but left without taking a degree; no record survives of his matriculation. 
Probably in the mid- to later 1640s and while he was living in London, Coppin was attracted successively to Presbyterianism, Independency, and the Baptists, rejecting each in turn as manifestations of spiritual tyranny or forms of worship that were merely human inventions. He turned instead -- probably about 1648 -- to a purely personal religion which was marked by a principle of saying or writing nothing 'that should perish or come to an end'. This represented the beginning of Coppin's ministry of preaching the redemption of all things, a message that was both anti-clerical and anti-university. He operated as a preacher, claiming that any money he received was turned over to the poor, in or near the Thames valley in Berkshire and Oxfordshire, where he encountered the hostility of local puritan ministers, most of whom were predestinarians and Baptists if not also Fifth Monarchists. By this time Coppin was part of a group of radical puritans all of whom had 'risen above ordinances' to await the coming of a higher spiritual order. Among these was the Ranter Abiezer Coppe, who influenced Coppin's beliefs and provided a preface for Coppin's extensive discussion and defence of his beliefs, 'Divine Teachings', published in London in 1649. This group would have been identified at the time as 'Seekers' and, in Coppe's account, had established a well-developed network across several towns and villages in the area. The response of the ministers in Berkshire was to contain Coppin's impact with the lure of a preferment in return for his recantation and a perhaps ill-conceived attempt to buy up every copy of his book. 

'Divine Teachings' is a remarkable work of religious enthusiasm, with its firm belief that the Holy Spirit or Christ had come to live within the meek and uneducated. Coppin argued that clergy would be punished while thieves and murderers would go free. Also evident in this text is the marked habit of controlled allegorical interpretation of the 'Bible', a central feature that infuriated the presbyterian divines with whom he disputed and who labelled him variously as a Familist and a Jesuit. Coppin's ideas are distinctive but are also related to many of those in the radical puritan diaspora. He believed that God and Christ are in all men, and that election pertains to God's choosing of Christ as the saviour of mankind, from which universal salvation follows. For him, the subject of reprobation is not the person but all the evil qualities in mankind that will finally be removed with the resurrection of God in man; death is the state of not recognizing these inner presences, the devil is the not-God that dwells within people, and the wrath of God is a purging of sin from all people. All of this Coppin describes in terms of images: the image of God in man and the possibility of seeing the 'Vision of God'. 
Coppin continued as an itinerant preacher but his activities led to a series of encounters with the law. Preaching at Burford and Evenlode in the summer of 1651, he found himself in conflict with another group of ministers led by Ralph Nevill and was brought to trial under the terms of the 'Blasphemy Act' at Worcester the following March. The judge was sympathetic but the jury was not: Coppin was found guilty and bound over until the next assizes. A similar dispute at Enstone in Oxfordshire resulted in a summons to the Oxford assizes in March 1653; once again, despite a sympathetic judge, Coppin was declared guilty and was only discharged at the following assize. The following year Coppin found himself set against both minister and magistrates in Stow on the Wold, Gloucestershire, which led predictably to another appearance at assizes, this time at Gloucester in summer 1654. However, on this occasion, the judge considered the charges to be insubstantial and Coppin was acquitted. During this period Coppin published, among other works, 'Saul Smitten for not Smiting Amalek', an allegorical interpretation of scripture written to demonstrate how the 'Bible' had prophesied the fall of the Rump Parliament in April 1653. Coppin approved of many of the reforms that the succeeding Barebone's Parliament called for, although his own desire for complete religious tolerance would have been far too much for most of that assembly's representatives. 
Coppin published his spiritual autobiography and defence of his beliefs, 'Truths Testimony', in 1655. In the summer of that year he returned to Kent, where he succeeded the former Ranter Joseph Salmon, who had preached on Sundays in Rochester Cathedral for most of the early half of the decade. Where Salmon had been carefully guarded in his sermons in order to avoid interference, he correctly predicted that Coppin would draw attention to himself. By October a group of local ministers had organized regular preaching against Coppin's alleged assertions about the sinful nature of Christ, that all mankind was the body of Christ, that all would be redeemed, and that there would be no resurrection of the body. Coppin was duly examined on 24 December by Major-General Kelsey and several justices, and was found to have breached the terms of the 'Blasphemy Act'; he and his supporters were described by Kelsey as 'church and state Levellers'. Coppin was imprisoned in Maidstone for six months: 'I will delight myself with the worst of men as well as with the best' was his response (Hill, 222). Two publications, 'A Blow at the Serpent' (1656) and 'Michael Opposing the Dragon' (1659), both in much the same vein as his previous writings, represent the last evidence of his activities. 
Coppin was one of the first in England to preach universal salvation; the Digger Gerrard Winstanley may have preceded him in this but only just. Although he denied being a Ranter, Coppin's writings, especially 'Divine Teachings', were influential among Ranters, and his beliefs may have gathered a small group of followers by the early eighteenth century. Some of his writings were republished in the 1760s when they were the focus of both admiration and opprobrium. 


@@@@@


doc= 6278


Coppinger, Edmund (c.1555-1591), prophet, was the impoverished younger son of a fervently protestant Suffolk gentry family. He does not appear to have taken a university degree, though two of his brothers were at St John's College, Cambridge. Henry was rector of Lavenham between 1578 and 1622, and Ambrose was MP for Ludgarshall in 1586 as well as 'chiefe officer' to the earl of Warwick, the well-known champion of the puritan cause. It was through Ambrose that, around 1588, Edmund made the acquaintance of the presbyterian leader Thomas Cartwright. Some time before 1591 he had acquired a minor post in the royal household and was living chiefly in London. There he developed a firm friendship with a Yorkshire gentleman named Henry Arthington, with whom he shared a belief that the Church of England was in need of far-reaching reform. Both were noted for their religious zeal, and their 'itching eares' carried them to the sermons of godly preachers all over the city (Cosin, 2). It was in the context of the imprisonment and trial of Cartwright and other puritan ministers that Coppinger and Arthington were introduced to the Northamptonshire maltster William Hacket, with whom they began to formulate an ambitious and risky scheme for 'the deliverye of ther restrained bretheren' ('Kenyon MSS', 608), the overthrow of the bishops, and 'th'expelling of dumme ministers all at one clappe' (Throkmorton, sig. A2'v'). Coppinger initially sought sanction for this 'secret project' from key figures in the puritan movement, but when his importunate overtures were sharply rebuffed he and his accomplices turned fiercely against them. He also pestered the queen and her close advisers with letters, and used his connections to arrange an interview for Hacket and himself with Lord Burghley, who dismissed them 'without further adoe' and accused Coppinger of building 'castels in th'ayre' (Cosin, 30; Throkmorton, sig. A4'r'). Coppinger had a series of close encounters with God in his dreams, during which he was 'inwardlie ravished in spirit'. The strange groans he made in his sleep led his bedfellows to suspect him 'not to bee well in his wittes', an opinion shared by Thomas Cartwright, who believed Coppinger suffered from 'some crazing of the braine' and on one occasion threatened to confine him in Bridewell or Bedlam (Throkmorton, sigs. A4'v', A3'v'). 
As a result of these experiences Coppinger became convinced that he and Arthington were prophets of mercy and judgment, divinely appointed lieutenants of Hacket, the new messiah and supreme king of the earth. As a consequence, their plot to depose the queen, replace several privy councillors, and establish presbyterian discipline in England gathered momentum. 
Always the more energetic and proactive of the two disciples, Coppinger organized the publication and dissemination of hundreds of pamphlets and broadsides on the eve of the planned insurrection. On 19 July 1591 he and Arthington moved through the streets of London proclaiming 'newes from heaven', before mounting a cart in Cheapside and announcing the second coming of Christ in the guise of William Hacket. A tumult ensued, and shortly afterwards all three were arrested. By this time Coppinger seems to have been completely mentally deranged, though in his 'Conspiracie, for Pretended Reformation' (1591) Richard Cosin alleged that he had feigned madness in the hope of escaping the full rigour of the law. He died in Bridewell on Thursday 29 July, twenty-four hours after Hacket's execution for treason, following a hunger strike which he had begun seven or eight days before. According to Arthington, who recanted and wrote a narrative of his 'seduction' in 1592, prior to his death Coppinger had 'detested Hacket and asked pardon of the almightie' (Arthington, 7). The episode was used by spokesmen for the ecclesiastical establishment as propaganda against the puritan movement, and was held up as an example of the dangers of religious enthusiasm. 


