@@@@@


doc= 56193


Leonard Mortimer Harris (1903-1989), department store manager, also made a career with the firm. Born on 24 August 1903 at The Elders, Grosvenor Road, Hoylake cum West Kirby, Cheshire, he began work as a drapery apprentice with Marshall and Snelgrove in London, and then worked for Harrods before becoming a freelance advertising agent. In 1924 he was invited to take up the temporary post of advertising manager at Browns of Chester, and remained there for the rest of his working life. 


@@@@@


doc= 56194


Holland, William (1837-1895), showman and music-hall and theatre entrepreneur, was born on 26 December 1837 at 58 Newington Causeway, London, the son of alderman William Holland, linen draper and wholesale upholsterer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Bayly. Though apprenticed to the family business, he was enamoured of amateur theatricals and left the trade while still young to promote minstrel shows, in which he played the interlocutor. 
In 1866 in partnership with a publican uncle, Holland successfully revived Weston's music-hall in Holborn, a major venue fallen on hard times. He went into independent management in 1867 in the famous Canterbury music-hall in Lambeth, another ailing business rescued by the lavish refurbishments, aggressive publicity, and flamboyant self-promotion that were the trade marks of his career as 'the British Barnum'. At the Canterbury he laid the stalls with expensive Brussels carpet, compounding the misgivings of friends by inviting the public to 'Come and spit on Billy Holland's thousand guinea carpet' (H. G. Hibbert, 'Fifty Years of a Londoner's Life', 1916, 57). Here in 1868 Holland signed the biggest star of the day, George Leybourne, 'Champagne Charlie', to an exclusive contract, obliging him to maintain the lordly and extravagant style of his hit song off as well as on stage, while Holland placarded London with details of his sensational salary. 'We are', declared Holland, 'living in an age of luxury' ('Chat with William Holland', 'The Era', 6 Jan 1894), a luxury which he determined to extend to all classes, casting himself as 'the People's Caterer', and 'Emperor of Lambeth', an invocation of his personal hero, Napoleon III, whom he emulated in dress, manner, and carefully cultivated moustache. 
In the 1870s Holland extended his entertainment empire to management of the Victoria and Surrey theatres and proprietorship of the North Woolwich Riverside Pleasure Gardens where his novel promotions included contests of trade skills for such as barmaids, postmen, and costers. 'The People's William' was himself frequently part of the show, riding on Blondin's back on tightrope at one of his halls and making surprise appearances in pantomime at the Surrey. Famously generous, he was a prominent freemason and ubiquitous figure at professional benefits and dinners, accompanied by his confidant and business adviser, fat Joe Pope, former army surgeon. Holland provided private entertainments for the prince of Wales, but also held benefits for Newcastle workers on strike for the nine-hour day in 1871 and provided soup for London's unemployed in 1886. Among his equally sensational failures were bull-fights at the Agricultural Hall over Christmas 1869, when imported Spanish bulls proved too meek to fight and Holland lost $7000 in three days -- a notable improvidence for the then president of the Music Hall Provident Fund. Later ventures included management of Wilton's and the Alhambra, circus and variety bills at Covent Garden Opera House, and schemes to convert the Great Eastern steamship into an entertainment complex. Though he escaped one process-server by balloon from the North Woolwich, Holland was forced to declare bankruptcy in 1876 and again in 1881. In his last major metropolitan venture he took over the Albert Palace in Battersea, joining with the RSPCA in sponsoring a 3 mile parade of London carthorses as publicity. When the Albert proved 'not too cashful' (H. Chance Newton, 'Idols of the Halls', 1975, 89), Holland moved in 1887 to the new frontier of mass entertainments, Blackpool. Despite the timidity of fellow directors, his enterprising management of the Winter Gardens (and a similar operation in Morecambe) achieved popular and financial success and he commissioned the town's new opera house. Holland drove himself hard and died at his home, 46 Park Road, Blackpool, on 29 December 1895, following a talent scouting trip to the USA, his personal finances reportedly in a mess. He was buried in Blackpool and survived by his wife Mary Matilda, (to whom he had been married for more than thirty years), a daughter Matilda (Minnie), and a son Louis, also in theatre management. 
Though his bravura style was being superseded by the bureaucratic disciplines of the large corporation, Billy Holland's quasi-aristocratic largess and populist rhetoric of progress and plenty exemplified the confidence of liberal capitalism in an expanding modern leisure market. 


@@@@@


doc= 56195


Houlding, John (1833?-1902), brewer and football club sponsor, was born in Tenterden Street, off Scotland Road, Liverpool, probably in 1833, the year his father, Thomas Houlding, established himself there as a cow keeper and dairyman. His parents came from Lancashire farming stock. 
Educated at the Church of England school in Bond Street, Houlding spent a year at Liverpool College before taking a job as office boy in a firm of shipbrokers, although only eleven and a half years old. Over the next two years he made good progress, but his father's cows were stricken by cattle disease and when only three remained John had to give up his job to look after them while his father took better-paid work in a brewery. Houlding later worked as a porter at the Liverpool Exchange until his father helped him obtain a position as labourer and drayman at a brewer's in Soho Street delivering beer to public houses for $1 a week. This lasted for about four years when the brewer employed by the firm left and John Houlding was appointed in his place in January 1856. A rent-free house went with the job, and marriage soon followed, on 20 July of the same year, together with a pay increase of 5's'. a week. His wife was Jane Lowe, a farmer's daughter, with whom he had a son and a daughter. He joined the St Anne's Building Society and at the end of the year had saved his first $12. In 1864 Houlding had saved his first $100 and bought a public house followed by a second in 1869. By this time he had taken over the administration of the brewery and become its manager on a salary of $200 a year. By 1870 Houlding had accumulated capital to the extent of $900 and in 1871 he went into business on his own buying a piece of land in Tynemouth Street, Breck Road, and converting it into a brewery. He only had one employee at first but good profits were made from the start. 
Houlding lived and worked in Everton, a rapidly growing working-class suburb containing an occasionally combustible mixture of Liverpool-born and English, Irish, and Welsh immigrants and it was Everton which supported his public career. This began in 1872 when he was appointed chairman of the Everton branch of the Conservative Association. The following year he was elected the representative for Everton on the west Derby board of guardians of which he was later chairman in 1878 and 1887. He joined the Everton burial board in 1876 and was chairman from 1880 for twenty years. Houlding won the Everton and Kirkdale ward in the city council elections of 1884, was elected alderman in 1895, became a JP in 1897 and lord mayor of Liverpool in 1897-8. He was the first president of what became the Mersey Quay and Railway Carters' Union, a freemason, Orangeman, churchman, and philanthropist being among the initiators of the annual dinner for the aged poor. 
Houlding was interested in sport, playing cricket and swimming in his younger days, and it was as the benefactor of the Everton Football Club that he became best known. He became the club's president in 1882 and managed the move to a ground in Anfield Road which the football club rented from him. Football became very popular in the 1880s as both a recreative and a spectator sport and therefore important as a market for brewers. The club agreed that as their income rose so would Houlding's rent, but the membership later felt that he was making too much money out of it. His role in the drink trade also upset some of them. Houlding found his vision for the commercial development of the club challenged by groups within the membership who differed from him ideologically, politically, and socially. In 1892 he gave the club notice to quit the Anfield Road ground and Everton moved to the other side of Stanley Park and built a new stadium in Goodison Road. Undaunted, Houlding created a new club from scratch and called it Liverpool. Not only did it obtain a place in the second division of the Football League but it won the championship without losing a match in 1893-4. His shrewdest move was to persuade Tom Watson to transfer from Sunderland and become club secretary with full responsibility for the playing side, an early example of what would later be called a football manager. Liverpool won the first of their Division One championships in 1900-01 under Houlding's chairmanship. 
Houlding was a popular figure, particularly in Everton, and was often referred to as 'King John', a nickname affectionate rather than critical. Contemporaries attributed his success to a combination of hard work, determination, a powerful physique, and intelligence. A Liverpool newspaper judged that his popularity was due 'to his intimate acquaintance through experience of the condition and requirement of the working classes, absence of any pride of position and a daily readiness to help in any undertaking from a school room concert to a Parliamentary deputation' ('Liverpool Review', 26 May 1888). Houlding was a 'parochial patriot' (Waller, 63), who may have lost the chance to stand for parliament because important local Conservatives thought him insufficiently polished. In later years he became a good French scholar and travelled widely on the continent. He died in France at the Pension Thomson, Cimiez, Nice, on 17 March 1902. He was buried next to his wife in Everton cemetery, Fazakerley, on 21 March 1902, when large crowds turned out to see the cortege pass. 


@@@@@


doc= 56196


Jackson, (John) Enderby (1827-1903), musician and impresario, was born in Mytongate, Kingston upon Hull, on 14 January 1827, the son of John Jackson who was a tallow chandler and soap-boiler, a trade which had been in the family for several generations. Enderby Jackson was a talented musician; he played several instruments and composed. But it was as an entrepreneur and impresario that he made his mark, inventing the brass band contest in its modern form. 
Jackson's mother died when he was a child and his relationship with his father was not easy. He attended Hull grammar school, where he distinguished himself, but because music was not taught at the school, he took lessons privately with several teachers, becoming proficient on flute, French horn, piano, and in singing. He also took lessons in harmony and composition. He claimed to have been inspired to a career in music when, as a small boy enlisted to assist his father in the administration of footlight candles at the Theatre Royal, Hull, he heard Jullien's orchestra perform. He ignored the family business and became a professional musician playing in theatre and touring bands in northern towns. On 18 January 1860 Jackson married Eliza S. Smith (1837-1909) of Nettleham, Lincoln; they had four children. 
Jackson's observation of the popularity of competitive agricultural events inspired the idea of brass band contests, which he organized under his 'National Musical Contests' enterprise. His first 'Open Contest' was held at the Belle Vue Gardens in Manchester in July 1856. Its success launched band contests as a feature of Victorian life, and many other provincial contests followed. Jackson negotiated tenaciously with railway companies to provide modestly priced transport for mass audiences travelling to his contests, with the result that the North Eastern Railway Company agreed to provide privileged prices for bands and their supporters. In 1859 the Crystal Palace Company engaged him to run a bell-ringing contest at Sydenham. The following year Jackson was similarly engaged to put on a band contest. This was spectacularly successful: 72 bands attended and they were listened to by an audience of over 22,000. Further contests were held at the Crystal Palace in the following two years. 
Jackson was always ambitious to add an international dimension to the brass band contest, but though he visited many European countries to attend musical congresses and expositions, his vision of a 'Music Unity of Nations' was never entirely fulfilled. In September 1871 he left England for Australia and, more briefly, New Zealand and South Africa, with his London Star Company Comique. He returned to England in July 1873, and became the sole agent for many important foreign bands, including Lumbley's band from Copenhagen and Gilmore's from the USA. He was also agent for British and foreign instrument manufacturers. 
Jackson died suddenly on 9 April 1903 of a brain haemorrhage, at his home, Sherwood House, 2 Sherwood Street, Scarborough, and was buried in Manor Road cemetery in the town. Although he was a man of eclectic talents, his surviving musical works show him to have been no more than a competent tunesmith. He dabbled in local politics and was a gifted painter and designer who, in 1891, put forward plans to join the two bays of Scarborough. Jackson's autobiographical writings reveal him as a man of considerable self-confidence and self-opinion, and he was one of the most effective impresarios of his time. His retrospective claim that his mission had been 'The Propagation of Music amongst the Working Classes' (Jackson) probably disguised more mundane, financial motives, but his impact on the musical life of ordinary Victorians cannot be denied. 


@@@@@


doc= 56201


Jaques, John (1823-1898), sports and games manufacturer, was born in London, the only son of John Jaques (1795-1877), an ivory- and wood-turner of Leather Lane in the City of London, and his wife, Ann. In adolescence he was apprenticed into the family firm of T. and J. Jaques, founded in 1795 by his grandfather, Thomas Jaques (1765-1844), which moved its headquarters in 1838 from Leather Lane to 102 Hatton Garden, London. Eventually the firm was renamed Jaques & Son. 
The firm's fortunes were built on handcrafted bowling woods, false teeth made from hippopotamus ivory, and elegant chess sets of a new standard design, named after a leading Victorian player, Howard Staunton. The younger John Jaques expanded the product range to include a variety of indoor games, demonstrating his ingenuity as an inventor: 'Happy Families', 'Tiddly-Winks', 'Ludo', and 'Snakes and Ladders', staples of domestic entertainment for well over a century. 
The most important change came in 1851 when Jaques exhibited a croquet set at the Great Exhibition in London and became the game's most influential popularizer. During the next two decades croquet spread extremely rapidly, not least in British India, proving ideal for a newly affluent upper middle class seeking to play gentle games on private lawns; it also offered a very useful, socially controlled and partly chaperoned addition to the marriage mart. Jaques codified the rules in what long remained the standard work, his 'Croquet, the Laws and Regulations of the Game', first published in 1864. He married Harriet Ingram (1823-1898), the daughter of Nathaniel Cooke, proprietor of the 'Illustrated London News'; they had six daughters and two sons, one of whom continued the innovatory traditions of the firm. John Jaques was made a freeman of the City of London in 1869 and played a prominent role in one of the City livery companies, the Turners. John Jaques died on 3 April 1898 at his home, Hillside, Duppas Hill, Croydon, Surrey. He was survived by his wife. 
By that time the business had already passed into the control of his second son, also 
In the longer term the most significant of Jaques's innovations was 'Gossima', later renamed 'Ping-Pong'. It was an indoor game, playable on dinner tables. It boomed in the early 1900s, although Jaques's product soon found a rival in the similar 'Table Tennis', produced by other manufacturers with slightly different rules. It then lost popularity rapidly until it re-emerged after the First World War as a staple of youth club provision. 
In 1901 Jaques married Mimie Constable Roberts, who died in the following year giving birth to a son, John Jaques. In 1917 he married Irene Amy Dodgson, the niece of Lewis Carroll; they had nine children, and she survived him. The firm's integrity in a fickle and competitive market was strengthened by incorporation as a private limited liability company in 1899 when John became a salaried managing director at $400 a year; in 1912 outside investors were allowed in but never to such an extent that Jaques family control was threatened. John Jaques died on 14 January 1937 at his home, Croft Cottage, 5 Forest Road, Branksome Park, near Bournemouth. He left his descendants a very well-established firm, combining innovation and a strong product line rooted in the quality of its Victorian staples. 


@@@@@


doc= 56202


John Jaques (1862-1937), sports and games manufacturer, who was born on 3 September 1862 at 4 Caroline Place, St Pancras, London. He joined the firm in 1884 and was a keen sportsman and an all-round athlete. He maintained the firm's base in domestic games but directed output towards other burgeoning middle-class sports after croquet declined in the later 1870s, after the rapid spread of lawn tennis. That sport was catered for by the firm, together with cricket, archery, football, and badminton, which experienced an Edwardian surge in popularity. Croquet also revived in this sporting boom, as did bowls. John Jaques responded to that by introducing mechanized production of bowling woods, and Jaques's bowls became the game's standard for a long time. There were also additions to the range of board games, including a short-lived response to the 1890s bicycling boom, 'Wheeling', which involved moving lead figures of cyclists along a stylized route through the Thames valley. 


@@@@@


doc= 56206


Norris, Sir Henry George (1865-1934), property developer and football promoter, was born on 23 July 1865 at 23 Royal Terrace, Kennington, London, the son of John Henry Norris, warehouseman, and his wife, Georgiana Sarah Shaw. Educated privately, he was articled at the age of thirteen to a firm of solicitors. 
Norris's great leap forward came in 1896 when he joined W. G. Allen in the firm of Allen and Norris, auctioneers and estate agents, builders, and joiners, of 298 Wandsworth Bridge Road (which was still extant in Fulham Palace Road in 1976). Under the auspices of this firm, he became a successful property developer in the London of the 1890s, building some 2000 flats and houses on what had been farmland and market gardens in Fulham. Many of the houses were divided into two flats with separate sculleries and a staircase leading from the upper flat to the back garden. They were designed for lower middle class and better-off working people. Norris also built larger houses of self-contained flats with bathrooms off the Fulham Palace Road. He later became a director of several companies including Kinnaird Park Estates and the Municipal Freehold Land Co. In 1901 he married Edith Anne 'nee' Featherstone; they had three daughters. 
An energetic and ambitious man, Norris also played prominent roles in the worlds of politics and professional football. Having served for six years as a member of the Battersea vestry, in 1906 he was elected to the Fulham borough council for the Sands End ward. He was elected mayor in 1909, an office he retained until 1919. He was on the London county council from 1916 until 1919. The war provided an ideal opportunity to fuse energy and entrepreneurialism with patriotism. Norris had formerly held commissions in the 3rd Middlesex artillery volunteers and the 2nd Tower Hamlets volunteers. He was a member of the committee which raised the footballers' battalion of the Middlesex regiment and he personally raised three brigades of artillery from the Fulham area, where he was recruiting officer with the rank of colonel. A later wartime appointment was as director of recruiting for the south-eastern counties. In recognition of his role during the war he was knighted in 1917. The following year he was elected Conservative MP for East Fulham, but as a staunch free-trader retired in 1922 when the government adopted tariff reform. A leading freemason, he held high masonic office in the Kent and London mayors' lodges, and also in the grand lodge of England. 
In addition Norris made a significant impact on professional football in London. He became a director in 1906, and later chairman, of his local club, Fulham, and helped it to reach the second division of the Football League in 1907-8. However, when Woolwich Arsenal appeared on the brink of bankruptcy he took it over and tried to amalgamate it with Fulham, but the Football League rejected the plan. He subsequently retired from Fulham and became chairman of Arsenal. The Arsenal was the capital's oldest professional club and Norris realized that it had to move from Plumstead if it was to realize its potential, and in 1913 $20,000 was spent on 6 acres of land belonging to St John's College of Divinity at Highbury in north London. There was opposition from local residents and from Clapton Orient and Tottenham Hotspurs who disliked the idea of a competitor only 4 miles away, but the Football League felt the market was far from glutted and Arsenal played the first match at Highbury on 6 September 1913. 
English league football had been suspended in 1915 because of the war, with Arsenal in the second division, to which it had been relegated in 1912. However, in 1919 the Football League decided to expand the number of clubs in the first division from twenty to twenty-two. It was expected that the two teams who would have been relegated in 1915, Chelsea and Tottenham, would keep their places but Norris pulled off an audacious and ruthless coup, the full details of which remain unclear to this day. He persuaded the AGM of the Football League to keep Chelsea but to relegate Tottenham and further claimed that Arsenal should take its place on the dubious grounds of having been a member of the league for longer. Arsenal thus returned to the first division, not by virtue of performance on the field but as the result of apparently shady deals. 
Norris was never again to be so influential in the corridors of Football League power, noticeably failing to persuade the league to place an upper limit on the amounts which could be paid in transfer fees when a player moved from one club to another. In 1927 he was suspended from all football and football management for making illegal payments to obtain players. Two years later he lost a libel action against the members of the FA commission which had convicted him. This was his third libel action in nine years, but the first he had lost. 
A combative character, Norris was clearly a man used to exercising power and getting his own way. One Arsenal manager said that everyone in the club was frightened of him. Tall and thin, with pince-nez and white walrus moustache, he must have found it very frustrating to watch the success of Arsenal in the early 1930s under the management of Herbert Chapman, whom he had appointed in 1925. Norris died at his home, Sirron Lodge, Barnes Common, on 30 July 1934 and was buried in East Sheen cemetery on 2 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 56207


Payne, (George) Adney (1846-1907), music-hall manager, was born in the Curragh, Ireland, the son of Edward Payne, a licensed victualler. Unlike most music-hall entrepreneurs of his generation, Adney Payne (as he was generally referred to), was not born into the theatrical profession. Indeed, he frequently recalled that his parents had held a very low opinion of the value of popular entertainments. 
It was while working as a wine merchant in Greenwich that Payne first became involved in the music-hall business. In 1878 he and Charles Spencer Crowder purchased Lusby's music-hall, Mile End Road, for $25,000. Crowder took responsibility for the theatrical aspects of the business, while Payne utilized his experience as a licensed victualler in overseeing the backstage activities, primarily the sale of refreshments. Lusby's had a chequered history under Crowder and Payne's control. It bore the brunt of Frederick Charrington's religious crusade against London's music-halls and was burnt down in 1884, soon reopening as the Paragon. Meanwhile, in 1882 Crowder and Payne also purchased the Canterbury music-hall, Westminster Bridge Road, Lambeth. When Crowder retired in 1887, Payne became managing director of the newly formed Canterbury and Paragon Limited. 
Payne rose to prominence within the music-hall business during the West End boom of the 1890s as a key figure in the emergence of Henry Newson-Smith's syndicate of theatres. After the retirement of the latter in 1896, Payne, as the managing director of the Tivoli and Oxford music-halls and the London Pavilion, enjoyed a virtual monopoly over the West End's music-halls. He was largely responsible for nurturing the talents of many of the greatest 'stars' of the variety stage who rose to fame during the 1890s and was closely associated with the much heralded 'improvement' in both the artistic merit and the moral tone of performances and in the behaviour of audiences at this time. After the turn of the century Payne, in collaboration with Henry Gros, turned his attention to the booming suburban music-hall market, becoming joint managing director of 'Palaces' in Chelsea, Walthamstow, Tottenham, and East Ham. His influence over the metropolitan music-hall business was further enhanced by the marriage of one of his daughters to Walter Gibbons, another leading manager. 
Payne was twice married. His first wife was Marion Ford (died 1897); they had six children, two of whom died in infancy. On 15 November 1898 he married Clara Agnes Proctor (whose stage name was Ethel Earle), a theatrical and music-hall performer. She was the daughter of Alfred Pavey, a builder and estate agent. Payne was a keen fruit grower and horticulturalist and a member of the Hertfordshire yeomanry for seventeen years. He took especial pride in his thirty prizes for best turned-out man and horse at local shows. 
According to one obituary Payne played a significant role in 'the foundation of the variety theatres into a large commercial industry' ('Daily Mail', 16 May 1907); and he was certainly renowned for his energy and perseverance. An imposing figure, he was 'a man of wonderful decision and dominating temperament' ('Daily Telegraph', 16 May 1907) and 'when his mind was thoroughly made up as to a particular course, nothing would divert him from it' (ibid., 18 May 1907, 4). In spite of his 'marshal ['sic'] bearing, [and] strict disciplinarian methods in business' ('Daily Mail', 16 May 1907) Payne cultivated a paternalistic relationship with his performers and was a trustee of the Music Hall Benevolent Fund. Notwithstanding this image, Payne's halls were boycotted by performers during the infamous music-hall strike of 1907. 
George Adney Payne died of a blood clot at the Mount Ephraim Hotel, Tunbridge Wells, on 15 May 1907, ten days after a serious motor car accident in the town. He was buried in a family plot in St Pancras cemetery, East Finchley, on 18 May. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 56208


Pulteney, Sir William, fifth baronet (1729-1805), politician and property developer, was born William Johnstone on 19 October 1729 at Westerhall, Dumfriesshire, the third son of Sir James Johnstone MP, third baronet (1697-1772), and the Hon. Barbara Murray (died 1773), daughter of the fourth Lord Elibank. Little is known of his childhood or early education until he attended prelections on history and Roman antiquities with Dr Charles Mackie at Edinburgh University in 1746-7. He was admitted to the Scottish bar on 16 July 1751. From references in the correspondence of contemporaries such as Adam Smith and Sir John Sinclair it seems that he lived the life of an intelligent, if impoverished, young lawyer in literary and intellectual circles in Edinburgh. As a younger son he was dependent upon the patronage of senior members of the family to obtain appointments but surviving correspondence reveals that at an early stage he was developing a reputation as a sound political and financial adviser. He remained close to his family, particularly to his brothers George and John and his unmarried sister Betty, who cared for their, often difficult, parents. 
Johnstone left Edinburgh for London in 1759 when he was appointed to a post worth $400 a year in customs and excise. He was now in possession of a secure income and on 10 November 1760 married Frances (1728?-1782), daughter and heir of Daniel Pulteney MP, whose means were then similar to his own. Johnstone's employment allowed him to return to Edinburgh and the couple lived comparatively modestly until the unexpected deaths in quick succession of Frances Johnstone's cousin, Viscount Pulteney, in 1763, and his father, William Pulteney, earl of Bath, in 1764. Lord Bath's immense fortune was entailed upon his 79-year-old bachelor brother General Harry Pulteney but on his death in 1767 it passed to Frances Johnstone. The Johnstones, who had returned to live in London, immediately adopted the Pulteney name and moved to General Pulteney's home, Bath House, Piccadilly, from Cleveland Row, St James's. Their only child to survive infancy, (Henrietta) Laura Pulteney, had been born the previous year, on 26 December 1766. 
His developing interest in politics led to Pulteney's return to parliament for Cromarty in 1768, following an unsuccessful attempt at Shrewsbury, in which the Pulteney family had an interest, in the same year. In 1775 he was successful at Shrewsbury and represented the borough until his death. Pulteney remained independent and there is no evidence that he actively sought office. His principal interests were in financial and economic matters, which encompassed American and East Indian affairs, agriculture, fisheries, and transport throughout Great Britain. In all of these he had, or developed, a personal financial interest. 'He possessed a sound understanding and his opinion was always received in the House with respect for full attention. As a public man, no commoner understood the Constitution of a country better, or more uniformly supported it by his conduct. ('GM')' During a period of great parliamentary turbulence in 1797-8 a proposal was mooted for the establishment of a third party to form a government and Pulteney was identified, by others, as a likely chancellor of the exchequer. James Gillray recorded the episode in a caricature entitled 'Le tresorier' on 21 May 1798. 
Pulteney's American interests appear to have stemmed from the appointment of his brother George Johnstone as governor of West Florida in 1763 and existing Johnstone family interests in the West Indies. On the outbreak of the American War of Independence in 1776 he and his brother George, by then also an MP, became involved in attempts at reconciliation. George Johnstone joined the earl of Carlisle's peace mission to America while Pulteney undertook a secret mission, under the alias of Mr Williams, to Paris to attempt negotiations with Benjamin Franklin, the American ambassador to France. Neither initiative bore fruit but subsequently Pulteney made his views known in pamphlets criticizing government policy, pointing out the cost of the American war, and supporting a more generous treatment of the rebellious colonists. 
Pulteney applied a similar approach to Indian affairs. His brother John Johnstone held a post with the East India Company, and the brothers corresponded regularly on Indian affairs. In 1783 Pulteney wrote a pamphlet entitled 'The Effects to be Expected from the East India Bill upon the Constitution of Great Britain' criticizing Fox's policies and setting out his views on a proper relationship with the subcontinent. 
While pursuing his political interests, Pulteney was engaged in schemes for the management and development of his wife's extensive estates in London and Bath. The Bath estate offered the greatest potential for building development and to exploit this he promoted an act of parliament in 1769 allowing the bridging of the Avon between the old city and the parish of Bathwick on the east bank. Robert Adam, an Edinburgh contemporary and friend, was commissioned to design the estate but in the event only the Pulteney Bridge was built according to his plans. The bridge and the Great Pulteney Street development, which took place over the next thirty years, remain the greatest visible monuments to Pulteney's endeavours. 
Frances Pulteney died in 1782 and Pulteney was then responsible for managing the estates on behalf of his daughter, Henrietta Laura, as her mother's heir. His role diminished on her marriage in 1794 to Sir James Murray, seventh baronet (1751-1811), his first cousin, who changed his name to Pulteney on marriage. Pulteney had earlier used his influence to have his daughter created Baroness Bath in her own right in 1792. She was advanced to the rank of countess of Bath in 1803. 
Pulteney had always been interested in agricultural improvements and originally experimented at Solway Bank, his own small estate near Lockerbie in Dumfriesshire. He subsequently applied the same principles to his wife's estates in Staffordshire, Shropshire, Montgomeryshire, Northamptonshire, and Somerset. At Solway Bank there were also fisheries which he developed and improved and his experience here was later applied nationally in Scotland through his role in the British Fisheries Society, of which he was director from 1790 to 1805. He was particularly concerned with highland fisheries and he is commemorated in the nineteenth century development of Wick, known as Pulteney Town. 
The opening up and development of the highlands was made possible by road construction in which Thomas Telford, a native of Westerhall and a protege of Pulteney's, was much involved, as he was in earlier road and canal construction on the Pulteneys' other estates. Because of his modest nature the true extent of Pulteney's patronage is largely unrecorded, but although careful he was not ungenerous. When Andrew Stuart, a close friend and political associate, became financially embarrassed Pulteney granted him an annuity of $400. He encouraged not only Thomas Telford but the children of friends and proteges, including William Pulteney Allison, sometime president of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, and Admiral Sir Pulteney Malcolm who served under Lord Nelson and whose father came from Westerhall. His public benefactions included the endowment of the chair of agriculture in the University of Edinburgh. 
From 1791, as part of the 'rapprochement' with the USA, Pulteney invested heavily in American stock and then began his greatest speculation of all by buying 1 million acres in upper New York state, of which a new town of Bath became the centre. Largely through the work of his agent Colonel Charles Williamson, the scheme was so successful that by 1802 the whole area was opened up and the initial investment of $250,000 was valued at $2 million. 
Always a frugal man, with few personal social aspirations and of unpretentious appearance and demeanour, Pulteney lived quietly between Bath House and Shrewsbury, where with Telford's assistance he adapted the ruinous castle as a house. The only doubts recorded about his conduct relate to his apparent failure to attend appropriately to the early social needs of his daughter, who was noted as the richest heiress of her day, but who appears to have been somewhat eccentric and who eventually married a professional soldier many years her senior. 
In 1794, on the death of his older brother James Johnstone, Pulteney became fifth baronet and inherited the Westerhall estate together with plantations and slaves in the West Indies. On 3 January 1804 Pulteney married his second wife, Margaret, daughter of Sir William Stirling, bt, of Ardoch and widow of his old friend Andrew Stuart. 
Pulteney died on 30 May 1805 at Bath House, Piccadilly, London, and was buried in the south cloister of Westminster Abbey on 11 June 1805 next to his first wife, Frances, and at the foot of the monument to her father, Daniel Pulteney. No monument to him or his wife or his daughter, who died in 1808, was ever erected. Surprisingly, for such a rich and careful man, he died intestate. His personal estate in England passed to his widow and daughter and was valued at over $600,000. The landed estates in England and the overseas properties passed to the countess of Bath and his Scottish properties passed to his nephew Sir George Johnstone of Westerhall, sixth baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 56209


Sainsbury family (per. 1869-1956), food retailers, originated with 


@@@@@


doc= 56210


Smith, Henry Newson- (1854-1898), accountant and music-hall entrepreneur, was born on 14 May 1854 at 28 Wyndham Street, Marylebone, Middlesex, the son of Henry George Smith, leather merchant, and his wife, Emily Newson. Smith was educated at the North London Collegiate School, Camden Town, and in 1871 took up employment in a City solicitor's office. In 1876 he married Elizabeth Caroline Louisa, the daughter of Nicholas Powning, a builder, of Truro. The same year he established his own accountancy business at 37 Walbrook in the City of London (which remained his office throughout his career). His business interests flourished and in 1880 he became a fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants. In later life he was known as Henry Newson-Smith. 
Newson-Smith's financial acumen became evident in the closing decades of the nineteenth century, when he stimulated a profound transformation of the commercial aspects of the buoyant music-hall business. His initial involvement in popular entertainment came through his role as an auditor of theatre companies, but he soon became more deeply involved in the ownership and management of the London Pavilion during the late 1880s. In partnership with George Adney Payne he purchased the recently built Tivoli in 1891 and his control of the West End variety business was consolidated by the opening on 31 January 1893 of the rebuilt Oxford music-hall. As the guiding force behind this syndicate of halls, Newson-Smith controlled the finances of the most influential and successful theatres of the music-hall boom of the 1890s. 
According to 'The Era', Newson-Smith's financial success and his distinctive contribution to the development of popular entertainment in Britain lay 'in the intelligent application of ordinary business principles to a calling which had hitherto been regarded as incapable of such treatment' ('Era', 14 March 1896, 19). Previous generations of music-hall entrepreneurs had adopted a largely cavalier and providential attitude towards the financial aspects of their activities. Newson-Smith, drawing on his experience outside the entertainment industry, pioneered the adoption of a much more rigorous and prudent approach to music-hall finance. His involvement with the music-hall business was cut short by ill health, however. Newson-Smith resigned his directorships of the London Pavilion, Tivoli, and Oxford music-halls in November 1896, and by the time of his death he had sold off the majority of his interests in these companies. 
In addition to his business responsibilities, Newson-Smith was also a deputy lieutenant of London and the honorary auditor of the Music Hall Benevolent Fund. 'Hennie', as he was often known to intimates, was a motor enthusiast, a keen collector of Constable paintings, and an avid follower of cricket. Newson-Smith died from cirrhosis of the liver and acute jaundice on 28 April 1898 at his home, 25 Avenue Road, St John's Wood, London; he was only forty-three. He was buried at the old parish church, Hampstead, on 2 May 1898. He had at least one son, who was at that time a chartered accountant's articled clerk. 


@@@@@


doc= 56211


Sterling, Sir Louis Saul (1879-1958), gramophone company manager and industrialist, was born into a Jewish family on 31 May 1879 in New York's Lower East Side, the son of Morris Isaac Sterling, an accountant. Little is known of his childhood beyond his own frequently repeated story of selling newspapers on the streets of New York. If true, then it was in that sphere that he discovered and first developed his natural abilities as a salesman. Later Sterling worked for various New York concerns, before obtaining employment with an import-export company. It was there that he first encountered the record industry, beginning an association that lasted for much of his business life. 
The litigious travails of the early American record industry deterred Sterling from entering the business in that country. However, his knowledge of overseas markets, together with important contacts with fellow countrymen already exploiting this new technology in Europe, persuaded him to seek his fortune overseas. In February 1903, with $30 ($6) in his pocket, he left New York to settle in London. Years later, he told George VI that his first night in Britain was spent in the police cells, following an over-ambitious celebration of his arrival in London. 
Sterling found employment with the Gramophone and Typewriter Ltd, a venture then developing the disc record trade in Britain, Europe, and Russia. In an interview shortly before his death Sterling recalled how he addressed envelopes and did all sorts of menial jobs before becoming a salesman for the company at $3 per week. At the time, because machine and record prices were significantly lower than those of discs, the cylinder record format dominated the infant British market. In an attempt to challenge this, the Gramophone and Typewriter Ltd in 1904 created a range of cheap disc records, and Sterling was given the task of creating a new catalogue of records from existing and back catalogues. The company's failure to give Sterling a promised senior management position caused him to leave at the end of 1904 and go into business on his own account. 
In December 1904 Louis Sterling, in partnership with an American sound engineer, Russell Hunting, formed the Sterling Record Company Ltd to manufacture and sell cylinder records. Hunting created an impressive catalogue of recordings, among which were some of the earliest records by the Irish tenor John McCormack, while Sterling created markets using what later became a hallmark of his business methods -- mass advertising. However in 1908, despite a strong domestic and overseas base and a German record company agency, the venture collapsed. The combination of a sharp recession and a switch by key German machine and record manufacturers to the disc format destroyed the European market for cylinder records and the disc format became the industry standard. 
To capitalize on this important development in 1909 Sterling formed the Rena Manufacturing Company to manufacture and sell disc records and record players. The players failed to materialize, but a catalogue of records was released from existing and back catalogues of the financially troubled British branch of the American firm, the Columbia Phonograph Company General. The Rena contract gave Columbia's record factory and recording studios a financial lifeline. In the rising market of 1910 Rena Records scored a major success, and later that year Sterling sold the business to Columbia, which he then joined as British sales manager. It said something of the state of Columbia's finances and Sterling's own self-confidence that, initially at least, he was employed on a commission-only basis. 
Between 1910 and the outbreak of war in 1914 Sterling established himself as a major figure in the growing European record business. His business acumen and selling skills transformed Columbia's fortunes: its development had previously been hampered by the American parent which used it as a source of ready cash. Under Sterling's management, Columbia published regular lists featuring new records of the latest popular music, music-hall songs by top performers, together with complete operas, symphonies, and other large-scale ensemble pieces. These recordings featured important conductors such as Henry Wood and the young Thomas Beecham. With these catalogues of records, Columbia and the industry as a whole established its position as a new and important medium for disseminating musical culture and the performing arts. The success of Sterling's efforts can be gauged by the fact that in 1914 about one third of British households possessed some form of record player, and, at a time when German manufacturers controlled more than half the British record market, Columbia held more than 15 per cent. 
When war was declared in August 1914, Sterling's qualities as an industry leader came to the fore. One immediate effect of the unexpected crisis was the collapse of the record industry as consumers stopped buying luxury goods. Sterling seized the initiative and at the end of August published the first of a series of Columbia war record supplements, each containing new recordings of the latest popular war and patriotic songs. He personally persuaded reluctant wholesalers and dealers, who were convinced that the industry was finished, to take these records and engaged in a massive advertising campaign to sell them. The move proved an overwhelming triumph and was imitated by Sterling's competitors. However, it was thanks to Sterling's bold action that the industry survived its greatest crisis. 
The war years enabled Louis Sterling to consolidate his position at the centre of the British record industry. In December 1914 he became Columbia's European general manager, and, although cut off from the company's German branch, he presided over a boom in the British trade. In 1917, in order better to protect the venture's growing assets, the company was incorporated in Britain as the Columbia Graphophone Company Ltd, with Sterling as managing director. The same year saw the acquisition of the Hertford Record Company, which, prior to the war, had been the main British business of the German record company Carl Lindstrom AG. 
In the decade after the war, the Columbia Graphophone Company, under Sterling's leadership, became the world's most dynamic record company. In 1923 Columbia's American parent found itself once again in the hands of receivers. This gave Sterling the opportunity to arrange a management buy-out of the British and European business. With support from financiers Ernest de Stein and Michael Herbert of Morgan Grenfell (then the British branch of J. P. Morgan, the American merchant bank), Sterling bought the business, and in 1924 achieved a successful flotation of the company's shares on the London stock market. The following year, with Morgan's assistance, Sterling acquired the former American parent, Columbia Phonograph Company, Inc., which he then reorganized and rationalized, installing new management, and turned into a profit-making venture. In 1927 Columbia Phonograph invested in the New York-based Independent Broadcasting Network, which was renamed Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS) and later became one of America's major broadcast networks. The same year he acquired the Okeh Record Company, with its large jazz and popular music catalogue and roster of star names. 
Sterling's purchase of the Columbia Phonograph Company, Inc. began a bout of acquisitions and mergers, which included the German Carl Lindstrom AG and the record interests of the French company Pathe. The 1920s was a boom time for the record industry in general, and Columbia in particular. Moves into radio manufacture added new products to the Columbia range, and enhanced the value of what had become on both sides of the Atlantic a glamour stock. At one stage Columbia's 10's'. shares traded at $15 each. All of this helped Sterling become a very rich man. By the early 1930s he had integrated much of the world's record industry and was a major electrical goods manufacturer, with worldwide manufacturing and distribution networks and an important research laboratory. He became a naturalized British subject in 1932 and was knighted in the 1937 coronation honours list. 
On 17 September 1919 Louis Sterling married Cissie Kandt ('nee' Stevens), a widow, at London's Central Synagogue; there were no children of the marriage. The couple set up home at 7 Avenue Road, in London's Regent's Park, where they created a haven for artists, bankers, and men of letters. The Sterlings' Sunday afternoon soirees were for decades an important feature of London's artistic life. Louis Sterling held strong socialist beliefs and was a member of the Labour Party. Overlaying all this were equally strong beliefs in egalitarian principles which had more in common with the writings of Thomas Jefferson than those of Karl Marx. He believed in the practical application of his beliefs, which he tested on his fiftieth birthday, in 1929, when he distributed $100,000 of his personal wealth among Columbia employees. Furthermore, he established and endowed a company pension scheme. 
Sterling, Herbert, and de Stein developed close links with banker Thomas Lamont, then head of J. P. Morgan, who by 1931 controlled eighty per cent of Columbia's American depository stock, which represented the bulk of the shares in the business. In that year pressure grew to merge Columbia with the Gramophone Company, which was run by Sterling's great rival Alfred Clark, and whose business was also substantially controlled by American interests (notably RCA Victor). Until then Sterling's poor personal relations with Clark (who was also a New York emigre who had taken British nationality) made him reluctant to consider such a move. However, under intense pressure from Lamont and Owen D. Young (president of the American General Electric Company) who owned half the shares in RCA Victor, the merger was accomplished. 
Sterling became managing director of the new company, Electric and Musical Industries Ltd (EMI), and Clark chairman. In the first three years of its existence, in face of the great depression, EMI made cumulative losses of more than $1 million. For the company to survive, Sterling was forced to undertake a massive rationalization programme of EMI's worldwide manufacturing and distribution network, which was more than halved. He also had to cope with the collapse of the record business (in 1929 the combined forces of Columbia and Gramophone sold 30 million records in Britain; the figure for 1938 was around 5 million), the company's main cash-earning product. He focused EMI's radio manufacturing facilities at the company's Hayes factories, and introduced a new range of products such as refrigerators and electric irons and other domestic appliances. Sterling realized that the market for radios would quickly reach saturation levels. With this in mind he supported Isaac Shoenberg, the director of EMI's central research laboratory, in his development of the 405-line television system. With this new product Sterling believed the company would be in a strong position to exploit the next major innovation in domestic leisure activities. The EMI system of television was adopted by the BBC when, in 1936, it began regular public broadcasting of television in the London area. 
During EMI's crisis years, relations between Clark and Sterling deteriorated. They became intolerable when, in 1937, Sterling was knighted (an award Clark coveted). The death of two EMI directors enabled Clark to pack the board with his nominees, and in 1939, amid great bitterness, Sterling was manoeuvred out of the company. 
Sterling had important interests outside EMI and was a director of several other companies including Chappell, the music publishers, Harrburger Brooks, manufacturers of piano mechanisms, and Solvent Products, a chemical business. In 1938 he became a director of Mercantile Credit Ltd, and the same year he joined Siegmund Warburg as a founding partner of the merchant bank S. G. Warburg Ltd: interesting appointments for a committed socialist. During the Second World War he became chairman and managing director of A. C. Cosser Ltd, the electrical manufacturers, who also made radar equipment. 
In the 1930s, as the Nazis began their persecution of German Jews, Sterling, often surreptitiously, assisted many friends, colleagues, and former business associates escape to safety. Throughout his life Sterling put his beliefs into practice, and became one of Britain's largest individual philanthropists, giving away around $1.5 million in his lifetime, through individual donations and his own charitable trust. The bulk of his estate benefited the many charities, including Jewish ones, which he had created and supported over the years. 
In his private life, Sterling was an avid collector of first editions and incunabula, and, two years before his death, he gave London University one of the finest privately owned libraries of its kind. With a substantial endowment, the collection was housed, with his portrait, in the Sterling Library at the University Senate House. In recognition of this gift, he was made a DLitt. Sterling died of a coronary thrombosis and diabetes in St Mary's Hospital, London, on 2 June 1958 at the age of seventy-nine. He was buried on 4 June 1958 in Willesden Jewish cemetery, and a memorial service was held at the Central Synagogue in Portland Street on 3 July 1958. He was survived by his wife. 
A pioneer of the gramophone record, radio, television, and domestic electrical appliance industries, Sir Louis Sterling was a remarkable man. He combined an acute business sense with deeply felt humanitarian beliefs. Faced with hard decisions, he could be ruthless, but, unusually for such a powerful figure, he retained the friendship and affection of business associates, performing artists, and employees alike. It was Sterling's bad luck that Alfred Clark's pettiness forced him to leave the business he had done so much to create. A bigger man than Clark, he attributed his success in business to the skill of finding and retaining able subordinates and allowing them to get on with the job. 


@@@@@


doc= 56212


Topham, Mirabel Dorothy (1891-1980), racecourse owner, daughter of Henry Hope Hillier, a licensed victualler, and his wife, Nellie, was born on 14 August 1891 at the Baron's Court Hotel, Connaught Road, Fulham, London, which her father ran. There Mirabel spent her childhood. Henry Hillier later became manager of the Haymarket Theatre, where Mirabel went on stage as Hope Hillier, a gaiety girl. She appeared in several West End productions. 
This career wound up in 1922, when on 19 April Mirabel Hillier married Arthur Ronald Topham ('b'. 1885/6), a leading member of the family which had long run Aintree racecourse near Liverpool. In 1935 she was elected to the board of the family company, Topham Ltd, which ran Aintree. Three years later she became managing director of the company, and in her attempts over the next three decades to make Aintree financially viable, displayed immense enthusiasm and real business skill. Taking an immense pride in staging the Grand National, the world's greatest steeplechase, she purchased the freehold of the 270 acre racecourse from Lord Sefton in 1949 for $275,000. Mirabel Topham then restored a derelict cottage on the course and lived there in what she subsequently described as her 'padlocked house' ('The Times', 2 June 1980). 
Unfortunately, a significant decline in attendances at the hurdle and flat races at Aintree, caused in large part by the emergence of television as a medium for popular entertainment, put the future of the racecourse in jeopardy. In a bid to generate new income Mirabel Topham devised new attractions, including the opening of a motor-racing circuit. This allowed the European grand prix to be staged there in 1954. 
Mirabel Topham learned to negotiate quickly and effectively with a wide range of individuals and groups, including stable lads, trainers, accountants, and bookmakers. A redoubtable person, she gained a reputation as a no-nonsense woman. In her business dealings she did not suffer gladly those whom she perceived as fools or opportunists. A number of outside trainers were known to harbour resentment towards her, and she was occasionally in dispute with the Jockey Club. She could be tough where corporate interests were concerned. Mirabel Topham caused a number of newspaper headlines over her attacks on commentary rights and lack of television revenue from the BBC. Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, moreover, as attendances at Aintree fell, she reduced its racing calendar, so that by the early 1970s Aintree was reduced to a single annual three-day meeting, the highlight of which was the Grand National. As a number of obituaries later put it, Mirabel Topham found the Aintree going heavy. 
Mirabel Topham's combative spirit inevitably made her a public figure, and the battles in which she engaged 'gave the public a picture of a tough, unapproachable and obstinate impresario' ('The Times', 2 June 1980). Yet that was far from being the whole picture, and friends and family remarked that she possessed 'an engaging charm and a sense of humour' (ibid.). In addition Mirabel Topham could never be called a philistine: she was a patron of the arts, and a generous benefactor of the Walker Art Gallery in Liverpool. She initiated an annual competition from 1949 for the design and manufacture of a trophy for the Topham Trophy steeplechase, a race held during the Grand National meeting. 
From at least the early 1960s Mirabel Topham was involved in attempts to sell the racecourse. In 1964 Lord Sefton took legal action against her sale of the land for residential purposes (on the grounds of a restrictive covenant in the 1949 agreement). Mirabel Topham finally won the action, after the House of Lords ruled in her favour; but the sale fell through. Mirabel Topham's reign at Aintree finally ended in 1973, when the course was purchased by the Merseyside property dealer and prominent member of the turf, William Davies, for an estimated $3 million. In retirement Mirabel Topham lived at her beloved Paddock Lodge home at Aintree. She also had a house at 18 Hanover Terrace, Regent's Park, London. 
Mirabel Topham died of cancer, aged eighty-eight, on 29 May 1980 in Paddock Lodge. She was buried in the family vault in north Wales. Although Mirabel Topham had no children of her own, she adopted a cousin's children, Patricia and James Bidwell; they inherited most of her estate. In a long and appreciative obituary, 'The Times' described Mirabel Topham as one of the turf's most forceful and controversial personalities. 'Mrs Topham will be remembered', it added, 'as a large, formidable figure of eighteen stone, dressed in tweeds and prepared to stand firmly by decisions, however unpopular. She enjoyed the scent of battle and was always ready to champion David against Goliath' ('The Times', 2 June 1980). 


@@@@@


doc= 56213


Ward, Ann (1715/16-1789), printer, married a York printer, Caesar Ward (bap. 1710, d. 1759), about 1738, but little else is known about her early life. She is best known for her role in the publication of the first edition of Laurence Sterne's 'Tristram Shandy' (1760). 
Women had always been active in the York newspaper trade. Its first newspaper, the 'York Mercury', was printed and published by Grace White and John Hammond from 1719 to 1721; later it was printed by Alice Bourne. The 'York Courant', established by John White in 1725, was for a time printed by another woman -- Sarah Coke. It changed ownership several times before 1739, when it was bought by Caesar Ward and his brother-in-law Richard Chandler. Chandler's over-ambitious publishing ventures led to his suicide and Ward's bankruptcy in 1744, but Ward recovered his interest in the 'Courant', and the proprietorship passed to Ann Ward when her husband died in 1759. 
Kenneth Monkman has shown beyond any bibliographical doubt that Ann Ward was the printer of the first two volumes of 'Tristram Shandy'. It is true that Sterne turned first to the literary publisher Robert Dodsley to oversee the printing and publishing of his book in London, but when Dodsley questioned the author's conditions, Sterne took his manuscript to a York printer whose work he already knew: Caesar Ward had printed several of Sterne's sermons, and his widow, Ann Ward, had recently taken over the Coney Street business. 'The Book shall be printed here', Sterne wrote to Dodsley in October 1759, '& the Impression sent up to You; for as I live at York & shall correct every Proof myself, it shall go perfect into the World -- & be printed in so creditable a way as to Paper Type etc -- as to do no Dishonour to You, who I know never chuse to print a Book meanly. ('Correspondence', 421)' This first instalment of 'Tristram Shandy' convinced readers and the trade alike: the book sold well, Dodsley bought up the copyright (at a far higher price than Sterne had originally asked), and Ann Ward attracted more business. 
Like most provincial printers, Ann Ward printed primarily local material: sermons preached at York, trials, official publications, poll books, guidebooks, and regional history, including editions of Francis Drake's 'Eboracum'. Other favourite authors were John Evelyn and William Mason. Horace Walpole called Mason's York-printed translation of Dufresnoy's 'De arte graphica' 'a very handsome book' ('Letters', 403). The 'Eighteenth-Century Short-Title Catalogue' records almost a hundred different titles printed by Ann Ward, many of them in association with the Dodsleys or other important London booksellers. 
For much of her career, Ann Ward was assisted by the printer David Russell, formerly employed by her husband. Russell became part-owner of the business, although his name did not appear in their imprints. About 1787 Ann Ward bought back Russell's share, so that the whole of her printing business could be passed on to her son-in-law George Peacock. 
Ann and Caesar Ward had at least eight children, among them Caesar Ward (baptized 4 December 1741), who became free of the Stationers' Company in 1763 and set up a printing house in London, and Mary (baptized 27 June 1740), who married George Peacock, her mother's successor in business. Ann Ward was said to be seventy-three years old when she died on 10 April 1789. 


@@@@@


doc= 56217


Baines, Sarah Jane (1866-1951), suffragette and social reformer, was born on 30 November 1866 in Birmingham, the daughter of James Edward Hunt, gun maker, and his wife, Sarah Ann, 'nee' Hunt. She started work in a Birmingham small arms factory aged eleven and at fourteen was assisting her parents in Salvation Army activities, rising to the rank of lieutenant. At twenty she was assigned to caring for women charged in court and was appointed evangelist to an independent working men's mission in Bolton. These experiences involved her in the temperance movement and, eventually, the broader sphere of feminism. 
On 26 September 1888, at Bolton, Jennie Hunt married George Baines, a bootmaker; they had five children, three of whom survived childhood. Motherhood and work as a sewing machinist delayed full-time public activities but confirmed her commitment to social reform. She joined the Independent Labour Party, the unemployed committee, and the feeding of school children committee and stood, unsuccessfully, for the board of guardians in Stockport. 
In October 1905, on reading of the arrest of the militant suffragettes Christabel Pankhurst and Annie Kenney for assault, Jennie Baines joined their organization, the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), as a voluntary worker. Appointed a paid organizer in February 1908, she organized disruption of meetings, held open-air rallies, and established new branches in the midlands and north. Though slightly built, she possessed a 'deep, rich and powerful voice' that projected conviction (private information). 
In November 1908 Jennie Baines was the first WSPU member to be tried by jury. Convicted of unlawful assembly outside the Coliseum in Leeds, she was sentenced to six weeks' imprisonment on refusing to be bound over because she did 'not recognise the laws of this Court administered by men' ('Votes for Women', 26 Nov 1908). Her release occasioned an elaborate reception in Trafalgar Square. In July 1912, using the alias Lizzie Baker, she assisted Mary Leigh and Gladys Evans in their attempt to burn down the Theatre Royal in Dublin the night before the prime minister, H. H. Asquith, was scheduled to speak there. Sentenced to seven months' hard labour, she joined the others on hunger strike and was released after five days. On 8 July 1913, with her husband and son Wilfred, she allegedly attempted to bomb carriages in a Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway siding. Appearing at the assizes to deny involvement, Jennie was re-arrested under the ''Cat and Mouse Act'' and consigned to Holloway prison, where she refused food and water and was released 'in a very serious condition' ('The Suffragette', 15 Aug 1913). Though chorea had prevented force-feeding, WSPU leaders judged her health too frail to endure further imprisonment. Under the name Evans, Jennie and members of her family boarded the 'Ballarat', bound for Australia. George and Wilfred Baines were acquitted on 28 November and also embarked for Australia. 
In Melbourne, the Baines joined the Victorian Socialist Party and the Labor Party but Jennie devoted her primary energies to the Women's Political Association and Women's Peace Army. With former suffragette Adela Pankhurst, she campaigned against conscription in 1916-17 and in August 1917 led a series of violent protests by women against the surging cost of living. Though sentenced to nine months' imprisonment, both women were freed on appeal. Jennie was gaoled again in March 1919 for flying the prohibited red flag. Faced with six months behind bars, she resorted to hunger striking, reputedly the first prisoner in Australia to do so, and was released on the attorney-general's advice. 
Jennie Baines helped found the Victorian branch of the Communist Party in 1920 but was expelled in 1925 and rejoined the Labor Party. In 1928 she was appointed special magistrate to the South Melbourne children's court. She maintained her fiery eloquence on the hustings, abandoning the public platform only months before her death from cancer in Port Melbourne on 20 February 1951. She was cremated, survived by her husband and three children. Jennie Baines distilled her evangelical devotion to socialism in these words: 'To fight for that which is better and nobler in this world is to live in the highest sense, but to submit and tolerate the evils which exist is to merely vegetate in the sewers of iniquity' ('The Socialist', 11 April 1919). 


@@@@@


doc= 56219


Biggs, Caroline Ashurst (1840-1889), novelist and campaigner for women's suffrage, was born in St Margaret's, Leicester, on 23 August 1840, the second daughter of Matilda Ashurst Biggs (1816/17-1866) and Joseph Biggs (1809-1895) ['see under 'Biggs, John (1801-1871)], hosiery manufacturer, of Leicester. Under her mother's influence she developed at an early age a strong belief in the political and social emancipation of women. In August 1858 she wrote to Joseph Cowen, secretary of the Northern Reform Union: 'I deeply regret that it [the union] limits its desires of obtaining political rights... to men alone, in defiance of its motto 'Taxation without Representation is Tyranny'... I do not feel inclined to become a member of any society which... is purely selfish in its object, and does not recognise the principle of justice and rights for all mankind. (Joseph Cowen Collection, Tyne and Wear Archives, C137, C146)' Another of the causes that Biggs shared with her mother was anti-slavery. In 1862 she published a three-volume novel, 'White and Black: a Story of the Southern States', which was praised by the Italian republican exile Giuseppe Mazzini, a close friend of the Biggs family. 
During the 1860s, probably after her mother's death in 1866, Biggs moved to London, where she joined the small group of middle-class feminists, including Henrietta Taylor and Millicent Garrett Fawcett, that set up the first organized women's suffrage movement. There was a strong family involvement -- her aunts Caroline Stansfeld and Emilie Venturi were both active supporters of women's suffrage. She was made assistant secretary of the London National Society for Women's Suffrage (NSWS), alongside Clementia Taylor, in 1867, a post which she held until 1871. In this role 'Her ready pen, methodical work and untiring industry soon proved her an invaluable ally' (Blackburn, 63-4). When the NSWS split into two groups in 1872 she became honorary secretary of its central committee, and she remained a committee member until her death. Following the passage of the 1867 'Reform Act' she was involved in the campaign in London to place women with property qualifications on the electoral register. After the negative decision of the court of common pleas in 1868 ('Chorlton v. Lings') her attention focused on public campaigns and petitions in support of the annual parliamentary bill sponsored by Jacob Bright. Each year she was heavily engaged in public speaking tours, speaking on twenty-three occasions in south Wales during 1873. 
The mid-Victorian campaign for women's suffrage was overtly constitutional and non-militant. The exclusion of married women from the initial campaign aims became a perennial source of contention within the movement, not least for Biggs's married aunts. The related question of the legal status of women in marriage was the background to her second novel, 'Waiting for Tidings' (1874). In 1879 she published a short pamphlet, 'Ought Women to have the Right to Vote for Members of Parliament'. This was followed in 1889 with 'A Letter from an Englishwoman to Englishwomen' (published by the central committee of the NSWS) in which she emphasized the fact that the role of women was expanding within political parties, yet 'while competent to instruct voters in their duties, they are pronounced incompetent to give a vote themselves'. 
Biggs opposed allowing the new women's sections of the political parties to affiliate to the NSWS, as was debated in 1888. She was one of a small group, mainly from the older generation of feminists -- including Millicent Fawcett, Lydia Becker, and Helen Blackburn -- that broke away to form a new central committee of the NSWS. Biggs's views on political affiliation prevailed after her death, when the various wings of the movement were consolidated under the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies in 1897. 
Biggs was also keen to promote the work of women in local government (opened up to women by the 'Municipal Franchise Act' of 1869), both in her position as editor (1870-89) of the 'Englishwoman's Review' and as committee member of the Society for Promoting the Return of Women as Poor Law Guardians. In 1887 the society reprinted one of her editorial articles, 'Women as poor law guardians', in which she called on women of property in London to stand for election. That year also saw the publication of the third volume of the monumental 'History of Woman Suffrage', edited by the American feminist Elizabeth Cady Stanton. Biggs was author of the chapter on Great Britain, and took the opportunity to pay homage to the earlier generation of English feminists, including her mother. Early in 1889 she added her signature to a statement of protest against the candidacy, as alderman on the London county council, of Sir Charles Dilke, who had been involved in a celebrated divorce case. As with many Liberal suffragists there was a strong moral basis to her feminism. 
Biggs died, unmarried, at her home, 19 Notting Hill Square, London, on 4 September 1889. In 1893 her friend and colleague Helen Blackburn included her portrait in an exhibition of eminent British women in Chicago. 


@@@@@


doc= 56221


Brackenbury, Georgina Agnes (1865-1949), portrait painter and suffrage campaigner, was born at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, on 1 July 1865, the fifth of nine children of Charles Booth Brackenbury (1831-1890), an officer in the Royal Artillery who became director of the Artillery College, Woolwich, with the rank of major-general, and his wife, Hilda Eliza (1832-1918), daughter of Archibald Campbell of Quebec, Canada. General Sir Henry Brackenbury (1837-1914), director-general of ordnance, was her uncle. A cousin, Henry Langton Brackenbury (1868-1920), of Thorpe Hall, Louth, Lincolnshire, was Conservative MP for Louth in 1910 and from 1918 to 1920. 
As their mother disliked domestic duties Georgina Brackenbury and her siblings were looked after by a housekeeper/governess who was a relative by marriage, Flora Shaw (later Lady Lugard). After her father died suddenly in June 1890 Georgina -- who was the eldest child of the family remaining in England -- lived with her mother and her sister Marie Venetia Caroline Brackenbury (1866-1945) at 2 Campden Hill Square in Kensington. They also had a cottage, Brackenside, at Peaslake in Surrey. 
Brackenbury's parents had artistic and literary interests and both were amateur painters. From 1888 to 1890 she studied at the Slade School of Fine Art in London, where she was a pupil of Hubert von Herkomer. He encouraged her to specialize in portraiture. By 1894 she was producing works such as her portrait of the antiquary Harold Lee Dillon, seventeenth Viscount Dillon (NPG). Between 1891 and 1907 she exhibited at the Royal Academy and in other London galleries. At one time she had a studio in Rossetti Mansions, Chelsea, but she chiefly worked from home. Her sister Marie was also a Slade student. 
Brackenbury's mother was interested in women's suffrage, joining first the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies and then in 1907 the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), as did Georgina and Marie. This decision changed their lives. As WSPU members, the sisters gave up painting for seven years to devote their energies to the suffrage movement; they used their studio to train women in public speaking. In February 1908 both were arrested during a WSPU demonstration, the 'pantechnicon raid', outside the House of Commons, charged, found guilty of 'using insulting behaviour and resisting police at Old Palace Yard' and sentenced to six weeks in Holloway prison. Imprisonment proved no deterrent, and each sister chaired a section of the Hyde Park meeting of 21 June 1908 called 'Women's Sunday'. 
Georgina Brackenbury said she had 'smelled powder' with the WSPU ('Votes for Women', 18 June 1908, 251) and became an influential political activist. After her release from prison in 1908 she spoke at meetings all over Britain, including Scotland and Ireland, and toured Germany, where she gave speeches on women's suffrage. She also belonged to the International Women's Franchise Club in London. At a spa in Germany she met the South African writer and activist Olive Schreiner, who came to stay at 2 Campden Hill Square. In 1909 Georgina Brackenbury joined Annie Kenney, Elsie Howey, Clara Codd, Vera Wentworth, Mary Blathwayt, and Mary Phillips in the WSPU west of England campaign and in 1910 she replaced Mary Gawthorpe as WSPU organizer in Manchester. Mary Blathwayt invited Georgina and Marie to her home, Eagle House, near Batheaston, where her father, Colonel Linley Blathwayt, planted a tree in Georgina's honour in his suffragette arboretum. Another friend was Rose Lamartine Yates, organizing secretary of the WSPU's Wimbledon branch. 
Brackenbury supported the Women's Tax Resistance League, founded in 1909 and one of the most militant of the suffrage groups, appealing particularly to middle-class women who resented taxation on their earned income when they had no right to vote. Many members also boycotted the 1911 national census; there are no entries in that year's census for Georgina, her mother, or her sister. On census evening, 2 April, the Brackenburys were reported to have held an all-night party at 2 Campden Hill Square for twenty-five women and one man. 
Both Georgina and Marie Brackenbury agreed with the increasing militancy advocated by Christabel Pankhurst. At the beginning of March 1912 they took part with their mother in a mass demonstration in the West End of London. Their mother, aged seventy-nine, was accused of breaking windows in the Royal United Services Institute in Whitehall and served eight days on remand before being sentenced to fourteen days in Holloway prison. Georgina and Marie were also arrested and sentenced to fourteen days in prison. Suffragette prisoners who went on hunger strike and who were temporarily released from Holloway prison under the government's ''Cat and Mouse Act'' were given shelter in the Brackenbury family home in Campden Hill Square, which became known as 'Mouse Castle'. There the 'mice' were able to avoid police surveillance and re-arrest. In June 1914 the house became the temporary headquarters of the WSPU following a police raid on their Westminster offices. The Brackenburys' cottage at Peaslake was also used as an informal convalescent home for released prisoners. 
After the First World War and the partial extension of the franchise to women in 1918 Georgina Brackenbury resumed her artistic career. An unsigned watercolour of Christabel Pankhurst (Museum of London) may be her work. In 1927 she completed a fine portrait of Emmeline Pankhurst (NPG) late in life. Following Mrs Pankhurst's death in 1928 Margaret Haig Thomas, second Viscountess Rhondda, Katherine (Kitty) Marshall, and Rosamund Massy raised money to purchase it for the National Portrait Gallery. 
Like many of their activist contemporaries Georgina (known in her family as Ina) and Marie were vegetarians and interested in theosophy. In the 1930s they had a country cottage in Bushey in Hertfordshire. Marie died, unmarried, in London on 2 February 1945. Georgina, recalled as tall and friendly but rather formidable, died on 27 January 1949 in St Mary Abbot's Hospital, Kensington, also unmarried. She left 2 Campden Hill Square to the Over Thirties' Association. A plaque, now in the Museum of London, was commissioned for the house, later adapted to accommodate vulnerable and needy women by the charity, renamed Housing for Women, to which it was bequeathed. 


@@@@@


doc= 56223


Brailsford, Jane Esdon (1874-1937), suffragette, was born on 3 April 1874 in Elderslie, Renfrewshire, one of the six children of John Malloch (died 1898), a Scottish cotton manufacturer, and his wife, Margaret Marion McLeod. On leaving Paisley grammar school, she matriculated in 1893 at Glasgow University, where she studied philosophy and Greek, the latter under Gilbert Murray, for whom she developed a passionate, if unrequited, attachment. She was also a founder of the Glasgow University Fabian Society, launched in the spring of 1896. A headstrong young woman, widely acknowledged as a promising Hegelian, she possessed remarkable beauty, which not only made her the cynosure of a host of undergraduate contemporaries, but was later to arouse the ardour of Henry W. Nevinson and Wilfrid Scawen Blunt. After completing her studies in 1896, she went to Oxford where she attended Somerville College for one year before returning to Glasgow and eventually consenting to marry her persistent suitor and former philosophy instructor, Henry Noel Brailsford (1873-1958). 
Immediately after a civil marriage ceremony on 29 September 1898, Jane Brailsford accompanied her husband to Crete, where he was serving as a foreign correspondent for the 'Manchester Guardian'. In 1903 the Brailsfords travelled to Macedonia to report on the Bulgarian insurgency, later returning for five months in 1903-4 as relief agents following an uprising against Turkish rule. In addition to assisting her husband to distribute food and relief funds collected by the Macedonian Relief Committee, Jane Brailsford administered a hospital in Ochrida until a bout of typhus forced her to return to England. During the years in which H. N. Brailsford gained prominence as a leader writer and foreign correspondent for a succession of Liberal daily and weekly newspapers, Jane Brailsford attempted to discover her own creative outlets, first as a novelist and later as an actress, but to no avail. Whether she was impeded because she was a woman or simply because, despite earlier promise, she lacked talent is unclear, but her efforts to build a reputation for herself other than as an adjunct to her husband and as an occasional participant in radical campaigns proved abortive. 
An advocate of votes for women, Jane Brailsford joined the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies but, impatient with constitutionalist moderation, she began to participate in militant demonstrations, shifting her affiliation to the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) in 1909. Inspired by the selfless dedication of militant leaders, she was among a dozen suffragettes, including Lady Constance Lytton, who resolved to undertake acts of violence in Newcastle on 9 November 1909 to protest against the forcible feeding of women prisoners. After attacking a barricade with a concealed axe as a symbolic revolutionary act, Jane Brailsford was taken into custody and sentenced to the second division for a month. As the wife of a notable journalist she received preferential treatment -- she was not forcibly fed -- and was released after three days of imprisonment. Arrested again during a WSPU demonstration on 21 November 1911, she was sentenced to seven days in the second division at Holloway prison. It was a propensity for impetuosity coupled with deep-seated frustration that led her to invest such energy in WSPU activity between 1909 and the end of 1912. Her yearning for a cause to which she could wholeheartedly commit herself and her ambition for notoriety were temporarily satisfied in franchise agitation. 
When Frederick and Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence were expelled from the WSPU in October 1912, Jane Brailsford resigned from the organization in disgust and quarrelled with her husband over militant tactics, to which he was opposed. She later suffered severe depression and a physical breakdown, possibly precipitating the uncontrolled drinking that blighted her later years. Regarding marriage as a form of subjugation, she never concealed her repugnance for her husband, whom she treated with contempt. At her insistence they had no children. In 1913 the Brailsfords parted, only to be reconciled temporarily a year later when they moved to Welwyn. In 1921 they separated permanently, although she refused to agree to a divorce. By the late 1920s Jane Brailsford, incapacitated by alcoholism, was living alone in Kew, London. She died on 9 April 1937 at 385 High Road, Chiswick, Middlesex, of pneumonia and cirrhosis of the liver. 


@@@@@


doc= 56224


Sanderson, (Julia Sarah) Anne Cobden- (1853-1926), socialist and suffragette, was born on 26 March 1853 at Westbourne Terrace, London, the fifth of the six children of Richard Cobden (1804-1865), radical politician and statesman, and his wife, Catherine Anne (1815-1877), daughter of Hugh Williams, timber merchant, and his wife, Elinor. Her early years were spent at Dunford House, Midhurst, Sussex, but after her father's death she attended schools in London and Germany. Her mother having moved to Wales in 1869, she spent lengthy periods among a loyal circle of family friends, most formatively with the poet and novelist George MacDonald, then residing at The Retreat (later, as Kelmscott House, the home of William Morris). In 1874 with her sister Ellen she accompanied Sir Robert Lambert Playfair on his expedition to the Aures Mountains, Algeria. In 1877 she set up home in London with her sisters, taking up social work in the East End, enjoying amateur theatricals, and continuing to travel abroad. In April 1881 at Siena in the company of her sister Jane ['see 'Unwin, (Emma) Jane Catherine Cobden], and of Jane Morris, she met the briefless and unworldly barrister Thomas James Sanderson. They were engaged in February and married on 5 August 1882, when they both took the surname Cobden-Sanderson. The early years of their marriage were marked by travel, reading, philanthropy, theosophy, vegetarianism, and a keen interest in the ideas of Henry George and of their friend William Morris. Annie, somewhat dissatisfied with Sanderson's metaphysical search for the Absolute, encouraged him to take up the craft of bookbinding. Through their own manual work, they identified with the wider cause of the working class, joining Morris's Hammersmith Socialist Society in 1890. With Annie providing energy and funds as well as a ready needle, Thomas set up the Doves Bindery in 1893. He played a leading part in the arts and crafts movement, while at their Hampstead home Annie was hostess to a wide array of political and artistic friends. However, she spent the years 1897 to 1898 with their children Richard (1884-1964) and Stella (1886-1979) in Lausanne. There Thomas recorded 'the freedom of her life suits her', although her absence was part of a joint plan of 'renunciation... the better way for ourselves 'and' our children' ('Journals of Thomas James Cobden-Sanderson', 1.370, 378). After their return, Sanderson set up the Doves Press in 1899, but with Thomas much given to self-doubt as well as cosmic yearning, Annie's role was a vital one in sustaining his business and artistic ventures. 
After 1900 Annie played a more active part in the socialist movement, organizing in 1902 an important series of lectures for the Independent Labour Party (ILP) in London and serving as treasurer of the Metropolitan ILP. She took a special interest in the needs of children, supporting the pioneering Bow Children's Clinic, set up by Margaret MacMillan, with whom Annie campaigned for school meals and compulsory medical inspection. She was also prominent in the right to work campaign. More dramatically, in 1905 she joined the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) and, following its Westminster protest in October 1906, she was imprisoned in Holloway, gaining the women's suffrage movement a high profile with this notorious mistreatment of 'the daughter of him who gave you bread', 'one of the nicest women in England suffering from the coarsest indignity' as George Bernard Shaw wrote to 'The Times' (31 October 1906). Released in November, Annie continued to campaign for women's suffrage but in 1907 seceded from the WSPU to help form the Women's Freedom League. In late 1907 and early 1908 she and Thomas travelled to the United States, where Thomas was lionized in 'arts' circles, she in suffrage ones. On their return, Annie remained a prominent advocate of women's rights, attending suffrage congresses abroad, supporting the 'Great Watch' on Asquith's home in December 1909 (she was sentenced to a week's imprisonment but avoided this through the intervention of a third party), leading the procession to the Commons on 'black Friday' (18 November 1910), and escaping arrest in the 'Downing Street raid' a week later only through Winston Churchill's intervention. (She had been a guest at his wedding in 1908.) But she now turned primarily to the tactic of tax resistance, helping to set up in October 1909 the Women's Tax Resistance League and speaking widely on its behalf until it suspended activities in August 1914. However, by 1909, her husband, a fervent admirer of Annie's courage and selfless devotion to others, noted 'The Labour Party, and especially the 'right to work' is Annie's field. She has contributed her unit to the Women's Cause' ('Journals of Thomas James Cobden-Sanderson', 2.134-5). She was also interested in land reform, enrolling her father's name in the socialist cause in her pamphlet 'Richard Cobden and the Land of the People' (ILP, 'c'.1909). 
Annie's increasing concern with unemployment led naturally to a close interest in the poor law, and having become publicly embroiled as a critic of its operation locally, she was elected on a reform platform to the Hammersmith board of guardians in March 1910. Her scope for influence proved limited, but through long service (until 1922) 'a dear old lady still ever young', she achieved much, especially for the women and children among 'her 'Pauperibus'' ('Journals of Thomas James Cobden-Sanderson', 2.348, 326). Thomas suffered severe mental anguish during the First World War, and they mixed largely in pacifist circles. After the war, Annie resumed her involvement in Labour politics in Hammersmith, campaigning for the unemployed in both the 'Hammersmith Pioneer' and on the board of guardians. Following Thomas's death in 1922, Annie settled at great personal cost a lawsuit brought against her by Sir Emery Walker, seeking compensation for the typeface her husband had thrown into the Thames on closing the Doves Press in 1917. More happily in June 1926, she undertook the visit they had long planned to California, where she was feted by their many friends and admirers, and in July she saw published by her son the heavily self-censored 'Journals' of her husband. She died at 15 Upper Mall, Hammersmith, on 2 November 1926 and was buried on 6 November. Her work 'in the service of humanity' was commemorated by the Anne Cobden-Sanderson Fund organized by Sir Nigel Ross Playfair, reviver of the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith, and nephew of her travelling companion in Algeria half a century earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 56227


Duval, Una Harriet Ella Stratford (1879-1975), suffragette and marriage reformer, was born on 28 January 1879 at Slanmore, Beulah Hill, Upper Norwood, Surrey, the elder daughter and one of five children of Commander Edward Stratford Dugdale, a naval officer, and his wife, Alice Florence Richards. Brought up in a distinguished Warwickshire family, Una was educated in Aberdeen near the family's holiday home in Aboyne and at Cheltenham Ladies' College, finishing her education in Paris and Hanover where she studied singing. Although both her parents supported the women's suffrage struggle, it was during the summer of 1907, when in London for the social season, that Una became involved herself and joined the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) after hearing Christabel Pankhurst speak in Hyde Park. 
For the next five years Una Dugdale, like many other women of her age and social class, committed herself to the militant suffrage struggle, campaigning for the women's vote in Scotland on speaking tours with Emmeline Pankhurst, helping to arrange social events for the WSPU in London, and engaging in direct action. In 1909 during a WSPU 'raid' on the House of Commons she was arrested in Parliament Square and imprisoned for a month. 
In 1911 Una Dugdale met her future husband Victor Diedrichs Duval (1885-1945). Also from a wealthy upper-class family with liberal credentials, Duval had founded the Men's Political Union for Women's Enfranchisement and had been arrested and imprisoned for activism. It was as a result of her refusal to say the words 'I obey' at her marriage ceremony on 13 January 1912 that Una Duval acquired a brief notoriety within the women's movement. Although on the day of the wedding two priests were sent by the archbishop of Canterbury to the Chapel Royal at the Savoy where the service was taking place, the only concession made to their insistence that Una Duval pronounce the words 'I obey' was that the officiating minister read the words out even though they were not repeated. Marriage reform had long been a feminist concern and Duval's standpoint signified a feminist commitment to marriage as an equal partnership based on love and respect rather than subservience and subordination. Later in the year she explained her reasons for departing from convention in her pamphlet 'Love and Honour but NOT Obey'. 
After the First World War Una Duval appears to have devoted herself to family life, in particular bringing up her two daughters; but she did not encourage them to take up careers. Although she remained committed to preserving the memory of the militant suffrage struggle through membership of the Suffragette Fellowship, of which she was co-founder and was treasurer for many years, there is no evidence of any further active engagement in women's politics. Una Duval died in St Stephen's Hospital, Chelsea, London, on 24 February 1975. 


@@@@@


doc= 56228


Ferguson, Rachel Ethelreda (1892-1957), journalist and novelist, was born on 17 October 1892 at The Nest, Church Grove, Hampton Wick, the third child and younger daughter of Robert Norman Ronald Ferguson ('c'.1850-1903), a clerk in the Treasury (and, as his daughter chose repeatedly to mention, the son of the physician-extraordinary to Queen Victoria), and his wife, Rose Geraldine Cumberbatch ('c'.1863-1947). Soon after her birth the family moved to Teddington where they remained until Mr Ferguson's death on Strawberry Hill golf course, after which the two girls were taken by their mother to live for two years in Italy. On their return the Fergusons settled in Kensington, the history and atmosphere of which Rachel Ferguson absorbed and eventually distilled in two inimitable books: 'Passionate Kensington' (1939) and 'The Royal Borough' (1950). She attended two small private schools, the first run by Miss Mildred Wetton at 17 Sheffield Gardens and the second, described in its prospectus as 'Paris in London' (French was to be spoken at all times), in Wetherby Road, Earls Court. Both appear to have devoted most of their curriculum to drama, an emphasis happily to Rachel Ferguson's taste. 
Rachel Ferguson was certainly impressed by the dramatic overtones of the suffrage campaign staged by the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) and about 1908 with her sister and mother entered into the fight for the vote, revelling in participation in suffrage spectacle. Ferguson was a founder of the WSPU's young people's society, the Drummers' Union, and then honorary treasurer and chair of a breakaway group, the Young Purple, White, and Green Club, which staged 'How Spring Came to Nutt's Alley', a one-act propaganda play which she co-authored. Rachel Ferguson, with her mother, withdrew from involvement with the WSPU after Mrs Pankhurst, whom she characterized as 'an idea rather than a friend or mother, a torchbearer, dedicated and -- inevitably -- fanatical' (Ferguson, 'We were Amused', 109), broke with the Pethick-Lawrences, of whom they were especially fond. In 'Victorian Bouquet: Lady X Looks On' (1931) Rachel Ferguson allows her doughty heroine to sum up the suffrage campaign as 'our Eton and Oxford, our regiment, our ship, our cricket-match' (p. 21). In her autobiography Rachel Ferguson, essentially conservative, commented, 'The trouble about the vote is that it was unlawfully withheld far too long and ultimately bestowed far too lavishly' (Ferguson, 'We were Amused', 112). Her education continued with a secretarial course at Kensington College and a period of instruction at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, which was, as she wrote, 'grand copy' (ibid., 130), although her own stage and film career, while clearly highly enjoyable, lasted only three years, its end more or less coinciding with the outbreak of the First World War. 
Rachel Ferguson's novels are redolent of her witty affection for the theatre, particularly for its lighter manifestations. In the 1920s Rachel Ferguson developed a career in journalism, first with the 'Sunday Chronicle' and then, by 1925, as 'Rachel', a regular columnist in 'Punch'. Her wit -- fey, whimsical, and elliptical -- found an outlet in tender parody; many of her 'Punch' articles were collected in 'Nymphs and Satires' (1932). 'Celebrated Sequels' (1934) parodies such popular writers of the day as E. M. Delafield, Beverly Nichols, Rudyard Kipling, H. G. Wells, and Hugh Walpole. In 1923 her first novel, 'False Goddesses', which she characterized later as 'a story of stage and suburbia', was described by one critic as 'one of the two oddest books he had ever come across' (Ferguson, 'We were Amused', 171). Of another of her novels, 'The Brontes Went to Woolworths' (1931), she herself commented, while in the process of writing it, that 'It's getting so odd that I'm rather frightened of it' (ibid., 185). This oddness, curiously unsettling, has given 'The Brontes' a lasting reputation; it was reprinted as a 'Virago Classic' in 1988. Later novels such as 'The Stag at Bay' (1932) and 'Alas Poor Lady' (1937), fuelled by mordant social observation, reveal her compassion for impoverished gentlewomen: 'whose terrible needs every government overlooks, being apparently unable to visualize an empty larder and a coal-less grate as a condition of life suffered by any class above the labouring one. The continuity of this neglect is made possible by the victims themselves, who, inhibited and handicapped by caste, are too proud to beg, too inexperienced to live upon their wits in a competitive age. (Ferguson, 'Passionate Kensington', 215-16)' Rachel Ferguson's life in Kensington, living happily with her mother, was enlivened by friendship with such other literary denizens as Violet Hunt and Angela Thirkell, the presidency of the Kensington Kitten and Neuter Cat Club, and, in her last years, by involvement in founding the Kensington Society, which aimed to conserve the buildings and atmosphere she had woven into so much of her writing. Rachel Ferguson died at her home, 2 Phillimore Terrace, on 26 November 1957 of cardiac failure and pernicious anaemia. An edition of her memoirs, 'We were Amused', appeared posthumously in 1958. 


@@@@@


doc= 56229


Fonblanque, Florence Gertrude de (1864-1949), suffragist, was born on 22 July 1864 at 142 Bishopsgate Street in the City of London, a younger daughter of Gaudente Sparagnapane ('c'.1816-1877), an Italian immigrant wholesale confectioner, and his wife, Aurelia Williams ('c'.1832-1915). She was educated in Brussels and at Brighton. Tall, dark, and elegant, she became an actress. On 17 October 1891, at St George's Bloomsbury, giving her age falsely on her marriage certificate as twenty-one and her father's profession as 'gentleman', she married a young actor, Robert Edgar De Grenier de Fonblanque ('c'.1869-1932), the son of a barrister. Her husband later acquired the titles marquess of Juliers, comte de Hautserve, and comte de Fonblanque. Nothing is known of the couple's early married life except that they apparently had no children and by 1906 had taken up residence in Duncton, a small Sussex village. 
At this time, with her sister, Maud Arncliffe Sennett, Florence became interested in the movement for women's suffrage, belonging successively to both constitutional and militant societies. By 1912 she was a member of the committee of the west Sussex branch of the Conservative and Unionist Women's Franchise Association. It was in this year that she originated the idea of a 'Woman's March' to draw the country's attention to the woman's cause. She felt that the constitutional arm of the movement should be seen to enact a heroic feat to emulate the daring deeds of the militants. Her first idea was that women should march from London to Edinburgh, but she was soon convinced by more experienced publicists that the direction of the march should be changed to culminate in London. Maud Arncliffe Sennett wrote of her sister, 'She dressed her little army in warm autumnal brown and bright emerald green brazzards and rosettes, and she secured a splendid Press -- London as well as the provinces' (Arncliffe Sennett, 70). 
The 'army' was indeed 'little'. Although invitations were sent in early September to all the suffrage societies, only six women set off from Edinburgh on 12 October, a few others joining the march 'en route'. Despite the small numbers taking part, the report of the march in the 'Suffrage Annual and Women's Who's Who' (1913) was exhaustive -- a result, no doubt, of the sisters' ability to activate the publicity machine. It appears from this report that the character of the march was distinctly more religious and spiritual than political, and that the suppression of sweated labour and of the white slave trade were of concern as well as the enfranchisement of women. The marchers reached London on 16 November, having held as many as three meetings a day along the route. Maud Arncliffe Sennett co-ordinated the arrival into London, the women being accompanied at this stage by such male suffragists as Cecil Chapman and Israel Zangwill. A large meeting was held in Trafalgar Square, at which Charlotte Despard was one of the speakers, and a petition praying 'the Government to bring in a bill for Women's Suffrage this Session' and containing thousands of signatures garnered during the course of the march was presented by Florence de Fonblanque to a representative of the prime minister. 'Mr Asquith promised to give it his consideration; and later, informed Mrs de Fonblanque that he had nothing to add to his previous statement' ('Suffrage Annual', 149). Although the march achieved no political success it provided an outlet for active women who could not condone militancy. 
Florence de Fonblanque founded and became leader and honorary organizer of what was originally called the Marchers 'Qui Vive' Corps, later the Qui Vive Corps. This group, although not militant, was distinctly militaristic, dressing, as they had done for the march, in a brown and green uniform. Perhaps it was Florence de Fonblanque's stage experience that gave her a penchant for such dressing up. The idea was that the Qui Vive Corps should offer its services to different suffrage services impartially whenever extra workers were required. Although intended as a national movement, with the aim of showing that the women of England were as capable of organization, comradeship, and discipline as the men, its influence does not appear to have spread beyond Sussex. However, although the main constitutional society, the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, had refused to take part in the Women's March, it obviously recognized the value of the idea, and shamelessly adopted it, organizing its own Pilgrimage the next year. 
Florence de Fonblanque died of cardiac failure at her home, The Cottage, in Duncton, on 2 January 1949. Her gravestone in the tiny parish churchyard carries the epitaph 'Originator and leader of the women's suffrage march from Edinburgh to London 1912', wording she specified in her will. One might conclude from this evidence that she felt that her contribution to the suffrage cause represented the highlight of her life. 


@@@@@


doc= 56230


Moyes, Helen Miller (1881-1979), women's activist, was born on 14 September 1881 at 1 Grosvenor Crescent, Leeds, one of ten children of James Fraser and his wife, Christiana Sutherland. Her parents were both Scottish. Her father went from Caithness to Edinburgh as a tailor's cutter, then to Leeds, and finally, when Helen was still a child, to Glasgow, where he established a wholesale clothing firm. (According to an account given by Helen in 1908 she took a studio in Glasgow where she painted and did embroidery, but neither in her autobiography nor when interviewed in 1975 did she even hint at such leanings.) Helen grew up in a lively family, with progressive, supportive parents, who strongly believed in improving conditions for workers. As described by her in 1975, her early life was that of a typical middle-class young woman, going to balls and dances, playing tennis, performing in amateur theatricals, collecting for charity, and visiting families in the poorer districts of the city. 
Helen Fraser's life was transformed in 1906 when she heard Teresa Billington (subsequently Billington-Greig), one of the early supporters of the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), speak about the burning need for women to get the vote. From that day until 1914 Helen's whole life revolved around the women's suffrage movement. She became the first Scottish WSPU organizer and was also among the earliest suffragettes to be imprisoned for attempting to enter the House of Commons. In 1908, however, when the first stones were thrown, she was horrified at the advent of violence and resigned from the WSPU. She was invited to work for the non-militant National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS), under the leadership of Millicent Garrett Fawcett, and in 1910 she was instrumental in setting up the North of Scotland Federation of Women's Suffrage Societies. Much later she recalled that her best audiences were in Aberdeen, as they really appreciated a well-argued, logical speech. Subsequently she worked as an organizer in London and other parts of England and also helped to build up branches in south Wales. In England she became known as 'the chieftainess because of her fine presence and air of command' (Mitchell, 164). 
After war broke out in 1914 Helen Fraser was recruited by the government, in the first instance to organize patrols to watch girls near training camps and subsequently to organize an area in the south-west for the National War Savings Committee. She insisted on being paid the same rate as a man. During that period she was also lent to the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries to make speeches urging women to go and work on the land, and, before rationing, to the Ministry of Food to urge voluntary rationing before it was imposed. In 1917 she was sent on a propaganda tour of America, which was a great success. She 'went to over forty States, spoke 232 times in 228 days' (Moyes, 48). After a brief visit to France, so that she could describe what she had seen at first hand, she went back to the USA for a second tour. 
After the war Helen was employed as a commissioner for National Savings, resigning in 1922 to stand as the Liberal candidate for Govan, the first woman to be adopted as an official candidate in Scotland. She was aware that Govan was a safe Labour seat, but she enjoyed electioneering enough to stand a second time, in 1923, for the Hamilton division in Lanarkshire. On that occasion, however, abuse and calumny by the Labour Party candidate made the experience a thoroughly unpleasant one. Her last political invitation was to fight Kelvingrove in Glasgow, but the Conservative candidate was a friend, and she knew that she would poll enough votes to cause him to lose his seat, so she refused and gave up the idea of a career in politics. 
Helen then moved to London, earning money from freelance articles on women's issues, and sat on Kensington council for seven years. During that period she was a delegate to all the major international women's conferences. 
Helen Fraser called herself a 'profound' Christian, believing in mystical, visionary teachings. She was convinced that her not having married was 'meant' because she was free to move into international work. But meanwhile she kept in touch with an old friend named Moyes who had married and gone to Australia, where one of Helen's brothers was also living. Moyes's wife died, and he proposed to her on numerous occasions before she finally agreed and emigrated to Australia in 1938. 
As Helen Moyes she wrote an autobiography, published in Australia in 1971, entitled 'A Woman in a Man's World'. She continued lecturing on feminist subjects and was one of the surviving suffragettes and suffragists interviewed by Brian Harrison in August and September 1975. She died on 2 December 1979. 


@@@@@


doc= 56231


Garland, Alison Vickers (1862-1939), suffragist and political activist, was born on 10 April 1862 at 1 Village Road, Oxton, Cheshire, the daughter of Alfred Stephen Garland, master silversmith, and his wife, Isabella, 'nee' Priestley. She combined suffragism with an active role in Liberal politics, and lectured on subjects as diverse as bimetallism and infant welfare. It was as a Liberal that she spoke in Devon and Cornwall at meetings of the Central and West of England Society for Women's Suffrage in 1897. In the following year she joined the executive committee of the Union of Practical Suffragists, a ginger group within the Women's National Liberal Federation (WNLF) that aimed to persuade women's Liberal associations not to work on behalf of Liberal parliamentary candidates who were anti-suffrage. In 1899 she was elected president of the Devon Union of Women's Liberal Associations and in December of that year she attended the Indian National Congress held in Lucknow, as a delegate of the British Indian parliamentary committee. While in India she travelled, made speeches, and collected some thousands of pounds for famine relief on the subcontinent, work that she continued on her return to Britain. 
In 1904 Garland joined the executive of the WNLF. Her involvement in suffrage societies continued and on 9 February 1907 she participated in the 3000-strong march from Hyde Park to Exeter Hall in the Strand organized by the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, and dubbed the 'mud march' because of the state of the demonstrators' clothing at the finish. The decision of the WNLF in 1903 to seek from Liberal parliamentary candidates a commitment to women's suffrage led to the voluntary dissolution of the Union of Practical Suffragists in that year. But when the 'test' question resurfaced in 1905, the decision to disband seemed premature, and in 1908 the Forward Suffrage Union emerged to renew the pressure. Garland was again involved, and represented the group on the suffrage deputation received by Asquith and Lloyd George on 17 November 1911. The deputation sought to persuade the government to give parliamentary time to the 'Conciliation Bill' introduced earlier that year. That bill, however, seemed likely to enfranchise many more Unionist than Liberal women, and Garland showed political realism by proposing instead that an extensive suffrage amendment be included in the government's own 'Franchise Bill', scheduled for 1912. It was a course of action that Asquith had indicated would have government support, though when it was tried in January 1913 the speaker of the Commons unexpectedly ruled the suffrage amendment out of order, and a settlement of this vexed issue was further delayed. 
Garland is sometimes credited (Crawford, 236) with the authorship of a suffrage play, 'The Better Half', which was performed at the King's Hall, Covent Garden, on 6 May 1913 to an audience principally consisting of members of the Actresses' Franchise League. The drama promoted 'the cause' by depicting an imaginary society where only women possessed the vote and could make laws, and where men, supported by some of the women members of parliament, were campaigning for the vote ('The Times', 7 May 1913, 10). However, both the play, and a novel published in 1888, 'By the Tide', appeared over the name of Alison L. Garland. 
Enabled by the 1918 'Franchise Act', for which she had so long campaigned, Garland stood for parliament on three occasions. Her best performance was her first, at Portsmouth South in 1918, when she came second to the Conservative, after winning nearly 19 per cent of the vote. But at Dartford, Kent, in 1922 she lost her deposit in a three-way fight, and at Warrington in 1929 she fared no better. The Liberals were specially weak in Lancashire, and Garland, who came last with barely 7 per cent of the vote, again lost her deposit. She nevertheless played an active role in post-war public affairs and at the women's international housing congress at Caxton Hall, in July 1924, identified a lack of tradesmen as a factor in the housing shortage in Britain. 'If you clothe me suitably', she said, 'I will undertake to learn bricklaying in four months', a bold promise that was met with laughter and cheers from the audience ('The Times', 24 July 1924). 
Towards the end of her life Garland played a central role in the affairs of the WNLF, and served as its president from 1934 to 1936. At the annual conference at Scarborough on 17 May 1933 she moved a resolution urging an international solution to the problem of war debts and reparations, which she believed caused the stagnation of world trade. And in her first speech as president, at Kingsway Hall in May 1934, she warned of the dangers of political extremism in England, at a time of fascist and communist dictatorship abroad. This presented both a challenge, and an opportunity, to Liberalism. The possibility of fascist candidates standing in urban constituencies at the next election, she suggested, might take votes away from Conservatives, allowing the Liberals to win seats: 'It was the unexpected that happened in politics. An international situation might arise that would dominate the election, and the Liberal attitude to that situation might sweep the field' ('The Times', 2 May 1934). Such optimism for her party proved to be ill-founded. 
At the WNLF conference at Blackpool in 1935 Garland was re-elected president. The conference gave enthusiastic support to the policies of the 'New Deal' being pursued in the United States and Garland advocated a similarly positive response to the continued high levels of unemployment in Britain. She followed the line given by the party leadership in recommending a 'prosperity loan' to attract industrial investment: 'This is the brilliant idea of Mr Lloyd George, and we entirely agree' ('News Chronicle', 22 May 1935, 13c). Garland, who in her day was styled 'a Lloyd George in petticoats' ('The Times', 9 Dec 1918, ELS 3d), died on 26 September 1939 at her home, 21 Ferndale, Tunbridge Wells, Kent. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 56232


Garnett, (Frances) Theresa (1888-1966), suffragette, was born on 17 May 1888 at 33 Stanningley Road, Armley, Leeds, the daughter of Joshua Garnett ('b'. 1862), an iron planer, and his wife, Frances Theresa, 'nee' Armstead. Theresa Garnett was educated at a convent school and was for some time a teacher. 
In 1907 Theresa Garnett joined the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), the organization formed in 1903 by Emmeline Pankhurst to lobby for women's enfranchisement. She claimed to have inherited her fighting spirit from Irish ancestors ('Votes for Women', 2 July 1909, 877). In April 1909, with four others, including Alys Russell (first wife of Bertrand Russell), Theresa Garnett chained herself to a statue in the central lobby of the houses of parliament to protest against the so-called 'Brawling Bill', which was intended to penalize anyone found guilty of disorderly conduct within the confines of the Palace of Westminster while parliament was in session. She suffered no punishment on this occasion but on 29 June, by now a seasoned protester, after having taken part in a WSPU deputation from Caxton Hall to the houses of parliament she was arrested in Whitehall while participating in the ensuing stone-throwing at government offices. She was sentenced to a month's imprisonment in Holloway, where she went on hunger strike and was, in addition, charged with biting and kicking a wardress. Her defence was that she had not bitten but that the wardress might have been scratched by her WSPU brooch. She was found guilty of assault, sentenced to a further term of imprisonment, again went on hunger strike, and was released within a few days. In August 1909, as Annie O'Sullivan, Theresa Garnett was sentenced after taking part in a demonstration in Liverpool on the roof of the Sun Hall, in which building R. B. Haldane, the Liberal minister, was holding a meeting. She was imprisoned in Walton gaol, went on hunger strike, and was released on 26 August. 
In Bristol in November 1909, wearing a 'merry widow' hat and with a whip in her hand, Theresa Garnett accosted Winston Churchill. The account in the WSPU newspaper, 'Votes for Women', on 19 November 1909, mentions that she struck him several times but in an interview, recorded in 1964, Theresa Garnett was adamant that she had not touched him. She was, in the end, charged with disturbing the peace, sentenced to a month's imprisonment in Horfield gaol, and went on hunger strike. As a protest against being forcibly fed she set fire to her cell, and was then placed in a punishment cell, in solitary confinement, for eleven of the fifteen remaining days of her sentence. After being found unconscious, she spent the rest of her sentence in a hospital ward. By the end of 1910, however, suffragette militancy had increased to a level that she could no longer support; she left the WSPU and did not join any other suffrage group, although she kept in touch with her erstwhile comrades. Theresa Garnett was a sister at the London Hospital and nursed at the front during the First World War. She was an active member of the Suffragette Fellowship after the Second World War and in 1960 was honorary editor of the Women's Freedom League 'Bulletin'. In 1962 Theresa Garnett gave to the National Portrait Gallery a wooden head of Frederick Pethick-Lawrence, which had been sculpted by Albert Moroder in 1949. She died on 24 May 1966, virtually penniless, in Whittington Hospital, near her home in north London. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 56233


Langton, Lady Anna Eliza Mary Gore- (1820-1879), campaigner for women's rights, was born in February 1820, the only daughter of Richard Plantagenet Temple-Nugent-Brydges-Chandos-Grenville, second duke of Buckingham and Chandos (1797-1861), and his wife, Lady Mary Campbell (1795-1862), daughter of John, first marquess of Breadalbane. Her father dissipated his inheritance after succeeding to the dukedom in 1839. He left England a ruined man in 1847, and the contents of Stowe, the family seat, were sold in 1848. Her parents were divorced in 1850. Nothing is known of Lady Anna's formal education, though her home life presumably gave her instruction in the realities of politics; her father had been the proposer of the Chandos clause to the 1832 'Reform Bill', by which the vote in counties was conferred on $50 tenants. 
On 9 June 1846, at St George's, Hanover Square, London, Lady Anna married William Henry Powell Gore-Langton (1824-1873). They had three sons and two daughters. The family's country home was Newton Park, Newton St Loe, near Bath. Her husband was a Conservative member of parliament for Somerset, but was sufficiently radical to support John Stuart Mill's attempt to include women in the 'Representation of the People Bill' in 1867. Lady Anna had signed the petition in favour of women's suffrage that Mill presented to parliament in 1866. From 1872 she was president of the Bath committee of the National Society for Women's Suffrage, and in 1874 she became president of the Bristol and west of England branch. In April 1873 she was a speaker at a public meeting organized by the central committee of the National Society for Women's Suffrage at the Hanover Square Rooms, London. Helen Blackburn wrote of Lady Anna that 'Her speaking was thoroughly practical, and carried with it great earnestness and conviction -- perhaps it was all the more convincing because it was quiet and unassuming. Her fine presence and noble face lent great dignity to all she said' (Blackburn, 113-14). In June 1877 Lady Anna was a member of a deputation to the chancellor of the exchequer, seeking his support for a bill in favour of women's suffrage that Jacob Bright was to present the next day. After this bill's disastrous defeat Lady Anna took the lead in organizing a meeting of suffrage workers at her London house in order to review the position. She was presumably riled by the suggestion, in the course of the parliamentary debate, that supporters of women's education (particularly supporters of Girton College) were not friends to women's suffrage. Lady Anna was decidedly a supporter of both; she was to leave $1000 to Girton in her will. 
Lady Anna Gore-Langton was involved with several other feminist enterprises, being a director of the Women's Printing Society; a member, from 1871, of the general committee for securing a medical education to women in Edinburgh; and, by 1878, a vice-president of the London School of Medicine for Women. At a public meeting held in London on 25 June 1877 she had described how, from her own knowledge, women in English villages failed to seek medical attention because it could be had only from men; for the same reason, she thought women medical practitioners much needed in India. She was a vice-president of the National Indian Association, particularly interested in the welfare and education of women in India. She accompanied her brother, Richard Plantagenet Campbell Temple-Nugent-Brydges-Chandos-Grenville, third duke of Buckingham and Chandos, when he was appointed governor of Madras in 1875 and spent much of the remainder of her life in India. During one of her return visits to England she gave lectures on 'The Social Conditions of Indian Women'; initiated, with Mary Carpenter, a scheme to train and send out women teachers to India; and assisted in raising scholarships for women in Indian universities. 
Lady Anna Gore-Langton died of cerebral apoplexy at her London home, Langton House, George Street, Hanover Square, on 3 February 1879, shortly after returning from India. 


@@@@@


doc= 56235


Haverfield, Evelina (1867-1920), suffragette and aid worker, was born at Inverlochy Castle, Kingussie, on 9 August 1867, the third daughter of William Frederick Scarlett, third Baron Abinger (1826-1892), landowner and army officer, and his wife, Helen ('c'.1840-1915), daughter of Commodore George Allan Magruder of the US navy. She was educated at home by governesses and in 1880 attended a school in Dusseldorf, becoming fluent in German. Spending much of the year on the family's Scottish estate, she was a keen sportswoman, especially adept at riding astride. On 10 February 1887 in the parish church of St Stephen's, Kensington, she married Henry Wykeham Brook Tunstall Haverfield ('c'.1847-1895), a major in the Royal Artillery; the couple moved to Dorset, and had two sons (John, who was killed in 1915, and Brook, who emigrated to Canada). Widowed in 1895, on 8 July 1899 in the parish church at Caundle Marsh, Dorset, she married John Henry Balguy (1859-1933), another Royal Artillery major. Within a month of the marriage she enacted a document by which she reverted to the name Haverfield. She spent two years with her husband in South Africa during the South African War, and while there formed a retirement camp for horses left to die on the veldt. Evelina Haverfield returned to an active country life in Dorset and, although she had never previously evinced any interest in politics, at some point joined the Sherborne branch of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies. As the campaign for women's enfranchisement gathered momentum, she transferred her allegiance to the militant section of the movement in March 1908, and after attending a large rally in the Albert Hall, joined the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU). In June 1909 she was arrested after taking part in a WSPU deputation to the House of Commons. With that of Mrs Pankhurst, hers was treated as a test case, Sir Robert Cecil defending her on the grounds that she had been wrongfully arrested while exercising a constitutional right. She was found guilty, however, and fined; the case went to appeal, and the fine was upheld. Although she was determined to go to prison, the fine was paid without her consent. She was arrested again in November 1910, charged with assaulting a policeman after taking part in a WSPU demonstration in Parliament Square. She denied neither the charge nor the suggestion that she had said that the next time she would bring a revolver. She was sentenced to a fine or a month's imprisonment, but again the fine was paid without her consent. Imprisonment for the suffrage cause was at length achieved in November 1911, after she had attempted to break a police cordon by leading police horses out of their ranks; she spent two weeks in Holloway. Sylvia Pankhurst noted of Mrs Haverfield that: 'When she first joined the Suffragette movement her expression was cold and proud... I was repelled when she told me she felt no affection for her children. During her years in the Suffrage movement her sympathies so broadened that she seemed to have undergone a rebirth. (Pankhurst, 345)' On the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 Evelina Haverfield founded the Women's Emergency Corps and in late 1914 served briefly as commander-in-chief of the Women's Reserve Ambulance (Green Cross Corps), which was a founding unit of the future Women's Army Auxiliary Corps. In May 1915 she joined Elsie Inglis and the Scottish Women's Hospital unit in Serbia, working there until forced out in February 1916 by the German advance. Undeterred, in August Mrs Haverfield sailed for Russia, in charge of the unit's transport column, which comprised seventy-five women noted for their smart uniforms and shorn locks. She herself is invariably described as being small, neat, and aristocratic, able to command devotion from her troops, although some of her peers, not so enamoured, were scathing of her ability. By March 1917 the harshness of the weather, combined with the disrepair of the vehicles and internal feuding, led Mrs Haverfield to return to Britain where, for the remainder of the war, she campaigned for the Serbian cause. After the armistice Mrs Haverfield founded an orphanage in Serbia and was working there when she contracted pneumonia and died on 21 March 1920 at Baijna Bashta, where she was buried. A plaque in her orphanage building, later a co-operative health centre, commemorates her work for the Serbian people. 


@@@@@


doc= 56236


Heitland, Margaret (1860-1938), journalist and social activist, was born in Cambridge on 27 February 1860 in the master's lodge, St John's College. Daughter of William Henry Bateson (1812-1881), master of the college, and his wife, Anna, 'nee' Aikin (1829-1918), she had three sisters and two brothers; among them were William Bateson, a biologist, and Mary Bateson, a historian. Margaret was educated at Highfield Finishing School in Hendon, and at Heidelberg. She was fluent in French and German, and for a time coached pupils for the Cambridge higher local examinations. Inheriting her parents' concern for the advancement of women, in 1884 she became assistant secretary of the Cambridge Women's Suffrage Association, which her mother founded with Millicent Garrett Fawcett in that year. Finding in Cambridge inadequate scope for her energies, she took the unusual step of moving to London in 1886 to work as a journalist. In 1888 she began to write for 'The Queen', at that time a leading journal for women; she founded in 1889 its 'Women's employment department' feature, edited it until 1914, and made it a pioneering and powerful voice for the increase of opportunities for middle-class women. Gathering into a book, 'Professional Women upon their Professions' (1895), her journal accounts of twenty-five interviews, she regretted that the choice given to young women was often 'between complete domestic obscurity on the one hand and the very highest distinctions that art and letters can offer on the other'; instead, she suggested 'the intense happiness that merely being and doing 'something' yields' -- a phrase typical of her writing in its enlightened yet practical helpfulness (M. Heitland, 'Professional Women', 1895, v-vi). 
On her return to Cambridge after her marriage in 1901, Margaret was tireless in the suffragist cause, serving from 1905 until 1918 as chair of the Cambridge society, which at its height had 550 members; she was prominent with Mrs Fawcett and others in the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, founded in 1897 to co-ordinate the work of associations like Cambridge's in a non-violent and constitutionalist campaign. Her acuteness of mind, sense of humour, and capacity to work with others were further tested during the First World War; within a few months of its outbreak over 250 refugees from Belgium arrived in Cambridge, and as chair of the town's hospitality committee she had to arrange for their accommodation, support, and employment, and to do so in conjunction with two other committees representing the university and the county. Among the other societies with which she was involved was the Cambridge and District Women Citizens' Association, of which in 1918 she was one of the founders and the first chair; its aims were 'to stir up in women a sense of the community spirit' and to press for the removal of inequalities ('Annual Report of the Cambridge and District Women Citizens' Association: Jubilee Year 1919-1969', 1969, 7). 
A vigorous, self-confident, and forthright woman of independent mind, Margaret Bateson remarked that 'compassion acts like a strong poison upon those who have no need of it'. Thus 'the happiest and busiest spinster... if compassionated for her lot by a woman bound to a tedious husband and a family of troublesome children' was likely to feel on the margins of society. In contrast, she urged the joy and unselfishness of the spinster's home. 'It will be a school of training for your servants' and 'an oasis of peace to numbers of people in trouble and perplexity. The married woman cannot compete with you here, in her home distracted by family cares'. Admitting that 'all roads lead to the altar', she was glad (in 1895) that the professional woman 'is often in no hurry to reach the bourne' (M. Heitland, 'Professional Women', 1895, 130-33). She herself was in no hurry, and it was not until 2 July 1901 that she married W. E. Heitland, a fellow of her late father's college ['see below']. 


Among Heitland's prolific writings on the classical world the most distinguished were 'Agricola' (1921), on agricultural labour in antiquity, and the 'History of the Roman Republic' (1909), which in its day was compared to Mommsen's great work. Heitland's scholarship was said to be 'consumed with a passionate desire to attain the truth' (Winstanley, 6-7). His judiciousness led, in his advancing years, to an excessive balancing of arguments in his speeches in the senate and his writings on issues of the day; despite his occasional prophetic voice, he was ineffective in essays on the menace of class war and the value of eugenicist planning, or the need to construct a league of peace after the First World War, or, within Cambridge, to transfer resources from colleges to the university. His most capable polemic was 'A Letter to a Lady, or, A Word with the Female Anti-Suffragists' (1915), directed against a local audience in a cause to which Heitland was committed for many years. 
Heitland was a stimulating and kindly, though pernickety, teacher, discerning and encouraging talents hidden from others. He was also renowned for his freakish and often mordant humour, his fidelity to close friends and the strength of his aversions, and his insistence on a changeless college routine. Departure from the expected led his 'irritable and sensitive' nature to take offence, and 'he found it difficult to forgive, and impossible to forget, wrongs which he thought he had suffered' (Winstanley). 
Both Heitlands died at their home, Carmefield, Wordsworth Grove, Cambridge, William on 23 June 1935 and Margaret on 31 May 1938. He was buried in St Giles's cemetery, Cambridge, on 26 June 1935, she on 3 June 1938. Margaret Heitland's devotion to the cause of women manifested itself at the last in her will, under which she made Newnham College, Cambridge, her residuary legatee. 


@@@@@


doc= 56237


Housman, Clemence Annie (1861-1955), illustrator and suffragette, was born on 23 November 1861 at Bromsgrove (her birth registered, nameless, as 'female'), the third child and first daughter of Edward Housman (1831-1894), a solicitor, and his wife, Sarah Jane Williams (1828-1871). Her eldest brother was the poet A. E. Housman (1859-1936). Clemence was educated at home by a governess. By her early twenties she was undertaking much of her father's clerical work; a second brother, Laurence Housman, recorded that she 'was, for two or three years, the expert who worked out all the Income tax calculations for half the County of Worcestershire' (L. Housman, 94). Her mother died when she was nine, charging her with special responsibility for Laurence, four years her junior. Indeed Laurence Housman records in his autobiography that it was only in order to look after him in London that Clemence was eventually 'released from the Victorian bonds of home' (ibid., 104). 
In 1883, having been left a small legacy, Clemence Housman went with Laurence to London and trained as a wood-engraver at the City and Guilds South London Technical Art School at Kennington, and at the Millers' Lane City and Guilds School in South Lambeth. After a year away from home, Clemence was very nearly recalled in order to provide domestic support for her stepmother and younger siblings. She did, however, 'claim a return to freedom' (L. Housman, 110) after inheriting another legacy. The brother and sister lived for fourteen years in Marloes Road in Kensington and then, in 1903, settled in Pembroke Cottages, Edwardes Square, which they took over from the artist William Rothenstein. Clemence Housman gained employment as a wood-engraver, at first providing illustrations for such weekly illustrated papers as 'The Graphic' and the 'Illustrated London News'. Then, as wood-engraving was superseded by photomechanical 'process' engraving for commercial work, she began to work for such fine private presses as C. R. Ashbee's Essex House Press and James Guthrie's Pear Tree Press. She also published two novels of Christian allegory. The first, 'The Were-Wolf', was written to entertain her fellow students in the engraving class at Kennington and was first published in 'Atalanta', and then in 1896, illustrated by Laurence Housman, by John Lane at the Bodley Head. The second, 'The Unknown Sea', was published by Duckworth in 1898. She based her third novel, 'The Life of Sir Aglovale de Galis' (1905), on a story, teased out of Malory's 'Morte d'Arthur', of a knight who put truth above honour. Laurence Housman, not one to underestimate his own talent, always considered Clemence the finer literary artist and in 1954 arranged for the publication by Cape of a new edition of 'Sir Aglovale'. The only other of her publications to be traced is a short story, 'The Drawn Arrow', published in '31 Stories by Thirty and One Authors', edited by Ernest Rhys and C. A. Dawson Scott and published by D. Appleton & Co. (New York) in 1923. 
In 1908 Clemence Housman subscribed to the militant suffragist Women's Social and Political Union and in 1909 was a co-founder of the Suffrage Atelier, which described itself as 'An Arts and Crafts Society Working for the Enfranchisement of Women'. Laurence Housman described her as the atelier's 'chief worker' (L. Housman, 274) and the studio in the Housmans' garden became a centre of banner making. Clemence Housman worked on three banners designed by her brother: the 'Prison to citizenship' banner for the Kensington WSPU in 1908; that for the Hampstead branch of the Church League for Women's Suffrage (now in the Museum of London); and that for the United Suffragists in 1914. She also made a banner (1913), now lost, for the Conservative and Unionist Women's Franchise Association, and may have worked on those of the Oxford Graduates, the Women's Tax Resistance League, and the Actresses' Franchise League. She was kept busy repairing banners damaged in use. 
In 1910 Clemence Housman became a member of the committee of the Tax Resistance League, doubtless inspired to follow this particular form of protest by her youthful involvement with income tax forms. On 30 September 1911 she was the first woman arrested for following that society's precepts; she had for eighteen months refused to pay inhabited house duty. Her reward was a prison sentence with all its attendant publicity. A photograph of her arrest appeared in the 'Evening Standard' and the Tax Resistance League organized a procession and demonstration to protest against her imprisonment. She was released after a week, no reason being given, and did not pay her debt until she received the right to vote in 1918. After Mrs Pankhurst's statue was unveiled in Victoria Gardens in 1930, Clemence Housman for many years supplied it with flowers. She and Laurence were, from before the First World War, close friends of Roger and Sarah Bancroft Clark, both parties sharing an interest in women's suffrage and pacifism. In 1924 the Housmans moved to Street, home of the Clarks' family shoemaking business. Clemence Housman's relationship with her brother Laurence remained intense throughout her life. In her last years she declined into senility, suffering a severe stroke in 1953, and was cared for assiduously by her brother and by Roger and Sarah Clark. She died on 6 December 1955 at Mount Avalon, Glastonbury, having suffered a further stroke, and was buried at Smallcombe cemetery outside Bath, alongside her brother Robert (died 1905) and her sister Kate (died 1945). 


@@@@@


doc= 56238


Martyn, Edith How (1875-1954), suffragist and advocate of birth control, was born on 17 June 1875 at Bexley Road, Lessness Heath, Erith, Kent, the daughter of Edwin How, grocer, and his wife, Anne Darley. She was educated at The Hall, Cheltenham, and North London Collegiate School for Girls, and studied at University College, Aberystwyth. She was awarded a BSc (external) by the University of London in 1903 and gained an MSc in economics in 1922. The first woman associate of the Royal College of Science (mathematics and physics), she lectured in mathematics at Westfield College for a short time. On 4 August 1899 she married George Herbert Martyn, a science teacher. The couple, who were married for fifty-five years, did not have any children. 
How Martyn later admitted that she had 'been a rebel ever since I can remember', adding, 'I was always in hot water at school, even in my very earliest school days, because I resented the difference made between boys and girls, and the greater amount of liberty allowed to the former' ('The Vote', 19 March 1910, 244). Her suffrage career began in the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), which she joined after going to a meeting. The women present 'were like a revelation to me. For the first time I felt I had met women who were strong and self-reliant... My imagination was fired' (ibid.). She resigned her post at Westfield College to devote the whole of her time to the WSPU. She first spoke in public in the deputation to Asquith on 21 June 1906, and was one of the first women to be imprisoned that year. In 1907, however, disillusioned by the WSPU's undemocratic structure, she and others founded the Women's Freedom League (WFL), a non-violent, militant organization. How Martyn became a leading strategist at the height of the suffrage campaign and was unanimously appointed honorary secretary of the League. 
From 1910, when she joined the Malthusian League, How Martyn attempted to promote public discussion of contraception, at the time a very contentious issue avoided by suffrage organizations. Her beliefs were not motivated by Malthusian doctrine, but by her feminism: by the view that women had the right to sexual fulfilment and by her concern for women's welfare. Disliking Mrs Despard's authoritarian style of leadership, she retired on health grounds as head of the WFL's political and militant department in April 1912. 
In 1918 How Martyn was one of the first women parliamentary candidates, standing as independent (liberal) in Hendon, Middlesex. She was elected as the first woman councillor in Middlesex county council in 1919 and served for three years. In 1921 she helped the Malthusian League establish one of the first birth control clinics in Britain. During the 1920s she helped to mobilize public opinion in Britain to promote birth control both as morally acceptable and as an essential aspect of sexual relations. She was the linchpin of an extensive campaign to bring birth control to poorer women through local authority provision, arguing that birth control information was a 'legitimate and natural extension of the work of Maternity and Child Welfare Centres' (How Martyn). 
How Martyn continued to debate suffrage issues, and in 1927 she wrote that she agreed with both sides in the dispute between new and old feminism within the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship (NUSEC). She shared Mrs Abbott's definition of equality and feminism, yet, as one anxious to realize this equality, 'I soon find myself ranged as an ardent supporter of Miss Eleanor Rathbone' ('Time and Tide', 218). In October 1932, just back from visiting Russia, she claimed that its government 'has established complete political, economic and social equality between men and women, while their organisation for the welfare of mothers and children compares very favourably with that of any other country in the world' ('Jus Suffragii', 4). In 1928 she founded the Suffragette Fellowship with Lilian Lenton, to preserve memories of the fight for women's suffrage; its records have provided much of the primary source material for the historiography of the Edwardian suffragettes. 
From 1915 Edith How Martyn had worked with the American Margaret Sanger aiming to bring contraceptive knowledge to women all over the world. They felt women's needs were being ignored in international debate where many interests -- religious, scientific, medical, and eugenic and sexual reformism -- jostled with politico-economic considerations. They wanted women to have access to safe, cheap, reliable methods of contraception which could be used in homes without basic sanitation, water, or privacy, and where females had little control over sexual initiative. In 1927 How Martyn set up a small office in Geneva, hoping to establish a permanent bureau close to the League of Nations for international exchange of birth control information. In 1934 she made the first of several visits to India, perceiving that, as India emerged from colonialism, it might be possible to integrate women's reproductive needs into programmes for social and health reform. She introduced Margaret Sanger to Mahatma Gandhi, but they could not convince him of the benefits of contraception. How Martyn also visited China, Ceylon, Burma, Malaya, the Philippines, Japan, Hawaii, Jamaica, and North America. Finances were always meagre and ultimately How Martyn's Birth Control International Information Centre was amalgamated with the other voluntary organizations which eventually formed the Family Planning Association and International Planned Parenthood. 
Shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War, Edith How Martyn set out on another propaganda tour, accompanied by her husband. They spent a year in New Zealand, and then went on to Australia. They did not return to England (or go on to South Africa as intended) but settled in Australia. Increasing ill health and penury clouded the remaining years of How Martyn's life. She died in Sydney on 2 February 1954. Her husband died a few months later. 


@@@@@


doc= 56239


Howey, (Rose) Elsie Neville (1884-1963), suffragette, was born at Finningley, Nottinghamshire, on 1 December 1884, the daughter of Thomas Howey (1851/2-1887), rector of Finningley, and his wife, Emily Gertrude ('nee' Oldfield). Following Thomas Howey's death, the family moved to the Malvern area which remained Elsie's home for life. Although details of her childhood are sparse, Elsie was educated to a good standard, and in 1902 enrolled in St Andrews University for a standard arts degree course, taking classes in English, French, and German. For unspecified reasons she did not complete her studies, but left in 1904 to travel to Germany. Here 'she first had occasion to realise women's position' and determined to work to improve it ('Votes for Women', 18 June 1908). 
In December 1907 Elsie encountered the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) campaigning in a by-election at Ross. With her mother and elder sister Marie 
(Mary Gertrude Oldfield Howey; 1882-1967)
she joined the union. Both Howey girls embraced militant tactics and were arrested and gaoled in February 1908 when, with other suffragettes, they hid inside a pantechnicon and were 'delivered' into the House of Commons. For Elsie this marked the beginning of a dedicated WSPU career. She soon joined a group of young 'freelance militants' undertaking daring independent actions for the cause. A loyal and popular suffragette, she was motivated as much by friendship as political conviction. In January 1910 when Lady Constance Lytton, disguised as a working-class woman, was arrested and forcibly fed in Walton gaol, Elsie broke the governor's windows and was also gaoled in order that Lady Constance should not suffer alone. Constance Lytton felt this made Elsie the 'most dear one of our members' (C. Lytton and J. Warton, 'Prisons and Prisoners: some Personal Experiences', 1914, 247). Elsie also drew sympathy from less expected quarters. In December 1912, when she was gaoled for two months for giving a false fire alarm, seventy-five 'working men and farmers' from Malvern wrote to their MP demanding a reduced punishment for their 'much loved' local suffragette ('The Suffragette', 27 Dec 1912). 
Although an active militant, Elsie did not eschew the more mundane sides of WSPU work. Early in 1909 she responded to a call for 'young women with private means' to work as honorary WSPU organizers for a year. Supported financially and morally by her mother, Elsie spent the next year working in Plymouth and Torquay where she helped to establish a suffragette presence. She also achieved national recognition that year when she headed a WSPU demonstration through London dressed as Joan of Arc, in a full set of armour, 'astride a great white charger' (Pankhurst, 'Suffragette Movement', 367). 
From 1910 Elsie was 'in the vanguard' of militancy ('The Suffragette', 3 Jan 1913). She underwent at least six imprisonments. This hides the full extent of her daring as she was skilled at escaping arrest. In September 1909 with two others she climbed into Lympne Castle, Kent, where the prime minister was staying, and demanded 'votes for women' through the dining-room window while the Asquiths dined. The suffragettes escaped via an adjacent canal. On the occasions that she was arrested, Elsie demonstrated total dedication to her cause, undergoing several hunger strikes and enduring forcible feeding. Her final imprisonment was in December 1912. This time she was released early following a prolonged hunger strike which prompted questions in parliament, although the anonymous friend who paid her fine was too late to prevent forcible feeding from breaking most of Elsie's teeth. 
Tired and ill, Elsie vanished from public life when militancy ended in 1914. She remained in Malvern but followed no career, and never fully recovered from the sacrifices she made in the name of the WSPU. She died on 13 March 1963 at the Court House Nursing Home, Court Road, Malvern, from chronic pyloric stenosis, almost certainly connected to her numerous forcible feedings. Aside from about $2000 in personal legacies, she left the residue of her $23,000 estate to the English Theosophical Trust. She gave instructions in her will for cremation and the scattering of her ashes, requesting 'that no funeral service of any kind shall be held for me'. Her cremation took place at Worcester. 


@@@@@


doc= 56240


Leigh, Mary (b. 1885, d. in or after 1965), militant suffragette, was born in Manchester and was a schoolteacher until her marriage to a builder named Leigh. More details of her family have proved impossible to trace, because of the ubiquity of her name. From 1906 until 1913 Mary Leigh was a member of the most militant of the women's suffrage organizations, the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU). Mary Leigh was herself one of the first to engage in the acts of violent and escalating militancy which marked the later phases of the WSPU's campaigns, for which she was to be imprisoned on more than nine occasions. 
On 30 June 1908, following Prime Minister Asquith's refusal to meet a WSPU delegation, Mary Leigh and Edith New smashed the windows of 10 Downing Street. They were arrested and sentenced to two months' imprisonment. When they were released on 23 August, they were greeted by a brass band and accorded a ceremonial welcome breakfast attended by Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst. Mary Leigh immediately resumed her campaigning, acting as drum-major of the WSPU drum and fife band, which often accompanied their processions and demonstrations. Then on 17 September 1909 Mary Leigh conducted a rooftop protest at Bingley Hall, Birmingham, where Asquith was addressing a meeting from which all women had been excluded. Using an axe, she and Charlotte Marsh tore slates from the roof and threw them at the police below, causing some injuries, and at Asquith's car. For this Leigh was sentenced to three months' hard labour for assault, and one month for damage to property. On arriving at Winson Green gaol in Birmingham, she broke the window in her cell in protest, demanding to be treated as a political offender. She embarked on a hunger strike (a tactic which had previously secured the release of suffragettes on grounds of ill health), and became one of the first suffragettes to be forcibly fed. Her graphic account of the horrors of forcible feeding was published while she was still in prison. The WSPU was incensed, and initiated legal proceedings against the home secretary, prison governor, and prison doctor on Mary Leigh's behalf, opening a defence fund in her name. The case was brought to trial in December 1909, and the jury found for the defence, upholding the defence's claim that forcible feeding had been necessary to preserve life and that minimum force had been used. 
During 1910 Mary Leigh was involved in by-election work in Wales, and on 18 November ('black Friday') was among the many women injured in violent scuffles with the police near the houses of parliament following the dropping of the 'Conciliation Bill'. On 21 November 1911 she was again arrested, following the organized window-breaking campaign which accompanied another deputation to the House of Commons, and was sentenced to two months' hard labour for assaulting a policeman (she claimed it was in self-defence). On 18 July 1912 she was in Dublin, where she threw a hatchet into Asquith's carriage; later that evening she and Gladys Evans went to the Theatre Royal, Dublin, where Asquith had recently seen a performance, and set fire to the curtains, threw a burning chair into the orchestra pit, and set off several small bombs. Mary Leigh conducted her own defence at her trial on 6 August, and her speech was reported as the focal point of the proceedings. She was convicted, and sentenced to five years' penal servitude. The sentence was condemned by the WSPU, and tributes to Mary Leigh's courage filled the pages of its newspaper, 'Votes for Women'; Christabel Pankhurst, however, later denied that Leigh and Evans's actions had been specifically sanctioned in advance by the organization. Mary Leigh undertook a hunger strike of six weeks, which left her in an emaciated condition, and she was released on licence. (The case was eventually dropped after prolonged litigation about the terms of the licence.) 
Following the events in Dublin, Mary Leigh became disillusioned with the WSPU, which she felt had not responded adequately to her lengthy prison sentence. Consequently she involved herself increasingly with Sylvia Pankhurst's breakaway suffrage organization, the East London Federation of Suffragettes (ELF). In October 1913 she was badly injured during scuffles with the police at an ELF meeting at Bow Baths. She continued to work with the ELF long after the WSPU's campaign ceased in 1914. During the war years she applied for war service, but was rejected because of her criminal record. Reverting to her maiden name, Brown, she gained a place on an RAC course to train as an ambulance driver. Little is known of Mary Leigh's life after this time. She apparently took part in the first Aldermaston march (1958), and as a committed socialist regularly attended the May day processions in Hyde Park. She was a founder of the Emily Wilding Davison lodge, a memorial to her suffrage comrade who died after throwing herself under the hooves of the king's horse at the 1913 Epsom Derby. Every year Mary Leigh made the pilgrimage to Morpeth, Northumberland, to tend Davison's grave. In later years she continued to recall with pride her days in the WSPU, and stood by her actions as a suffragette. Mary Leigh gave two interviews in 1965; nothing is known of her after this. 


@@@@@


doc= 56243


Marsh, Charlotte Augusta Leopoldine (1887-1961), suffragette and social worker, was born on 3 March 1887 at Alnmouth, Northumberland, the third daughter of Arthur Hardwick Marsh (1842-1909), watercolourist and genre painter, and his wife, Ellen Hall. She was educated at St Margaret's School, Newcastle upon Tyne, and Roseneath, Wrexham, and then spent a year studying in Bordeaux. She was one of the first women to train as a sanitary inspector but, appalled by the insight her work gave her into the lives of many women, gave up a promising career to join the women's suffrage movement in 1908, to give women a voice in public affairs. She became a member of the most militant organization, the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU). 
Charlotte Marsh was a regional organizer for the WSPU, working in many cities and towns, including Nottingham and Portsmouth, and was imprisoned three times for 'the cause', hunger-striking on two occasions and being forcibly fed. On 30 June 1908 she was one of twenty-five women arrested following a demonstration in Parliament Square. Charged with obstructing the police in the execution of their duty she was sentenced to one month in the second division at Holloway. On 17 September 1909, along with fellow suffragette Mary Leigh, Charlotte was arrested in Birmingham after staging a roof-top protest at the Bingley Hall where the prime minister, H. H. Asquith, was addressing a meeting. The police attempted to move the two women by, among other methods, turning a hosepipe on them and throwing stones. However, Charlotte Marsh and Mary Leigh proved to be formidable opponents and were only brought down from the roof when three policeman dragged them down. For her part in this, Charlotte Marsh was sentenced to three months' hard labour at Winson Green gaol. In protest at the refusal of the authorities to treat her as a political prisoner Charlotte adopted the hunger strike and, one of the first suffragettes to be forcibly fed, was tube-fed 139 times. She was imprisoned for the last time in 1912 for her part in the window-smashing raid in London's West End on 1 March. As she had previous convictions she was sentenced to six months' imprisonment, which she served in Aylesbury prison (Holloway was being redecorated). Once again she staged a hunger strike and was forcibly fed and released four and a half months into her sentence. 
A beautiful and striking figure with long golden hair and an elegant poise, Charlotte Marsh was often chosen as standard-bearer for WSPU processions. In December 1908 she was the colour-bearer at the procession organized to celebrate the release from Holloway of Christabel and Mrs Pankhurst. On 14 June 1913, a more solemn occasion, carrying a large wooden cross, she led the funeral procession of her comrade Emily Wilding Davison, who had died as a result of the injuries she sustained when she fell under the hooves of the king's horse at the Epsom Derby on 4 June. 
Charlotte Marsh continued to work with the Pankhursts until the outbreak of the First World War, when the WSPU declared a cessation of militancy. Ironically, during this political truce, having first worked as a motor mechanic, she became Lloyd George's chauffeur, accepting his suggestion that the relationship would promote the victory of the cause of women's enfranchisement. She later worked as a land girl in Surrey before returning to feminist politics in 1919 when she worked for a brief time on the staff of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom. Following the granting of the full franchise in 1928, Charlotte devoted her time to social welfare work. She worked first for the Community Chest Organization in San Francisco and then with the Overseas Settlement League, and when this organization closed down in the 1930s she became an officer of the National Assistance Board until her retirement. In later years Charlotte Marsh worked as a technical adviser on a BBC documentary, written and produced by Norman Swallow, to celebrate Mrs Pankhurst's birthday, the story of which was woven around Charlotte's life. She continued to be involved with suffrage commemorations and gave many years' service to the Suffragette Fellowship of which she was the vice-president until her death, unmarried, at 31 Copse Hill, Wimbledon, on 21 April 1961. 


@@@@@


doc= 56246


Merington, (Maria) Martha Crawford (1831-1912), poor-law guardian, was born in Islington, London, on 21 January 1831, the eldest daughter in the family of at least four daughters and four sons of Richard Whiskin Merington (1807-1874), deputy principal of the discount office of the Bank of England, and his wife, Margaret (1802-1877). By 1871 she was living with her unmarried sisters in her parents' home in Kensington. She was well connected: her close associates included Caroline Biggs (editor of the 'Englishwomen's Review' and member of the Committee for Promoting the Return of Women as Poor Law Guardians), Helen Taylor and Augusta Webster (members of the London school board in the 1870s and 1880s), the educationist Emily Anne Shirreff, and the philanthropist Mary Anne Donkin. 
The earliest reference to any public activity on the part of Martha Merington (or Merrington as her name was often misspelt) is a minute of the London school board (10 January 1872), where it is recorded that she had joined Chelsea divisional committee in January 1872. This was a local body formed to assist the London school board in the struggle over school attendance, and she served alongside Emily Shirreff, the co-founder of the National Union for the Improvement of the Education of Women of all Classes. Later that same year Mary Anne Donkin joined the committee. A worker for the Charity Organization Society, she lived just the other side of Kensington High Street from Merington (London school board minutes, 18 Dec 1872). By June 1874 Miss Merington was manager of three elementary schools in Notting Hill (ibid., 7 May and 22 Oct 1873, 17 June 1874). In these years she also established creches for the babies of working women in Kensington. 
In the spring of 1875 Merington put herself forward as a candidate for the Kensington board of guardians. She polled 3893 votes and was elected eighteenth of eighteen successful candidates (Kensington board of guardians minute book, 16 April 1875). The first woman to be elected to a poor-law guardianship, she was appointed to a local relief committee, as well as becoming a visitor to the workhouse and the workhouse infirmary. Six months later, when one of her male colleagues from the visiting committee, Frederick Edgcombe, pressed the appointment of a committee to visit the asylums and schools, she joined him on it. 
For the next three years Martha Merington took an active interest in poor-law administration. Authorized to reorganize the staffing of the workhouse infirmary, she earned the gratitude of her male colleagues when she managed to produce a weekly saving on the wages bill of $4 17's'. 6died (Kensington board of guardians minute book, 16 March 1876). She had previously visited a school at Herne Bay, Kent, where some Kensington pauper children were boarded. Her concern led the guardians to appoint a lady volunteer visitor and in December 1875 Mary Anne Donkin was deputed to produce a further report. The experiment was a success. Miss Donkin submitted a list of recommendations and the guardians thanked her 'for the careful and efficient manner in which she had conducted the enquiry' (ibid., 30 Dec 1875). In April 1877 Merington's efforts were acknowledged when she was elected twelfth of eighteen guardians. For two years she prioritized her duty visits to the infirmary and pauper schools and became an infrequent attender at board meetings (ibid., April 1877 to May 1879). She was disqualified from serving in 1879 when a ratepayer took legal action against her candidacy on the grounds that she was moving house when the election took place. 
In November 1879 Merington joined the controversy over the administration of Upton House, the London school board's new truant school. Replying to a letter from Helen Taylor informing her of the conditions at the school, she proposed a radically different approach. In particular, she pressed the case for altering the management of the day schools in order to promote school attendance. First, she suggested that there should be a good fire in the entrance room or hall; second, that a 'kind old woman 'not a teacher'' should greet the children, reward the early arrivals with a 'bun or sugarplum', take their outer clothing, and 'send them into the schoolroom warm and happy -- whereas they now go in cold and crying to undergo school discipline' (Merington to H. Taylor, 18 Nov 1879, Mill-Taylor MSS). Writing as the school board faced the triennial elections, she also offered her services as a public speaker and informed Helen Taylor of a campaign meeting to be held at her home in Harrington Gardens on behalf of Augusta Webster. Merington set a precedent for female involvement in local government. It seems fitting that in 1881 Mary Anne Donkin inherited her seat on the Kensington board of guardians. 
In 1881 Martha Merington was living with her schoolmistress sister, Emily, at 10 Harrington Gardens, Kensington, on income derived from property; twenty years later she was living with two young nieces in Croydon, as a self-employed teacher of languages. She died at 20 Lingfield Road, Wimbledon, on 2 September 1912. 


@@@@@


doc= 56247


Murray, Eunice Guthrie (1878-1960), suffragist and author, was born on 21 January 1878 at Moore Park, Cardross, Dunbartonshire, the third and youngest daughter of David Murray (1842-1928), a lawyer, and his wife, Frances Porter Stoddard (died 1919). Frances Murray, whose parents on both sides were American with strong links to the abolitionist movement, shared with her husband an interest in all aspects of the women's movement. Eunice Murray was educated at St Leonard's School, St Andrews. Her two older sisters, Dorothy and Sylvia, graduated MA at Glasgow University and BA at Girton College, Cambridge, respectively. 
In the late nineteenth century Eunice Murray became involved in philanthropic activities. She was active in the local branch of the League of Pity, volunteered regularly at a local settlement, and was an advocate for temperance. On 9 November 1896 she recorded reading about the formation of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, commenting: 'I should like to join such a society for the question of the emancipation of my sex is a stirring one and leads to vital matters' (Murray, journals). 
After the militant movement reached Scotland Murray, her mother, and sister Sylvia joined the Women's Freedom League (WFL). The WFL had a strong presence in Scotland, and from 1909 onwards Murray was the secretary for 'scattered members' -- all those who did not live in Edinburgh, Glasgow, or Dundee. She was one of the three Scottish members on the WFL's national executive committee and in 1913 was described as president for Scotland of the WFL. 
In June 1908 Teresa Billington-Greig asked Murray to ascertain the views of her neighbours toward women's suffrage. She received such a discouraging response that she concluded: 'If Cardross is an example 'twill be our great great great grandchildren that will vote' (Murray, journals). Nevertheless, she threw herself wholeheartedly into the campaign. She was articulate and persuasive both in print and in person, and her letters appeared regularly in the press. She went on to write suffrage pamphlets, including 'The Illogical Sex', 'Prejudices Old and New', and her most popular one, 'Liberal Cant', all published by the Scottish council of the WFL. 
A telling response to Murray's oratory comes from a letter published in the 'Glasgow Herald' on 17 July 1913 from a John Hunter in Rothesay, who had been disappointed when he learned that Murray would be appearing instead of the usual WFL speaker: 'but once I heard her convincing, eloquent and logical speech I was quite delighted, and feel persuaded if people had the opportunity of hearing her, and if Cabinet Ministers had that privilege, the vote would be won without delay'. 
In 1913 Murray attended the International Woman Suffrage Alliance conference in Budapest. After her return, on 17 November, she was arrested for obstruction after attempting to address a meeting near Downing Street. Although she could not have contemplated taking part in the arson and destruction campaign of the Women's Social and Political Union -- 'my type of mind could never do the things they do' -- she was aware that those tactics brought awareness of the issues to everyone, and she laid no blame on the women -- 'No -- I blame the Government' (Murray, journals). 
At the beginning of the war in August 1914 many women were thrown out of work, and their plight was a major concern of the WFL. A Women's Suffrage National Aid Corps was formed, with branches in Edinburgh and Glasgow, and Murray was on the executive committee. The WFL continued to campaign for the vote during the war years. In speeches and articles Murray stressed the dangers women would face in the labour market when the war ended, and also spoke about the changes brought about by the war in the attitudes of women previously in domestic service and other subservient positions. She also wrote a suffrage pamphlet, published by the WFL, about all the praise women were getting for their efforts during the war, entitled 'Woman: the New Discovery'. 
Murray had works published in a number of genres, including novels, local histories, and a memoir of her mother. In 1930, when most Scottish historians were interested only in political history, she published 'Scottish Women of Bygone Days', in which she broke with the traditional approach and discussed social and domestic life, including witchcraft, education, and sports. The book was dedicated 'To the Women of All Ages who Defied Convention and Held Aloft the Banner of Progress'. In 1935 she turned to an older model and produced biographies in 'A Gallery of Scottish Women'. An interest in social history developed later in Scotland than in many other countries, but again Eunice Murray was a pioneer. 'Scottish Homespun' (1947) was a fascinating account of Scottish traditional costumes, and was illustrated by photographs of dolls (many of whose clothes were made by Murray herself). In the conclusion to this work Murray wrote that: 'Women have a two-fold calling, for not only are we as wives and mothers the guardians of the future, but we are also the custodians of the past' ('Scottish Homespun', 105). 
In 1918 Murray had the distinction of being the first woman to stand in a parliamentary election in Scotland -- as an independent candidate at Glasgow (Bridgeton) -- but she was unsuccessful. In 1923 she was elected on to Dunbartonshire county council, and in the same year she became the first president of the local Scottish Women's Rural Institute. But she did not restrict herself to campaigning on local issues, for she was involved with the National Trust for Scotland soon after its inception, serving on its council and executive committee from 1931, and donating generously to many of its appeals. Murray, who never married, was appointed MBE in 1945. She died on 26 March 1960 of cardiovascular degeneration and cerebral thrombosis at her family home, Moore Park, Cardross, Dunbartonshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 56248


Neilans, Alison Roberta Noble (1884-1942), suffragist and social reformer, was born at Ellesmere, Friern Road, East Dulwich, Surrey, on 19 June 1884, the only daughter of Robert Neilans (1843- 'c'.1896), a commercial traveller, and his wife, Alison Ferguson, 'nee' Noble ('b'. 'c'.1842). Her parents were from Coldstream-on-Tweed in the Scottish borders, where her grandparents had been farmers. She was educated at a private school in Dulwich until the age of twelve, when the death of her father dealt an emotional and economic blow that saw her education and her home life, according to a friend, 'come to an abrupt end' (Acres, 12). From her early teenage years she was forced to be financially independent and lived in lodgings and women's hostels in London while working as a book-keeper. She never married. 
In 1908 Neilans joined the Women's Freedom League as its financial secretary, and settled into employment in political campaigning which, though it never kept her far from poverty, became her lifelong career. She gained notoriety as a 'militant' when she was twice arrested in 1908: first, in January 1908, during a protest outside the London home of Lewis Harcourt, a cabinet minister; and then in October 1908 during a demonstration outside the Houses of Parliament. On both occasions she was imprisoned for one month after refusing to pay a fine. During the Bermondsey by-election of November 1909 she took part in an attempt to spoil ballot papers, in protest at the withholding of the vote from women, but the ammonia used for the purpose accidentally caused an eye injury to an electoral official. Imprisoned for three months, she went on hunger strike and was force-fed. Over the next few years she continued to organize on behalf of the Women's Freedom League, as well as the Catholic Women's Suffrage Society (her parents were Catholics though she seems not to have maintained strong denominational ties) and Sylvia Pankhurst's East London Federation of Suffragettes. 
By 1912 she had begun to develop an interest in an issue that would become her lifelong cause: prostitution. She joined the British branch of the International Abolitionist Federation, founded by Josephine Butler, James Stuart, and others who had campaigned for the repeal of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' and who opposed state-regulated prostitution. When the British branch merged with the Ladies' National Association (another Butler-led organization) to form the Association for Moral and Social Hygiene in 1915 Neilans became its secretary with the support of Helen Wilson, the president, and soon afterwards took over the editorship of its journal, 'The Shield'. 
During the First World War Neilans fought attempts to introduce compulsory testing and treatment of venereal disease, and campaigned against military brothels in France and regulated prostitution more generally on the continent and in the empire. She also protested against the efforts of the National Vigilance Association and other social purity advocates to pass bills allowing for the extended incarceration of girls under eighteen who had been convicted of prostitution-related offences. She also oversaw a significant private enquiry in 1918 that examined laws against street prostitution and venereal disease legislation, and published its recommendations in 1920. 
Neilans was particularly involved in the campaign of the Association for Moral and Social Hygiene for the repeal of Britain's laws against street prostitution. 'The solicitation laws', as they came to be called, were founded on the idea that a common prostitute was a legally definable person, and that, while prostitution itself was not an offence, the action of street solicitation represented a special kind of public nuisance. She condemned these laws as unjust, unequal between men and women, and as stigmatizing the women who came under their power. She wrote in 1917: 'Justice is higher than mere morality, and the test of our justice is the way we treat those who are held to be of little esteem. The solicitation laws can only be carried out by riding carelessly over the principles of law. They depend upon lack of proper definition, lack of proper evidence, and their foundation is the double standard of morality. ('The Shield', 1917, 415)' She also criticized the way in which the police enforced these laws, and urged women's participation in the police force and other criminal justice professions.Neilans's beliefs and policies on prostitution-related issues were marked by her firm commitment to the principles of individual liberty, justice, sexual equality, and 'personal responsibility'. Her defence of libertarian feminism and the individual rights of prostitutes regardless of their occupation sometimes put her at odds with other campaigners, who placed more importance on the immorality of prostitution or on the reform of prostitute women. She wrote pointedly in 1922: 'The prostitute is the scapegoat for everyone's sins, and few people really care whether she is justly treated or not. Good people have spent thousands of pounds in efforts to reform her, poets have written about her, essayists and orators have made her the subject of some of their most striking rhetoric; perhaps no class of people has been so much abused, persecuted, hated, or, alternatively, sentimentalized over as prostitutes have been, but one thing they have never had yet, and that is simple legal justice. ('The Shield', 1922, 402)' Neilans succeeded in mobilizing a wide range of feminist organizations: the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship, the National Council of Women, and the National Association of Women Teachers all tabled resolutions backing the Association for Moral and Social Hygiene's struggle against the unjust treatment of prostitutes, while the St Joan's Social and Political Alliance, the International Women's League, the Six Point Group, the Women's Freedom League, the Open Door Council, the Salvation Army, and the Young Women's Christian Association among others all lent their support to many of her campaigns. With the help of Nancy Astor and several supportive male MPs, she oversaw the introduction of several bills into parliament to repeal the existing solicitation laws and replace them with a general regulation that sought to prevent annoyances by any person on the street. She testified to several government commissions as an expert on prostitution, including the street offences committee, appointed in 1928, which proposed to do away with the term 'common prostitute' (though its recommendations did not pass into law). 
Neilans supported other feminist causes, protesting against protective legislation that restricted the occupations open to working women, for instance, and advocating unemployment insurance for women. Unlike many of her feminist and social worker contemporaries, she argued against such eugenic principles as voluntary sterilization. Her role as the author of 'Changes in sexual morality' in Ray Strachey's volume 'Our Freedom and its Results' (1936), which reflected upon the status of women in the years after gaining the suffrage, is testimony to her important place in inter-war feminism in Britain. 
Neilans also took part in international networks to oppose state-regulated prostitution and prevent the trafficking of women and children. She regularly attended International Abolitionist Federation conferences as a British representative and served on the advisory committee for social questions of the League of Nations. She held the chair of committees relating to prostitution at the International Council of Women and the International Alliance for Equal Citizenship. A gifted public speaker, she travelled widely on lecture tours in the Middle East and continental Europe, and corresponded with feminists and prostitution experts in India, the Far East, and the United States. She was particularly well remembered in the press for having organized a women's rally at the sultan's palace in Istanbul. 
Many of Neilans's contemporaries considered her to be the Josephine Butler of her generation. She organized the celebrations in 1936 to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the repeal of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts', reaffirming Butler's challenge to the 'double standard' in sexual matters. Neilans feared, however, that the principle of 'personal liberty with personal responsibility' was under renewed threat with the spread of militarism, and the attendant trend to reintroduce regulated prostitution ('The Times', 14 April 1936). Her twenty-five years of work for the Association for Moral and Social Hygiene was marked by a dinner in November 1938 attended by William Temple, archbishop of York, Lady Astor, and Maude Royden. 
Just after the outbreak of the Second World War Neilans suffered from a rare and rapidly progressing illness described only as a 'paralysis disorder', and over two years gradually lost the use of her limbs and eventually her power of speech. She died on 17 July 1942 at her home, 34 Asmuns Place, Hampstead Garden Suburb, London, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 21 July. A memorial service at St Martin-in-the-Fields was held on 25 September. 'Human individual freedom was safe so long as she lived', a friend and admirer reflected, 'because she knew with perfect clearness how to assert it and maintain it' (supplement to 'The Shield', April 1943, 5). 


@@@@@


doc= 56250


Walsh, Adela Constantia Mary Pankhurst (1885-1961), suffragette and pacifist, was born on 19 June 1885 at Chorlton upon Medlock, Manchester, Lancashire, the fourth of five children and the third and youngest daughter of Richard Marsden Pankhurst (1835/6-1898), barrister, and his wife, Emmeline Pankhurst, nee Goulden (1858-1928), suffragette leader. In 1888 Richard Pankhurst, seeking a parliamentary career, moved his family to 8 Russell Square, Bloomsbury, London, where Adela received her early education. The Pankhursts returned to Manchester in 1893, to 4 Buckingham Crescent, and Adela and her sisters, Christabel Pankhurst and Sylvia Pankhurst, were enrolled at Manchester Girls High School. After Richard Pankhurst's death in 1898, the family, in reduced circumstances, moved to 62 Nelson Street. Adela left school at sixteen after a severe illness, and helped in her mother's fancy goods shop. At seventeen she became a pupil-teacher in a working-class suburb of Manchester. 
A child apart, fragile physically from birth, Adela Pankhurst developed a strong will and her own ideas, becoming secretly a believer in Jesus in spite of her father's rigid opposition to religion. At seventeen, after a traumatic visit to Chorlton workhouse, she was drawn to a vague but passionate Christian socialism, and began to help her mother in her work for women's suffrage and the Independent Labour Party. 
At eighteen Adela became the youngest of the early members of the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) formed by her mother in October 1903, and her enthusiastic campaigning led to arrests and prison terms. After a month in Holloway gaol, following the riot at the House of Commons in October 1906, Adela left teaching to work full-time for the WSPU, mainly in the north of England or Scotland, speaking, writing, and organizing in testing conditions. She was prominent in the rowdy and successful suffragette by-election campaigns of 1907 and 1908. But by 1910 Adela's criticism of the increasingly militant tactics of Christabel's leadership of the WSPU led to conflict with her mother. Christabel, firmly concentrated on the women's vote issue, saw Adela 'as a very black sheep... because of the warmth of her Socialism', as the middle sister, Sylvia, artist and socialist, noted in her memoir, 'The Suffragette Movement' (E.S. Pankhurst, 367). 'One of Adela is too many', said Christabel (ibid., 384). 
Following a severe breakdown in health in 1912 Adela Pankhurst agreed to withdraw from campaigning, to take a course, paid for by her mother, at Studley Horticultural College, Warwickshire. After graduating she escaped (from an arduous gardening job near Bath) to Switzerland, in the summer of 1913, as governess to the children of feminist Helen Archdale. But she was still seen as dangerously divisive and after a final painful interview with her mother in Paris in January, Adela agreed to sail for Australia on 2 February 1914. She never saw England or her family again. 
Partly because of this sudden disappearance, Adela Pankhurst has received little attention in British suffragist history, though her many admirers included Rebecca West, and her memoirs, 'Looking backwards' (in 'Stead's Review', Melbourne, 1928-30) are illuminating. Always impetuous and restless, she managed in Australia to offend communists, socialists, trade unionists, patriots, feminists, nationalists, imperialists, and conservatives as she zigzagged from left to right, denigrated as a renegade by the left, an eccentric by the right. Yet, brimming with Pankhurst self-belief and a naive, Joan of Arc sense of mission, she showed enormous energy and will, as well as flashes of insight and a talent for charismatic leadership, as for three decades she struggled to have her say on social, economic, and foreign policy, at a time when few women featured in public life in Australia. 
After arriving in Melbourne on 27 March 1914, Adela Pankhurst worked for the women's movement with the prominent Australian feminist Vida Goldstein. An ardent pacifist since the South African War, she became a leading speaker for the Women's Peace Army when the First World War broke out, travelling widely in Australia and New Zealand. 
Adela Pankhurst's journalism for the 'Australian Woman Voter' and 'The Socialist' and her popular anti-war polemic, 'Put Up the Sword' (1915), brought her under the notice of military intelligence and into conflict with Prime Minister W. M. Hughes. Late in 1916 she left the Goldstein group unexpectedly to work for the Victorian Socialist Party. Only 4 feet 11 inches tall, the tiny, fair-haired, grey-eyed, 'Maid of Peace', became a courageous star speaker in the bitter campaigns against conscription of 1916 and 1917, and published an anti-war play, 'Betrayed' (1917), and a pamphlet, 'After the War, What?' (1917). Her mother disowned her, and Adela's leadership of demonstrations led to her arrest and imprisonment in Pentridge, Melbourne, from late 1917 to January 1918. 
On 30 September 1917, between prison terms, Adela Pankhurst married Irish-born Thomas Walsh (1871-1943), militant unionist and socialist, a widower fourteen years her senior, in a Free Religious Fellowship service. In her happy marriage Adela bore a son and four daughters between 1918 and 1926, in chaotic and straitened conditions in Sydney and Melbourne, while also caring for three stepdaughters and pursuing her socialist interests. But her increasing advocacy of a family-centred feminism dismayed many feminists. 
Adela Pankhurst Walsh campaigned with her husband (who was general secretary of the Seamen's Union), in the landmark seamen's strike of 1919, and wrote for and helped edit the 'Seamen's Journal'. A foundation member of the Australian Communist Party in 1920, along with Walsh, she was an active communist until, disillusioned with revolution, she resigned in 1922. She also lost faith in militant unionism after the seamen's strike of 1925, when Walsh was imprisoned and threatened with deportation; and the death of her newborn baby in 1926 further sapped her confidence. When years of violent struggle in the union ended in 1928 with Walsh's expulsion over his ideas of industrial peace (that is, co-operation between employers and employees), she rejected unionism, socialism, and the Labor Party, and was reconciled with her mother just before Emmeline's death in 1928. 
In 1929 Adela Pankhurst Walsh formed an Australian branch of the London-based Women's Guild of Empire, a conservative welfare group with a mainly middle-class following. During the 1930s, through this group and its organ, the 'Empire Gazette', Adela preached anti-communism, the benefits of industrial peace, the importance of the family, and the need for a strong British empire. In 1937 she received the Coronation Medal for community services. Savaged as a radical turncoat, Adela Pankhurst Walsh also lost many of her conservative followers when, as a pacifist, she opposed the Second World War in 1939. Forced to resign from the shocked guild, she advocated economic co-operation with Japan and distrust of American imperialism in the Pacific. A visit she and Walsh made to Japan as guests of the Japanese tourist bureau in late 1939 resulted in the pamphlets 'Conditions in Japan' (1940) and 'What We Should Know about the Orient' (1940). In 1940 she stood unsuccessfully for the Australian senate. 
In a last attempt to influence history, Adela joined in late 1941 with an anti-British group to create the Australia First movement, a tiny, nationalistic, xenophobic, anti-communist, anti-war party. After Japan's entry into the war, leading members were interned. Adela, who had resigned from the group, was interned on 20 March 1942 but released on 13 October after a hunger strike. Her husband died from cancer on 5 April 1943. Hampered by myocardial degeneration, Adela withdrew from public life, living with her children in turn, taking occasional work as a companion and a nurse for retarded children until of pensionable age. 
Adela Pankhurst Walsh was an enthusiast to the end; her final conversion was to the Roman Catholic church in December 1960. She died from a coronary arrest at the Home of Peace, Wahroonga, Sydney, on 23 May 1961, and was buried the following day in the Unitarian section of the Northern Suburbs cemetery, Sydney, beside her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 56251


Richardson, Mary Raleigh (1882/3-1961), suffragette and political activist, though apparently born in Britain, was brought up by her Canadian mother in Belleville, Ontario, Canada, and her grandfather who was the local bank manager. She returned to Britain when she was sixteen, studying art and travelling to Paris and Italy. While living in Bloomsbury she undertook some freelance work as a journalist. A witness to the events of 'black Friday' (18 November 1910), in which the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) lobbied parliament and were brutally attacked by the police, she joined the WSPU and quickly engaged in militant activities. She described this change in her life as enlisting 'in a holy crusade' (Richardson, 'Laugh a Defiance', 6). She was arrested nine times, serving several sentences in Holloway prison for assaulting the police, breaking windows, and arson. She was often physically attacked while campaigning for the suffrage cause: her shoulder blade was broken and her clothing torn to shreds when she presented a petition to George V in Bristol in 1913. She campaigned with the socialist Sylvia Pankhurst in east London and was arrested and then imprisoned with her after a rally in Bromley by Bow in July 1913. She apparently also carried out orders from Christabel Pankhurst to enact daring deeds. Mary Richardson was one of the first two women to be force fed, under the ''Cat and Mouse Act'' in 1913, having been arrested at the scene of an arson attack. She suffered extensive bruising and poor health as a result, writing about this experience as 'torture': 'forcible feeding is an immoral assault as well as a painful physical one' (Richardson, 'Personal Experience'). When released in 1914 after a long period of forcible feeding to be operated on for appendicitis, she declared, 'The worst fight on record since the movement began is now raging in Holloway' (C. Pankhurst, 286). Mary Richardson was not the first, but the most famous, suffragette to slash a painting as a political protest. On 10 March 1914 she attacked Velazquez's 'The Toilet of Venus' (the 'Rokeby Venus'), which had been acquired for the National Gallery through the National Art Collections Fund in 1906. She claimed that this act was perpetrated to draw attention to the plight of Emmeline Pankhurst, then on hunger strike in Holloway prison, saying, 'You can get another picture but you cannot get a life, as they are killing Mrs Pankhurst' ('The Times', 11 March 1914). For Mary Richardson, the most beautiful woman in art was of little significance compared with the life of Mrs Pankhurst, 'the most beautiful character in modern history' (ibid.). This action secured her notoriety, and eighteen months with hard labour. It also led to many museums' closing their doors to unaccompanied women. 
On the outbreak of war in 1914 Mary Richardson resumed her literary career, publishing a novel, 'Matilda and Marcus' (1915), and two volumes of poetry, 'Symbol Songs' (1916) and 'Wilderness Love Songs' (1917). Her third book of poetry, 'Cornish Headlands', appeared in 1920. In the 1920s and 1930s she stood several times as a parliamentary candidate. The first occasion was in November 1922 when she stood as Labour candidate in Acton, Middlesex, obtaining 26.2 per cent of the vote against the successful Conservative candidate. In October 1924 she stood for the same seat as an independent socialist against the official Labour candidate and received 7.6 per cent of the vote. Although adopted as a prospective parliamentary candidate for the rural constituency of Bury St Edmunds in 1926, she did not stand in the 1929 election. In 1931 she was adopted as a last-minute Labour candidate in Aldershot against Lord Wolmer, the National Government incumbent, and lost heavily. 
Although Mary Richardson had approached Sylvia Pankhurst with the idea of establishing a communist nunnery for social and religious service, she subsequently continued in public political life. First she joined the New Party, formed by Sir Oswald Mosley in 1932, and then, in 1934, at a time of significant membership growth, she joined the British Union of Fascists (BUF) as the organizing secretary of its women's section. Like many British fascists, she had been impressed by the work of Mussolini in Italy. She spoke extensively for the British Union of Fascists and wrote regularly for the fascist press. She frequently drew analogies between the current work of British fascists and those of the militant suffrage feminists before the First World War, controversially interpreting her fascist politics as the logical outcome of her suffrage past, 'I was first attracted to the Blackshirts because I saw in them the courage, the action, the loyalty, the gift of service, and the ability to serve which I had known in the suffrage movement' ('Blackshirt', 29 June 1934, 3). She had left the BUF by 1935, having drawn hostility from Mosley's mother, who described her as full of 'dishonest inefficiency' (Mosley, 92). 
Although single, after the First World War Mary Richardson adopted a son, Roger. In 1953 she published her autobiography, 'Laugh a Defiance', a sensationalist account of her time in the WSPU which was reticent about her later career. Mary Richardson died of heart failure and bronchitis, aged seventy-eight, on 7 November 1961 at her home in Hastings. Recently her time as a fascist has received attention from historians attempting to see the BUF as a movement in which feminist ideas were contested. Certainly in her autobiography she made no mention of this political activity and press coverage at the time of her death focused on her popular image as Slasher Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 56252


Solomon, Georgiana Margaret (1844-1933), philanthropist in South Africa and suffragette, was born at Haymount, near Kelso, Roxburghshire, on 18 August 1844, the daughter of George Thomson, an unsuccessful gentleman farmer, and Margaret Stuart Scott, of Abbotsmeadow, Melrose. She was educated in Edinburgh at Miss Deuchar's Trafalgar House School. From childhood she taught in Sunday schools. Because of her family's financial difficulties she took up paid employment, first as a teacher at Trafalgar House School and later as a governess in Liverpool. 
In 1873 in Cape Town, Cape Colony, under the direction of the Revd Andrew Murray of the Dutch Reformed church, who had been active in women's education, a committee was formed to establish a school for the higher education of girls in Cape Town. Through the friendship of Georgiana Thomson's parents with Murray's uncle, Dr Charles Murray, she was invited to take up the position of lady principal of the Good Hope Seminary. After some initial hesitation she agreed to go on contract for a year. 
In Cape Town, again through family connections, she met Saul Solomon (1817-1892), proprietor of the 'Cape Argus' and member of the legislative assembly for Cape Town, a noted liberal and philanthropist. They found themselves in close accord, intellectually and emotionally, and, despite the considerable difference in age, as she was twenty-nine and he fifty-six, they were married at his home, Clarensville, in Sea Point, Cape Town, on 21 March 1874. The marriage was a happy one, producing six children, four sons and two daughters -- Saul, who became a judge of the supreme court of South Africa, Margaret (Maggie), George, William Ewart Gladstone, later principal of the Bombay School of Art, Daisy Dorothea, and a son who died in infancy. 
Saul Solomon was one of the most noted of the Cape liberals, and the emphasis he placed on racial equality between black and white gave his views a very different slant from those of the other noted Cape liberal, John X. Merriman, whose liberalism was more constitutional and legalistic. Saul Solomon's liberalism led him to campaign for the disestablishment of the Dutch Reformed and Anglican churches, and liberalism was to draw both Merriman and Georgiana Solomon into the pro-Boer camp during the Anglo-Transvaal War. 
Through her marriage into the extended Solomon family Georgiana Solomon became a member of a circle of educated, enlightened, and politically active women at the Cape. Foremost were Olive Schreiner and her close friend Mary Brown, daughter of Saul's brother Henry. Also included in this group were Saul's niece, Emilie Solomon, Betty Molteno, daughter of the first prime minister of Cape Colony, and Alice Green. Most of them, with the partial exception of Olive Schreiner, were shaped by a deep Christian faith which attracted them to the temperance movement, the movement opposing the Cape contagious diseases legislation, and similar reform activities. An abstainer, Georgiana Solomon spoke at temperance meetings and was elected president of the World's Temperance Union at the Cape. Sharing her husband's commitment to moral reform, she became first president of the Social Purity Alliance in Cape Town, and campaigned successfully against an attempt by Sir Thomas Upington, premier of Cape Colony, to reintroduce the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' there. 
In July 1888, following a breakdown in Saul Solomon's health (in which the drowning of their elder daughter in 1881 had been a contributory factor), the family left for Britain. They settled in Bedford, where the three boys attended school. Georgiana Solomon gave voice to her grief at the loss of Maggie and an infant son, born on 15 August 1883, in a volume of verses, 'Echoes of Two Little Voices'. On 16 October 1892 Saul Solomon died, leaving her to bring up the children. From this point her younger daughter, Daisy Dorothea, born on 21 August 1881, became her closest companion during her widowhood, when she moved first to Sidcup in Kent and then to West Hampstead, London. 
Although now resident in England, Solomon revisited South Africa and was involved in the women's suffrage movement which emerged there in 1902, at the end of the South African War. This movement differed from British models in being almost entirely non-militant, taking the form, rather, of 'welfare feminism'. She gave practical expression to these affiliations through a collaboration with General Louis Botha's wife, Annie, to form the Suid-Afrikaanse Vrouefederasie (South African Women's Federation, SAVF) in the Transvaal in 1904. Unlike the Cape-based Afrikaanse Christelike Vrouefederasie (Afrikaans Christian Women's Federation, which was closely tied to the Dutch Reformed church, the SAVF embraced a wider South Africanism, derived from the desire for reconciliation between Boers and British in the wake of the South African War, with the aim of 'safeguarding and fostering the progress of the South African people in the spiritual, moral, intellectual and material fields' ('Standard Encyclopaedia of Southern Africa', 1970-76, 10.346). The main work of the SAVF in its early days was to care for the Boer families left devastated by the war. Solomon became honorary president of the SAVF on its foundation and was its representative in England. 
Georgiana Solomon (whose name was often spelt Georgina in reports of her public activities) supported the women's suffrage movement in England initially through her membership of the Women's Liberal Federation and the London Society for Women's Suffrage. With her daughter she joined the militant Women's Social and Political Union in 1908, and in March 1909 led its deputation to the House of Commons to present a resolution to the prime minister, Asquith, but was unable to meet him. Arrested during a deputation to the House of Commons in June 1909, she complained of being brutally assaulted by the police during a further deputation to the House of Commons, on 'black Friday', 18 November 1910, which left her invalided for a while. She described her ordeal in a letter to the press, which also referred to the sexual assaults that the deputation had endured ('The Times', 3 March 1911, 10). On 4 March 1912 she was sentenced to one month's imprisonment for breaking nine small windows in the office of black rod at the House of Lords, serving her sentence in Holloway gaol. Daisy Solomon shared many of these experiences with her, including imprisonment. Georgiana Solomon broke with the Women's Social and Political Union when it split in 1913, but remained a member of the Women's Freedom League, and was vice-president of the Free Church League for Women's Suffrage. She also remained active in the purity movement through her membership of the Ladies' National Society for the Abolition of the State Regulation of Vice and the Association for Moral and Social Hygiene. 
Despite this involvement Georgiana Solomon followed events in South Africa closely. She was appalled at the 'Act of Union' of 1910, which failed to extend the suffrage to black men. When W. P. Schreiner, brother of Olive, led a deputation of black leaders to protest against the bill she opened her home to them, forming many friendships among this black elite. Her relationship with Solomon T. Plaatje was particularly close and M. K. Gandhi became another associate of this period. The 1913 'Land Act', which deprived Africans of the right to own freehold land in South Africa, also dismayed her. As a committee member of the Anti-Slavery and Aborigines' Protection Society she lobbied against this 'un-British' colour bar which she deplored as tending to 'stultify and blight the finest developments of Missionary enterprise' and increasing the 'miseries and perils' of black women (question submitted to Lord Buxton, 24 Oct 1916, University of Cape Town, Kathleen Murray papers). She saw England as primarily responsible for the colour bar, believing that she 'ought to treat Africans as she is treating Indians -- by removing their barriers to advancement and liberating them from oppression of every kind' (Georgiana Solomon to Alice Greene, 28 Sept 1919, ibid.). 
During her later years Georgiana Solomon was cared for by her daughter Daisy. Although no longer politically active, she maintained a wide correspondence and an active interest in the careers of her grandchildren and those of her friends. She died at Esperance, Hartington Road, Eastbourne, Sussex, on 24 June 1933, and was buried in Ocklynge cemetery on the Sussex downs. 


@@@@@


doc= 56253


Stobart, Mabel Annie St Clair (1862-1954), medical relief worker and writer, was born at 37 Wood Street, Woolwich, on 3 February 1862, the third daughter of Sir Samuel Bagster Boulton, first baronet (1830-1918), merchant and contractor, and his wife, Sophia Louisa, 'nee' Cooper (died 1900). Her childhood was largely spent at Charlton in Hertfordshire with five sisters and two brothers. Auguring a life that was to be unusually independent and active, she refused to attend school (she was educated by governesses) or to be presented at court. On 16 July 1884 she married St Clair Kelburn Mulholland Stobart (died 1908) of Mount Bagnal, Ireland, with whom she had two sons; for seven years the Stobarts lived in Cornwall, then moved to London, and finally, after financial reverses, to the Transvaal to farm in 1903. In 1907 she returned to England and was widowed the following year. On 11 March 1911 she married John Herbert Greenhalgh (died 1928), a retired barrister and colonial service judge, but continued to be known professionally as Mabel Annie St Clair Stobart. 
Early in her first marriage Mrs Stobart had published some articles about fishing and a small book on golf as a county champion golfer. In 1907, for a more ambitious article in the 'Catholic Times' and in 'Catholic Opinion' of 20 December, she went to Brussels to interview important politicians to support her contention that Britain was claiming Belgian misrule in the Congo as an excuse to annex the territory. An ardent feminist, who believed in the potential wartime usefulness of women and that the reward of proving their national worthiness would be enfranchisement, she also began the Women's Sick and Wounded Convoy Corps in 1907 to serve between field and base hospitals, using a training programme based on Royal Army Medical Corps methods. Although the British Red Cross refused the corps's services in the First Balkan War in 1912, by enlisting the aid of Queen Eleonora of the Bulgarians, Stobart enabled an all-woman unit led by herself to set up a hospital at Kirk-Kilisse in Thrace for the Bulgarian Red Cross; she recorded its experiences in 'War and Women' (1913). Despite having participated in an anti-war rally on 4 August 1914, she also founded the Women's National Service League to provide wartime service at home or abroad. At the invitation of the Belgian Red Cross she arrived in Brussels to set up a hospital, but before her unit could join her Brussels had fallen, and she was arrested in Louvain and condemned as a spy, though subsequently released. On 22 September she brought another National Service League unit to organize a hospital in Antwerp; when Antwerp had to be abandoned, with yet another group she set up a hospital at Chateau Tourlaville, near Cherbourg, for the St John Ambulance Association, finally with the approval of the hitherto scoffing British Red Cross. Ever indefatigable and resourceful, and with that hospital functioning smoothly, in 1915 she redirected her energies to Serbia, and for the Serbian Relief Fund, with still another group, set up an innovative tented hospital and a chain of emergency dispensaries to which thousands of civilians came for help. When the Serbian Army Medical Services sent a group under her command to the front as a mobile hospital unit, riding ponyback she led a column for eighty-one days of the gruelling Serbian retreat, the only column to arrive at Scutari in Albania on 20 December 1915 without any losses or desertions. For her services she was decorated with the Serbian orders of the White Eagle and of St Sava and by the Bulgarian Red Cross. On 7 June 1916 she was appointed a lady of grace of the order of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem in England. In 1916 she also published 'The Flaming Sword in Serbia and Elsewhere', illustrated with her own photographs, and undertook British lecture tours, the proceeds of which she contributed to the Serbian Red Cross. For the Ministry of Information in October 1917 - May 1918 she lectured in Canada and the United States, and from September to November in Ireland. In 1918 she was awarded custody of her two granddaughters whose parents had died in the influenza epidemic; in 1928 she would suffer the double loss of her elder son and her husband. 
Reared an Anglican but later converted to spiritualism, Mabel became chair of the British College of Psychic Science and inaugurated and led the Spiritualist Community, serving as chair of its council in 1924-41, besides joining the council of the World Congress of Faiths. Books such as 'The Torchbearers of Spiritualism' (1925), describing the witnesses of God who became great teachers because of their psychic faculties, attested to her faith. In 1929 she helped found and became vice-chair of the SOS Society to provide hostels for the unemployed. In 1935 she published her autobiography, 'Miracles and Adventures'. She died on 7 December 1954 at the Cavendish Nursing Home, Braidley Road, Bournemouth. 


@@@@@


doc= 56256


Tuke, Mabel Kate (1871-1962), suffragette, was born on 19 May 1871 at 40 Crescent Road, Plumstead, Kent, the third of the six children, and the eldest of three daughters, of Richard Lear (1834-1894), clerk of works in the Royal Engineers department at Woolwich arsenal, and his wife, Emma Margaret, 'nee' Lear ('b'. 1836). Both her parents had been born in Alverstoke in Hampshire and were probably cousins. Nothing is known of the type of education Mabel Lear enjoyed; after it ended she does not appear to have had any paid occupation. 
The Lear family lived for some of the years of Mabel's youth in Lichfield, Staffordshire, but by 1891 had returned to Plumstead, where on 25 February 1895, two months after the death of her father, she married James Quarton Braidwood, a gas engineer. Nothing can be traced of the fate of this marriage; it was presumably ended, possibly in South Africa, by the death of her husband. In 1901 she married, probably in South Africa, George Moxley Tuke, a captain in the South African constabulary. He, too, died young, however, and in 1905 Mabel Tuke returned to England. In the course of this voyage she got to know of Frederick and Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence. It was through a growing friendship with the latter, who held her interest with a description of her work with the Esperance Girls' Club in Somers Town, that she was introduced to the embryonic London branch of the Women's Social and Political Union, the organization that had been formed in Manchester in 1903 by Emmeline Pankhurst to lobby for women's enfranchisement. From 1906 until the outbreak of war in 1914 Mabel Tuke was the honorary secretary of the WSPU, in titular charge of its head office in Clement's Inn. She was particularly close to Christabel and Emmeline Pankhurst, to whom she was affectionately known as Pansy, a nickname obviously inspired by her luminous dark eyes. Beautiful, soft, and appealing, she represented the 'womanly' image that the Pankhursts were keen to promote in order to counteract the popular conception of the suffragettes. She was not involved in any of the WSPU's militant activities until, on 1 March 1912, with Emmeline Pankhurst, she went to Downing Street and threw a stone through the window of no. 10. For this she received a sentence of three weeks' imprisonment and while in Holloway was charged with conspiracy, along with Christabel and Emmeline Pankhurst and the Pethick-Lawrences. She was, however, dismissed from the case on 4 April. 
On 15 June, with the leaders of the WSPU in prison or, in the case of Christabel Pankhurst, in Paris, Mabel Tuke took the chair at a triumphant WSPU fund-raising meeting in the Albert Hall. From prison Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence wrote to her that Mr Marshall, the WSPU's solicitor, had told her that he 'could not believe that you were not a practised orator and chairman. Said he had never been at a meeting more brilliantly conducted' (BL, Add. MS 58226, fol. 2). Tuke had never been strong, however, and after this experience her health deteriorated and in the autumn, after the Pethick-Lawrences had been expelled from the WSPU, she embarked on a recuperative sea journey to South Africa. On her return she frequently visited Christabel Pankhurst in Paris, and remained a loyal friend to the Pankhursts after they had ceased their involvement with the suffrage cause. In 1925 she took part, with Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst, in an ill-fated scheme to run a tea-shop (the English Tea-Shop of Good Hope) at Juan-les-Pins on the French riviera. Mrs Tuke provided most of the capital and did the baking. In later life she lived in the care of her nephew the Revd Alban Prentice at Shadforth in co. Durham. She died of cerebral thrombosis in Ashbrooke Nursing Home, 12 St John's Road, Nevilles Cross, Durham, on 22 November 1962. 


@@@@@


doc= 56257


Dunlop, Marion Wallace- (1864-1942), suffragist and artist, was born on 22 December 1864 at Leys Castle, Inverness, in Scotland, the daughter of Robert Henry Wallace-Dunlop, of the Bengal civil service, and his wife, Lucy Dowson (1836-1914). Two of her sisters, Madeline and Rosalind Wallace-Dunlop, wrote 'Timely Retreat, or, A Year in Bengal before the Mutinies' (1858), which became a best-seller. Her father, who had been decorated for distinguished service in the Indian mutiny, retired from India in the year of her birth. Although she lived most of her life in London, she did not forget her Scottish origins, describing herself as 'a direct descendant of the mother of William Wallace' ('Votes for Women', 2 July 1909). Indeed, the large house that her father built in what is now Montpellier Road, Ealing, was named Ellerslie after Wallace's birthplace. She herself was called after the patriot's wife. 
Marion Wallace-Dunlop studied at the Slade School of Fine Art and exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1903 (when she also exhibited a painting at the Royal Glasgow Institute of the Fine Arts), and in 1905 and 1906. Her paintings were also exhibited in Paris. She illustrated in art nouveau style two books, 'Fairies, Elves, and Flower Babies' and 'The Magic Fruit Garden', both published in 1899. 
From 1906 to 1913 Wallace-Dunlop was a member of the Fabian Women's Group. She was involved in the suffrage movement from 1900, when she subscribed to the Central Society for Women's Suffrage, but militancy made an immediate appeal to her, and from 1908 she was active in the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU). She was arrested and imprisoned in Holloway for the first time in July 1908 for 'obstruction' and again in November of that year for leading a deputation to the House of Commons. In June 1909 she stencilled the following extract from the 'Bill of Rights' on the wall of St Stephen's Hall in the Palace of Westminster: 'It is the right of the subject to petition the King, and all commitments and prosecution for such petitions are illegal' (Rosen, 118). Back in Holloway prison she went on hunger strike, an entirely independent action that was then taken up by the WSPU as future policy. After ninety-one hours of fasting she was released. 
At that time (5 July) Frederick Pethick-Lawrence wrote to Marion Wallace-Dunlop: 'Nothing has moved me so much -- stirred me to the depths of my being -- as your heroic action' (Rosen, 120). In common with a number of other suffragettes, Marion became a vegetarian. In 1910 and 1911 she helped to design many of the spectacular WSPU processions. In November 1911 she helped to organize a window-smashing campaign and was imprisoned for her own part in this. In her entry for the 'Women's Who's Who' in 1913, under 'Recreations' she recorded: 'No time for them -- till the vote is won.' Nevertheless, early in 1918 she was visited by Mary Sheepshanks, who observed her leading an idyllic pastoral life in the countryside: 'we found her in a delicious cottage with a little chicken and goat farm, an adopted baby of 18 months, and a perfectly lovely young girl who did some bare foot dancing for us in the barn; we finished up with home made honey. (M. Sheepshanks to C. Marshall, 7 April 1918, box 23, Catherine Marshall papers, Cumbria AS)' In 1928 Wallace-Dunlop was a pallbearer at Emmeline Pankhurst's funeral, and for a time after that she took care of Mrs Pankhurst's adopted daughter, Mary, in her magnificent Elizabethan house at Peaslake, Surrey. She died on 12 September 1942 at the Mount Alvernia Nursing Home, Guildford. 


@@@@@


doc= 56258


Wilks, Elizabeth (1861-1956), suffragist and tax resister, was born on 17 July 1861 at De Montfort Square, Leicester, the daughter of John Bennett, corn merchant and sometime mayor of Leicester, and his wife, Sarah Annie Swain. She qualified as a doctor, graduating MB in 1894 and MD the following year, and in 1896 received the degree of bachelor of surgery, also from the University of London. She practised in the East End of London for many years. On 30 July 1894 she married Mark Wilks, a teacher at a London county council school; and they had one adopted daughter, Helen. 
As part of the Edwardian campaign to obtain the vote for women Elizabeth Wilks resisted payment of income tax, an action which ultimately resulted in her husband's imprisonment in 1912. She was a founder member and treasurer of the Women's Tax Resistance League, a suffragist organization whose aim was to refuse taxation until such time as women were enfranchised on the same terms as men. Established in 1909, the league drew on historic precedents of tax refusal on the principle that taxation without representation was unconstitutional, adopting the rallying cry of 'No Vote No Tax!' (Parkes, 39). 
At the time -- despite the 'Married Women's Property Acts' of 1870, 1874, and 1882 -- a married woman was not legally liable for income tax. Under the 'Income Tax Acts' of 1848 the separate incomes of husband and wife were aggregated and treated as one; any rebates were automatically paid to the husband. The wife was legally bound neither to pay income tax nor to disclose her income to her husband. Elizabeth and Mark Wilks exploited this anomaly during a four-year protest which confused the authorities and created publicity for the suffrage cause. 
From 1908 Elizabeth Wilks refused to comply with the demand for payment of her income tax. In 1910 some of her goods were distrained -- that is, her property was seized in lieu of the tax payment. This was against the law since the tax was due from her husband. The Board of Inland Revenue then tried to claim the tax from both of them or from Mark Wilks alone, thus holding him liable for a tax on property which did not belong to him. He refused to pay. As a teacher employed by the London county council at Dalgleish Street School, Stepney, he earned considerably less than his wife, whose income from her medical practice was about $600 a year. After a tortuous legal battle with the Board of Inland Revenue, Mark Wilks was imprisoned in Brixton gaol. Protest demonstrations were held in Trafalgar Square and Hyde Park, and over 3000 London teachers signed a petition objecting to his treatment. The case attracted a good deal of publicity in the national and provincial press, Elizabeth Wilks was very unpopular in some quarters, and the incongruous tax situation provided excellent publicity for the campaign for women's emancipation. Technically, Mark Wilks could have been held in gaol for an indefinite period until the debt was paid. However, he was released after two weeks and the couple were feted by suffrage campaigners for their stand for equal rights. 
The case was debated in the House of Lords, where Earl Russell argued that a state of law, 'which rendered a man liable to indefinite terms of imprisonment for matters over which he is by statute deprived of any control is undesirable and should be amended' ('The Times', 15 Oct 1912, 10). For the government, Lord Ashby St Ledgers admitted the illogicality of the law but condemned the case as a publicity stunt, adding that Mark Wilks's imprisonment had been intended only as a deterrent (ibid.). In the House of Commons the chancellor of the exchequer, Lloyd George, pointed out that changes in the law would lead to serious losses of revenue but said he would consider amending it ('Hansard 5C', 42, 1912). The regulations were not changed then, and a law permitting wives to have their earned income assessed separately for taxation purposes was not introduced until 1972. 
The Wilks' daughter, Helen, died in 1919, and in 1923 the couple moved to Openlands, Furze Vale Road, Headley Down, Hampshire. In 1932 Elizabeth Wilks became concerned by the poor condition of the local housing stock, and in 1933 she set up the Headley Public Utility Society, which built sixteen new cottages for families in urgent need of rehousing. Elizabeth Wilks died at Openlands at the age of ninety-five on 16 November 1956, her husband having predeceased her. In her will she left Openlands to house a needy local person, and a 10 acre nature reserve; both are in the care of the Headley Public Utility Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 56260


Nevill, Meresia Dorothy Augusta (1849-1918), political activist, was born on 14 December 1849 at 29 Upper Grosvenor Street, London, the eldest of the four surviving children of Reginald Henry Nevill (1807-1878) and the hostess and horticulturist Lady Dorothy Fanny Nevill (1826-1913), daughter of Horatio Walpole, third earl of Orford, and Mary Walpole, 'nee' Fawkener. 
The outstanding influence in Meresia Nevill's life was undoubtedly her mother, Lady Dorothy, a notable society hostess and a woman with extensive connections in the world of politics and literature. Her early years were spent at Dangstein, Sussex, where Lady Dorothy guided the education of her three sons and only daughter, and where Meresia studied with a governess. In keeping with upper-class custom she was presented at court in 1871, but by all accounts her coming out as a debutante was an unhappy experience, made the more awkward perhaps by signs of the St Vitus's Dance from which she suffered all her life. A 'manly' young woman, with cropped hair and a deep gruff voice, hers might have been the lot of the dutiful, unmarried daughter: becoming social secretary and companion to her busy and sometimes difficult mother. However, from an early age she demonstrated a marked interest in public affairs, and embarked on a productive life in politics. Her powerful talents for organization and public speaking were nurtured within the embryonic Primrose League and Ladies' Grand Council. A generous inheritance from her father precluded any financial need to marry, and consequently there was no impediment to a political career that consumed much energy and took her on speaking tours around the country. 
Although mainly a tory stronghold, Lady Dorothy's London home in Charles Street, Berkeley Square, attracted men and women from across the political spectrum. Disraeli had been a neighbour and close friend, and it was at her famed luncheon table in the 1880s that members of the so-called Fourth Party discussed the idea of the Primrose League. Eschewing her mother's less partisan views, but acquiring her taste for politics, Meresia Nevill became an 'uncompromising Tory', which she steadfastly remained all her life. Having joined the Primrose League on 6 February 1884, once women were admitted to membership, Meresia and Lady Dorothy were among those attending the inaugural meeting of the Ladies' Grand Council the following year. Appointed honorary treasurer at her mother's prompting, Meresia remained on the executive committee of the Ladies' Grand Council in that capacity until 1904, when she became honorary secretary, and then a vice-president until her death in 1918. 
The 'Corrupt Practices Act' of 1883, which forbade the payment of canvassers at elections, indirectly paved the way for the Dames of the Primrose League to provide an 'army of unpaid substitutes'. Meresia Nevill was perhaps the person most instrumental in directing this new force in politics. From her organizational base at the league headquarters in Victoria Street, Westminster, she transformed the Dames into an efficient organization of backroom constituency workers, which quickly became the envy of other political parties. Guy Nevill was later to observe that 'Like Boadicea she led an army', and could be seen at election time wheeling around the streets of London in her blue and white dog cart ('Exotic Groves', 166). Any apprehensions about the public nature of this new political activity for women were quickly dispelled by the success of their efforts at the general elections of 1885, 1892, and 1895. She publicized the work of the league in effective speeches at habitation meetings around the country and in articles in society magazines. While thus developing the political skills of a great many women -- she likened canvassing to political district visiting -- she was none the less lukewarm on the feminist implications of their work, and always maintained the official league line on women's suffrage: that it was a matter of personal opinion which should not be made an object of league policy. Her own views on the subject are not recorded. 
Meresia Nevill remained her mother's indispensable companion -- 'my sheet anchor and rudder' -- both at social functions on behalf of Erridge habitation at the family home of Lord Abergavenny and at their London residence in Charles Street until Lady Dorothy's death in 1913 ('Life and Letters', 287). When the First World War broke out the Ladies' Grand Council, with Meresia Nevill at the centre of activities, turned its attention to fund-raising for the war effort. After an illness of a few months she died of cancer on 26 October 1918 at 29 Sloane Gardens, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 56261


McLaren, Eva Maria (1852/3-1921), social reformer and political activist, was the younger daughter of William Muller, a wealthy German businessman, and an English mother, Maria Henrietta. She spent her early life in Valparaiso, Chile, and was educated by a governess and at school in London. The family travelled widely, eventually settling in Hertfordshire, with a London residence in Portland Place. She was much influenced by her mother's interest in progressive issues and by her elder sister, Henrietta Muller, founding editor of the 'Women's Penny Paper' and 'Woman's Herald', who was elected to the London school board in 1879. Both sisters led unusually active lives, unshackled by Victorian convention and no doubt helped greatly by their personal wealth; as young women they mountaineered in the Swiss Alps and continued to travel in later years, for example, to India and the United States. Drawn initially to organized philanthropy, at the age of twenty Eva Muller worked with Octavia Hill in Marylebone, where her duties were to collect rents and to look after the welfare of tenants. She subsequently accepted a nurse training post at Brownlow Hill workhouse infirmary in Liverpool, but returned to London to take care of her ailing father. 
Eva's marriage to 
Eva and Walter were remarkably close in political outlook and aspirations, and devoted much of their married life to the attainment of women's rights. Greatly influenced by his maternal relations, Walter had written a pamphlet on women's suffrage in 1874 and was instrumental in attempting to make it part of the Liberal Party's policy on electoral reform as early as 1883. He and Eva joined the executive committee of the Manchester Society for Women's Suffrage while living in Bradford, serving from 1884 to 1895. When his parliamentary career took them to London they became increasingly involved with the central committee of the National Society for Women's Suffrage, of which Eva was already a member, with her sister, Henrietta. Walter served as joint secretary of the all-party committee of the Parliamentary Supporters of the Women's Franchise Bill, which Helen Blackburn called 'an authoritative nucleus of action' (Blackburn, 173). Although keenly aware of the legal disabilities of married women, they shared the view of the central committee that any successful women's suffrage bill, even a restricted measure which enfranchised only widows and spinsters, would be better than none. This was a fiercely contested issue within the suffrage movement, which split the Bright family into two camps. On the equally divisive matter of affiliation of political associations, they were instrumental in pressing for change: Walter chaired the special general meeting of the central committee in 1888 which led to the formation of the Central National Society for Women's Suffrage on whose executive committee he and Eva served for a number of years. In the same period Eva became a leading member of the Women's Liberal Federation: she was its first honorary treasurer (1887-1914), honorary secretary of the Welsh Union of Women's Liberal Associations from 1894, and inaugurated several Women's Liberal Associations (WLAs), serving as president of Southport WLA and as vice-president of Crewe WLA in the 1890s. A member of the progressive faction during the split over suffrage in 1891, Eva believed that the federation's first aim should be to achieve electoral rights for women, and supported the implementation of the test question policy which obliged parliamentary candidates to declare themselves in favour of women's suffrage before they could obtain the crucial electoral assistance of constituency WLAs. She was active in a series of suffrage pressure groups within the WLA: the Union of Practical Suffragists, the Forward Suffrage Union, and the Liberal Women's Suffrage Union. She was author of 'The History of the Women's Suffrage Movement in the Women's Liberal Federation' (1903). 
Both McLarens were active members of the movement to extend women's rights in local government. Eva had been elected to the Lambeth board of guardians about 1882, and after her marriage served as poor-law guardian for the Horton district of Bradford; she continued to work for improvements in the poor law and for better conditions in workhouses. They campaigned for Lady Sandhurst and Jane Cobden in their attempt to become the first women elected to the new London county council in 1889. In the same year Eva became treasurer of the Society for Promoting the Return of Women as County Councillors, while Walter took a leading part in the affairs of its successor, the Women's Local Government Society. He introduced a successful clause into the 1894 'Local Government Act' to the effect that a woman should not be disqualified by marriage from being on the local government register of electors, provided that husband and wife were not qualified in respect of the same property. This was to be a significant landmark in improving the rights of married women. The McLaren marriage was clearly an egalitarian one -- insofar as the law would allow -- and both disliked the remnants of coverture which were still the hallmarks of a wife's legal subordination. A keen feminist, Eva rejected the conventional title of Mrs Walter McLaren and was known throughout her political career as Mrs Eva McLaren, on the grounds that 'it is more important to know who a woman is than whose wife she is' ('Women's Penny Paper', 1 June 1899). They were attracted to the advanced views of Edward Carpenter on the simplification of life and were drawn to many of the social reform issues of the day. They worked with Josephine Butler in the campaign for the repeal of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts', Eva serving as secretary and then chair of the London branch of the Ladies' National Association (LNA). This led to an interest in the lives of Indian women -- child marriage and the effects of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' were of growing concern to a number of feminists in Britain -- and in 1888 Eva co-sponsored the studies of an Indian woman student at the London school of medicine, while Walter worked with other MPs to rescind the acts governing the state regulation of prostitution in India in 1888. Members of a peace society in London in the late 1880s, they advocated the concept of a court of arbitration to settle international disputes. They attended, as delegates of the LNA and central committee of the National Society for Women's Suffrage, a French government Congress on the Civil Rights of Women in 1889, and Eva subsequently published a pamphlet on this subject in 1891. Typical of many of the Liberal suffragists of the time, she also became involved in the temperance movement. Walter was the nephew of Margaret Bright Lucas, founder of the British Women's Temperance Association (BWTA), in which Eva came to national prominence as vice-president (1894-1900). She fully supported Lady Henry Somerset's successful, albeit divisive, attempt to steer the BWTA away from a narrow crusade against drink and towards a broad platform of social reform, and served as superintendent of the Department of Work Among Municipal Women Voters. 
During his first spell in the Commons from 1886 to 1895 Walter had immersed himself in legislation which chiefly affected women. In addition to suffrage and local government he had spoken favourably on the appointment of police matrons, opposed the sex discrimination implicit in the 'Deceased Wife's Sister Bill', and drafted an unsuccessful amendment to defeat the 'Shop Hours Bill' of 1892 on the grounds of equality. In practice he became an unofficial whip on behalf of the late Victorian women's movement, and his removal from parliament after the general election of 1895 was a serious loss, although he remained active in a number of organizations, including the Men's League for Women's Suffrage, serving as a member of the executive committee and as a vice-president after 1907, and the Women's Local Government Society. His re-election in 1910 for Crewe Division brought renewed activity, cut short by his death from heart failure on 29 June 1912. An enormously popular MP, he had worked particularly for those interests which reflected the industrial nature of his constituency. A firm believer in conciliation in industrial disputes, he had taken a prominent part in the Miners' Conciliation Board and had helped to bring in the 'Minimum Wage Act'. His support for the coalowners during the south Wales miners' strike, however, caused him to lose favour. Eva retired from the national spotlight, although she continued to represent the Home Counties Union on the Women's Liberal Federation executive committee in 1913-14. When war broke out she took the courageous step of resuming her belated nursing career, and worked at a base hospital in France during the winter of 1914-15. She subsequently experienced a severe breakdown in health, and died from chronic Bright's disease and uraemia on 16 August 1921 at Great Comp Cottage, Borough Green, Kent, survived by her adopted daughter, Mary Florence Campbell McLaren. 


@@@@@


doc= 56265


Lindsay, Anna (1845-1903), women's activist, was born at 38 Melville Street, Edinburgh, on 24 June 1845, the elder daughter of Alexander Colquhoun Stirling Murray Dunlop (1798-1870), Free Church lawyer and MP, and his wife, Eliza Esther, 'nee' Murray ('c'.1818-1902). Educated at home in a liberal political atmosphere, she added a study of literature and philosophy to her early training, and was one of the earliest members of the University Classes for Women in Edinburgh, where her work was much praised by professors Tait and Campbell Fraser. On 8 October 1872 she married Thomas Martin Lindsay (1843-1914), who had just been appointed professor of divinity and church history at the Free Church college in Glasgow: she was to pass the rest of her life in that city. 
In 1877 Anna Lindsay was one of the founders of the Glasgow Association for the Higher Education of Women, acting as one of the organization's honorary secretaries until 1883, when the association became Queen Margaret's College; she remained on the college council for some years. Anna Lindsay's wide range of work on behalf of women sprang from her Christianity; engaged in the home mission work of the Free Church at Broomielaw, her contact with poor women led her to consider other means, beyond the strictly religious, for improving their lot. She was actively involved in a number of philanthropic organizations for the benefit of working-class women and girls, including the Partick division of the Scottish Girls' Friendly Society, which she managed from 1881; the Ladies' Union for the Care and Help of Women, a preventive and reformatory association of which she was vice-president from 1885 until her death; the Training School and Temporary Home for Friendless Servant Girls; and the Mothers' Prayer Meeting (which evolved into the Scottish Mothers' Union). 
From the 1880s onwards, however, the main focus of Mrs Lindsay's attention was women in industry. Margaret Irwin of the Scottish Council for Women's Trades (SCWT) commented of her that 'It is not possible to give any definite account of her work here, as the history of this would practically be the history of the Women's Industrial Movement itself' ('Anna Lindsay', 6). She was one of the founder members of the Women's Protective and Provident League, which later merged with the SCWT, and chaired the executive committee of the latter for a number of years. Again according to Irwin, she was 'the mainspring of the whole movement.... Whoever might grow tired of committee work and drop away from time to time, Mrs Lindsay never failed, but was to be found standing loyally at the helm' (ibid., 7). From her desire to promote legislation in the interests of women workers, Mrs Lindsay was led into party politics. In 1889 she was one of the committee which formed the Glasgow and West of Scotland Women's Liberal Association, and was vice-chair until its merger with the Scottish Women's Liberal Federation (SWLF) in 1891. She chaired the SWLF from 1891 until 1899, when her health gave out. 
Unswerving in her attachment to her church (she was an influential member and vice-president of the Glasgow branch of the Women's Foreign Missionary Society, and from 1892 to 1899 vice-president of the executive committee of the Free Church of Scotland), Anna Lindsay was valued for her capacity for seeing her opponents' points of view, for the catholicity of her sympathies, and for her great tact and judgement. The countess of Aberdeen observed that her domestic life was 'as ideal as her public life, and remains a testimony to the possibility of a mother's duties to the family and to the wider community outside the home being combined without clashing on one another' ('Anna Lindsay', 17). The Lindsays had three sons and two daughters; their eldest son, Alexander Dunlop Lindsay, first Baron Lindsay of Birker, was to become master of Balliol College, Oxford, and their daughter Susan married Sir Frederick Maurice Powicke. 
Anna Lindsay's health failed in 1899, and after suffering from Bright's disease for some three years she died early in the morning of 1 March 1903 at 37 Westbourne Gardens, Kelvinside, Glasgow; her death was certified by Dr Alice McLaren, her support for working women evident to the last. 


@@@@@


doc= 56267


Chilembwe, John (c.1870-1915), Baptist minister and anti-colonial rebel, was probably born at Sangano, Chiradzulu, in modern Malawi, of a Yao father (reportedly called Kaundama), and a Mang'anja or Cewa slave mother (reportedly called Nyangu). Very little is known of his early life. He acquired a basic knowledge of English from one of the earliest outposts of Scottish Presbyterian missionaries. In 1892 he became 'cook boy' to the recently arrived independent English missionary Joseph Booth (1851-1932) at his Zambezi industrial mission, near Blantyre. Booth was a controversial, unorthodox, radical, negrophile egalitarian, considered a trouble-maker by settlers and officials. He later wrote that he and his daughter would have died but for Chilembwe's 'never wearying tender help' (Rotberg and Mazrui, 355). In 1893 Booth baptized Chilembwe and in 1897 took him to the USA. 
After studying at the Virginia Theological Seminary and College at Lynchburg, Virginia (1898-1900; AB and BD 1901), Chilembwe, in 1900 or 1901, returned to British Central Africa (Nyasaland from 1907) and, with crucial African American Baptist support and finance, established the Providence Industrial Mission in the Chiradzulu district. There, initially supervised by two African American missionaries (Emma B. DeLany and the Revd L. N. Cheek), he built up a network of village schools linked to a central church, and grew cash crops. In 1913 Chilembwe completed his impressive brick church. A respectable pastor, in dark suit and gold-rimmed spectacles, preaching the gospel and protestant Smilesian values and singing Moody and Sankey hymns, he may have seemed an exemplary 'new man'. But he was apparently increasingly politically disaffected. His mission adjoined the Scottish owned Magomero estate, managed by William Jervis Livingstone. Chilembwe became a sounding board for the grievances of Magomero Africans working for low pay under the forced labour system, and also of black African businessmen denied tax rebates, unlike their white counterparts. The settlers considered the mission a 'hornets' nest'. Chilembwe, who is said to have had a previous wife, married Ida Z., who is thought to have been of mixed parentage; they had a daughter, who died before 1914, and two sons. 
The years immediately preceding the First World War were difficult ones financially for Chilembwe and his followers. These were also years of increased millenarian expectation and fresh forms of Christian enthusiasm in Nyasaland. Chilembwe also had increasing problems with his eyes and with his (possibly psychosomatic) asthma. The two developments which appear to have pushed him into armed revolt were, first, the outbreak of the war and the severe casualties suffered by Africans at the battle of Karonga (9 September 1914), when a British force defeated a German force from German East Africa and, second, the excision by officials of his letter of protest to the 'Nyasaland Times' in November 1914; this stated his view that 'the poor Africans who have nothing to own in this present world... are invited to die for a cause which is not theirs' (Shepperson and Price, 235). Admittedly, reports of Chilembwe's new militant mood had been reaching officials for some time. Historians differ on the causes and significance of his revolt. None the less, Shepperson's and Price's assumption in their 1958 biography, 'Independent African', that the excision of his letter was for him the last straw, still seems persuasive. 
Evidence is lacking on Chilembwe's aims. He seems to have intended to establish an independent African state, a theocratic 'New Jerusalem'. Possibly he sought martyrdom, perhaps as an African John Brown. Apparently hastily improvised, Chilembwe's rising began on 23 January 1915 with attacks on Europeans. Chilembwe directed from his headquarters at his church. Rebels killed and decapitated W. J. Livingstone and took his head on a pole to the church where it was exhibited during Chilembwe's Sunday service. He appealed to the Germans for help but his message did not reach General von Lettow-Vorbeck until March, and in any case the Germans probably could not have helped even had they wanted to. The British were over-confident, unprepared, and taken by surprise. However, the rising was bungled and confused and, though inter-tribal, had only limited support -- fewer, possibly far fewer, than 900 were actively engaged. The rebels did not know what to do, apparently expecting divine intervention. The uprising was suppressed in less than a fortnight. Chilembwe and others fled towards Portuguese territory. On 3 February 1915 a police patrol in the bush north of Mlanje, near the Mozambique border, who had fired on a fleeing group of rebels, found they had killed Chilembwe. On 4 February he was buried in thick bush about 2 miles from the boma at Mlanje, so quietly that many Africans refused to believe he was dead. Many believed he had escaped and would return to liberate them. Government forces demolished his church with dynamite; rebel leaders were executed and followers imprisoned. Chilembwe's widow is reported to have died in the 1918 influenza pandemic. Chilembwe later came to be regarded as a nationalist hero and martyr of Malawi: according to the UNESCO 'History of Africa' his posthumous significance 'exceeded his earthly accomplishments' (Adu Boahen, 190). 


@@@@@


doc= 56268


Lee, William (1815-1883), Church of Ireland clergyman, was born on 3 November 1815 at Newport, co. Tipperary. He was the son of William Lee, curate of Newport, and afterwards rector of Mealiffe in the diocese of Cashel, and Jane, daughter of Richard White of Green Hall, co. Tipperary. In 1825 he was sent to the nearby endowed school of Clonmel, and on 20 October 1831 he entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he obtained the first (classical) scholarship in 1834. In August 1835 his father died, leaving a wife and five other children, but Lee nevertheless did well at university: at his degree examination in 1836 he obtained the first senior moderatorship in mathematics, and he won the Law mathematical prize in 1837 and the Madden fellowship premium in 1838. After graduating BA in 1837 he was elected a junior fellow in 1839 and proceeded MA in 1840. 
In 1841 Lee was ordained in the Church of Ireland, and in 1844 he married Anne, daughter of William English of Farmley, Castleknock, co. Dublin. They had two sons and three daughters. In 1857 Lee was created DD and appointed professor of ecclesiastical history in the University of Dublin. In 1862 he became Archbishop King's lecturer in divinity, and also rector of the college living of Arboe in the diocese of Armagh. Archbishop Trench of Dublin made him his examining chaplain late in the year 1863 and in 1864 preferred him to the archdeaconry of Dublin and the rectory of St Peter's, Dublin. He played an influential role in the reconstruction of the Church of Ireland in the period immediately after disestablishment, becoming a prominent member of the house of convocation, and subsequently of the general convention. When it was proposed to give the laity a share in legislating on matters of doctrine and discipline, however, he entered a strong protest and ceased to attend. In February 1870 he was elected a member of the New Testament Revision Company. He was a prolific writer whose most important works include: 'The Inspiration of Holy Scripture: its Nature and Proof', (1854), 'Three Introductory Lectures on Ecclesiastical History' (1858), and a 'Commentary on the Revelation of St. John' (1882), in the 'Speaker's Commentary' on the 'Bible'. 'The University Sermons of William Lee', edited by G. Salmon and J. Dowden, were posthumously published (1886). Lee was a high-churchman and a learned theologian, of strong conservative convictions. His influence was great as a preacher and lecturer. He died of pneumonia at his home, 24/64 Merrion Square South, Dublin, on 11 May 1883 and was buried on 15 May at Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin. A tablet was erected to his memory in St Peter's Church, Dublin. His daughter Jane Lee (d. 1895) studied Sanskrit and Lithuanian in Bonn, Germany, and was afterwards college administrator from 1889. She died on 6 November 1895 at her home in Elgin Avenue, Maida Vale, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 56269


Charlotte Amy May Burbury (1832-1895), educationist, the eldest daughter, was born at The Grove, Harrow School. She married on 10 June 1852 William Burbury (1821/2-1865), second master at Shrewsbury School and, from 1861, rector of West Felton, near Oswestry (her father succeeding to the living after her husband's death). They had no children. She was for ten years secretary to the Cambridge Local Examinations Board, and from 1871 to 1876 was secretary to the London National Society for Women's Suffrage, standing unsuccessfully as a candidate for the London school board in 1873. From 1870 until her death she was a member of the committee of the Society for the Employment of Women. She was a governor of the London School of Medicine for Women and of the North London Collegiate School. Charlotte Burbury died at 4 Cambrian Villas, Queen's Road, Richmond, Surrey, on 14 November 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 56271


Archer, Georgina (1827-1882), promoter of women's education, was born on 27 September 1827 in Edinburgh, the youngest of the four children of Andrew Archer, dentist, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Cunningham. The family consisted of two sons and two daughters. The eldest, James Archer (1822-1904), was a portrait painter, and the younger son, Andrew, was the author of a history of Canada (1876). 
Georgina Archer was orphaned at the age of fourteen. Thereafter, she went to live with two unmarried aunts in Edinburgh, where she attended a private school. After completing her education, she became tutor to the children of an invalid lady. She then returned to live with her aunts for a time in order to engage in further study. She was, however, frustrated in her ambition to obtain a university education, and departed for Germany in 1850, settling initially in Luneburg. From 1857, until her death, she resided in Berlin. In the same year she published a book of fairy tales, entitled 'Flowers and Moonshine', under the pseudonym of Dudu. 
Georgina Archer was a teacher of English, and was employed by Queen Victoria's eldest daughter, the Crown Princess Victoria of Prussia, as tutor to her children, Wilhelm (the future Wilhelm II), Heinrich, and Charlotte. Wilhelm II later recalled that Georgina Archer had been 'a lively, pleasant person' and that her educational abilities had been 'remarkable'. Georgina Archer was also a friend of the crown princess and continued to visit both her and her children after she had ceased to be their tutor. Georgina Archer shared the crown princess's commitment to the cause of women's education, and in 1869 she founded the Victoria Lyceum, with the encouragement of the crown princess. The Lyceum served as a college of higher education for women. Initially, there were only four weekly lectures, attended by seventy students. However, by 1890, thirty-nine weekly lectures were given, with one thousand students attending. Georgina Archer was director of the Lyceum until her death and gave highly popular lectures on English literature, which were noted for their interest, originality, and humour. 
In addition to her ground-breaking work in the sphere of women's education, she also established three societies: The Association for Home Hygiene, which was concerned with the welfare of the poor; the Sanitats-Verein ('health association'), which entitled teachers and governesses to high-quality medical treatment; and The Anglo-German Club, which sought to promote cordial relations between the two peoples and to counter mutual prejudice. 
Georgina Archer had a large number of friends and was universally regarded as sociable and likeable. Her nature was characterized by a selfless devotion to the welfare of others. As a teacher she was remembered for her enthusiastic and diligent approach. She had a determined character, as witnessed by her commitment to the cause of higher education for women at a time when there was considerable official hostility to this aim in Germany and elsewhere. Georgina Archer's health broke down in the final months of her life, as a consequence of overwork. She died on 18 November 1882 at Montreux, Switzerland, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 56272


Swaine, Ann Sykes (bap. 1821, d. 1883), suffragist and philanthropist, was baptized at Birstall, Yorkshire, on 15 September 1821, the eldest of the four daughters of Edward Swaine and his wife, Martha Sykes. She was a spinster, and lived in York for the last twenty-eight years of her life, nursing her ageing father until her own death at the age of sixty-one. A Unitarian, Swaine had a strong interest in social and educational questions, and was one of the first women in York to become involved in the women's suffrage movement. She supported the national campaigns for married women's right to hold property and for the extension of university education to women. Active in local education, Swaine was honorary secretary of the Yorkshire Ladies' Educational Association and a member of the Ladies' Council of Education of Yorkshire. She was also involved in Sunday school and cookery school work in York. 
Swaine published a small number of texts, including a translation, 'History of the Doctrine of the Deity of Jesus Christ' (1870), of the work by the French theologian Albert Reville, which ran to three editions. A year before her death she published a collection of short biographies for the Sunday School Association, entitled 'Remarkable Women as Examples for Girls'. The volume included biographical sketches of Caroline Herschel, Harriet Martineau, Mary Carpenter, and Charlotte Bronte, among others. Ann Sykes Swaine was an active, clear-thinking woman who divided her time between philanthropy, feminism, publishing, translation, and domestic and familial duties. The 'Englishwoman's Review' (1883) noted that her writings were characterized by her own common sense and pragmatism. She died unexpectedly from heart disease at 1 The Crescent, Micklegate, her home in York, on 21 June 1883, survived by her father. 


@@@@@


doc= 56273


Sturge, Eliza Mary (1842-1905), women's activist, was born on 14 November 1842 in Frederick Street, Edgbaston, the daughter of Charles Sturge (1800-1888), corn factor and sometime mayor of Birmingham, and his wife, Mary Darby, 'nee' Dickinson. As such, she was a member of the dynasty of midlands Quaker philanthropists: Joseph Sturge was her uncle, and Sophia Sturge (1795-1845), the Birmingham anti-slavery activist, her aunt. 
Brought up in a reforming atmosphere, Eliza Sturge dedicated her life to liberal causes, in particular 'asserting the right of women to work, side by side with men, for the public good' ('Englishwoman's Review', 122). In 1869 she took up the cause of women's suffrage with fervour, becoming secretary and then vice-president of the Birmingham branch of the Women's Suffrage Association. She became an active suffrage lecturer, on one occasion moving the resolution in favour of women's suffrage in opposition to her family friend John Bright. One of her speeches, given at a meeting in Birmingham town hall on 6 December 1872, was published (as 'On Women's Suffrage'). The speech ranged over the inability of politicians to suggest practical methods of making a living for women reduced to poverty, the failure of the Liberal Associations to take up the cause of women's suffrage, the undervaluing of women's work and activities, and the demeaning practices of chivalry ('I set a low value upon the surface forms of politeness which we are supposed to receive in lieu of a vote'). Sturge highlighted the fact that class, not gender, frequently dictated the treatment meted out to women, and that women were blamed for being the product of a social and educational system designed to restrict their intellectual and spiritual development ('if [men] will not allow room for the virtues of independence, they must be content with the vices of dependence'). Her rousing conclusion asserted 'You may say we have liberty of conscience; liberty of conscience without liberty of action is a mockery'. 
In 1873 Eliza Sturge was adopted by the Birmingham Liberal caucus as a candidate for the school board elections; she came third, behind Joseph Chamberlain and George Dixon, and served on the board until 1876. The first woman elected to the Birmingham school board, her work has been assessed as 'highly competent' (Hollis, 140), but she was 'rendered virtually voiceless and invisible' at meetings of the board which were dominated by her male Liberal colleagues. She stepped down in 1876 to pursue her interests in the suffrage movement and in temperance reform. She retained an interest in education, however, and from 1902 served on the Worcestershire education committee. In later years she lived at 28 Bank Hill, Bewdley. Eliza Sturge died from cancer of the breast and lungs on 24 November 1905 at 45 Hagley Road, Edgbaston, the home of her niece, Dr Mary Darby Sturge, who certified her death and was the sole beneficiary of her will. 


@@@@@


doc= 56275


Marshall, Marian Sutton (1846-1901), secretary and trade unionist, was born at Lockwood, Huddersfield, in Yorkshire on 12 September 1846, the daughter of William Broadbent, tea dealer, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Thornton. After her father's death she went with her mother to New Zealand. Returning to Britain, she married, at Camberwell on 1 June 1870, Thomas Sutton Marshall (1834-1910), deputy assistant commissary general at the War Office and a member of a military family. The marriage did not last, however, and they separated. Being obliged to support herself, she took the advice of the novelist Charles Reade to follow the new career of 'type-writing' and did her first piece of professional work for him. In 1884 she established the Ladies Type-Writing Office, probably the first of its kind, in Chancery Lane, London, and later moved her business, which was prospering, to 126 Strand. Among her clients was Oscar Wilde, who later wanted her to oversee the copying of his prison letter 'De Profundis', for 'Mrs Marshall can be relied on' (20 July 1897; 'Letters of Oscar Wilde', 624). She was a founder member of the Society (later the National Union) of Typists in June 1889 and wrote for its small membership, which included both employers and employed and had the character of a craft guild. Her own standards of accuracy and speed in secretarial work (including shorthand which she thought should be taught routinely to children) were very high; she looked for intelligence and an excellent level of both general and special education in women workers. Adequate payment at standard rates to prevent undercutting and proper sanitary conditions where women were employed were her chief concerns as a unionist. She was an able speaker and organizer, and photographs indicate a woman of poise. The Society of Arts made her its first examiner in type-writing in 1891 and she held that position until her death, and also examined for the London chamber of commerce. She published a short pamphlet of examples in 1892 entitled 'Practical Type-Writing Cards for Use in Offices and Schools', of which a copy survives in the British Library. 
In the same year Mrs Marshall moved to Cambridge: 'I have no fear for the future; good work and punctuality will tell here as much as they did in London' ('London Phonographer', Aug 1892). She was proud of her competence in deciphering technical matter in what she politely called 'hurried' handwriting and her office was soon patronized by senior members of the university, and thanks to them it was granted the title of the Cambridge University Type-Writing Office in July 1898 by the vice-chancellor. She introduced a Remington typewriter with Greek characters for classical texts and extended her service to library research. She was a steady though not a headline-making member of the Women's Suffrage Society and represented the Liberal women of Cambridge at the International Congress of Women Workers held in London in 1899, when she spoke at length on the personal qualities she looked for in employees and on business training. 'To train for a teachership in a high-class commercial school ought to be looked upon as one of the most favourable openings for highly educated women, and one in which their talents will find a remarkable and gratifying outlet' (countess of Aberdeen, 4.118). 
Mrs Marshall's health failed rapidly and she was forced to sell the Cambridge business in the spring of 1900 to her pupil Miss Minnie Pate. She returned to London, where she had arranged to act as private secretary for G. P. Gooch, then a young historian of independent means and sympathetic to female suffrage, whose family were long-standing friends. She also joined the local women's Liberal organization. With her funds almost exhausted, she faced death supported by a firm religious faith and among friends with 'my mind at peace with all the world' (Greenwood, 220). Mrs Marshall died of cancer at 61 Hamlet Gardens Mansions, Ravenscourt Park, London, on 7 April 1901 aged fifty-three and was buried in Hammersmith old cemetery on 10 April. No monument was erected on her grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 56276


Gough, Mary Fisher (1832-1896), women's activist, was born on 9 May 1832, probably in Dublin; she was one of the five children of Josiah Richard Gough and Deborah Fisher. An Irish Quaker, she lived and died, unmarried, in Dublin. Gough was a signatory to the 1866 petition for women's suffrage (as, it would appear, were her mother, Deborah, and one of her sisters, Susanna Josiah Gough). Sources suggest that she may also have signed later petitions for female enfranchisement. However, evidently a woman of considerable pride, she eventually refused to sign future petitions for the suffrage because, according to her obituarist, 'she would not condescend to go on begging for it' ('Englishwoman's Review'). 
Nevertheless, Gough remained a steadfast supporter of the women's movement. She was particularly involved in the cause of women's education and was closely associated with the Queen's Institute in Dublin -- an institution devoted to female education. She taught the scrivenery class throughout the life of the institute (1860-80). Her teaching of such a vocational course is suggestive of her progressive ideas concerning female employment. Towards the end of her life Gough had to retire from her active interests due to paralysis. She died on 29 December 1896 at her home, 15 Windsor Avenue, in Fairview, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 56277


Brookfield, Jane Octavia (1821-1896), literary hostess and writer, was born on 25 March 1821, at Clifton, near Bristol, the youngest of the eight daughters (there were also five sons) of Sir Charles Abraham Elton, sixth baronet (1778-1853), of Clevedon Court, near Bristol, and his wife, Sarah Smith (died 1830). Her father, who had possessed literary inclinations in his youth, was the friend of Lamb and Coleridge and the author of an elegy, 'The Brothers', written after his two eldest sons had drowned in the Bristol Channel, and commended by Southey to Landor. In 1837 the Eltons moved to Southampton. The teenaged Jane, 5 feet 9 inches tall (an immense height for a woman in the Victorian period) and nicknamed Glumdalclitch by her father, was by all accounts of striking appearance. Courted by the newly arrived curate of All Saints' Church, William Henry Brookfield (1809-1874), she became engaged at the end of 1838. The wedding was delayed for some time while attempts were made to find him a better job. The couple were eventually married, on 18 November 1841, eighteen months after Brookfield's appointment to the curacy of St James's, Piccadilly, London. 
The nature of the Brookfields' marriage is open to debate. Twelve years older than his wife, and the son of a Sheffield solicitor, Brookfield was no catch. While Jane's letters to him are lively and agreeably complicit, their early years were characterized by genteel poverty -- at one point Brookfield was reduced to sleeping in the church crypt -- and Jane spent much of her time billeted on relatives. Subsequently, although Brookfield carved out a modestly successful career for himself as a clergyman (he became an honorary chaplain to the queen) and inspector of schools, he was conscious that he had not lived up to the expectations of his undergraduate days. This, together with his wife's self-confessed 'foolishly blind fondness of being admired', probably contributed to their later difficulties. 
Although she maintained an influential literary salon, which included her husband's old college chum Alfred Tennyson, Jane Octavia Brookfield is chiefly remembered for her association with another of his old friends, the novelist William Makepeace Thackeray. The two met for the first time in 1842. Thackeray was initially cautious, as well as preoccupied with the incurable insanity of his own wife, but by the mid-1840s he and the Brookfields were on terms of considerable intimacy: letters and diaries from August 1845 record four visits from Thackeray in the space of a week. Although intense -- at any rate on Thackeray's side -- the relationship between him and Jane was almost certainly not sexual (there may have been a chaste embrace or two during the course of a joint stay at Clevedon Court, the Elton family's residence, late in 1848); but neither could it be indefinitely sustained. As early as 1847 Thackeray had to apologize for some 'uncouth raptures' ('Letters and Private Papers', 2.272), of which Brookfield had complained. In January 1849 Jane's cousin, Harry Hallam, protested at Thackeray's behaviour and effectively warned him off, Thackeray maintaining his innocence. Prolonged by the birth of Jane's first child, Magdalene, in February 1850 and Thackeray's absence abroad, the situation was finally resolved in a flaming three-way argument in September 1851. Here, according to Thackeray, Brookfield 'spoke out like a man', and the affair was resolved. There was a subsequent reconciliation, but the former intimacies were never re-established. 
After Thackeray's death in 1863, Jane Octavia Brookfield wrote four indifferent novels, two of which -- 'Only George' (1866) and 'Not too Late' (1868) -- have plots reminiscent of the Thackeray-Brookfield triangle. In some ways, however, her chief literary memorial is the contribution to the characters of Amelia Sedley in Thackeray's 'Vanity Fair' (1848) and Laura Bell in 'Pendennis' (1850). Brookfield, whose health had never been good, died in 1874. Some years before her own death, on 27 November 1896 at 14 Walpole Street, Chelsea, London, his widow caused a minor scandal by publishing some of the Thackeray correspondence in an American magazine. She was survived by her two sons, Arthur Montagu Brookfield (1853-1940) and Charles Hallam Elton Brookfield (1857-1913). The former wrote several novels and stood for some years as a Unionist MP, then became a successful diplomat; the latter was an actor. 


@@@@@


doc= 56279


Muller, (Frances) Henrietta (1845/6-1906), women's rights activist and theosophist, was born in Valparaiso, Chile, daughter of William Muller, a German emigre businessman and JP for Hertfordshire, and his wife, Maria Henrietta Muller. She grew up in Chile with little formal schooling but was evidently well-educated; she spoke six languages and travelled widely in Europe and America. In 1873 she entered Girton College, Cambridge, taking a third in the moral science tripos in 1877. 
Inspired by recent efforts by feminists, including Girton's founder mistress, Emily Davies, to enable women to enter public life, Muller devoted herself to social and political causes concerned with the advancement of women. While still at Cambridge she became involved with Emma Paterson's efforts to set up trade unions among women and helped to found the Women's Printing Society. Upon leaving Cambridge in 1878, a woman of independent means with no need to earn her living, she stood for the Lambeth division for election to the London school board; an investment of $12,000 and the efforts of many female assistants ensured that she was returned top of the poll. She remained a member until 1885, independent of political party and renowned for her close relations with teachers, which enabled her to carry out small but significant practical reforms. On discovering, for example, that the girls had to sew a number of stitches to the inch which exceeded that of the finest work sold in London shops she had the number reduced to save their eyesight. 
In 1882 Muller presided at the meeting which planned the first hall of residence for women in Bloomsbury. In 1883 she succeeded in getting the London school board to employ women clerks, cannily pointing out that this would save money since women were paid less than men. In fact she was in favour of equal pay for the sexes and shortly afterwards proposed that female junior teachers, who earned two-thirds the wage of men in equivalent jobs, should be paid the same. She lost, equal pay for teachers not being fully implemented until 1961. 
A poor-law guardian herself, Muller founded the Society for Promoting the Return of Women as Poor Law Guardians about 1883 and was its first secretary. In 'The work of women as poor law guardians' in the 'Westminster Review' of April 1885 she argued that such work was eminently suited to women because their sphere was the home, and poor-law work was simply 'domestic economy on a larger scale'. Similar reasoning -- women's suitability for work with the young -- underlay her article about the work of the London school board in the 'Westminster Review' of January 1888. 'The future of single women' ('Westminster Review', 65, Jan 1884) suggested that spinsters, possessing women's superior qualities of insight and self-control yet free from men's demands in marriage, should undertake the task of protecting the rights of women and children. 'What woman is fitted for' ('Westminster Review', 71, Jan 1887) was an attack on contemporary marriage which, Muller claimed, stunted women's humanity. 
During the 1880s Muller was a member of the executive of the National Vigilance Association (NVA) which, in campaigning against the sexual exploitation of women and girls, supported government moves to close down brothels. Muller, however, was concerned that this could leave prostitutes open to harassment and destitution, a view shared by the Personal Rights Association, to which she also belonged. In 1888 Muller resigned from the NVA over this point and because the NVA attempted to prosecute birth-control pamphlets as 'vicious literature'. Muller herself favoured contraception to free women from continual child bearing until men learned self-control. Recognizing that contraception might give men even freer access to women's bodies, she argued that women must control its use. 
At a time when the criminal justice system was entirely in men's hands, Muller campaigned for women police, magistrates, and jurors. On one occasion she resisted an order for all women to leave the court during an incest case, observing that the young victim needed 'one or two of her own sex in court to give her their moral support' (Jeffreys, 62). She supported the temperance movement because she perceived a connection between men's drinking and domestic violence and impoverishment. She was on the executive of the National Society for Women's Suffrage and a tax resister. 
In 1885 Muller joined the Men and Women's Club, a London circle of freethinkers founded by Karl Pearson. Unusually for a mixed gathering, the group discussed such issues as prostitution, (hetero)sexuality, marriage, birth control, and women's emancipation. Muller contributed to several debates but resigned in 1888. She accused the men of laying down the moral parameters of the debate and refusing to examine their own motives and behaviours, particularly with respect to sexual licence. In the same year she founded the 'Women's Penny Paper', adopting the editorial pen-name Helena B. Temple. Claimed to be the only paper in the world conducted, printed, and published entirely by women, the 'Women's Penny Paper' covered a range of issues of interest to women. It has been described by David Doughan and Denise Sanchez as exhibiting an 'uncompromising feminism', unequalled by any other journal of the period (Burton, 303). 
Throughout the 1880s Muller's heart was in the 'woman's movement'. Around 1890, however, she 'gradually withdrew from civic efforts' and embarked upon a spiritual quest. She joined the Theosophical Society about 1891, drawn by its ideas of universal brotherhood and complementary male and female aspects to the spirit. In 1892 she travelled to India on a lecture tour on behalf of the Theosophists. The original plan was that she would accompany Annie Besant, but Besant cancelled at the last minute, so Muller went alone. Both Besant and Muller attended the Parliament on Religions in Chicago in September 1893, where Muller addressed the Theosophical Congress. Touring Ceylon and India in November 1893, this time with Besant, Muller's lectures drew crowds of Indian women, mostly in purdah, who had come to see 'the renowned woman-suffragist' (Nethercot, 'Last Four Lives', 17). For the first time, the Indian section of the Theosophical Society allowed Indian women to attend its convention, where Muller was also present. Many articles on Indian women appeared in the 'Women's Penny Paper' before it ceased publication in 1893. 
At the Parliament of Religions in 1893 Muller met Swami Vivekananda, who in 1897 founded the Ramakrishna mission. This combined India's traditional spiritual disciplines with western-style philanthropy, and it is to this mission that Muller transferred her energies. She edited 'The Yoga of Christ, or, The Science of the Soul' (1894) and Vivekananda's 'From Columba to Almora' (1897). M. S. Kilgour writes in her obituary in the 'Girton Review' (Lent term, 1906) that 'She spent many years in India, during part of this time living as a native among the natives in the hills. Wherever she went she sought to study not only the religion of the people, but the position held by women... and in some of the most secluded parts of India she had a measure of encouragement among the natives, and was able to secure in some degree better treatment for the women.' In 1895 she adopted a young Bengali man, hoping he would study law and become a politician dedicated to reform. 
Muller subsequently lived in China and America, maintaining a permanent address at the Westminster Palace Hotel in London. She died on 4 January 1906 in Washington, DC. Her will of 1897 left personal effects worth $12,750 to her sister Eva McLaren; there was no mention of the adopted son. In 1912 Eva McLaren gave $500 in memory of her sister to Girton College, to which Muller had in her lifetime given furniture and drawings by John Varley. 
As a feminist, Muller's writings reveal a characteristic mixture of Victorian sexual essentialism and hard-hitting analysis of male power. This approach fed tactically into dominant ideologies but brought Muller up against fierce opposition: she was accused of being a 'man-hater'. Her campaigns, ideas, and subsequent withdrawal into spirituality have many parallels among later feminists, and her disappearance from historical record is typical for a woman whose life contained hard lessons for the men and women of her own and later generations. 


@@@@@


doc= 56280


Craig, Maria (1822-1905), Post Office official, was born in Dublin and was the wife, and almost certainly by 1853 the widow, of Robert Craig, a classical tutor, with whom she had at least two sons and two daughters. Her significance lies in her recruitment in 1853 as one of the first female employees of the private telegraph service and the General Post Office. In the middle of the nineteenth century there were few job opportunities for middle-class women; the professions were largely closed to women, and office work was still a male preserve. However, the newly established telegraph companies provided a new area of employment for women. By the 1850s a small number of private companies were providing the beginnings of a national telegraph system. Nationally, provision was decidedly patchy, but in London competition between the companies led to a considerable number of branch offices opening up. The Electric and International Telegraph Company was the largest of the companies and co-ordinated its London operations from Central Station, Moorgate. Central Station was organized on a scale which reflected its importance at the heart of the telegraph network: located on three floors, its instrument galleries serviced not only London's commercial, government, and private business, but also the provincial cities. Although male telegraphists, engineers, and boy messengers formed the core staff at Central Station, from the early 1850s the Electric began to recruit large numbers of female telegraphists. Women were found to be as good as men as manipulators of the Wheatstone needle instruments, while for lower wages a superior social class of women could be recruited. Like the other companies the Electric adopted a marriage bar, ensuring that, unlike male workers, women would not expect an accelerating pay scale. At Central Station the female staff was young, single, and respectable. 
One of the first women to be recruited was Maria Craig, who started work at Central in 1853 and remained there for the rest of her working life. From the beginning she was employed in a key supervisory role. In 1855 she was the Electric's highest paid female employee, earning a fortnightly salary of $4 10's'., compared to 10-14's'. per week paid to the rest of the women. Unusually, she was married (but probably widowed), with at least one child, in a workforce otherwise composed of single women. The Scudamore report on the acquisition by the Post Office of the telegraph companies describes Mrs Craig as being employed as a 'matron' by the Electric in charge of the female telephonists at Central Station. Her marital status and relative maturity marked her off from the women in her charge. 
Maria Craig's managerial role was a complex one, shaped partly by the nature of the work and partly by the youth and gender of the workers. Although telegraphy required a period of training, her main role does not appear to have been in this area. Rather, she was responsible for general supervision of the female staff, attending to their well-being and discipline. It was said she had a 'watchful eye'. Although only male telegraphists worked at night, the women were employed during a long day shift of up to ten hours, six days a week. Moreover, although the work was light, they were required to be in close attendance to their machines even when not directly involved in the transmission or receipt of messages. Close supervision was essential. While at work the women were not allowed to leave the station, but were granted certain privileges: the company set aside a kitchen and dining room for their use and provided tea and coffee, bread and butter, plus fuel, light, utensils, linen, and attendance. 
The success of the Electric's system of female employment formed the basis for the further feminization of the workforce by the General Post Office, following the nationalization of the telegraphs in 1870. The Post Office expanded telegraphic communications, and embarked on an accelerated training programme and a big staff recruitment drive. Female employees had already proved to be cheaper and socially superior to men; they were also less militant at a time when male telegraphists were becoming unionized. 
At Central Station the female workforce increased rapidly from 267 prior to transfer to 466 by September 1870. The Post Office fully exploited the maternal system of control already in place. Maria Craig continued in her role as matron. In the Scudamore report she was congratulated along with her staff for her forbearance during the stress of transfer. When Central was reorganized in 1870 she was given her own sitting room as part of the new female accommodation. Although there was a proliferation of female supervisors in the telegraph service in the 1870s, Maria Craig continued in her role as matron until her retirement in 1883. She was then earning $250 a year and, unusually for a woman, was provided with a pension. She died on Christmas eve 1905 at her home, 34 Harpenden Road, West Norwood, London, after an accidental fall. 
Maria Craig's managerial role was not formally recognized by the Post Office. She was not mentioned in the Post Office establishment books, which were restricted to male officers at this time. Neither did she give evidence before either the Scudamore or Playfair inquiries of the 1870s. However, her importance in the management of women in a new area of technology cannot be underestimated. 


@@@@@


doc= 56282


Bowring, Deborah, Lady Bowring (1816-1902), local activist, was born on 30 July 1816, one of the fourteen children of Thomas Castle of Clifton and his wife, Mary. Her family were Unitarians, and she was brought up in the Bristol circle which included Lant Carpenter and J. B. Estlin. On 8 November 1860, at the age of forty-four, Deborah Castle became the second wife of the linguist and politician Sir John Bowring (1792-1872), whose first wife had died in 1858. The couple made their home in Exeter, where they took a prominent part in the life of the city. Lady Bowring was active in local philanthropy, supporting, 'inter alia', the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital and the Children's Band of Mercy. She was a prominent member of the Unitarian George's Meeting, where she was often to be heard 'hopefully pleading the cause of a large-minded and practical Christianity' ('The Inquirer', 493). Lady Bowring was a keen advocate of the university extension movement, serving as a member of the Exeter committee, and a promoter of education for the young women of the city. She was a supporter of the Albert Memorial Museum, of which her husband had been among the founders, and to which she left a bust and portrait of Sir John in her will, and a member of the Devonshire Association for the Advancement of Science, Literature and Art. 
Lady Bowring was a keen supporter of the women's suffrage movement, becoming in 1871 one of the vice-presidents of the Bristol and West of England Society for Women's Suffrage, a position she retained until her death. She regularly appeared on west country platforms in support of the cause, the last occasion being a meeting at the skating rink, Exeter, in May 1897, when she presided. A committed Liberal, she also spoke at public meetings on other political issues; an 'apt and dignified speaker', she 'blended a good deal of humour with her shrewd and graceful remarks' ('The Inquirer', 493). 
After Sir John's death in 1872, Deborah Bowring edited 'A Memorial Volume of Sacred Poetry' (1873), for which she also wrote a fluent memoir of her husband; the memoir was republished in 1895 as a preface to her edition of his 'Matins and Vespers'. A woman of 'vigorous grasp of mind and efficient action' ('Englishwoman's Review', 282), Deborah Bowring died at her home, 7 Baring Crescent, Heavitree, near Exeter, on 28 July 1902, having survived her husband by thirty years. She was buried alongside him on 30 July in the higher cemetery, Exeter. 


@@@@@


doc= 56283


Nathan, Sarina (1819-1882), supporter of Italian independence, was born on 7 December 1819 at Pesaro on the Adriatic coast of Italy. Her father, Angelo Levi (died 1859), was a merchant in the Papal States. Her mother, 'nee' Ricca Rosselli, came from another family of Jewish merchants established in Leghorn and London. After her mother's early death, Sarina Levi was sent to be brought up by her cousins at Leghorn, where Jews were much less in danger of persecution and forcible conversion than in papal territory. Before her seventeenth birthday she was married at Leghorn to Meyer Moses Nathan, who was a German from Frankfurt, and the couple in 1836 or 1837 moved to London, where they took British citizenship. Before his death in 1859 Meyer had made a modest fortune as an agent on the stock exchange. All twelve of their children were born in London. 
Giuseppe Mazzini, the Italian nationalist, met Sarina Nathan through his friendship with her London cousin Michelangelo Rosselli, since the two men used to play duets at musical evenings to which she was invited. Meeting Mazzini, as she later explained, was the most important event in her life and she became his devoted disciple, helping to finance his conspiracies. In January 1848 he first sought her help in promoting a penny subscription for Italy, and her husband at once found 200 subscribers among his colleagues in the City. One of Meyer's friends, Dr Henri Conneau, was a trusted collaborator of the French emperor, Napoleon III, and not impossibly was a source for Mazzini's astonishing knowledge about the secrets of European diplomacy. 
Sarina Nathan returned to Italy in 1859 following her husband's death, since her eldest daughter, Janet, needed a milder climate. At Cornigliano she barely escaped arrest when the Italian police, who saw her as a dangerous revolutionary, forced entry to her house to seize books and papers, but she escaped to Switzerland. For ten years she mainly lived at Lugano, where her house, La Tanzina, became famous as a convenient centre for planning republican revolution. Mazzini was soon referring to her and Janet as his two greatest friends. In 1872 Sarina and three of her children were present when Mazzini died at Pisa in the house of Janet's husband, Pellegrino Rosselli. For the remaining ten years of her life Sarina Nathan devoted herself to the publication of Mazzini's voluminous writings, after purchasing the copyright from his sister and publisher. Living now in Rome, helped by subscriptions from Benjamin Jowett and other English friends, she also started a free school for poor girls to propagate Mazzini's ideas on education. In this initiative she was assisted by Ernesto, the only one of her nine sons to take Italian citizenship (in 1888) and who in 1907-12 became a famous mayor of Rome. Another son, Joseph, after fighting as a volunteer in Garibaldi's army, collaborated actively with Josephine Butler in the campaigns against the state regulation of prostitution, a cause which his mother also supported. 
Sarina Nathan died at 13 Portsdown Road, Kensington, London, on 19 February 1882, after surgery for what was probably cancer. Her express wish was that the funeral should be without religious ceremony, and she was buried in the campo Verano, near porta San Lorenzo, in Rome. 


@@@@@


doc= 56284


Pochin, Agnes (1825-1908), campaigner for women's rights, was the youngest daughter of George Gretton Heap, manufacturer, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Lord (1813-1878). She was born at Ryefield, Timperley, Cheshire, on 25 November 1825, and had three brothers and four sisters. A woman of slight physique but great determination of character, on 20 April 1852 in a Unitarian ceremony she married Henry Davis Pochin (1824-1895). His successful career in Manchester as an industrial chemist was already well established, and he later became a Liberal MP. Agnes's sister was the widow of Pochin's partner. The Pochins lived at Broughton Old Hall, Salford, and had many children, most of whom died in infancy. Three survived those dangerous first years: Walter (1853-1867), Laura Elizabeth (1854-1933) (later Laura McLaren, Lady Aberconway), and Percival Gerald (1862-1918). 
Although nothing is known of Agnes Pochin's upbringing and education, it gave her, or did not prevent her from developing, an ability to think clearly and imaginatively, free from the shibboleths of the day. In 1855 she wrote, as Justitia, 'The Right of Women to Exercise the Elective Franchise', a pamphlet published by Chapman and Hall. This was one of the earliest tracts on women's suffrage to appear in the nineteenth century. Although it was acknowledged at the end of the century by such women of perception as Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy and Helen Blackburn, and although it had been reprinted in 1873 under Mrs Pochin's own name, it has been overlooked by most twentieth-century commentators. In her essay Agnes Pochin argues cogently, with verve and wit, that women should have the right to the parliamentary franchise on the same conditions as men, that mere sex should be considered no barrier in the recognition of talent, that women should have the same rights to divorce as men, that marriage should not necessarily put a stop to a woman's career, and that a woman's education should train her for a career. She writes: 'Woman's life in the middle classes is, and has been rendered, essentially a dull one. The necessity she is thought to be under of confining herself almost exclusively to one spot; the little variety she sees, whether of scene or character; the small number of her Creator's works upon which she is permitted to render her perceptive faculties; her entire withdrawal from the investigation of her Creator's laws; the necessity she is under of conforming to a stereotyped conventional standard of character... all combine to produce what may be emphatically designated a dull life. ('The Right of Women to Exercise the Elective Franchise', 1855, 31)' When John Bright introduced his 'Reform Bill' in 1858 Agnes Pochin tried, unsuccessfully, to persuade him to include a clause on women's suffrage. She persisted in her campaign, and in April 1868 sat on the platform of the Free Trade Hall in Manchester during the first public meeting devoted to women's suffrage. She introduced the second resolution of the evening, Lydia Becker having moved the first. Her husband, then mayor of Salford, chaired the meeting. She was an early member of the Manchester Society for Women's Suffrage, and in 1872 was a member of the newly formed executive committee of the central committee of the National Society for Women's Suffrage. She and her husband were on the radical wing of the Liberal Party, and at a public meeting held by the central committee in July 1872 she remarked that it would be well on some future occasion to make some appeal to the working classes in the interests of women's suffrage. In the early 1850s her husband had founded the Salford Working Men's College and by 1860 Mrs Pochin, putting principle into practice, was teaching classes of girls. 
The Pochins left Salford in 1870 and moved to Barn Elms, in Surrey, which they leased until 1884. In 1874 they bought the Bodnant estate in the Conwy valley; Agnes does not appear to have taken any decisive part in the development of the now-famed gardens. She died there on 12 February 1908, some dozen years after her husband, and was buried in the family mausoleum, The Poem. 


@@@@@


doc= 56286


Lowe, Elizabeth (1829-1897), journalist and newspaper editor, was born on 18 May 1829, at St Vincent Street, Liverpool, the daughter of James Lowe (1795-1834), a successful Liverpool solicitor, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Parry (1803-1887). The second of three surviving children, Elizabeth Lowe and her younger sister, Anne, were fortunate that their parents considered it important for the girls to share an education at home with their brother, James. They had tutors in classics, mathematics, and modern languages. However, the premature death of their father, when the children were still young, left the family in straitened circumstances. James took up journalism while Elizabeth spent three years travelling in France, Germany, and Italy before returning to England to find work. 
By this time her brother was editor of 'The Critic'. For Elizabeth Lowe, like many women journalists of her day, the encouragement, position, and contacts of a brother were to prove invaluable in starting out. James Lowe trained his sister in journalism and then commissioned her to supply book reviews and articles about art to 'The Critic' and later 'The Queen'. This journal, originally founded by Samuel Beeton, was bought in 1862 by Serjeant Cox, owner of 'The Critic'. The following year Cox bought its rival, the 'Ladies' Paper', and the two then merged. Elizabeth Lowe was thus associated from the start with the new, enlarged magazine, called 'The Queen: the Lady's Newspaper', and in 1864 was offered the editorship of the combined journals while Horace Cox, nephew of Serjeant Cox, retained overall responsibility as manager and head of the enterprise. 
When Lowe first took over, the magazine contained sixteen pages and was a rather prim society journal. By the time of her death it numbered 144 pages, including some ten pages of advertisements, and had become one of the most important magazines primarily for rich and leisured women, steering their sphere of interest towards politics and social matters without in any way neglecting the practical and domestic. Key elements in its success were the high-quality coloured fashion plates included in every issue as well as paper patterns as supplements, with designs for a variety of handwork such as decorative fretwork, lace, and Berlin woolwork. However, the success was not immediate. It was not until Lowe introduced the idea of dividing the paper into departments -- dress, home decorations, fashion, gardening, cooking, charities, women's employment -- and answered readers' queries on all these, that the circulation picked up. It then increased dramatically, although no figures have been kept. The response was enormous and a lively correspondence began between Lowe and her readers on almost all issues. 
One of Lowe's most important editorial skills was an ability to attract very high profile contributors. She managed, for example, to secure original sketches by Queen Victoria for publication in the magazine, as well as articles and short stories by Mrs Lynn Linton, Walter Besant, and several princesses. At the same time she acquired a reputation as a generous supporter of struggling writers and artists and an editor who inspired her staff with her composure, strong personality, and powers of leadership. However sympathetic an ear she proffered to female journalists, she did not put aside her sound editorial judgement merely because a woman needed work. 'They make me feel like a brute because I must cut down or return their articles', she once said in a rare interview ('The Queen', 12 June 1897). 
Elizabeth Lowe must have moved effortlessly in the top echelons of British society to produce the journal which 'The Queen' became, and yet she steadfastly avoided making herself well known to a wider public. She refused nearly every request for an interview or for her portrait to be published. Her own magazine admitted in an obituary notice that a picture of its former editor would be of great interest to its readers, yet refused to publish one, adding that 'she retained her good looks and fine presence to the last'. 
Elizabeth Lowe lived for her work and had little recoverable private life beyond it. However, she had regular Sunday afternoon At Homes where a large circle of friends would gather. She would never discuss politics on these occasions, but was a born raconteur with a shrewd and racy humour. In 'The Queen' too, she retained an objectivity on political matters and refused to give a platform to any one view. The last issue she produced carried an article on the subject of women's suffrage in New Zealand, which commented: 'That the influence of women in politics and their voting will not be different from that of their husbands and brothers may be regarded as foregone conclusion, and should this much debated reform come into actual operation in the UK it is probable that it will not produce the effects that are hoped for by its promoters and apprehended by its adversaries. (1 May 1897)' Elizabeth Lowe died at Victoria House, 46 Gillingham Street, London, on 1 June 1897, from a skin and ear complaint after an illness lasting some five months. She was sixty-eight. She was buried on 4 June at Brookwood cemetery, Woking, in Surrey, in the same grave as her brother, James, who had died, aged thirty-seven, in November 1865. Her sister's husband, Richard Stott Deane, was with her when she died, and the editorship of 'The Queen' passed to his daughter, Lowe's niece, Ethel Deane. From the poverty of her young womanhood, Lowe acquired a considerable fortune, leaving more than $20,000 in her will. 


@@@@@


doc= 56287


Burford, Roesia (d. 1329), merchant, was one of the four daughters of Thomas Romeyn (d. 1313), a wealthy merchant and pepperer, mayor of London in 1309-10; her mother, Juliana Hauteyn, came from an old city dynasty. At an unknown date Roesia married her father's business associate John Burford (died 'c'.1322), a rich wool exporter and pepperer from Oxford, who from 1297 traded extensively in spices with the great wardrobe; he was alderman of Vintry ward in 1321-2. Roesia is best known as the recipient of 50 marks in 1317, part payment of 100 marks owed to her by Queen Isabella for an embroidered cope, a royal gift to the pope. The transaction has led many to identify Roesia as a London embroiderer of some standing. However, given her family's affluence and their links with the great wardrobe, it is more probable that she organized and financed the venture on the queen's behalf. 
The commission is tentatively linked with two of the magnificent embroidered copes created at this time (generically referred to as 'opus anglicanum'): a lost cope of 1315-35 only known through a seventeenth-century watercolour (now in the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), and more recently -- and more probable -- the cope presented to Pienza Cathedral in Tuscany by Pope Pius II in 1462 which is still preserved there. This latter cope is also dated to 1315-35, and has scenes from the lives of the Virgin, St Margaret, and St Catherine in three concentric zones. Richly embroidered copes of this kind were extremely expensive but nothing is known about the workshops where they were manufactured. They must have been designed by gifted professional artists and, clearly, were worked by a small team of highly skilled embroiderers. They were valuable diplomatic gifts much sought after by successive popes. 
Roesia and John Burford apparently had a son Thomas, born before 1313 when he is mentioned in a document of expenses incurred by the executors of Thomas Romeyn; he did not survive to adulthood. There were two daughters, Joanna and Katherine, and then a further son, James, was born about 1320. On Romeyn's death in 1313 Roesia and John Burford inherited property in Aldermary. 
When John Burford died 'c'.1322 Roesia appears to have continued his business, and in 1324 is recorded selling sugar to the great wardrobe. She took John Lammas apprentice at about this time, and at her death in 1329 the apprenticeship was transferred to her son James. In due course Lammas became a leading pepperer and in 1345 was one of those who founded what became the Grocers' Company. 
Roesia died in 1329. Her will, dated 25 March 1329, was made at her manor of Charleton in Kent. It reveals that Roesia had built a chapel on the south side of St Thomas the Apostle, London, where she now established a chantry for herself, her husband, and others. She left property in the London parishes of St Thomas the Apostle, All Hallows, Bread Street, and St Benet Sherehog to her young son James who also inherited her manors at Stockwell, Erith, and Combe. He and his sister lived at Charleton, under the guardianship of John Pulteney, a rich draper and alderman, who was later mayor of London. James did not become a merchant like his father, but instead lived as a gentleman on his country estates, and by 1358 was knighted. His sister Joanna was married to Thomas Betoyne, another pepperer. 


@@@@@


doc= 56291


Benson, Margaret (1865-1916), Egyptologist and religious philosopher, was born on 16 June 1865 at Wellington College, Berkshire, the fourth of the six children of Edward White Benson (1829-1896), archbishop of Canterbury (1882-96), and his wife, Mary (1841-1918), daughter of the Revd William Sidgwick, of Skipton, Yorkshire, and sister of the philosopher Henry Sidgwick. Margaret's academic, if not her literary achievements, exceeded those of her more famous brothers, Arthur Christopher Benson, Edward Frederic Benson, and Robert Hugh Benson. Her mother was notable as a 'spiritual counsellor' to younger women, and tended to romantic involvements with them. Her sister was the social worker Mary Eleanor Benson. 
Benson was educated at Truro Girls' High School from its founding in 1879 to July 1883. That October she entered Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, where she read philosophy and political economy. She was extremely happy there. Her drawings, as well as her youth, delighted John Ruskin. Her supervisor, G. W. Gent, later described her intelligence as 'remorseless', observing that he had looked for, but could not discern, the 'feminine difference'. In June 1886, in the women's examination, she tied for first place in England; after which she went to live at home, to help with dinner parties at Lambeth Palace. Here she met -- and quarrelled with -- some formidable contemporaries, including the composer Ethel Smyth. She produced two books during this time: 'Capital, Labour, Trade and the Outlook' (1891) and a ladylike piece of anthropomorphism about her pets (1895). 
In 1895, thwarted, restless, and increasingly frustrated by chronic low-grade illness, Benson found an outlet in Egyptology. She obtained permission to excavate the Temple of Mut, situated between Karnak and Luxor. With a companion, Janet Gourlay, she spent the winters of 1895 and 1896 there. In 1897 she wrote for the 'Edinburgh Review', discussing contemporary books on Egypt and describing her own excavation. By 1899 she and Janet Gourlay had produced a fine account of the latter, 'The Temple of Mut in Asher'. In 1900 the archaeologist P. E. Newberry, who admired her crisp prose, asked her if she would collaborate on his monumental history of Egypt. She declined: it would be, she explained, a 'free choice' not a call 'by God'. Instead, between 1900 and 1904, she produced a witty and hostile polemic against Christian Science, opposed the rationalism of Robert Blatchford in 'The Clarion', a socialist weekly paper, edited a number of her father's works, and helped her brother to write their father's biography. 
Margaret Benson involved herself in theology, particularly as it bore on the field of women's higher education. From 1902 to 1904 she was on the council of Lady Margaret Hall. In 1904 she organized the St Paul's Biblical Association as part of the Oxford and Cambridge vacation terms scheme. The association became a forum at which women met to give and discuss papers, and to hear leading theologians. This grew into the archbishop's diploma in theology, which still exists. In 1904 she used the association to set up an ambitious lecture series in biblical study from the women's branch of King's College at Kensington. The courses met a real need, finding 292 subscribers in their first year. 
Benson's theological concerns dovetailed with her work on Hegel. She spent fifteen years writing a book, aimed at 'the average man', which used philosophical discursive tools to argue that it was reasonable to postulate the existence of a merciful God. The result, called 'The Venture of Rational Faith', appeared in 1908, a year after a mental breakdown, with attendant loss of faith, caused her to be confined, first in an asylum at St George's Convent, Wivelsfield, Sussex, and from November 1907 to 1912 at The Priory, Roehampton, Surrey. She suffered severe depression with occasional delusions, though generally remained quite lucid. From late 1912 she lived quietly under supervision in a private house, The Rowans, 27 Lingfield Road, Wimbledon. In 1913 she produced an extraordinary collection of semi-autobiographical prose-poems, 'The Court of the King', many of which have Egyptian settings. She died at The Rowans on 13 May 1916, and was buried on 16 May at Addington Park, Croydon. She never married. 
Margaret Benson was fiercely handsome, with heavy-lidded eyes, whose shadows became very pronounced in later life. Absolute in temperament, she had a strong, lucid intelligence, and great thwarted organizational ability. She attempted a self-immolatory patience for which she was unsuited, and was arguably the casualty of her attempts at self-suppression. 


@@@@@


doc= 56292


Wakeford, John (1859-1930), Church of England clergyman, was born on 26 October 1859 at 21 Claremont Terrace, Prince of Wales Road, Kentish Town, the second son (one of eight surviving children) of William Wakeford, then a Metropolitan Police sergeant and afterwards police superintendent of Devonport dockyards, and his wife, Catherine Crocker. His chief education was acquired on the streets of Devonport and by private study. Despite his social and educational disadvantages he was ordained, and in 1885 was appointed curate of West Alvington, Devon. His ardour and zeal found fulfilment as an itinerant rural missioner in the dioceses of Exeter and Chichester (1886-93). Wakeford married, in 1893, Evelyn Mary, daughter of John Worthington, rector of Northlew and a member of the brewing family. They had a son and daughter. 
At W. E. Gladstone's recommendation Wakeford was appointed in 1893 as vicar of the poor, sprawling parish of St Margaret's, Anfield, where the 'Liverpool Review' reported 'his intense vitality, his volcanic energy, his fire, his earnestness, his enthusiasm' (Treherne, 53). Though he enjoyed the confidence of his congregation, outsiders demonstrated against his high-church practices, which included masses and confessionals. In 1899-1904 he was calumnied by militant Protestant agitators led by George Wise (1856-1917), pastor of the Protestant Reformers' Church in Liverpool, who claimed that ritualism corrupted women: 'weak feminine minds are readily led astray by theatricalism' (Treherne, 59). Wakeford was involved in two libel actions. 
Wakeford became BD at Durham (1901), passed his intermediate law examinations at London University (1902), lectured in pastoral theology at King's College, London (1911-12), and published numerous devotional and doctrinal writings. He was appointed canon and precentor of Lincoln (1912), archdeacon of Stow (1913), and vicar of Kirkstead (1914) by Bishop Edward Lee Hicks, who respected 'his powers of physical endurance, of memory and observation, of spiritual instruction and mystical exposition', but regretted his tactlessness and 'peremptory handling of what he thought laxity among the clergy' (Fowler, 246). There were many malicious intrigues in the cathedral chapter, and Wakeford had a powerful adversary in the dean, T. C. Fry. 
In February 1921 Wakeford was found guilty by Lincoln consistory court on charges of adultery at the Bull Hotel, Peterborough, on 14-16 March and 2 April 1920. The evidence against him had been collected by a detective hired by the Revd C. Thomas Moore, who detested Wakeford and had himself appeared before a consistory court in 1915 on a charge of immorality instigated by Wakeford. Moore acted in concert with his friend the Revd Herbert Worthington, Wakeford's brother-in-law and enemy. The Lincoln hearings were both ill-managed and unjust. Though the testimony against Wakeford seemed strong, he insisted that the most damaging witnesses had been suborned. Afterwards, much of the incriminating evidence proved nugatory: there was tampering with the hotel registration book, for example, and an apparently guilty remark attributed to Wakeford by the hotel staff was, in fact, uttered as a joke by another guest, Edmund Blunden, who became a strong and reasoned supporter of Wakeford. The case aroused intense public excitement. However, the judicial committee of the privy council to which Wakeford appealed in April 1921 was unable to accept his theory of an elaborate conspiracy (perhaps because this would have required police corruption). Wakeford was deprived of his preferments but not (according to precedent) of his holy orders. He conducted a platform campaign across the country, supported by Horatio Bottomley, who saw the case as an opportunity to revive the popularity of his 'John Bull' newspaper. Wakeford was bankrupted in 1924 by continuing legal costs. He lived on the proceeds of his wife's poultry farming at Biggin Hill until he was committed in March 1928 to Barming Heath Asylum, Maidstone, Kent, where he died of heart failure on 13 February 1930. He was buried in Cudham churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 56293


King, Bryan (1811-1895), Church of England clergyman, was born in Liverpool on 28 December 1811, the second son of George King, merchant, and his wife, Catherine. He was educated at Shrewsbury School from 1826 to 1831. In 1831 he entered Brasenose College, Oxford, taking a third class in 'literae humaniores' in 1834, becoming a fellow of the college, and holding a Hulme exhibition. At Oxford his theological views changed from evangelicalism to Tractarianism. He was deaconed in 1836 and priested in 1837. 
King was perpetual curate of St John's, Bethnal Green, from 1837 to 1842, a Brasenose College living, and played a leading role in the building of new churches in the area. On 28 September 1842 he married Mary Martha Fardell (died 1895), second daughter of Thomas Fardell, rector of Boothby Pagnell. In the same year he was appointed rector to another Brasenose living in the East End, St George-in-the-East. His determination to introduce high-church liturgical practices prompted fierce and sustained opposition from his parishioners and from the dissenters who composed the parish vestry. Matters came to a head in May 1859 when the parishioners elected the Revd Hugh Allen, a virulent anti-Tractarian clergyman, to a lectureship at St George's, provoking a cycle of rioting at the church and half-hearted action by the police which lasted for eighteen months. King's health broke down, and in 1860 he took his family abroad to Bruges for three years. In his absence the parish was run by a succession of clergy who managed to reimpose some order. In 1863 Bishop Tait of London secured an exchange of livings for King, and he became vicar of Avebury in Wiltshire, staying until 1894 and enjoying a quiet semi-retirement. 
King's historical significance rests largely on the events surrounding the riots at St George-in-the-East. In the 1840s and 1850s he was regarded as an important Tractarian parish clergyman, being active in the formation of the Society of the Holy Cross, an association for Anglo-Catholic clergy, in 1855. But his energy was sapped by long years in a struggling East End ministry, and then broken by his experience at St George's. 
King was described as a handsome man, stubborn and reserved, but sociable and possessing a strong sense of humour. He died on 30 January 1895 in Weston-super-Mare, where he and his wife had settled some months after his retirement. His wife died in October 1895. He was buried on 2 February 1895 at All Saints' Church, Weston-super-Mare. 


@@@@@


doc= 56296


Anna Cotton (d. 1721), of Ravenfield, whom he married on 27 March 1683, was a woman as strongly nonconformist as had been his father. Both offered hospitality to Oliver Heywood and his sons and were ready recipients of the nonconformist tracts which he procured. Not until Oliver Heywood lay on his deathbed in 1702 was any child of the Cotton family baptized at the parish church of Darton. 
Cotton and his second wife had four surviving children, and on his death, which occurred on 6 May 1703 when he was fifty-four, Anna and her brother-in-law 


@@@@@


doc= 56297


Daniel Cotton (c.1660-1723) of Church Hulme in Cheshire, acted as guardians for these children, all of them minors. Daniel Cotton had an $8848 share in the Cheshire ironworks in 1701 and was manager of the new Vale Royal furnace. In 1707 the Cheshire ironworks were amalgamated with the Staffordshire works, a Foley family concern, and Daniel Cotton obtained a sixth share in the former and a seventh share in the latter. About this time he took over the management of Cranage forge and Lawton furnace, near the Staffordshire border. In 1709 he and his cousin Edward Hall of Cranage ['see under 'Hall family] commenced mining at Crossgates in Furness, a prelude to the establishment in 1711 of Cunsey furnace near Lake Windermere, in which Daniel was one of the shareholders. The partnership of William Rea of Monmouth at Cunsey suggests that the later pattern of trade, in which only a small part of the tough pig iron produced there was used locally, the bulk of it being shipped to the Severn estuary to supply the south Wales and Stour forges, was envisaged from the start. Meanwhile, near the Shropshire border, Doddington furnace had been brought into the partnership about 1710 and in 1716, together with William Vernon, manager of Warmingham forge, Daniel Cotton repaired Madeley furnace, which was in blast again the following year. 
Daniel Cotton married five times, but little is known about his wives. His first wife's name is not known, and on 31 December 1696 he married Sarah Nicols of Boleshall. A third wife was called Lydia, and on 28 August 1707 he married Sarah Booth of Twemlow. His fifth wife, Anne, survived him. He had at least one son and one daughter. Far from entering the nonconformist ministry, as did his elder brother Thomas, Daniel had his children baptized in the established church, gave a new peal of bells to the church at Holmes Chapel in 1709, and presented William Dugard to the rectory of Warmingham in 1714. Daniel Cotton died on 1 January 1723. 
While the widowed Anna Cotton tried to safeguard her family's interests in Yorkshire against the encroachments of John Spencer ('c'.1655-1729) of Cannon Hall, the position of her family in the industry was consolidated by several judicious marriages. First, in 1708, her eldest daughter, Frances, married William Vernon, manager of Warmingham forge. In 1712 her second daughter, Anna, married Edward Kendall (1684-1746) ['see under 'Kendall family] of Stourbridge, joint manager with William Rea of Monmouth of the Staffordshire works. Meanwhile Elizabeth Hall of the Hermitage had married Ralph Kent of Kinderton, later to be a partner in the Cunsey works in Furness, and her cousin Elizabeth Hall of Cranage married Thomas Bridge, a Chester feltmaker; both of their sons, William and Edward Bridge, were eventually involved, along with the Vernons, in the expansion of the Cheshire partnership into Wales. Finally, in 1715, Anna Cotton's son 


@@@@@


doc= 56298


Thomas [iii] Cotton (1723-1802) of Haigh, who was born on 4 April 1723, the son of Mary and William Westby Cotton, continued in the trade for some years after his father's death. However, the business was in decline, and of the furnaces in the Barnsley area, Bretton alone was still in blast in 1774. By 1794 Bretton was being run by Messrs Cook and Cockshutt, and it too was closed down in 1806. The Yorkshire Thomas [iii] Cotton married Rebecca Ackton in 1765 and died, childless, on 3 October 1802. 
The Cotton family, in consolidating its partnerships by judicious marriages, was perhaps the most impressive example of the way in which ironmasters sought with considerable success to reduce the proneness to ruin through litigation, which had bedevilled the industry's progress during much of the sixteenth century and the seventeenth. Though parties to several chancery and Chester exchequer court cases, members of the family seem to have avoided initiating such suits themselves, even after 1703, when rivalry with the Spencer family was at its most intense. Not only was their influence felt in the iron trade throughout most of the north of England, their participation in the initiation of the steel industry on Tyneside and of tin-plate manufacture in the north midlands were interventions at crucial growing points in the British economy. The family also exhibited classic features of first, second, and even third generation enthusiasm for the trade, to the extent of female participation in management. This was followed by a rather surprising disinclination to meet the challenges faced by the iron industry in the later eighteenth century. The religious enthusiasm of the family followed a somewhat similar trajectory. 


@@@@@


doc= 56302


Russell, Richard (1687-1759), physician, was born on 26 November 1687 at the High Street (at a house now numbered 77), Lewes, Sussex, the eldest of the seven children of Nathaniel Russell (1657-1713), apothecary, and his wife, Mary (1659-1737?), daughter of Drew Ellis, yeoman, of Southerham, near Lewes. He attended the town's grammar school and was probably apprenticed to a surgeon in London, where he also assisted the physician George Howe (1654/5-1710). As a surgeon practising in Lewes, in 1713 he reported a case to the Royal Society and commanded the high premium of $80 for an apprentice. But his practice and interest extended more widely, as it was with a thesis on epilepsy in children, promoted by Hermann Boerhaave, that in December 1724 he graduated MD at the University of Leiden, a mere two months after matriculation. After a few further months in Rotterdam he returned to Lewes by October 1725, to take over the practice of Peter White, just deceased. Russell quickly established himself as the leading physician in east Sussex, soon prosperous enough to invest in property. On 4 December 1719 he married -- despite her parents' opposition -- Mary (1698-1764), only child of William Kempe, gentleman, and his wife, Mary, of Malling deanery, in South Malling, near Lewes. Nevertheless on Kempe's death in January 1721 his estate passed to his daughter, and Russell lived there for the rest of his life. He and his wife had five daughters and two sons between 1720 and 1735, all of whom outlived him. His daughter Hannah (died 1761) was the mother of the physician Sir Lucas Pepys. 
In the 1720s Russell observed how people living on the coast drank sea water to cure diseases of the lower belly, and at Leiden he was considering how to treat glandular secretions. From the 1730s Brighton, 8 miles from Lewes, was attracting visitors for informal recreation by the sea and on the South Downs, and patients were there following Russell's regime of sea water bathing and drinking, some of them referred by London physicians. He distilled his experience in 'De tabe glandulari, sive, De usu aquae marinae in morbis glandularum dissertatio' (1750). After the proprietor of a London mineral water warehouse published a pirated English translation in 1752 (fifth edition, 1769), Russell issued his own the following year, as 'A Dissertation Concerning the Use of Sea Water in the Diseases of the Glands'. Demand for his treatment encouraged him in 1753-4 to buy tenements on the low cliff at the eastern edge of Brighton, and build a substantial five-bay house for the reception of patients. In many cases the virtue of Russell's sea water treatments lay not in the water itself, but in the dietetic and hygienic routine and discipline imposed in Brighton's attractive surroundings. Russell's success helped to popularize such treatments and contributed to Brighton's emergence as Britain's first fashionable seaside resort. 
Professional recognition came with election as a fellow of the Royal Society on 13 February 1752, and, two years later, with the MD degree from the University of Cambridge granted by royal licence on the recommendation of the Royal College of Physicians and the university's chancellor, the duke of Newcastle. For the degree he submitted a synopsis of 'The Oeconomy of Nature in Acute and Chronical Diseases of the Glands' (Latin and English editions, 1755). Russell had long supported Newcastle's political interest in Sussex and benefited from his patronage. 
Russell died on 21 December 1759, and was buried at South Malling Church three days later. His eldest son and heir, William, a lawyer, took the surname of Kempe, as required by his grandfather's will if he was to enjoy the estate settled on his mother; his inheritance included about 1300 acres of land in east Sussex. The greater part of Russell's practice at Brighton passed to Dr Anthony Relhan. 
This Richard Russell has previously been confused with 


@@@@@


doc= 56303


James Welwood (fl. 1652-1727) who was the son of Robert Wellwood, of Touch, and his wife, Jean Livingstone, and who has often been wrongly credited with Welwood's works. 


@@@@@


doc= 56304


Murray, Flora (1869-1923), physician and suffragette, was born at Murraythwaite, in Dumfriesshire, on 8 May 1869, the fourth of five children of John Murray (1828-1862), landowner and retired naval captain, and his wife, Grace Harriet, 'nee' Graham (1838-1923). Having attended schools in London and in Germany, Murray went to the London Hospital in Whitechapel in 1890 for a six-month course as a paying probationer nurse; then, having decided to do medicine, she entered the London School of Medicine for Women in 1897. She completed three years' study there before going north in 1900 to finish her degree course at Durham, gaining the MB BS in 1903. Immediately after qualifying she worked for 18 months as medical assistant in charge of female admissions at the Crichton Royal Institution, a large asylum in Dumfriesshire, which provided the material for her subsequent MD thesis, 'Asylum Organisation and Management' (1905). She resigned her post there in December 1904 to become house surgeon at the Belgrave Hospital for Children, in London. In 1906 she moved to the Chelsea Hospital for Women as assistant anaesthetist and remained on the staff there until 1913. 
Shortly after arriving in London, Murray began working for women's suffrage, first as a supporter of Millicent Fawcett's National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies and then as a member of Emmeline Pankhurst's Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU). She became prominent in the militant movement, speaking at public meetings, joining in the 1911 census protest, and treating suffragettes injured in the large demonstrations. During this period she met Dr Louisa Garrett Anderson, a fellow WSPU member, with whom she formed a close friendship and working collaboration that would last for the rest of her life. In 1911 the two founded a small hospital, which opened in February 1912 as the Women's Hospital for Children, at 688 Harrow Road, London. Under the WSPU motto, 'Deeds, not Words', it provided not only much-needed health care to working-class families -- in the first eleven months over 2,500 children were seen in out-patients -- but also opportunities for its doctors to gain clinical experience, since few hospitals at the time offered resident jobs for women. At the same time Murray continued her wider suffrage work and became a vociferous campaigner against the practice of forcible feeding of suffragettes on hunger strike, citing her own findings in women whom she had treated after release from Holloway. Her actions attracted the attention of Home Office officials, who attempted -- unsuccessfully -- to discredit her. 
When war broke out in 1914 Murray and Anderson decided that contributing to the medical services for the troops would demonstrate clearly that women were capable of doing their duty as citizens and as competent in treating casualties as their male colleagues. However, knowing from their days with the WSPU that any approach by them would be rejected by the authorities, they offered their services to the French, and within five weeks had formed and equipped a small group, the Women's Hospital Corps (WHC), to run an auxiliary hospital under the Croix Rouge Francaise, in Paris, with Murray as doctor in charge. On 15 September 1914 the group left England for their new home in the Hotel Claridge on the Champs-Elysees, the first women's unit to go abroad. Within forty-eight hours of their arrival the 100-bed hospital was overwhelmed by casualties, but the women coped, and gradually this French military hospital run by English women acquired a reputation for dealing efficiently with injured men, with survival rates as good as those of other hospitals around. When in late October the WHC offered to run another hospital near the channel coast, the hard-pressed British authorities -- in a rather surprising 'volte-face' -- accepted immediately, agreeing to fund it. This second hospital, at the Chateau Mauricien in Wimereux, had sixty-five beds, and by the end of the year the entire corps was based there, because scarcity of heating fuel had forced the closure of the Hotel Claridge. 
Shortly after leaving Paris, however, Murray and Anderson learned that new hospital beds were being created in England, and having offered to run a unit there were invited to meet the director-general of Army Medical Services, Sir Alfred Keogh, who astonished them by suggesting that they set up an army hospital in London. They accepted, and the corps returned to England in January 1915. They were assigned large former workhouse buildings in Endell Street, Covent Garden, and their hospital would be known as the Endell Street Military Hospital. Murray was once again doctor in charge; her colleague Anderson was chief surgeon, the two of them acting as commanding officers, leading a carefully recruited female staff of around 180. Full responsibility for running the 573-bed hospital, however, fell to Murray, graded for the purposes of pay as lieutenant-colonel equivalent. Surviving accounts by members of the WHC and their patients describe a driven, rather austere woman, who had no difficulty in enforcing discipline among sometimes unruly male patients while striving tirelessly to make a success of the enterprise. 
Even though Endell Street was under the patronage of Sir Alfred Keogh there was still considerable opposition to the hospital within the War Office, and the general assumption was that it would close within six months. In the event it ran for over four and a half years, during which time Murray's staff treated over 24,000 in-patients, and saw 26,000 more as out-patients. The hospital became widely known and praised, 'The Tatler' declaring approvingly that 'the noble ladies who manage the Suffragette hospital in Endell Street... are men in the best sense of that word, and yet women in the best sense of that word also' (19 July 1916). At the same time, the campaign for women's suffrage continued at the hospital: Murray saw it her duty to educate her staff, particularly the younger orderlies, many of whom who had been too young to join the suffrage movement, through weekly teaching sessions about their future responsibilities as citizens when women finally got the vote. In August 1917 she and Anderson were both awarded the CBE for their war work. 
Endell Street was decommissioned at the end of 1919 and closed in January 1920. Murray returned to private practice and to the Harrow Road hospital, now renamed the Roll of Honour Hospital. She continued campaigning for universal franchise and in 1921 became a founder member of Lady Rhondda's Six Point Group. The diary and scrapbook of press cuttings that she had kept throughout the war were turned into a book about the WHC ('Women as Army Surgeons: Being the History of the Women's Hospital Corps in Paris, Wimereux and Endell Street, September 1914-October 1919'), published in 1920. The following year the expiry of the hospital's lease and lack of funds to start in new premises forced the closure of Harrow Road, and Murray retired with Anderson to their cottage, Paul End, in Penn, Buckinghamshire. She died in a nursing home in Hampstead, London, on 28 July 1923, shortly after an operation for large bowel cancer, and was buried in Holy Trinity churchyard, Penn. 


@@@@@


doc= 56305


Lowndes, Mary (1856-1929), stained-glass artist, was born on 30 December 1856 at the rectory, Poole Keynes, near Cirencester, the eldest in the family of four sons and four daughters of Richard Lowndes (1821-1898) and Annie Harriet Kaye (1827-1907), eldest daughter of William Kaye of the Inner Temple and Ampney Park, Gloucestershire. Her father was vicar of St Mary's Church, Sturminster Newton, Dorset, which was dedicated to her paternal grandfather, William Loftus Lowndes (1793-1865), barrister and QC; he was also a canon of Salisbury. When she was nine a large east window produced in the factory of John Hardman of Birmingham, depicting 'Christ in Majesty' and surrounded by the 'Acts of Mercy', was erected in the church, and appears to have inspired Mary's future vocation. 
At twenty-seven, and after an education described by her sister Rebe as by a long line of mostly very inefficient governesses, Mary Lowndes left for London, where in 1883 she entered the Slade School of Fine Art. She also studied privately with the stained-glass artist Henry Holiday (1839-1927), with whom she learned to make cartoons. In the 1890s she taught herself the techniques of glass painting as well as designing; her first commissions were made in collaboration with the firm of Britten and Gilson, in whose premises in Southwark Street she took a glass painting studio. Her work was much influenced by the designs and craftsmanship of another studio holder, Christopher Whall, who became the leading stained-glass artist of the arts and crafts movement. The firm had developed a new type of glass initiated by the architect Edward Prior and known as 'Prior glass' or 'slab glass', which was characterized by uneven thickness and great brilliancy of colour. Though she made extensive use of slab glass (for example, in the centre east lancet of Lamarsh church, Essex, in 1896), it was expensive to buy and time-consuming to lead. In 1897 she formed a business partnership with Alfred J. Drury, head glazier at Britten and Gilson, and set up the firm of Lowndes and Drury to provide facilities and permanent staff including cutters, glaziers, and kiln-men, to enable stained-glass artists to participate in the whole process of carrying out a design. Materials and services were to be paid for by artists out of commission fees. The firm was a success and moved from its small premises at 35 Park Walk, Chelsea, to purpose-built studios and workshops, known as the Glass House in Lettice Street, Fulham. These attracted artists, many of them women, from all over the country who went to work or to study there. Drury oversaw the practical side of the business, and Lowndes continued to design and collaborate on stained-glass projects with other artists, including the illustrator Isobel Gloag (1865-1917) and the painter Emily Ford (1851-1930). She designed and made over 100 windows from the 1890s to the 1920s, including figurative and decorative designs for churches, commercial premises, and houses. Two of her earliest works were of a personal nature and comprise two windows: a 'Nativity' (1895) dedicated to her grandmother Ella Lowndes, and a 'Resurrection' (1898), of an elegant arts and crafts design, dedicated to her father in the church at Sturminster Newton. 
From 1907 Mary Lowndes was active for about nine years, as a non-militant, in the last phase of the women's suffrage movement. She was chairman of the Artists' Suffrage League, and a committee member of the London Society for Women's Suffrage and of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies. She designed many of the banners executed for the latter, including those for the demonstration of 21 June 1908, and for the Women's Pageant of Trades and Professions held the following year at the Albert Hall as part of the International Woman Suffrage Alliance Congress. Many of her banner designs are in an album, together with her treatise 'On Banners and Banner-Making', in the Fawcett Library, London Guildhall University. From 1910 to 1920 she was a prolific contributor to 'The Englishwoman', and was active in the organization of the Women Welders' Union during the First World War. After the war Lowndes and Drury produced many war memorial windows. Though she sometimes grumbled about her committee work, Lowndes was an inspiring leader, and very generous. She worked hard (in spite of suffering from asthma) and to high standards. She never married. Following her death on 28 February 1929 at her home, 27 Trafalgar Square, London, she left most of her estate to her friend and companion Barbara Forbes. 


@@@@@


doc= 56306


O'Brien, Anna Maria (1785-1871), philanthropist, was born at 5 Werburgh Street, Dublin, the second of five children of John Ball (1728-1804), silk merchant, and his second wife, Mable Clare Bennett (died 1831). Like many wealthy Irish Catholic girls she was educated at the Bar Convent, York, England (1800-03). On 12 November 1805 Anna Maria Ball married John O'Brien, a Dublin businessman, to whom she brought a dowry of $5000. The couple remained childless, although they adopted the three children of Anna Maria's half-brother, John Ball, after his death in 1812. Mrs O'Brien also engaged in philanthropic activities, directed primarily at rescuing young girls: in 1809, with some other women, she opened a house of refuge in Ash Street, Dublin. 
In 1807 Cecilia Ball, Anna Maria's sister, entered the Ursuline convent in Cork as a novice, and Mrs O'Brien and her sister Frances Ball (1794-1861), who was to form the Congregation of Loreto Sisters in 1821, accompanied her on the journey. While in Cork, Mrs O'Brien met Mary Aikenhead (1787-1858), whom she invited to come to Dublin. Aikenhead arrived there the following year, and the two engaged in charitable work in the city. The Revd Daniel Murray (1768-1852) was a regular visitor to the O'Brien house and a close friend of Mrs O'Brien, who attended mass every day in his private oratory in Dublin. In 1809 Murray became archbishop, and coadjutor to the see of Dublin. He was keen to establish a religious congregation of nuns in the city to engage in charitable work and O'Brien introduced him to Aikenhead as a possible founder of such an enterprise: a friendship developed between Murray and Aikenhead, which led to the foundation of the Sisters of Charity in 1815. 
Mrs O'Brien became intimately connected with the new religious congregation. Not only did she provide funding for a number of its enterprises but she also engaged in philanthropic work with the community. The Ash Street house of refuge was put in the Sisters' care, and when the nuns engaged in prison visitation, she accompanied them. When the Sisters of Charity thought of establishing a hospital in Dublin, Mrs O'Brien and her husband travelled to Paris with three nuns sent to train there in 1833. When the Sisters took over the Kings Inns Street primary schools, she was, most unusually, appointed their manager; she was also credited with supporting a large number of orphanages in Dublin city in the early years of the nineteenth century. 
Mrs O'Brien suffered from senility in the last two years of her life and died on 28 March 1871, at her home, 5 Mountjoy Square, Dublin. She was part of a community of wealthy Catholic women who, working closely with powerful clerics, played a key role in developing religious communities of nuns during the early nineteenth century, as well as a network of lay Catholic philanthropy which worked closely with convent communities. 


@@@@@


doc= 56307


Sparkes, John Charles Lewis (1832/3-1907), educationist and college head, was among the most prominent art educationists of the Victorian period. He was the son of John Sparkes, but little is known of his early life except that he was first taught by Paul Naftel in Guernsey and, on arriving in London, pursued his studies at Leigh's academy and the Royal Academy Schools. Advised by Leigh to take up teaching, he entered the art masters' training class at Marlborough House, run by the fledgeling Department of Science and Art, about 1853. A year later, he took charge of the art classes formed by the Revd Robert Gregory at the schools of St Mary-the-Less in Lambeth. From these classes developed the successful Lambeth School of Art, which soon established itself as a leader in the provision of instruction in applied art and design to working artisans, many of whom were employed by local manufacturing firms. Through his friendship with Henry Doulton, Sparkes cultivated a special relationship between the Lambeth School and Doulton's pottery manufactory: from about 1869, the school developed coursework geared to the pottery trade, and the firm provided rooms for students to carry out the work, a link that was maintained until the 1880s when these advanced classes were taken over by the City and Guilds Institute. The result of this collaboration was a new line of 'art-pottery', known popularly as Doulton ware, many items of which were designed by Sparkes. 
As an educator, Sparkes proved to be both innovative and resourceful, being among the first art instructors to teach mechanical drawing by setting students to draw actual pieces of machinery as opposed to merely copying flat examples. Despite the technical flavour of such an experiment, he was actually a firm traditionalist in matters of art and design education, espousing throughout his life the approved academic belief that life drawing was the best training for any kind of artistic work. Although his students were generally quite successful in examinations and competitions, his methods were not fully endorsed by his superiors in the Department of Science and Art. When its head, Henry Cole, introduced full payment on results into the national system of art education in 1863, an association of art masters was formed to contest the new minutes, led by Sparkes. A nationwide revolt of art masters managed to attract a great deal of political momentum, projecting Sparkes to the fore of the debate. The masters were eventually defeated, as Cole's system survived a parliamentary inquiry in 1864, but Sparkes had begun to make his mark administratively. 
In 1875 (after Cole's retirement) Sparkes was invited by Edward J. Poynter to become headmaster of the National Art Training School at South Kensington and was promoted to principal when Poynter relinquished the position in 1881. He remained in this post until retiring in 1898, having reached the age limit. Many famous names can be counted among his pupils, including W. W. Ouless, George Frampton, and Stanhope Forbes. During these years he published works on a wide range of artistic subjects, including 'A Handbook to the Practice of Painting' (1877), 'The Classical Composition of John Flaxman, Sculptor' (1879), 'Hints on Pottery Painting' (1885), 'A Manual of Artistic Anatomy' (1888), 'Wild Flowers in Art and Nature' (1894), and 'Potters: their Arts and Crafts' (1897). He also contributed to the descriptive catalogue of the Dulwich Picture Gallery (1876-1905) and edited the 'Fine-Arts Library' series from 1884. 
On 1 August 1868 Sparkes married the painter and illustrator Catherine Adeline Edwards (died 1891), who had been his student at Lambeth and who exhibited many pictures at the Royal Academy between 1866 and 1890, first under her maiden name and then as Mrs C. A. Sparkes after 1870. After her death in 1891, and a few years before his own, Sparkes made arrangements with the Royal Academy to bequeath the proceeds of his Surrey estates towards founding scholarships for female students, in memory of his wife. Afflicted with blindness in his later years, he died on 12 December 1907 at Heathside, Ewhurst, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 56315


Heywood, James (1810-1897), politician, university reformer, and philanthropist, was born in Everton, Liverpool, on 28 May 1810, the fifth son of Nathaniel Heywood, a partner in the Manchester bank of Benjamin Heywood & Sons, and his wife, Ann, daughter of Thomas Percival, MD FRS. Sir Benjamin Heywood and Thomas Heywood were his elder brothers. His early education was at Manchester, followed by a period at Lant Carpenter's school at Bristol, and attendance at the universities of Edinburgh and Geneva. He entered Heywood's bank at Manchester, but on inheriting a fortune from his uncle (B. A. Heywood) he gave up banking and returned to study, entering Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1829. Although ranked twelfth senior optime in the mathematical tripos (1833), Heywood, being a Unitarian, was debarred from taking his degree by the religious tests then in force. He was called to the bar of the Inner Temple in 1838, but did not practise. 
After settling in Manchester, where he was one of the trustees of the Cross Street Chapel, Heywood became a member of the Unitarian network which played a prominent role in the cultural institutions of the city. He devoted his time to learned societies, of which his house in Mosley Street was often the centre. He was elected in 1833 to membership of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, of which his maternal grandfather had been a founder, and was himself one of the founders, with Richard Cobden and William Langton, of the Manchester Athenaeum, which opened in 1839 to provide reading rooms and lectures. Heywood envisaged the Athenaeum as bringing the culture of science, literature, and philosophy to young men working in commercial occupations in Manchester. A founder also, in 1838, of the Manchester Geological Society, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1839, and was a local secretary when the British Association met in Manchester in 1842. He was a fellow of the Statistical Society, a member of the first council of the Chetham Society, and president (1853-8) of the Unitarian Manchester New College. From 1845 to 1860 he was a trustee of the non-denominational Owens College, Manchester. 
A radical in politics, Heywood was a member of the Anti-Corn Law League. Reform of the ancient universities, whose religious and social exclusiveness hindered the diffusion of culture, became his principal interest. He edited a collection of Cambridge university and college statutes (1840) and gave financial support to the publication of translations of early statutes of Oxford colleges to expose the extent of their neglect. In 1850 he paid his Trinity College contemporary, Thomas Wright, to produce translations of the statutes of Eton College and King's College, Cambridge, and later (1855) to produce an edition of Cambridge University documents from the period of the puritan controversies of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Heywood himself compiled and published statistics on the state of the English universities in the 1840s. As MP for North Lancashire from 1847 to 1857, he became the leading parliamentary promoter of state intervention to reform the universities; his motion in April 1850 was the occasion for Lord John Russell to announce the appointment of royal commissions into both Oxford and Cambridge. The climax of his parliamentary career was in June 1854 when he carried an amendment removing religious tests for those matriculating or taking BA degrees at Oxford; a similar amendment to the 'Cambridge University Bill' in June 1856 enabled him to graduate BA (1857) from his old university. 
Heywood married in June 1853 Annie (died 1872), widow of Gustav Albert Escher of Zurich and daughter of John Kennedy of Ardwick Hall, Lancashire. They had one daughter, Anne Sophia. They were resident from 1859 in Kensington, where Heywood was active in the Notting Hill Unitarian congregation. He was an early promoter of the free public library movement, speaking in favour of the 'Public Libraries Act' in 1850 and maintaining at his own expense a public library in Notting Hill High Street from 1874 until 1887 when he donated it to the parish of Kensington and Chelsea. He was a founder member in 1875 of the Sunday Society to promote the opening of museums, art galleries, and public libraries on Sundays. 
Having secured the admission of dissenters to the universities, Heywood, who was a supporter of women's suffrage, worked to make university education available to women. Nominated by the crown a member of the senate of London University, he advocated opening London degrees to women. In 1869 he was one of the original members of Emily Davies's committee for the foundation of a college for women, which led to the establishment of Girton College, Cambridge. He was a member of the council of the college from 1872 until his death. 
Heywood was an early member of the Royal Historical Society, contributing to its transactions articles on Swiss freedom and the progress of free thought; his presidency of the society's council from 1878 to 1880 immediately preceded the displacement of the older generation of antiquaries and amateurs, to which he belonged, by university teachers of history. Though not conspicuous as a scholar in his own right, Heywood held a Unitarian faith in the power of reason, and throughout his life used his substantial wealth to support the spread of knowledge. He died at his London home, 26 Kensington Palace Gardens, on 17 October 1897, and was buried in Barnes cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 56316


Tennant, Stephen James Napier (1906-1987), aesthete, was born on 21 April 1906 at Wilsford Manor, near Amesbury, Wiltshire, the fourth son of Edward Priaulx Tennant, first Baron Glenconner (1859-1920), landowner and member of parliament, and his wife, Pamela Adelaide Genevieve Wyndham (1871-1928), a writer. Of his parents, Tennant was perhaps inevitably more attached to his mother, a romantic 'Soul' who would greet visitors to the Glenconners' Scottish baronial pile with her brood arranged about her 'in a sort of photographic pose' (Hoare, 7). But she was more at home at Wilsford Manor, the arts and crafts house she had created in 1906, the year of her youngest son's birth. Wilsford would become an extension of Stephen Tennant's personality, a constant reminder of his childhood in a life which remained essentially childlike. There his mother recorded his baby talk, the flowers speaking his name, 'Stephen, Stephen', as he passed; and acknowledged that 'what may be self-centred in later life is prettily cloaked in childhood' (ibid., 9). It was a sense of idyll destroyed by the death of the Glenconners' eldest son, Edward, a budding poet, in the First World War. Just as the aftermath of war influenced his generation, so Stephen Tennant's later relationship with the war poet Siegfried Sassoon seemed invested with the memory of his dead brother and the world before the war. 
Unsuited to formal schooling, Tennant was educated at home, his artistic talent encouraged by Pamela (he later illustrated her compendia 'The Vein in the Marble', 1925, and 'The White Wallet', 1928). In 1922 he attended the Slade School of Fine Art, where he met the artist Rex Whistler. The two shared a passion for Edgar Allan Poe and P. B. Shelley, but it was through Cecil Beaton's lens that Tennant's flamboyant imagination would create his fantastic self-image. Like his mother before him, Tennant adopted a romantic pose, becoming the visual epitome of the 'bright young people', a largely tabloid press response to post-war aristocratic hedonism. He was photographed by Beaton in his silver-foil bedroom in Smith Square: made up, marcell-waved, and clad in a pinstripe suit with his brother's leather flying jacket over his shoulders, he seemed a parody of a City gentleman and a wartime flying ace, an outrageous simulacrum of the masculinity which the war had sapped. The 'Daily Express''s 'William Hickey' column, written by Tom Driberg, avidly recorded his party entrances: 'The Honourable Stephen Tennant arrived in an electric brougham wearing a football jersey and earrings' (Hoare, 105). 
If the bright young people's antics were essentially infantilist, then Tennant was part Peter Pan, part Dorian Gray -- a glittering androgynous figure invested with an almost alien sexuality. He remained inordinately attached both to his mother (who, two years after her first husband's death in 1920, had married Viscount Grey of Fallodon, the former foreign secretary), and to his nanny, Rebecca Trusler. When he half-seriously proposed marriage to Elizabeth Belloc-Lowndes, Tennant stipulated that Nanny should accompany them on their honeymoon. On the deaths of these two controlling influences (Lady Grey in 1928, Trusler a year later), Tennant was left to his life of fantasy. Into the emotional breach stepped Siegfried Sassoon (1886-1967), with whom he had begun a relationship in 1927, and who watched as Tennant's friends -- including the incongruous figure of William Walton -- were persuaded to act out his eighteenth-century 'fetes galantes' in full costume and make-up on the lawns of Wilsford. 'It was very amusing, and they were painted up to the eyes, but I didn't quite like it', Sassoon wrote in his diary (Hoare, 92); yet he had become obsessed by their fantastic ringmaster. 
'It was a tremendous 'coup de foudre'', recalled Peter Quennell, 'Sassoon was like the worthy vicar of a parish coming to town and meeting this great society beauty' (Hoare, 132). The pair 'honeymooned' in Bavaria, for the health of the now tubercular aesthete, and in Sicily. Tales of Sassoon being sent back to their hotel to fetch Tennant's pearls led Edith Sitwell to dub the pair 'the Old Earl and Little Lord Fauntleroy' (ibid., 132). But Tennant's precarious physical and mental state was a source of real concern, and in 1932 he was sent to the Cassel Hospital at Penshurst in Kent, where he received psychoanalysis and where Sassoon attempted to direct his friend's treatment with the help of Sir Henry Head. But Tennant was growing tired of Sassoon's attentions, and, dismissing his lover, returned to Wilsford alone. 
Tennant now began a period of restlessness. He travelled to the south of France searching for passion and inspiration in the Vieux Port of Marseilles, where he sketched 'matelots' for his putative masterpiece, 'Lascar: a Story of the Maritime Boulevards', 'a restless glittering book, about men who have no homes' (Culme, 16). He received encouragement from Virginia Woolf, E. M. Forster (a particular and loyal friend), Elizabeth Bowen, Rosamond Lehmann, and, most notably (for the contrast it presented), his beloved friend, the American writer Willa Cather; but as Cather told him, 'Nobody ever wrote a masterpiece by resolving to do so' (ibid., 172). Cyril Connolly was less forgiving: 'Essentially he is an adolescent exhibitionist acting out the role of grand 'ecrivain meconnu'' (Hoare, 298). Constantly rewritten in jewel-coloured inks, 'Lascar' remained unpublished. Yet Nancy Mitford could not resist putting Tennant in her own novel 'Love in a Cold Climate' (1949) as the character Cedric Hampton, who drives the tyrannical Uncle Matthew to an insane rage when encountered by the station bookstall dressed in a suit edged in contrasting colours, for which crime he is shaken 'like a rat'. 'You'd never think', as Cedric said afterwards, 'that buying 'Vogue Magazine' could be so dangerous. It was well worth it though, lovely Spring modes' (ibid., 281). 
During the Second World War Tennant retreated to a flat in Bournemouth when Wilsford was taken over by the Red Cross. Although he wrote a cogent preface, 'The room beyond', to Cather's 'On Writing' (1947), his depressive state had by now deteriorated to the extent that he received electroconvulsive therapy and insulin coma treatment at clinics in Scotland and Middlesex. He returned to Wilsford exhibiting what V. S. Naipaul, his later tenant, diagnosed as 'accidie' (Hoare, 361). 
Tennant now obsessively redecorated his childhood home, covering the Syrie Maugham decor of the 1930s with flock and velvet and littering the floors with paintings and letters like confetti; he turned the grounds into an English Cote d'Azur with sand, palms, and tropical lizards. Here, at Wilsford, he held court to guests brought by Beaton to visit this 'last professional beauty', as Osbert Sitwell had called him (Hoare, 337); Truman Capote complained of being served soup with candied violets in it, and Christopher Isherwood, having been subjected to a particularly intense session of poetic reverie, told Beaton, 'That kind of talk scares the shit out of me.' But for a new generation Tennant acquired a certain mythic status: David Hockney, Patrick Procktor, and Kenneth Anger came to pay homage, and Philip Core wrote that Tennant's 'mania for tinselled detritus' had anticipated 'the amphetamine glitter taste of the 1960s' (Core, 177); Caroline Blackwood could compare him only to the rock star David Bowie. Wreathed in his own legend, Tennant had become the stuff of footnotes and anecdotes, as the painter Michael Wishart described him, 'resembling a rainbow, exquisite and rarely seen... Stephen's unique beauty still hung around him like an old-timer at the stage door, hoping for employment' (Wishart, 164-5). When the present writer visited Tennant at Wilsford in 1986, the house had remained largely untouched since the war, filled with Venetian gilt mirrors, rare animal skins, straw hats, and, perhaps, its occupant's portrait in the attic. With his long hennaed hair and turquoise rings on elegant hands, Tennant himself resembled an exotic Edwardian hostess who had somehow survived into a modern age. 
On 28 February 1987 Tennant's languid reign at Wilsford came to an end with his death there; and on 4 March his ashes were interred in the neighbouring churchyard at St Michael's, Wilsford-cum-Lake, where his mother had been buried. The following October the three-day auction of his house and contents propelled Tennant into the spotlight once more. For all his self-obsession, there was yet something innocent and wonderful about Stephen Tennant: he had dedicated himself to a life as art, and in that unique creation he undoubtedly succeeded. 


@@@@@


doc= 56317


Beckett, Frances Sarah (bap. 1821, d. 1902), philanthropist and a founder of Scottish Home Industries, was baptized on 27 June 1821, at Frimley, Surrey, the only child of George Thomas Frederick Bousfield, solicitor, and his wife, Elizabeth Dingley. Frances Bousfield married Lieutenant Frederick William Leopold Thomas RN on 2 December 1841 at the parish church of St Paul, Deptford, London. 
In 1857 Mrs Thomas accompanied her husband, by that time a captain, to Harris in the Outer Hebrides, where he was working on the Scottish hydrographical survey. While living on Harris, her attention was drawn to the extreme poverty of the islanders. Following a tour of investigation she formulated a means of developing a local economy through the home industries of the women islanders. Having been presented with a pair of hand-knitted stockings, she resolved to teach the women to knit and shape well. On returning to Edinburgh she promoted the knitted work and developed markets for Harris stockings and socks through an agency which she opened in Edinburgh in 1859. Together with Catherine Murray, Lady Dunmore, she was a principal force behind the cultivation of the Harris tweed industry through the marketing and sale of Harris tweed. The success of these home industries was such that at the Edinburgh Exhibition of 1886 Harris stockings were awarded first prize, and the tweeds gained the medal for excellence of make. It was the belief of a Harris minister that more families would have been destitute, had it not been for the efforts of Mrs Thomas. Several hundred women were employed in the home industries, and the textiles proved to be more remunerative than the land and fishing during the early 1880s. 
Mrs Thomas moved to London in 1888 and opened a depot in Berners Street. This was a seminal step in the development of the Scottish Home Industries, which became a limited company in 1896. She became one of seven directors of the Scottish Home Industries Association Ltd, with the duchess of Sutherland as president. 
Not long after moving to London, and by now a widow, Fanny Thomas married a widower, James Flowers Beckett, retired naval officer, at All Saints' Church, Paddington, on 2 July 1890; they lived at his house, Avondel, Hollington Park, St Leonards, Sussex. Besides her involvement in the tweed industry she undertook a number of other philanthropic projects on Harris, including the education of children of the poorer ministers, and the building of the Free Church and manse at Tarbert in 1860. She is thought to have helped over 800 people to emigrate from Harris to Queensland and Canada. In 1897 she built and endowed a cottage at Manish to provide a village nurse. 
In his evidence given to the Napier commission of 1883, the Reverend Roderick Mackenzie of Tarbert stated, 'Harris, perhaps, owes more to her than to anybody else' ('Royal commission of inquiry'). Appreciation of Frances Beckett's services in promoting the interests of the Harris and Lewis crofters was formally recorded at a meeting of directors of the Scottish Home Industries Association following her death. Frances Sarah Beckett died on 7 September 1902, at Morningside Drive, Craighouse, Edinburgh, from cerebral thrombosis. She was survived by her second husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 56318


Betts, Annie Dorothy (1884-1961), apiculturist and expert on bee diseases, was born on 22 November 1884 at Claverley, Adelaide Road, Surbiton, Surrey, the daughter of Edward Peto Betts (1844-1918), civil engineer and financier, and his wife, Frances Ashenhurst Maclean (1853-1934). She was from a distinguished family of railway constructors that included her grandfather Edward Ladd Betts (1815-1872) and her great-uncle Sir (Samuel) Morton Peto (1809-1889). Little is known of her education, but she gained an external London BSc degree in 1906. 
During the First World War, Annie Betts engaged in aeronautical research on variable pitch airscrews, and, although she did not pursue a paid career thereafter, she was a lifelong member of the Royal Aeronautical Society, and published a paper, 'The effect of variable gearing on aeroplane performance', in the society's 'Journal' in November 1923. Suffering from a progressive loss of hearing, she became a very private person. Little is known of her domestic life except that she lived in the family home at Camberley, Surrey, until early 1935, after her mother's death, and later in Horsham, Sussex. 
Annie Betts kept bees from her teens, when she and her father were both members of the Surrey Beekeepers Association. Her notebooks, written between 1908 and 1924, show her early interest in the pollen loads of the honey bee and in practical bee anatomy. Her primary interest was in the field of bee diseases; she published her first paper in this area in 1912 in the 'Annals of Botany'. An extended version, 'The fungi of the beehive', subsequently appeared in the 'Journal of Economic Biology'. 
Annie Betts was a regular and esteemed contributor to journals on bee-keeping, and was appointed editor of 'Bee World' in 1929. She established the journal's position as the leading international apicultural magazine, and made it a source of inspiration to both scientists and progressive bee-keepers. Her skills as a linguist allowed her to maintain a trans-European correspondence during the inter-war period; she mastered Russian in order to extend the scope of her coverage of apicultural literature. Under her editorship 'Bee World' opened up European apicultural science to the English-speaking world. She was rigorous in her assessment of her own work, as well as that of others, and willingly acknowledged her own misunderstandings. If the management of a small voluntary journal's finances and production was difficult in the inter-war period, the Second World War brought material shortages and unimaginable problems to an editor dependent on overseas correspondents. She was, however, able to maintain links between nations. 
Alongside 'Bee World', Annie Betts built up the Apis Club Library, and then oversaw this important collection's transfer, with the journal, to the Bee Research Association (subsequently based at Cardiff as the International Bee Research Association). Her self-effacement was typified by a firm decline of any form of testimonial: when relinquishing her editorship in 1949, she said in her concluding 'Bee World' editorial that she looked forward to doing things of interest outside the world of apiculture, including motorcyling. 
Annie Betts died on 8 September 1961 at 43 The Broadway, Knaphill, Woking, Surrey. A bibliography of her works which appeared in 'Bee World' after her death revealed the full extent of her voluminous output. She wrote two books, 'Practical Bee Anatomy' (1923) and 'The Diseases of Bees' (1935; later edn, 1951), and published more than 145 articles on various aspects of apiculture. 


@@@@@


doc= 56322


Jones, William (bap. 1762, d. 1831), maker of scientific instruments, who was baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, London, on 27 June 1762, was the elder of two sons of John Jones (1736/7-1808) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Dillon. John Jones, the son of a stay maker of St Martin-in-the-Fields, had been apprenticed as a mathematical instrument maker and was made free of the Spectaclemakers' Company in 1758, the year of his marriage. He was in the Holborn area by 1776 and trading as an optician at 135 Holborn by 1782. William was apprenticed to his father in 1776, and was in partnership with him by 1784, not taking his freedom in the Spectaclemakers' Company until 1794. 
In 1786 Thomas Jefferson (1734-1824), later third president of the United States, patronized the Jones business on his only visit to London. Jefferson acquired a number of scientific instruments from some of the most eminent London makers, among them Peter Dollond and Jesse Ramsden, and this first link with a prestigious foreign customer must have assisted the Jones firm with subsequent overseas sales. Jefferson corresponded with the Joneses in 1787 and again in 1793. John Jones retired in 1791 to end his days at Islington, where he died on 15 August 1808. Apart from minor bequests, including $10 to his nephew John Dillon, a printer, then working for his sons, he left everything to his wife during her lifetime and then to his sons William and Samuel. William was forced by ill health to retire early from business and also removed to Islington. He died, unmarried, in Brighton, on 17 February 1831, and was buried at St Andrew's, Holborn. 

Samuel Jones (1770-1859) was baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 18 February 1770. He does not appear to have served an apprenticeship and, indeed, is a far more insubstantial figure than his elder brother; like him, he was a bachelor. He joined his brother in partnership in 1791 on the retirement of their father, obtaining his freedom of the Spectaclemakers' Company by patrimony in 1806. He continued to trade as W. and S. Jones long after his brother's departure. In his latter years he lived at Dalton House, St Albans, Hertfordshire, where he died on 10 October 1859, at the age of eighty-nine. The firm ceased to trade after this date. 
W. and S. Jones traded under the sign of Archimedes, at 135 Holborn, next to Furnival's Inn, moving across the road to 30 Holborn around 1800. The firm was extremely prolific, selling a wide range of optical, mathematical, and philosophical instruments and apparatus in the middle ranges of price and quality, as detailed in their comprehensive catalogues, issued at frequent intervals. William Jones was a friend and pupil of the prominent lecturer and instrument maker Benjamin Martin, who effectively introduced Jones into a wide society of like-minded people. A major opportunity for the Jones business occurred in 1782, as a result of Martin's bankruptcy and death, and the subsequent sale of his business; in 1795-6, a second, perhaps larger, boost resulted from the death of the younger George Adams and subsequent sales by his wife, Hannah. W. and S. Jones's trade must have benefited from the reduced competition after the cessation of two of the largest and apparently most successful contemporary London businesses. More important was its purchase of the copyright of the influential textbooks written by the two George Adamses, father and son: from 1797 onwards catalogues of the wares of W. and S. Jones, as illustrated in these texts, were priced and bound in the back of every volume. As a form of advertising, this appears to have had considerable success. It is possible that the copyright of Benjamin Martin's popular textbooks had also been purchased, as a number of these were revised by William Jones, and catalogues bound with them. 
Among W. and S. Jones's more prestigious customers were the college at Harvard, supplied with apparatus to order between 1797 and 1817, and the prolific American collector Charles Nicholl Bancker, a customer during the 1820s. The company also drew up the auction catalogue for disposal of the third earl of Bute's magnificent collection, in 1793. Items bearing the firm's signature can be found in collections all over the Western world. 


@@@@@


doc= 56324


Jones, William (bap. 1762, d. 1831), maker of scientific instruments, who was baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, London, on 27 June 1762, was the elder of two sons of John Jones (1736/7-1808) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Dillon. John Jones, the son of a stay maker of St Martin-in-the-Fields, had been apprenticed as a mathematical instrument maker and was made free of the Spectaclemakers' Company in 1758, the year of his marriage. He was in the Holborn area by 1776 and trading as an optician at 135 Holborn by 1782. William was apprenticed to his father in 1776, and was in partnership with him by 1784, not taking his freedom in the Spectaclemakers' Company until 1794. 
In 1786 Thomas Jefferson (1734-1824), later third president of the United States, patronized the Jones business on his only visit to London. Jefferson acquired a number of scientific instruments from some of the most eminent London makers, among them Peter Dollond and Jesse Ramsden, and this first link with a prestigious foreign customer must have assisted the Jones firm with subsequent overseas sales. Jefferson corresponded with the Joneses in 1787 and again in 1793. John Jones retired in 1791 to end his days at Islington, where he died on 15 August 1808. Apart from minor bequests, including $10 to his nephew John Dillon, a printer, then working for his sons, he left everything to his wife during her lifetime and then to his sons William and Samuel. William was forced by ill health to retire early from business and also removed to Islington. He died, unmarried, in Brighton, on 17 February 1831, and was buried at St Andrew's, Holborn. 

Samuel Jones (1770-1859) was baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 18 February 1770. He does not appear to have served an apprenticeship and, indeed, is a far more insubstantial figure than his elder brother; like him, he was a bachelor. He joined his brother in partnership in 1791 on the retirement of their father, obtaining his freedom of the Spectaclemakers' Company by patrimony in 1806. He continued to trade as W. and S. Jones long after his brother's departure. In his latter years he lived at Dalton House, St Albans, Hertfordshire, where he died on 10 October 1859, at the age of eighty-nine. The firm ceased to trade after this date. 
W. and S. Jones traded under the sign of Archimedes, at 135 Holborn, next to Furnival's Inn, moving across the road to 30 Holborn around 1800. The firm was extremely prolific, selling a wide range of optical, mathematical, and philosophical instruments and apparatus in the middle ranges of price and quality, as detailed in their comprehensive catalogues, issued at frequent intervals. William Jones was a friend and pupil of the prominent lecturer and instrument maker Benjamin Martin, who effectively introduced Jones into a wide society of like-minded people. A major opportunity for the Jones business occurred in 1782, as a result of Martin's bankruptcy and death, and the subsequent sale of his business; in 1795-6, a second, perhaps larger, boost resulted from the death of the younger George Adams and subsequent sales by his wife, Hannah. W. and S. Jones's trade must have benefited from the reduced competition after the cessation of two of the largest and apparently most successful contemporary London businesses. More important was its purchase of the copyright of the influential textbooks written by the two George Adamses, father and son: from 1797 onwards catalogues of the wares of W. and S. Jones, as illustrated in these texts, were priced and bound in the back of every volume. As a form of advertising, this appears to have had considerable success. It is possible that the copyright of Benjamin Martin's popular textbooks had also been purchased, as a number of these were revised by William Jones, and catalogues bound with them. 
Among W. and S. Jones's more prestigious customers were the college at Harvard, supplied with apparatus to order between 1797 and 1817, and the prolific American collector Charles Nicholl Bancker, a customer during the 1820s. The company also drew up the auction catalogue for disposal of the third earl of Bute's magnificent collection, in 1793. Items bearing the firm's signature can be found in collections all over the Western world. 


@@@@@


doc= 56325


Schwabe, Julie (1818-1896), philanthropist and educationist, was born at Bremen on 31 January 1818, daughter of the Jewish merchant Gottschalk Herz Schwabe, and was educated at Hamburg and Leipzig. She was originally named Ricke Rosetta Schwabe; by the time of her marriage she had the name Julie. In London on 14 October 1837 she married her older kinsman Salis Schwabe (1800-1853), a wealthy calico printer who had adopted Unitarianism and been naturalized British by act of parliament on 11 March 1835. Mistress of two grand homes -- Crumpsall House near Manchester and Glyn Garth near Beaumaris -- she entertained lavishly, hosting contemporary 'lions' like Chopin, Jenny Lind, Baron Christian Bunsen, and Ary Scheffer, whose portrait of her, painted in 1850, shows a bright, buxom woman with dark hair, full lips, and a challenging gaze. She had an insatiable urge to befriend people, at the risk of mixing them up. Among her assorted acquaintances were the Cobdens, the Brownings, Dickens, Ferdinand Gregorovius, Alexander Herzen, George Eliot, Jane Welsh Carlyle, and Elizabeth Gaskell who, while noting the gay flow of her existence, was one of many to salute her exceptional kindness, her help to anyone in sorrow. Her sensitivity to pain was seen when she walked out disgusted from a bullfight in Madrid. Like her husband, who not only built a colossus of a chimney for his factory at Rhodes, near Middleton, but did all that a benevolent capitalist could for both workers and society, she was enthusiastic for every good cause, from imprisoned Chartists to the German Hospital in Dalston. She found time also to give birth to three daughters and four sons, raising them with the help of governesses including Malwida von Meysenbug. 
Salis's unexpected death on 23 July 1853 deprived his wife (as she humbly avowed) of 'quiet, clear reasoning power' (BL, Add. MS 45789, fols. 199-204). Julie Schwabe's was an effervescent personality, passionate, impulsive, even indiscriminate, as she bounced from cause to cause. When she spoke, she intermingled half of Europe's languages. But in debate she was shrewder than critics contended. To one who thought foreign recipients of her charity might feel demeaned she wisely observed: 'I do not understand what scruples of delicacy should limit the freedom of all men to unite on the common ground of humanity in an act of benevolence' (Schwabe to A. Panizzi, 13 May [1862], BL, Add. MS 36720, fols. 434-5). Moreover, in devoting her energies to the happiness of others, she was seldom wasteful. If she lent money to Wagner (whose music sent her to sleep), she later defied his indignation by reclaiming it for a better cause. Ambitious, persuasive, and determined to succeed, she was never shy of knocking at famous doors in the hope of sponsorship. Few dared disobey her, be it to give money, run errands, or draft correspondence. Unlike Salis Schwabe, who had held that socialism was a subtle poison that needed replacing with Christianity, she cared little for the creed as long as it fed the belly and did not close the mind. 
Russian and Italian exiles found in Mrs Schwabe an ally for their political struggle. In 1860 she shipped tents, mattresses, and ambulance supplies to Garibaldi's troops, and raised money for the wounded; the first she induced to contribute was Florence Nightingale. In 1861 she became British representative of the Italian Ladies' Philanthropic Association, which Garibaldi, at her suggestion, had exhorted to provide food, work, and education for the masses. She quickly raised $2000 in subscriptions, and a further $1000 through a Jenny Lind concert. Long shocked by squalor and ignorance in Naples, she hastened to establish a girls' elementary school there under the direction of Emily Reeve; on the latter's untimely death from cholera in 1865, it had to be disbanded. Meanwhile she continued charitable works at home, frequently visiting the family schools at Rhodes, donating cloth for the children's uniforms, and arranging parties and outings. She increased her ability to help by personal economies, such as travelling third class on the railways. When the injured Garibaldi was confined at Varignano in 1862 she rushed to his side, made his first clean shirt, and procured a waterbed for him from Paris. 
Truly international in spirit, Julie Schwabe funded medical relief for victims of conflict everywhere -- Poles in 1863, Germans in 1866, French in 1870, Russian Jews in 1891. But her heart was set on Naples. After extensive negotiations she was granted in 1873 the lease of a large public building, the disused Collegio Medico. Earlier inspired by the ideas of William Ellis (1800-1881), she was convinced by friends to work also with Froebel methods. She opened first a kindergarten and a mixed elementary school, and with the proceeds of art sales in London and Berlin added in 1877 a training college and in 1879 secondary classes for girls, whose parents helped cover the costs of poorer pupils. At the Brussels pedagogical congress in 1880 she expounded her belief in the moral basis of education and the removal of prejudice. Despite malicious opposition from the church she persevered until, in 1887, her establishment was publicly incorporated as the Istituto Froebeliano Internazionale; in 1890 a handicrafts centre was added. Meanwhile she had conceived for England something more influential still: the Froebel Educational Institute in West Kensington, for which she liberally supplied both money and encouragement; its training college was officially opened by her friend the Empress Frederick in 1895. That same year she republished in its support her intriguing book about Richard Cobden, whose devotion to free trade she shared more for cosmopolitan than for commercial reasons. (It had come out first in French, in 1879, in aid of the Naples schools.) 
Julie Schwabe (who in later life was sometimes known as Julie Salis Schwabe) died suddenly of pneumonia at the former Collegio Medico on 20 May 1896, and was buried three days later at the British cemetery in Naples in the presence of Italian and foreign dignitaries. In a subsequent tribute Claude Montefiore praised 'her tremendous faith in the supreme importance of the cause, her unshaken conviction that persistent pegging away will at last overcome every obstacle' ('Middleton Guardian', 17 July 1897, 5). 


@@@@@


doc= 56327


Lawrence, Esther Ella (1862-1944), educationist, was born in 1862 in New York, the second daughter and third of the nine children of John M. Lawrence ('b'. 'c'.1827), a merchant, and his wife, Emily ('b'. 'c'.1833). Her father was English and her mother came from Spanish Town, Jamaica. The family moved from New York to London while Esther was a child and settled at 37 Belsize Lane, St John's Wood. From 1878 to 1880 she attended South Hampstead high school, which was strongly supported by the Jewish community to which she belonged. In 1880 she entered Bedford College, London, at the beginning of the Michaelmas term and remained for two terms, studying mathematics, English literature, French, German, Latin, and botany. 
Esther Lawrence continued her studies in 1881 at the Tavistock Place Training College, opened under the auspices of the Froebel Society in 1879, where she trained as a kindergarten teacher and gained a second-class certificate in 1883. The principal at this point in the college's short-lived history was Penelope Lawrence, who became headmistress of Roedean School in 1885. After completing her studies Esther opened a kindergarten in Gower Street, London. In 1884 she was invited to take charge of the preparatory department of the Chiswick high school by the headmistress, Alice Woods, who was herself a keen Froebelian; this collaboration initiated a friendship which lasted until Woods's death in 1941. 
Esther Lawrence left Chiswick high school in 1893 to take up the post of kindergarten mistress of the kindergarten and transition classes held at Glazbury Road, West Kensington, in conjunction with the Froebel Training School of Primary Instruction run by Emilie Michaelis in Norland Place, Notting Hill. This school became the Froebel Educational Institute in 1894 and the classes formed the Colet Gardens demonstration school, moving to a wing of the new institute buildings in 1895. The institute was founded after extensive fund-raising efforts by Julia Salis Schwabe, who persuaded Sir William Mather to become chairman with Claude Goldsmid Montefiore as the first treasurer. The link between these figures was the Froebel Society and, in the case of Esther Lawrence and Claude Montefiore, their shared adherence to the liberal wing of British Judaism. Froebel's spiritual view of education and his belief in the unity of God, man, and the natural world held a particular appeal for her. 
After serving for four years as head of the demonstration school Esther Lawrence resigned and went to visit Adele du Portugall, head of the Froebel Institute in Naples. When she returned to England in 1899 she was appointed mistress of method in the institute. On the retirement of Emilie Michaelis in 1901, Esther succeeded her as principal and remained in this post until her own retirement thirty years later in 1931. During this long period of office the institute underwent great change, moving from the increasingly cramped Talgarth Road site to the spacious grounds at Grove House, Roehampton, where it developed as a residential college and the training was extended to three years. 
Esther Lawrence set out her educational ideas in a number of articles, notably 'The application of Froebel's principles' ('Child Life', 6/23, 1904, 136-41) and 'The training of Froebelian teachers' ('Child Life', 7/27, 1905, 128-37), and in her powerful address to the Froebel Society in 1914, 'Nations and nurseries' ('Child Life', 16/91, suppl., 1914, 1-16). She made her own contribution to Froebelian practice in 'The Circular Tablet: a Connecting Link in the Froebel Series of Gifts' (1896). Her cousin Samuel Alexander was reported to be so impressed with the book's mathematical conceptions that he read part of it to his philosophy class at Manchester University (Jebb, 2). In her presidential address to the Froebel Society in 1926, 'The education of the spirit', she argued that 'A child considers that he is the centre of the universe, and so, indeed, he is. From the place where he stands in time and space he has the power, crude and undeveloped, of viewing the whole of life... We often say, 'I must put that child in his place,' meaning that we must suppress him. But if we put him 'properly in', or into, his place, we should make him feel the importance and the responsibility of the place which is actually his, and no other's. ('Child Life', 1927, 49)' Her affection for and friendship with children was described as the key to much of her life: 'there was a natural affinity between them, and intuitive understanding, a close sympathy with the mistakes, experiments and efforts of immaturity, a secret bond with the rebel' ('The Link', 1945, 13). 
As a member and later president of the Froebel Society, Esther Lawrence sought to make a Froebelian education available to all children. Hitherto kindergarten education had been the province of the middle class but she was deeply concerned for slum children whose squalid lives held little prospect of joy, with a stunted capacity for physical, creative, and intellectual growth. She was responsible for opening nursery schools in two of the most deprived areas of London, the Michaelis Free Kindergarten in Notting Dale (1908) and the Somers Town nursery school, Crowndale Road, St Pancras (1910). Both schools were supported by students of the Froebel Institute and the Michaelis Guild and, as well as education, offered health care and activities for parents. Lawrence encouraged mothers in these areas of London, many of them initially unwilling and suspicious, to send their children to the schools. They and others like them in London and Edinburgh, 'were the first example of separate free nursery schools in Britain' (Whitbread, 56). 
Esther Lawrence gave many gifts to the Froebel Educational Institute over the years, most notably the Lawrence family's country home, Hill House, at Inworth, Kelvedon, Essex, given in trust to the Froebel Institute in 1944 for educational or social welfare use. The house was subsequently administered by the Save the Children Fund, in which she had been interested since its foundation in 1919. The Esther Lawrence Association, originally formed in 1939 to manage the assets of Somers Town nursery school during its evacuation, and the Esther Lawrence Research Fellowship Fund, established in 1948, provided a continuing focus for the work which she held to be so important. 
A wealth of reminiscences attest Esther Lawrence's inspiration of a wide range of people -- colleagues, students, parents, and the children to whom she dedicated her life's work. On her retirement from the Froebel Educational Institute in 1931 Michael Sadler, a colleague and friend of many years, and Maude Royden were among those who paid tribute to her work. To mark her retirement the Lawrence scholarship was established in 1932. After her death students who had studied at Froebel during her long principalship, wrote of her spiritual as well as intellectual vision for the college, and of her power to draw out the best in those around her ('The Link', 1945, 20-21). She died, unmarried, on 23 July 1944 at 43 Park Road, Radlett, Aldenham, Hertfordshire, after a short illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 56328


Bishop, Caroline Garrison (1846-1929), promoter of kindergarten education, was born on 18 October 1846 at St Leonards, Heavitree, Devon, daughter of the Revd Francis Bishop, minister in the Unitarian church, and his first wife, Lavinia, daughter of Isaac Solly. Her mother died when she was six and her father remarried. Caroline subsequently had a stepbrother and stepsister for whose care she was given responsibility. Caroline's second name reflects her father's admiration for William Lloyd Garrison, the founder of the anti-slavery movement in America. When the family moved to Liverpool Caroline came into contact with runaway slaves who visited their house and the family took part in bazaars to raise funds for the cause. 
At the age of eleven Caroline Bishop was sent to a school at Rodelheim, near Frankfurt am Main. The school, housed in an old castle, was recommended to her maternal aunt, Charlotte Manning, by Florence Nightingale. It was happily remembered and she gained a facility in the German language which was to prove invaluable for her career as a Froebelian. After two years, in 1859, she returned to England and attended a school at Knutsford (the village which was the model for Mrs Gaskell's 'Cranford'), and was a fellow pupil of one of the author's daughters. She subsequently moved to London in the early 1860s to continue her studies at 32 Tavistock Place under the two Praetorious sisters, who had taken over the kindergarten and school established by Bertha and Johannes Ronge in 1853. This formed her introduction to the Froebelian ideas which were to motivate her lifelong educational work. Her friendship with her stepcousin, Elizabeth Adelaide Manning, developed at this period and Caroline introduced her to the Froebel Society; Adelaide subsequently became its honorary secretary and treasurer. 
During the early 1870s Caroline went to Berlin to continue her studies in education, staying with relatives of her mother. On her return to England she spent two years as governess to four of the younger children of George MacDonald in their home at Tudor Lodge, Albert Street, Regent's Park, forming friendships with both her charges and their father. ''Well, Bunny!' was George MacDonald's greeting to her years later, after a lecture in Birmingham' (Last, 222). 
In 1873 the school management committee of the London school board recommended the appointment of an instructor in 'Kinder Garten ['sic'] exercises'. Caroline Bishop was duly appointed in October 1873 at a salary of $100 p.a. plus travelling expenses. The success of the classes, which began in January 1874, was so considerable that it was necessary to restrict them to pupil-teachers in the five training centres. The emphasis in the twelve-week course was on the practical aspects of kindergarten education but the initial results were poor; only ninety-three passed the two-hour examination out of 199 candidates. Eleanor Heerwart, lecturer in kindergarten at Stockwell Training College, advised the board to concentrate on training head teachers and their assistants adequately in kindergarten principles before attempting to introduce Froebelian ideas throughout its infants' schools. Classes were subsequently arranged for them at various centres and the requirement that they should attend was strictly enforced. Inspectors were to report on schools where the exercises had not been introduced or were inadequately presented. Other duties of the post included visiting schools to advise on methods and the establishment of model kindergartens in three infants' schools. Caroline Bishop remained as instructor until 1877. By then the board was insisting that every infants' school should have at least one teacher trained in kindergarten methods and the Froebel Gifts and Occupations had been introduced into nearly all London infants' schools. 
Caroline Bishop attended the preliminary meeting of the Froebel Society at the Kensington home of Fraulein Beata Doreck in November 1874 and became a member of the committee in 1878. She supported the attempts of the Froebel Society to establish its own central kindergarten and training institution. In 1879 she returned to Germany to continue her studies at the Pestalozzi-Froebel House in Berlin, under the principal Fraulein Annette Schepel. When she returned to London she was appointed to the post of principal of the Tavistock Place Training College. This new venture by the Froebel Society in training teachers in a specifically Froebelian, non-denominational college was not to prove a success. Disagreements with the society led her to resign after two years, and she returned to Berlin where she took charge of the Pestalozzi-Froebel House in Fraulein Schepel's absence. 
Caroline Bishop returned to England in 1883 with Herr and Frau Schrader and Fraulein Schepel, and met Miss Emily Last, later her biographer and close colleague. She moved to Edgbaston where she took over a kindergarten, which she ran for twenty-three years, adding a transition class, schoolrooms, and a training college to the original kindergarten. Emily Last joined her staff in 1886 and the training college became residential in 1894 when premises at 18 Harborne Road, Edgbaston, became available. The Edgbaston Froebel College, School and Kindergarten was the culmination of Caroline Bishop's work to promote Froebelian education, and Emily Last's memoir of her contains many examples of her influence on a succession of children and students. Students trained at the Edgbaston college supplied many of the superintendents for the Greet Free Kindergarten in Birmingham, which opened in 1904 with funds provided by Mr and Mrs Barrow Cadbury, and supported by Miss Bishop. One former pupil remembered her as a disciplinarian: 'Her 'Put back your chair. Stand,' was enough to bring the most hardened offender to a sense of the enormity of his transgression. But I don't think any child was frightened' (Last, 94). A past student described her as 'short of stature, with her large and piercing blue eyes' (ibid., 95), while another recalled her 'vigorous geniality' (ibid., 75). A common theme is her leadership: 'She took us all, younger or older, a jumble lot, many of us much cumbered with cares of self, and showed us the deeper things of life' (ibid., 71-2). Her pamphlet 'Life in the Kindergarten' (1895) was reprinted in 'Child Life' (16, 1914) and her paper to the Froebel Society, 'Ideals of training for Froebelian teachers', appeared in the third volume of 'Child Life' (1901). 
When she retired in 1906 Caroline Bishop moved to Knighton, a suburb of Leicester, and became manager of Medway Street infants' school. From 1910 to 1913 she served as a Guardian of the Poor in the Newton ward of Leicester and sat on the children's committee, which dealt with issues such as emigration and adoption of children and visiting arrangements with parents. She supported the proposal that relieving officers should be required to report on the physical condition of children under school age whose parents were in receipt of outdoor relief. When her health began to fail in 1923 Caroline Bishop, who was unmarried, moved to Felden, Boxmoor, in Hertfordshire, to live with Emily Last at Dew Green Cottage, and died there on 12 December 1929. 


@@@@@


doc= 56330


Maitland, Edward Maitland (1880-1921), air force officer and developer of airships and parachutes, was born at 156 Westbourne Terrace, London, on 21 February 1880, the elder son of Arthur Gee (died 1903), a farmer and later barrister and JP, of Shudy Camps Park, Cambridgeshire, and his wife, Margaretha Marianne Maitland. Arthur Gee and his family assumed the surname Maitland in 1903. Educated at Haileybury and Trinity College, Cambridge, Edward Maitland volunteered for service in the South African War while he was still an undergraduate. He was commissioned in the Essex regiment and served in South Africa during 1901-2, receiving the Queen's medal with four clasps. Without resuming residence in Cambridge he took a BA (ordinary) in 1906 and obtained a third class. 
Remaining in the army, in 1907 Maitland took up ballooning. The following year, with two companions, he made a record 1171-mile voyage to Russia. He also made his first descent from a balloon by parachute. After service at the Balloon School in Farnborough, he commanded the airship company in the short-lived air battalion of the Royal Engineers (1911-12), and then, on the formation of the Royal Flying Corps, was given command of 1 squadron (airships). In 1913, when all British airships came under naval control, he transferred to the Royal Naval Air Service (RNAS). In the same year he made his first parachute jump from an airship. 
In October 1914 Maitland was sent to Belgium in charge of an RNAS balloon detachment for artillery spotting. He became impressed with the superiority of the French and Belgian kite balloons over his own spherical type, reported accordingly to the Admiralty, and was promptly recalled to initiate kite-balloon training at Roehampton in March 1915. From this he moved on to command the airship station at Wormwood Scrubs, and then went to the Admiralty to help in airship design and allocation. During this period he made a parachute descent from a balloon at 10,500 feet to investigate 'swinging'. In 1916, as a wing captain, he was appointed to command the airship station in Pulham, Norfolk, where Zeppelin imitations -- rigid airships of a greatly improved type -- were later to be based. 
In June 1917 Maitland was appointed to the DSO for 'extremely valuable and gallant work in connection with airships and parachutes'. Shortly afterwards he returned to the Admiralty as captain-superintendent, lighter-than-air, to take charge of the airships headquarters staff. In this post he helped to build up the airship service into a major weapon in the war at sea. RNAS non-rigid airships, able to stay aloft for many hours and send down reports by wireless, did important work on patrol and convoy escort, many times directing British destroyers into contact with the enemy's U-boats. Further recognition followed for Maitland with appointment as CMG (1919) and the award of the AFC (1919) and the American DSM (1917). 
July 1919 saw what was probably his greatest moment, when the naval rigid airship R34, with Maitland as chief observer, crossed the Atlantic successfully in both directions. The following month he received a permanent commission in the Royal Air Force, soon afterwards being promoted air commodore. With the transfer in October of all rigid airships from the Royal Navy to the RAF, Maitland continued at the Air Ministry his work on airship development and operations, but with civil uses now in view. 
In 1921 Maitland's previously brilliant career ended in misfortune and tragedy. He was in command of the airship station in Howden, Yorkshire, when on 21 January the R34 struck some high ground, was buffeted in strong winds off the Yorkshire coast, and later broke up. In May the Air Ministry decided to disband the RAF's airship arm. The newly constructed R38, the largest airship yet built, had been sold to the USA in 1919, but was still based in Howden for training and trials. When on 24 August 1921 she broke up over the Humber on a final exercise in sharp turns, Maitland, on board but not in command, died with forty-two others. He was unmarried. 
Among those who accompanied Maitland on the R34, and who died on the R38, was John Edward Maddock Pritchard (1889-1921), air force officer, who was born at Rushmere Lodge, Heath and Reach, Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire, on 28 December 1889, the son and only child of John Walter Pritchard (1842-1911), dentist, and his wife, Emily Mary, 'nee' Maddock (1851/2-1914). His father, an American citizen, had fought in the American Civil War. His parents were of Welsh descent and in 1897 purchased The Priory, Cardigan, of which his mother wrote a history. Pritchard was brought up there, educated by private tutors, before in 1909 being admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took passes in political economy and natural sciences, and graduated BA. He became a mining engineer, his occupation when he married on 2 October 1913 Hilda Elizabeth (1884-1974), daughter of Peter Caldwell-Smith, medical officer of health. He then studied at the Royal School of Mines, London, and undertook a survey of Flintshire lead and zinc mines. 
Pritchard was commissioned a flight sub-lieutenant in the Royal Naval Air Service in May 1915, and was posted to the Roehampton kite-balloon station. His first airship command was on sea patrols at Polegate, Sussex, after which he was posted to Mudros in the east Mediterranean in 1916, also on airship patrol duties. He returned to Polegate later that year, and had airship postings at East Fortune, then Howden in 1917. On the creation of the RAF in 1918 he was promoted to acting major. Early in 1919 he was Admiralty airship representative at the peace conference in Paris, and was appointed OBE in June 1919. With the rank of major, he joined the R34 transatlantic crossing in July 1919 as a technical observer, taking the official photographs reproduced in Maitland's account and making cloud observations. On reaching Mineola, Long Island, USA, on the morning of 6 July 1919, Pritchard parachuted from a height of 2000 feet to make preparations for mooring the airship. He thus had the distinction of being 'the first man to land in America by means of the air' (Maitland, 84) and was dubbed the 'air pilgrim' in the American press ('New York Times', 7 July 1919). He was a member of the crew on the successful flight back to Britain, which landed at Pulham, Norfolk, and along with other crew members was awarded the Air Force Cross. On his return he undertook technical flying duties under the airship research division of the Air Ministry. While serving as an observer for the ministry he was killed in the R38 over the Humber estuary on 24 August 1921. He was survived by his wife and their daughter and two sons. 
Denis Richards', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 56332


Corbet, Henry (1820-1878), agricultural editor, was born on 31 December 1820 and educated at Bedford School. He hoped to go to university but was unable to do so because of family difficulties. During the early 1840s he lived in London and first came to public attention in November 1846 when he was appointed secretary of the London (or Central, as it was then styled) Farmers' Club in succession to Thomas Thorp. The issue of tenant right was one of the great concerns of the club during its early years. In 1848 Corbet collaborated with William Shaw, the editor of the 'Mark Lane Express and Agricultural Journal' and founder of the Farmers' Club, to produce a digest of the agricultural customs of England and Wales that had been reported to Phillip Pusey's select committee on tenant right, the proceedings of which were never formally published. Corbet was also awarded a prize by the Wenlock Farmers' Club for an essay on tenant right which came to be regarded as a definitive statement on the subject. 
Shaw left abruptly for Australia in 1852 and Corbet was invited to write for the 'Mark Lane Express'; he soon took over as editor. He established a reputation for a combative, forthright style of writing, and while tenant right remained one of his most abiding concerns he also campaigned on a range of issues such as the abolition of the malt tax, the reform of the game laws, county expenditure and county rates, the need for effective government action to counter the spread of animal disease, and the sale of sub-standard and adulterated animal feedstuffs. Apart from leading articles in the 'Mark Lane Express', the six papers that he gave to the London Farmers' Club between 1860 and 1870 offer insights into Corbet's style and opinions. 
Although Corbet took a close interest in all aspects of agricultural progress he was more sceptical about the potential of agricultural science than many of his contemporaries. His particular expertise was in the appraisal of farm livestock, and he was much in demand as a stock judge at agricultural shows. The depth of his knowledge of stock was evident in his report on the livestock exhibited at the Royal Agricultural Society of England's 1872 Cardiff show and in his essay, 'Heads', for the Bath and West Society. Corbet was also an enthusiastic sportsman and edited the 'Steeplechase Calendar' between 1845 and 1848. Later he wrote extensively for 'The Field', 'Bell's Life', and 'All the Year Round'; a selection of these writings was published as 'Tales and Traits of Sporting Life' (1864). 
Despite Corbet's criticisms of the lack of a unified system of tenant right and the operation of the game laws, he was essentially conservative in many of his views about the countryside. He spoke out against trends in country sport of which he disapproved, such as the fashion for large-scale pheasant shooting or the overexploitation of two-year-old horses on the turf, and he saw fox-hunting as a cohesive social force. As he concluded in his address, 'Foxes 'versus' rabbits', to the London Farmers' Club (May 1869): 'let us try our best to keep one old English pastime amongst us pure and undefiled. We have scared the wolf from our woods and forests, we have banished the bustard from our plains, and the very grouse fly before the shepherd and his flock; but it will be a bad day for this country when a fox can no longer be routed from his lair to 'Die in the open as a good'un should do!' ('Farmer's Magazine', 3rd ser., 35, June 1869, 515-16)' Corbet was active in a number of agricultural institutions. He was secretary of the Total Repeal Malt-Tax Association, helped to reform the constitution of the Smithfield Club in the early 1860s, and was for many years auditor to the Royal Agricultural Society of England. In 1871 he, with his brother Edward, established the Alexandra Park Horse Show. He was made a member of the council of the Royal Agricultural Benevolent Institution and of the committee of Lord Vernon's French Farmers' Relief Fund, and in 1876 was elected a member of the Agricultural Society of France in recognition of services to agriculture. In December 1875 he suffered a severe stroke, which left him paralysed and unable to continue his work. 
Corbet was best-known for his editorship of the 'Mark Lane Express', which achieved under him 'an individuality and a reputation for thoroughness and independence' ('Noteworthy agriculturists: Mr. Henry Corbet'). But the paper -- like the London Farmers' Club -- carried little political influence. His antipathy towards the central chamber of agriculture (founded in 1866 in the wake of the disastrous outbreak of 'cattle plague') further fragmented the agricultural interest at a time when it was becoming marginalized in an increasingly urban and industrial economy. Although his anecdotes and strong sense of the ludicrous made him good company, his acerbic style and tendency towards personalized attacks -- as, for example, in his denunciation of Samuel Sidney, the secretary of the Islington Agricultural Hall Company -- made him a number of enemies. 
On his retirement from the London Farmers' Club Corbet was presented with 100 guineas; his poverty led to another collection, and he was presented with a further $350 in May 1878. After the long illness which followed his stroke, he died at his home, 22 Walpole Street, Chelsea, on 29 December 1878 and was buried close to his father at Chepstow on 4 January 1879. 


@@@@@


doc= 56335


Armstrong, Terence Ian Fitton (1912-1970), poet and journal editor, was born at 97 Gunterstone Road, Kensington, London, on 29 June 1912, the younger of the two children of Frederic Percy Armstrong (1877-1943), colonial broker, and his wife, Ethel Laura Jackson (1878-1947). The Armstrongs were of lowland Scottish descent, and through his father's line Terence Ian Fitton Armstrong claimed both Ben Jonson and Lionel Johnson as ancestors. His early choice of John Gawsworth as a pen name reflected the Jacobite link he claimed, through his mother, with Mary Fitton, supposedly Shakespeare's Dark Lady, who was born in the family home of Gawsworth, Cheshire. 
Of few writers has it been more true to say that they peaked too soon. Educated at Manor House School, Horsham, Sussex, and at Linton House and Merchant Taylors' schools, London, Gawsworth's adolescent passion for books and manuscripts was fanned by employment from 1928 in Andrew Block's bookshop, a stone's throw from Foyle's. Before he was twenty his published poetry was being praised, and he had acquired a wide knowledge of post-1890 literature. On 27 March 1933 he married Barbara Kentish (1907-1972), who divorced him in 1948. By 1935 he was a freeman of the City of London, and in 1938 a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature (Benson medallist, 1939). By 1937 he had been recognized as the originator, coordinator, and leader of the neo-Georgian movement, and was founder editor of the 'English Digest', from 1939 to 1941. He joined the Royal Air Force in 1941, serving on Algerian, Tunisian, Sicilian, and Italian campaigns, and in India, in 1942-5. Delegue General de la Societe des Ecrivains de l'Afrique du Nord, Tunis, in 1943, he was elected to the Salamander Society of Poets, Cairo, in 1944. 
Leaving the RAF with flying officer rank in 1946, unscathed by either shot or shell, Gawsworth found post-war England a more testing challenge. Fourteen years had passed since Ernest Benn, by whom he had been employed, had published his 'Ten Contemporaries' in 1932. In that same year had come his study of Wyndham Lewis, 'Apes, Japes and Hitlerism', and 'Lyrics to Kingcup', the latter prompting John Masefield's view that Gawsworth was 'one of the most beautiful and promising of our younger writers'. 'Poems, 1930-1932' followed in 1933, and (with much in between) 'New Poems' from Martin Secker in 1939. Throughout the thirties Gawsworth had made many friendships with writers mostly older than himself, including Arthur Machen, M. P. Shiel, and Eden Phillpotts. 
Younger post-war modernists, however, remembered the presumption of a 21-year-old traditionalist poet's retrospective selection, and the publication by Sidgwick and Jackson in 1948 of 'The Collected Poems of John Gawsworth' was for some the final straw. The often unattractive evidence of Gawsworth's increasing reliance on alcohol -- exacerbated by his growing fear of failing creativity -- put a convenient rod in his critics' hands. His second marriage, to Estelle Hayward, 'nee' Gilardeau ('b'. 1909/10), on 6 August 1948, foundered, and many friendships were over-tested. His 1949-52 editorship of the 'Poetry Review' was revoked, despite protests from Edith Sitwell and others, and his intriguing role as 'king' of the romantic Caribbean island of Redonda, inherited from the novelist M. P. Shiel (1865-1947), had declined by the early 1950s from being a pleasant literary legend to providing a happy hunting ground for tabloid journalists and publicans eager to receive a dukedom in exchange for a wiped slate. Earlier recipients of titles, approved by M. P. Shiel's watchful and stringent bibliographer the Grand Duke A. Reynolds Morse, included Lawrence and Gerald Durrell, Rebecca West, J. B. Priestley, Dorothy Sayers, Frank Swinnerton, Victor Gollancz, John Heath-Stubbs, Alfred Knopf, Stephen Potter, Ellery Queen, Arthur Machen, Roy Campbell, Dylan Thomas, and (Robert) Fabian of the Yard. On 21 June 1958 Gawsworth offered in 'The Times' his 'Caribbean kingship with royal prerogatives, 1000 guineas', receiving many responses including a $50 option payment from the Swedish Count Bertil Bernadotte, who lost his deposit, the offer being withdrawn. 
Gawsworth deserves to be remembered for some good lyric poems, for his editing of some sixty verse collections and volumes of prose, and for a bibliographic talent that led Lawrence Durrell to write that 'had he cared to be a bookseller he would now be the greatest one in England' (Durrell, 17). Though his posturing and addiction did not compensate for a lack of 'centre', many such have been more generously recognized for their abilities. To his credit was an undoubted poetic sensibility, early proof of unusual talent, a deep loyalty to literature, and much kindness to elderly writers and their needy dependants, for whom he lobbied the Royal Literary Fund tirelessly and with frequent success. 
Gawsworth's third marriage on 29 October 1955 to a widow, Doreen Emily Ada (Anna) Downie, 'nee' Rowley (1906/7-1980), was not dissolved, but despite her efforts and those of his remaining friends, his final years were spent in poverty, self-neglect, and squalor. He died on 23 September 1970 in the Brompton Hospital, London, his ashes joining his father's a week later at the Golders Green crematorium. His last poetry selection, 'Toreros', drawn from his 'Collected Poems' by Richard Aldington in 1961, failed to appear until its posthumous edition of 1990; a biography of Arthur Machen, written in the 1930s, was published in 2005. 


@@@@@


doc= 56336


Booth, Mary Catherine (1847-1939), social reformer and philanthropist, was born on 4 November 1847 at Clifton, Bristol, the second of the three children and only daughter of Charles Zachary Macaulay (1816-1886), civil servant, and Mary, 'nee' Potter (daughter of Richard Potter ['see under 'Potter, Thomas Bayley], known as Radical Dick). Her father was serving abroad as colonial secretary in Mauritius and her mother, Mary, and older brother, Thomas, were living in her grandfather Richard Potter's home in Manchester. Hers was, to say the least, an unorthodox upbringing. She was reading Plutarch's 'Lives' at the age of three. Her father, married to an unstable wife, was devoted to, and became emotionally dependent upon, his only daughter. 
Mary attended Hyde Park College, London, and Miss Marshall's boarding-school, Kensington. During her holidays she was entertained alongside her several Potter girl cousins at Standish, Gloucestershire. She left school at the age of sixteen and took over the housekeeping, but continued her self-education. 
After a lengthy courtship, on 29 April 1871 at East Teignmouth Mary married Charles Booth (1840-1916), a partner in the Liverpool-based Booth Steamship Company, who was to become renowned as a social investigator. In Liverpool she was unhappy among hostile Booth relatives. In 1873 Mary gave birth to the first of seven children, Antonia Mary (known always as Dodo). At this point Charles took his family to Europe for his health, and from there went with Mary to Brazil on business. On their return to England Charles set up an office of the company in London, and social relations with most of his family were severed. This stage of the Booth family life was spent at 6 Grenville Place, South Kensington. 
In 1878 Charles effectively took command of the family business and split his time between London, Liverpool, and America. Because of these long separations Mary's relationship with Charles was frequently expressed in lengthy correspondence. As her granddaughter wrote: 'She was a partner in business in all but name, weighing every decision, and giving sensible advice' (Norman-Butler, 49). Diminutive in stature, she was ever large in personality. The two shared a great mutual respect and understanding and achieved a remarkable partnership. 
Mary's own concern for the social problems of the age seems to have been inspired by a visit to Samuel and Henrietta Barnett at St Jude's, Whitechapel, in 1878. 'Boy, Boy, I must do something, put out a hand to help in all this misery. I do so long for strength and health', she wrote to Charles (letter, 1878, Booth correspondence). Her friendship with the Potter sisters, and especially Beatrice, was nurtured at least in part by a common interest in philanthropy. Few have noted how important Mary's help was in furthering and sustaining Booth's major works in the field of social investigation. This was not simply the support of a helpmeet (support which she certainly afforded in plenty), but an active intellectual and practical contribution. During the 1880s and 1890s there is ample evidence that Mary was reading widely and drawing to Charles's attention a number of important books -- for example, the works of Marx. Associates and friends, such as Alfred and Mary Paley Marshall and the Barnetts, became valued visitors at the Booth table. In January 1892 the first evidence of her active involvement in Booth's work occurs: she interviewed J. A. Spender, author of 'The State v. Pensions in Old Age', in connection with the Booth's 'Pauperism: a Picture', and 'The Endowment of Old Age: an Argument'. Her diary for this period is full of references to her work on the book. So close was Mary to Booth's social investigative work that she and Jesse Argyle saw this work on the pauper through proof and press. But it was in connection with the third and final series of 'Life and Labour of the People in London', the 'Religious Influences' series, that Mary's role is best documented: she played a major critical role during the authorship of the 'Religious Influences' books and was left holding the ultimate responsibility for publication of the 'Star' volume. Her children recognized her literary style in parts of the work. 
Mary's philanthropic work was notable. She spent a good deal of her time helping the families of local miners through the difficult times of a strike in the mid-1890s and a pit accident in 1897. The Booths had founded clubs for the women and men of Thringstone, near Gracedieu Cottage, Whitwick, Leicestershire, which was their home for many years. They also established a district nurse scheme. From her Macaulay income she financed from 1910 onwards the St Andrew's Home for invalid children. 
During the years after her husband's death Mary made an important contribution to keeping his memory and that of his great work alive, publishing in 1918 the retrospective 'Memoir'. The friendships she had built with Charlie dwindled as she retreated into the life of a Leicestershire lady and grandmother. She died on 25 September 1939. 


@@@@@


doc= 56338


Argyle, Jesse William (1859-1924), social investigator and statistician, was born at 7 Argyle Road, Mile End, London, on 4 September 1859, the elder of two sons of Jesse Smith Argyle (1834/5-1866), a grocer's travelling salesman, and his wife, Martha Annie, 'nee' Mattocks. After their father's death Jesse and his brother were brought up by their grandfather James Argyle and his wife Eliza James. He attended St John's College, Hurstpierpoint, Sussex, as a servitor. By 1881 he was living in Colchester, Essex, employed as a newspaper compositor. In 1888 he married Charlotte ('b'. 1856/7), daughter of Richard Condron, master brushmaker, and had one son and two daughters. 
Argyle became an employee of Charles Booth at some point during the early 1880s. In August 1885 Booth seconded him as a young clerk in the Booth shipping company to the Mansion House relief inquiry set up to investigate the causes of destitution in London. He showed considerable flair for the kind of work involved -- inspecting and analysing the 1881 census returns -- and in the following year Booth decided to employ him on his own inquiry into the condition of the London poor. In the interim Booth offered Argyle's services as a research assistant to Beatrice Potter (later Webb): 'Could Argyle help to work up your sketch of the legislation of the last fifty years or did you get enough done yourself... to prove that 'we are not governed by general principles' beyond controversy?' (Charles Booth to Beatrice Potter, 27 July 1886, Passfield MSS II I (ii) 8). Beatrice responded positively and Booth arranged for Argyle to do the work. Beatrice, who had initially doubted the suitability for the task of research in the British Museum of this 'East-end lad made good', reported back enthusiastically to Mary Booth, one of Argyle's most ardent admirers. When Booth began his work on Tower Hamlets in 1886 it was with Jesse Argyle as one of his chief assistants, with Argyle organizing the inquiry office, first at Talbot Square and then at Adelphi Terrace, Strand. 
From 1885 onwards Jesse Argyle was a welcome visitor at the Booth family home, where his sense of humour was much appreciated. A favourite family anecdote reported in the demotic his preference for pudding: 'Oy'll troy a little poy if you please Mrs Bewth' (Norman-Butler, 117). Mary Booth described him as sharing her husband's 'zeal for the good of the people', regarding him as 'able, sympathetic and independent-minded' (M. Booth, 20). In his turn Argyle acknowledged Charles Booth's ('the Chief's') generosity to him. 
Jesse Argyle gradually emerged from his apprenticeship on the 'Poverty Series' of Charles Booth's survey to become a social investigator in his own right. His interview notebooks, presented in a clear, large, flowing hand, reveal him as active and perceptive. He was given sole responsibility for the inquiry into Walthamstow and special districts of west and north London. Argyle was also responsible for anything between a third and a half of the research underlying the survey of the boot and shoe trade, which was published in 1892 under David Schloss's name. In that year he became a fellow of the Royal Statistical Society. Under his own name he contributed important sections to the 'Industry Series' of 'Life and Labour of the People in London'. He was involved in the Toynbee Economic Club and in March 1896 gave a lecture entitled 'The attractiveness of London to provincial labour'. He undertook much of the interviewing of clergy for the 'Religious Influences Series' and commented in detail on the draft chapters. 
Argyle continued to play a key part in organizing Charles Booth's publications and seeing them through the press. In 1902 and 1903, working alongside Mary and others, he brought together a definitive and agreed version of the 'Religious Influences Series' and the 'Star Volume' text, parts of which were in an untyped and rough draft, for the only entire edition of 'Life and Labour' (1902-3). Although Booth was undoubtedly the 'Chief' of his inquiry, the coherence and clarity of the published text of this enormous undertaking owed much to Argyle, his lieutenant. On 19 July 1904 the culmination of the great inquiry was marked by a celebration, involving dinner at the Savoy and a trip to the opera; for Argyle and his wife this was a high point of Argyle's own career. 
Jesse Argyle suffered from chronic bronchitis and dyspepsia. Health concerns may have contributed to his death by suicide on 28 July 1924. He jumped from Archway into the Archway Road and died from shock and multiple injuries. At the time of his death he was living at 66 Hornsey Lane, Islington. According to his death certificate he was a journalist and was described as of 'unsound mind' by the deputy coroner for London at the inquest on 31 July 1924. 


@@@@@


doc= 56340


Higgs, Henry (1864-1940), civil servant and economist, was born at 17 Fore Street, Torpoint, Antony, Cornwall, on 4 March 1864, the eleventh of thirteen children of Samuel Nicholas Higgs, master butcher, and his wife, Ann Pugh. His humble origins influenced his career choice, for he had to attain sufficient financial security to sustain his parents in their old age. He took full advantage of the meritocratic opportunities offered by a newly reformed civil service. Entering as a lower-division clerk in 1881 he passed the competition for class 1 in 1884, and for the next fifteen years served in the secretary's office of the General Post Office. 
When he moved to the Treasury in 1899 Higgs attracted the attention of its permanent secretary, Sir Edward Hamilton, from whom he learnt the intricacies of Britain's public finances, which he in turn communicated in a series of publications ('The Financial System of the United Kingdom', 1914; 'National Economy', 1917; 'A Primer of National Finance', 1919; 'Financial Reform', 1924). He became private secretary to a succession of ministers, culminating with Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman when prime minister between 1905 and 1908, when Higgs was made CB. On 16 July 1908 he married Winifred Sarah (1877/8-1939), daughter of Thomas John South, landscape gardener, of Kew, with whom he had at least one child, a son. He also served as a special commissioner to Natal in 1902-3 and as inspector-general of finance in Egypt between 1912 and 1915 before retiring from the Treasury in 1921 as principal clerk. 
Upon securing his position within the established civil service in 1884 Higgs enrolled in University College, London, intending to pursue legal studies. He also studied at the University of Berlin. In 1890 he took his LLB and was called to the bar at the Middle Temple. It was none the less economics rather than the law which quickly captivated Higgs. He fell early under the influence of H. S. Foxwell, whose political economy lectures he attended in 1885-7, and thereafter his energies were increasingly devoted to economics and to the burgeoning economics profession. Quickly adept at the subject, he won a scholarship in 1886 to continue his studies at University College, and the following year began lecturing in economics at Toynbee Hall. He was a fellow of University College, and Newmarch lecturer in statistics, and was lecturer in economics at the University of Wales (Bangor), 1925-9. It was under Foxwell's influence that he then began his lifetime interest in the physiocrats, and in particular in Richard Cantillon, who was the subject of his first economics article ('Economic Journal', 1891) and of his most significant contribution to the history of economic thought, his translation of Cantillon's 'Essai sur la nature du commerce en general' (1755; ed. H. Higgs, 1931). 
Higgs is also regarded for his contribution to the British economics profession at an important early stage of its development. He was one of the founding members of the British Economic Association (later the Royal Economic Society), serving as the association's first secretary and, with F. Y. Edgeworth, as joint editor of its 'Economic Journal' between 1892 and 1905. While he continued too long on the council of the Royal Economic Society, being still an active but unhelpful contributor to its meetings until his death (upon which see J. M. Keynes's bitter-sweet obituary for the 'Economic Journal'), his early work for the association and its journal was invaluable in promoting the professionalization of economics. He displayed similar administrative and interpersonal skills in his re-editing of the 'Palgrave Dictionary of Political Economy' (3 vols., 1923-6) under impossible conditions of minimal change. He also completed various projects, initiated but abandoned by Foxwell, most notably the publication of W. S. Jevons's 'The Principles of Economics' (1905) and 'A Bibliography of Economics' (1935). He stood unsuccessfully as Liberal parliamentary candidate for Putney in 1922. He died in Brighton Municipal Hospital on 21 May 1940. 


@@@@@


doc= 56342


Jay, (Arthur) Osborne Montgomery (1858-1945), Church of England clergyman and social commentator, was born on 14 April 1858 at Landour, north India, the second son of the Revd William James Jay and Harriet, daughter of Martin Rawling of St Ives, Huntingdonshire. His parents had married in 1850 just as William was about to take up a position as chaplain to the Bengal establishment, which he held until his return to England in 1860. From 1860 to 1866 William was chaplain of the East India Hospital, Poplar, and Osborne's connections with the East End of London went back to his childhood. In 1865, however, William was presented to the rectory of Elvedon, Suffolk, by the maharaja Duleep Singh, and Osborne was sent to boarding-school in Leamington Spa, where he remained until about 1870. From Leamington Spa he proceeded to Eton College, and in 1876 to St Catharine's, Cambridge, in the footsteps of his brother William (who was a pensioner there from 1874 until 1878). Osborne was also admitted pensioner on 1 September 1876 and took his BA in 1880. In 1881 he was ordained deacon in the diocese of London. Later Osborne remembered that he became curate of 'the mother church of East London, Old Stepney', which was Holy Trinity, Stepney, in that same year. In 1882 he took priest's orders and in 1883 became an MA of the University of Cambridge. 
From 1883 until 1886 Jay was in charge of a college mission in Stepney. He described in one of his books ('Life in Darkest London', 1891, 12) how 'on the closing of this enterprise [he was] living in a dismal street near Ratcliff Highway, close to the famous 'Tiger-Bay', drawing a stipend from the Bishop of Bedford's Fund... and looking for fresh opportunities of work'. Then the bishop of London offered him the living of Holy Trinity, Shoreditch, with $200 a year and a deal 'of hard work to be done, and that for many years to come'. In December 1886 Jay accepted the living, which was on the boundary between Shoreditch and Bethnal Green. Within the parish was the notorious Old Nichol. When Jay entered the parish there was no church building; instead services were held in the loft of a stable. He was supported by a grant from Magdalen College, Oxford. Within ten years he had raised $25,000 to build a church, social club, lodging house, and gymnasium. He campaigned (successfully) for the London county council to demolish the slums of the Old Nichol and replace them with an estate of model dwellings (known as the Boundary Street estate). Jay was much annoyed that the former slum dwellers were not rehoused in this estate but were forced to move themselves and their slums elsewhere. When he read Arthur Morrison's 'Tales of Mean Streets' (1894) he promptly wrote and invited the novelist to come and live in the parish and experience at first hand the life of the Old Nichol, which contrasted with the boring respectability of the mean streets. Morrison accepted the invitation, and the Old Nichol became the Jago of his novel 'Child of the Jago'; in the novel the character of Father Sturt was modelled closely upon Jay. Jay told his own story in three books, 'Life in Darkest London' (1891), 'The Social Problem and its Solution' (1893), and 'A Story of Shoreditch' (1896). Jay, in other respects a humane man, advised that the criminal elements of society (the population of the Old Nichol) could not be reformed and that, therefore, they should be forcibly removed to penal settlements where they should serve life sentences and be forbidden to procreate. This, he believed, would have the effect of wiping out the strain of criminality from the British population. 
In the late 1890s Ernest Aves commented that Jay was, with the exception of the bishop of Stepney, the 'best known man associated with the Church in Bethnal Green'. He went on to describe Jay's ministry, which he reckoned to be successful as measured both by attendance and by the success of his clubs. In contrast to many churches, more than half of the congregation at Holy Trinity consisted of men. Aves contrasted Jay's muscular brand of Christianity and his personal appearance -- 'he looks like a prize fighter' -- with his aestheticism and his high-churchmanship. He had never 'had the gloves on in his life' and 'in his buildings he has attached very great importance, and has secured great richness in design, compactness, and great aesthetic beauty. He is a High churchman, and estimates very highly the parish system of the church of England. He thinks that one 'should clean ones' own doorstep' and that useful work has to be concentrated in the way which strict adherence to the parochial system alone makes possible' (Ernest Aves's report on district IX, Booth Collection). In the interview upon which Aves's report was based, George Duckworth described Jay as 'a voluble and discursive talker' and described how he had roused considerable opposition in the neighbouring parishes. 
Jay never married and, when interviewed by Duckworth, admitted that he did not get on well with women. He remained at Holy Trinity, Shoreditch, until 1921. In that year he retired to Great Malvern, in Worcestershire, where he died of 'senile cerebral degeneration' at his home, Thornbury, Avenue Road, on 14 January 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 56343


Gurney, Emelia Russell (1823-1896), campaigner for women's higher education, was born on 26 July 1823, probably at Harrow, the elder daughter of the Revd Samuel Ellis Batten (1792-1830), assistant master at Harrow School, and his wife, Caroline, 'nee' Venn (1798-1870), daughter of John Venn ['see under 'Venn, Henry (1725-1797)]. Batten, 'whose gay and buoyant spirits made him the playfellow of his children' ('Letters', 1), died in Emelia's seventh year, and her younger sister, Florence, died in adolescence. After Batten's death the family moved first to Pinner, in London, then to Hereford. They often travelled abroad and were in Italy when Florence died in 1842. As a result of these early losses, Caroline and Emelia became close friends, their intimacy barely disturbed by Emelia's marriage. Nevertheless, Emelia's memories were of a strict evangelical upbringing; she confessed that, for her, Christmas Day had always been 'a second Sunday in one week... when the worldly people (envied creatures!) amused themselves all the more, and without breaking one of the ten commandments either' (ibid., 62). 
On 1 September 1852 Emelia Batten married Russell Gurney (1804-1878), a QC nearly twenty years her senior who would later become recorder of London and Conservative MP. It was a successful match; the Gurneys were an affectionate couple with a strong intellectual affinity who shared reforming and religious interests. Shortly after their marriage they moved to 8 Kensington Palace Gardens, London, where they lived until Russell Gurney's death. The Gurneys had no children, but in 1862 they became guardians of the five children of Gurney's brother John Hampden Gurney. They took a house for their wards which the family shared for three years. Although the ages of the children made it unnecessary for Russell and Emelia Gurney to live with them continuously, Emelia formed close ties of affection with them. 
Emelia Gurney was one of the original members of the Kensington Society, a debating group for women, and she hosted parties where reformers and feminists could meet. She was known as a woman of great warmth and charm. In 1860, when she was chairing a committee formed by Elizabeth Blackwell to investigate the possibility of opening medical education to women, she was introduced to the young Elizabeth Garrett. The Gurneys helped Garrett take the first steps in her medical education and Emelia became a close friend, advising her on one occasion to use her feminine charms to overcome the hostility of male doctors. 
Another friend from the Kensington Society, Emily Davies, who described her as 'heavenly', recruited Emelia to the campaign to admit women to local examinations, and she became one of the 'ladylike ladies' working for the cause (Stephen, 97, 152). She was involved in the establishment of Girton College from its earliest days, participating in the selection of its first site and the formulation of college rules. She approved of the recruitment of George Eliot to the campaign for a women's college, despite some supporters' misgivings about Eliot's personal morality. Emelia Gurney was one of the signatories of the college's articles of association (1872) and was a member of the college from 1872 until her death. 
During this period the Gurneys travelled widely, including a trip to Jamaica in 1865, where Russell Gurney served as a commissioner investigating Governor Eyre's response to a recent uprising. She found the scenery beautiful and had some sympathy for the Jamaican people, yet it cannot be said that her appreciation of their culture transcended the prejudices of her time. 
Caroline Batten died in 1870; Emelia grieved for her and consoled herself by furnishing a small cottage with mementoes of her mother. In 1871 the Gurneys travelled to Washington, DC, where they were to spend two winters while Russell Gurney acted as commissioner to arbitrate between British and American merchants. 
Emelia Gurney's intense spirituality infused all of her work and, as she grew older, absorbed increasing amounts of her attention. In her youth she and her mother derived great spiritual refreshment from visits to Linlathen, home of the Scottish religious thinker Thomas Erskine. After her mother's death Emelia Gurney attended the series of spiritual conferences held at Broadlands, Hampshire, the home of her friends Mr and Mrs Cowper-Temple (later Lord and Lady Mount-Temple), between 1874 and 1888. She was eager to learn from religious teachers and once told her cousin, 'I have an intense pleasure in being converted' ('Letters', 143). She became increasingly interested in the mystical aspects of Christian faith, linking it to her appreciation of beauty in nature and in art. Her family believed this freed her from 'the oppressive Calvinism of... her early youth' (ibid., 142). 
Russell Gurney died suddenly in 1878. Emelia immediately moved to a small house in 3 Orme Square, Bayswater, which the Gurneys had established in 1875 as a convalescent home for women recently discharged from hospital. She desperately tried to fill the void with travel, visiting Palestine in 1883 and Sicily in 1889, by nursing both her convalescents and her friends, and with her religious faith. 
About 1885 Emelia began reading Dante's 'Divine Comedy' for spiritual nourishment and consolation, and in 1893, after a year of illness, she published 'Dante's Pilgrim's Progress'. She had been negotiating for some time to buy a small piece of land on which to build a chapel in central London in memory of her husband. After many delays the Chapel of the Ascension, described by Cherry and Pevsner as 'chaste Italian Quattrocento', with paintings by the religious artist Frederic Shields, opened early in 1896 (Cherry and Pevsner, 673). At the opening of her long-awaited monument to her faith, Emelia Gurney contracted a chest infection, and, after lingering for seven months, died on 17 October 1896 at her home in Orme Square. The Chapel of the Ascension was little used and was demolished some time after 1950. 


@@@@@


doc= 56344


Cobban, Alfred Bert Carter (1901-1968), historian, was born on 24 May 1901 at 40 Oakley Crescent, Chelsea, London, the only son of Robert Cobban, a furniture salesman employed by the Army and Navy Stores, and his wife, Edith Frances, 'nee' Carter. A quiet, studious boy, he won scholarships to Latymer Upper School, London, and then to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge (1919). After gaining a first in both parts of the modern history tripos (1922) he became a graduate student and research fellow there until 1926, when, having completed his doctorate, he took up a lectureship in history at King's College, Newcastle. He married on 23 July 1929 (Kathleen) Muriel (1906-1988/9), daughter of James Hartshorn, a schoolmaster. She was a woman of immense energy and geniality who ran all aspects of his life outside the academic allowing him to give a lifelong commitment to teaching and writing. They had two daughters: Ann (1930) and Lucinda (1939). 
In 1937 Cobban became reader in modern French history at University College, London. He declined the offer of tenured professorship at the University of Chicago in 1947 and in 1953 was given the title professor of French history in the University of London. 
Cobban was a prolific writer, with thirteen books and some fifty articles to his name. While a schoolboy he kept a remarkable commonplace book showing him from the age of sixteen to have devoured up to twenty books a month in three languages, English, French, and Latin. Political ideas (particularly the Enlightenment and its critics) and French history, especially the Revolution, preoccupied him throughout his academic career. He was opposed to two approaches: the first divorced ideas from their context and treated them as if they had a simple linear progression and evolved in ethereal space; the second was thought systems which sought to squeeze the historical record into an ideological corset. For this reason he was fundamentally at odds with Marxist historiography which dominated Revolutionary studies in France until the late 1970s, while retaining an enormous respect for Georges Lefebvre, who held the Sorbonne chair. 
Cobban's first work, 'Edmund Burke and the Revolt Against the Eighteenth Century' (1926) was a study of the arguments of the conservative tradition in British eighteenth-century politics and the events in France to which these arguments referred. In contrast 'Rousseau and the Modern State' (1934) explores the development of ideas promoting state power. The approaching war prompted one of his most incisive analyses in 'Dictatorship: its History and Theory' (1939). He held that the Enlightenment, in its remorseless opposition to despotism, and its belief in man's right to earthly fulfilment, represented a high-water mark in the history of political ideas, a view which found its fullest expression in 'In Search of Humanity: the Role of the Enlightenment in Modern History' (1960), based on a series of lectures initially given in the United States, where his work was very highly valued. 
Cobban did some archive-based work, for example, 'Ambassadors and Secret Agents: the Diplomacy of the First Earl of Malmesbury at The Hague' (1954) on Anglo-French relations between 1784 and 1788. However, his outstanding talent lay in drawing upon the evidence contained in neglected volumes of printed documents and monographs in order to question received interpretation and offer a challenging alternative. His inaugural lecture at London, 'The Myth of the French Revolution' (1954), which he subsequently enlarged into the Wiles lectures (1962) to form 'The Social Interpretation of the French Revolution' (1964), disputed a Marxist interpretation of the Revolution -- which represented it as the triumph of bourgeois capitalism over feudalism. Instead he demonstrated that the politically active bourgeois of 1789 were economically hard-pressed groups of professionals and office holders who were reluctantly pushed into the abolition of vestigial seigneurial dues by an insurgent peasantry and that the 'Revolution' left the distribution of propertied wealth and power largely unchanged. This work, now recognized as a historiographical landmark, initially generated much dissent in France but by the 1980s his interpretation was accepted. Indeed, his analysis of the vocabulary of social history anticipated some of the debates on discourse of the bicentennial. Cobban was the last major twentieth-century historian to posit a social rather than an 'ideas' interpretation of the Revolution. 
Cobban's three-volume 'History of Modern France' (1957-65), a lucid and compelling narrative, introduced more than three generations of Britons to French history. The communication of ideas to as broad an audience as possible, young and old, inside and outside the academy, and the importance of fostering balanced judgement based on evidence were for him the essence of his job, and made him a deeply committed editor of 'History' (1956-67), who transformed the appeal of the journal. He was a brilliant teacher of undergraduates, generating confidence in the shy and diffident, and he attracted large numbers of graduate students from both sides of the Atlantic. He had a considerable impact upon the teaching of history in Canada and the USA as well as in Britain. A commemorative volume by his students ('French Government and Society, 1500-1850', 1973) attests to the extent of his influence. His seminar at the Institute of Historical Research was rigorous, lively, and very democratic. He actually liked his students to prove him wrong, as this proved their development. Even when terminally ill he discussed ideas with them from his sickbed. His intellectual rigour endured to the end. He died in London, slowly and bravely, on 1 April 1968 at a Kensington nursing home which became, in the last weeks of his life, a place of pilgrimage for colleagues, former students, and international scholars. 


@@@@@


doc= 56355


Lockwood, Richard Evison (1867-1915), rugby player, was born at Summer Hall, Crigglestone, near Wakefield, Yorkshire, on 9 November 1867, the son of Benjamin Lockwood, a general labourer and groom, and his wife, Mary Evison. He made his debut as a right wing three-quarter for Dewsbury at the age of sixteen in 1884 and rapidly established himself as a sporting phenomenon. He played for Yorkshire and England at nineteen -- he made the first of fourteen appearances for his country in 1887 -- and rose to captain the English rugby union side in 1894, the first player without a public-school background to do so. 
Known as 'the Little Tyke' and 'Little Dick, the World's Wonder', partly because of his age and also because of his diminutive stature -- he was only 5 feet 41/2 inches tall -- Lockwood was brilliant in attack and deadly in the tackle, with a knack of being in the right place at the right time. An astute tactician, he was responsible for introducing the Welsh-originated four three-quarter system into the Yorkshire county team and for popularizing the tactic of running after the ball after punting it in order to put his forwards onside. 
No player was as famous in northern rugby nor so symbolized the rise of the working-class player as Lockwood. He was employed as a woollen printer in a textile factory when he married on 2 February 1889, at the Wesleyan Centenary Chapel, Dewsbury, Sarah Grace Taylor, the daughter of a blanket raiser. That year he transferred to the Heckmondwike club, who paid him, it later emerged, $1 per game, contrary to rugby's amateur regulations. Although the club was suspended for professionalism by the Yorkshire Rugby Union, he survived two investigations of the same charge, much to the relief of an adoring public, as 'The Yorkshireman' (18 September 1889) magazine described: 'the news of his acquittal was received with an outburst of cheering, the gathering in all respects resembling those witnessed at an exciting political election.' 
If the feelings of Lockwood's supporters were unambiguous, the same could not be said for those of the rugby union authorities. He was continuously passed over for the Yorkshire captaincy in the early 1890s. And, despite the fact that he had captained England earlier in the season, he was barred by the Rugby Football Union in 1894 from playing in a club match after he had withdrawn from the Anglo-Scottish match because he couldn't afford to take time off work. This added to calls for payments for 'broken time' to working-class players, the issue over which rugby would split in 1895. A few weeks after the 1895 rugby schism, Lockwood joined Wakefield Trinity in the Northern Union (later the Rugby League). In 1900 his career turned full circle, however, as he returned to Dewsbury, and in 1903 he retired. 
Sadly, Lockwood was unable to translate his football fame into material wealth. He gave up his factory job to run the Queen's Hotel pub in Heckmondwike during the 1890s, but was declared bankrupt in 1897, and was forced to sell all his household furniture and return to manual work. On 10 November 1915 he died in Leeds Infirmary, shortly before he was due to have a second operation for cancer; he was buried in Wakefield cemetery four days later. His wife and four children survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 56356


Miller, James Arthur (1855-1939), rugby administrator and schoolmaster, was born in Leeds on 19 January 1855, the son of Joseph Miller, an engineer, and his wife, Elizabeth. He first played rugby in the 1870s as a pupil at Leeds middle class school, an Anglican establishment which specialized in science and technology. He later returned as the school's science master, a role in which he enjoyed great popularity with the boys. He played rugby for Yorkshire as a forward five times between 1879 and 1881, but it was as an administrator of the game that he made his mark. 
An official with Leeds St John's Club, which later became Leeds Rugby League Club, Miller was elected secretary of the Yorkshire Rugby Union (YRU) in 1889, and sought to steer a middle course between the amateurism of the Rugby Football Union (RFU) and calls for outright professionalism. In 1891, recognizing that pure amateurism was unworkable in the predominantly working-class environment of northern rugby, he proposed relaxing the RFU's amateur regulations to allow players to be paid for time lost at work through playing rugby, or 'broken time'. In the same year he also argued for a reduction in the number of players in a rugby team from fifteen to thirteen, in order to make the game more attractive and to help it counter the growing popularity of soccer. Ignored by the rugby union authorities at the time, the thirteen-a-side proposal was adopted in 1906 by the Northern Union as a basic rule of rugby league. 
The debate on payments for play came to a head at the September 1893 RFU general meeting. Miller proposed the motion 'that players be allowed compensation for bona-fide loss of time', arguing that working-class players were constantly called upon to lose their wages in order to play the game at the highest levels yet were refused recompense for the loss of time involved. But his motion was lost by 282 votes to 136, and the RFU consequently amended its constitution to allow membership only to those clubs 'entirely composed of amateurs'. The die was cast for the great rugby split of 1895. 
During his presidency of the YRU (1892-5), Miller's loyalty to the RFU led him to oppose the 1895 formation of the Northern Union. He subsequently became one of the most unyielding defenders of pristine amateurism, steadfastly opposing any attempts to compromise with the new union. Despite having a leg amputated and almost losing his life following an explosion at Roundhay Park in Leeds in 1910, he continued to serve on the YRU committee for another thirty years, and was appointed treasurer in 1922. Ironically, his life ended in disgrace over money, after he was sentenced to six months' imprisonment in 1927 for using his position to embezzle over $1000 from the YRU. He died, almost completely unnoticed and unmourned, at St James's Hospital, Leeds, on 10 March 1939, and was buried at Lawnswood cemetery in north Leeds three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 56357


Marshall, Francis (1845-1906), rugby administrator and schoolmaster, was born on 19 September 1845 at Witton Lane, West Bromwich, Staffordshire, the son of John William Marshall, a schoolmaster, and his wife, Sarah Salt. He was educated at Brewood School, then entered St John's College, Cambridge, in 1864, graduating BA as thirty-eighth wrangler in the mathematical tripos in 1868. He proceeded MA in 1880. He was ordained in 1869 and between 1868 and 1870 was vice-principal of Carmarthen Training College. From 1870 to 1878 he was headmaster of Wednesbury Collegiate School and in 1878 was appointed head of King James's Grammar School in Almondbury, near Huddersfield, in Yorkshire. 
Marshall was the embodiment of the late nineteenth-century quest for the purity of amateur ideals in rugby. His influence was such that the centenary history of the Rugby Football Union acclaimed him as 'one of the game's immortals'. He had played rugby as a schoolboy, but it was only when he took up the headmastership at Almondbury that he began to make his mark on the game. He became a well-respected referee, and was noted for occasionally smoking a cigar while refereeing. But it was following his election to the committee of the Yorkshire Rugby Union (YRU) in 1887 that he became most famous. Seeking to exorcize the evil of professionalism from rugby, Marshall helped to conduct more than twenty trials of clubs and players accused of professionalism, including two of the future England captain Dicky Lockwood. In 1890 he was elected president of the YRU. 
Although initially supportive, Yorkshire rugby clubs discovered that the suspension of players and clubs caused by Marshall's campaign was incompatible with the business exigencies of running successful teams. Growing support for payments to players to compensate them for time lost from work -- 'broken time' -- alienated Marshall from the leadership of Yorkshire rugby. In 1893 he was instrumental in helping to suspend his own club, Huddersfield, for breaches of rugby's amateur code, an act which estranged him from any remaining sympathizers in Yorkshire rugby union. In 1896 he left Almondbury to become rector of Mileham in Norfolk. 
As a muscular Christian, Marshall was a firm believer in the importance of rugby in 'developing the physique, in influencing the character, and in improving the moral as well as the physical well being of the working man player' ('''Payment for Broken Time at Rugby Football'', Athletic News Football Annual', 1893). Unfortunately for Marshall, these values were rarely shared by their intended recipients and he found himself heckled at meetings, stoned by schoolboys, and, on one occasion, jostled at his local railway station. 
To posterity Marshall is mainly remembered for his book 'Football: the Rugby Union Game' (1892), still regarded as the definitive work on the history and development of rugby in the nineteenth century, combining Marshall's own work with contributions from many of the game's leading players and administrators. Although written to demonstrate the importance of the public schools to a game increasingly dominated by working-class players and spectators, the book is notable for the absence of any mention of William Webb Ellis, ostensibly the founder of rugby football. This apparent anomaly is explained by the fact that the book was published three years before the Old Rugbeian Society, on dubious grounds, ascribed to Ellis his place in history. Marshall was also the author of school textbooks on Shakespeare, Sir Walter Scott, Euclid, and the 'Bible'. He died at Mileham on 19 April 1906, following an operation. He was buried six days later at Mileham church, leaving a widow, Catharine Ann, the daughter of John E. Taylor of Almondbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 56358


Waller, Henry Hirst (1861-1949), rugby administrator, was born on 11 August 1861 at Waring Green, Brighouse, Yorkshire, the elder of two sons of Abraham Waller, one of Brighouse's leading textile manufacturers, and his wife, Martha Ann Crossley. His grandfather had introduced cotton spinning to the town. Educated at Silcoates grammar school, near Wakefield, he helped to found the local rugby club, Brighouse Rangers, in 1878 and played until he received four broken ribs in a game in 1894. He then became a leading campaigner for a relaxation of rugby's amateur rules and for paying working-class players compensation for 'broken time', or time lost from work. 
On 29 August 1895 Waller chaired the historic meeting at the George Hotel in Huddersfield at which twenty-two leading northern rugby clubs voted to leave the Rugby Football Union and found the Northern Rugby Football Union (NU), which in 1922 became the Rugby Football League. The first decision of the new body was to legalize payments of no more than 6's'. per day for broken time. At this meeting Waller was elected president, a position he was to hold for the next two years, during which the NU grew from its original 22 clubs to over 150. As president of the NU, he oversaw a number of rule changes, such as the abolition of the line-out, which were to lay the basis for the modern game of rugby league football. After stepping down from the presidency in 1897, he continued to play a leading role on the sport's general committee until 1902, most notably in helping to steer the game towards professionalism. 
An articulate public speaker, Waller played the central role in developing the NU's self-image as a democratic sport. A lifelong Liberal, he became the Liberal chairman of Greetland urban district council in 1905, was the founding senior vice-chairman of the Urban District Councils' Association, and in 1906 was appointed a JP. His political principles guided his philosophy for rugby, and he believed that 'the game brought men together and united them in brotherhood which could hardly be found elsewhere' ('Yorkshire Post', 30 April 1894). In 1890 he had taken over the running of the family business, and this experience informed his belief in the importance of the social role of the NU. He saw rugby as a means of assisting working-class players to better themselves, and was instrumental in introducing the NU's 1898 'work clauses', whereby only those in regular employment were allowed to play, arguing that 'the Northern Union was anxious to make football the means of improving the positions of players' ('Yorkshire Post', 23 May 1898). 
After Brighouse Rangers disbanded in 1906 owing to financial problems, Waller became a regular spectator at Halifax rugby league club's matches. In November 1945, as the only surviving founder of the NU, he was guest of honour of the Rugby Football League at the game's jubilee banquet. He died on 19 May 1949 at Lyndhurst, Greetland, Halifax, Yorkshire, leaving a widow and two sons, and a daughter from his first marriage; he was buried three days later in Brighouse cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 56360


Cinquevalli, Paul (1859-1918), juggler, was born at Lissa, in the Posen district of Prussia, on 30 June 1859. Cinquevalli was his stage name and also the name by which he was known. In his will he gives his name at birth as Emile Otto Paul Braun. There is some disagreement over his given name -- some authorities give this as Paul Braun-Lehmann and others as Paul Kestner -- and also over his father's occupation. Cinquevalli himself referred to him in interviews as a 'miller', although more recent histories of juggling suggest him to have been a 'civil servant'. All sources agree, however, that it was his father's 'political opinions' that forced the family into exile in Berlin when Paul was only two. 
Paul was intended by his parents for the priesthood but seems to have been fascinated from an early age by a much more exciting vocation: that of throwing objects into the air and catching them as they fell. By the time he had reached school age he had mastered the techniques of juggling so well that he 'could, after a little practice, throw his pencil and slate in the air, catch the pencil, write the letter A on the slate, and catch the slate before it reached the ground' ('Cinquevalli'). Although he had found in this trick a brilliant proof of his own literacy it was the nearest he ever came to the priesthood. Indeed he seems to have devoted more school time to perfecting circus skills than to his more formal studies. At the age of thirteen he won a string of prizes for gymnastics and a year later -- after, it seems, one argument about his future too many -- he ran away with a troupe of Italian acrobats led by one Giuseppe Chiese-Cinquevalli. Chiese-Cinquevalli gave his young protege more than just a surname: the high-wire acts that he asked the younger man to perform inadvertently decided his future career. 
Young Cinquevalli made his debut on the trapeze in Odessa; after a period touring through eastern and central Europe -- which included a performance in Berlin before Kaiser Wilhelm I, the enormous success of which reconciled him to his parents 'after two years complete separation and silence' ('Cinquevalli') -- he returned to Russia to begin 'a long engagement at the Zoological Gardens of St Petersburg [which] earned him the name of the 'Little Flying Devil'' (Frost). Eventually, however, this proved disastrous: the circus employee who should have dried the trapeze had left his post, to 'absorb 'moisture' in glasses, at bars more congenial' ('Cinquevalli'). 'As usual' recalled Cinquevalli, 'I leapt with outstretched hands, but the trapeze slid through my fingers as if it had been greased' (ibid.). The fall, of 75 feet, at a time when safety nets were uncommon left him in a hospital bed for eight months. 
Cinquevalli's therapy during a period of frustration and intense boredom was to return to the tricks of his childhood: 'hour after hour, and day after day, I spent in balancing and juggling bottles, balls, plates, anything and everything I could lay my hands on' ('Cinquevalli'). This intense period of practice paid handsome dividends: when he next performed with the acrobats it was as a juggler rather than in his former role. His European reputation grew rapidly, and he was soon in demand throughout the United States and the British empire, but it was in Britain that he achieved his greatest and most lasting success. He married Dora Nowell, with whom he had a daughter, Margot. 
Cinquevalli's first appearance in London was in 1885 at the Covent Garden Theatre, where, perhaps fortuitously, among the admiring audience was the prince of Wales. Not long afterwards Cinquevalli was invited to give a private performance before the prince and 'a brilliant gathering' (Fitzgerald) at Marlborough House, which included one of his most celebrated small-scale feats: 'I take a wooden bar eighteen inches long and one inch in diameter, and suspend it by means of two loops of ordinary newspaper from the edges of two razors. My assistant holds the razors and I break the stick with a blow without injuring the paper in the least degree. ('Cinquevalli')' Apparently 'The Prince himself was greatly struck with [this trick], and asked [Cinquevalli] to repeat it again and again, in order that he himself might select razors, broom-handle, and striking stick, and also make the paper loops' (Fitzgerald). Performances such as these ensured that Cinquevalli swiftly moved to the top of many of the best bills, while also becoming synonymous with the proverbial safe pair of hands. As one political commentator opined in 1886 'Had he flourished in the old election days he might have gained a fortune by teaching Parliamentary candidates how to catch rotten eggs on the hustings without breaking them' ('Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News'). 
A second accident not long afterwards -- caused by performing an awkward lift 'when I was performing before the Shah and the Prince and Princess of Wales at the Crystal Palace' ('A talk with Paul Cinquevalli') -- forced Cinquevalli's temporary retirement and another move to Berlin, where he became proprietor of the Reichshallen-theater. His return to the stage -- at the prompting of a doctor who came to treat Cinquevalli's wife and 'saw a picture of me in my professional dress' (ibid.) -- was also a return to England. The welcome and the adulation that he received were as great as they had been before his move to Germany, and, in recognition of this, he took a house in Brixton in 1893 and, shortly afterwards, British citizenship. 
Cinquevalli's hold over his audiences, as well as over the future King Edward VII, can of course be ascribed to his unusual powers of agility, balance, and strength. However, the public's fascination was much increased by his habit of including 'very homely articles' (Fitzgerald) into his acts to create the additional and more subtle illusion that such impossible feats could be achieved by any man in his own parlour. The most celebrated of all his tricks in particular brought the world of the gentleman's club to the variety stage, as a reporter for 'Answers' magazine (26 September 1896) discovered: ''But this is the trick I must show you,' said [Cinquevalli], pulling on a peculiar-looking green-baize jacket. 'Now I am a billiard table. Where are my pockets? Ah!' An attendant tightly fixed five pockets, exactly similar to billiard-table pockets, one on each side of the professor's shoulders, one on each hip, and one in the middle of his back. 'My sixth pocket; where is my sixth pocket? Yes, it is my ear; my right ear is the sixth pocket. My forehead is 'spot'', said the professor, placing the red ball on his brow. 'What shot shall I make you? I will make a 'break', five -- six -- ten, what you will. Ten? All right.'... to make the ten 'shot', he placed a wineglass, containing a ball, in his mouth; then, on top of the ball in the glass, poised the cue. On top of the cue were balanced a white and a red ball. He threw a fourth ball at them, making a 'cannon' off the red, and, while all four balls were in the air, jumped suddenly round, caught the wineglass in the left-hip pocket, a ball in the right, another ball in the shoulder pocket, and the two remaining balls both went into the pocket fastened to his back. ('A chat with a human billiard table')' Extraordinary feats such as these led to invitations from other areas of theatre; in winter 1896-7 Cinquevalli performed 'amazing feats with blazing torches' ('Boxing day entertainments') as the Slave of the Lamp in the Drury Lane pantomime 'Aladdin', opposite Ada Blanche (in the title role) and Dan Leno's Mrs Twankey. Over the next fifteen years his career as a top-of-the-bill variety artist prospered; in 1912, in one of his final appearances, he repeated the 'human billiard table' trick at the Palace Theatre, Cambridge Circus, as part of the first royal variety performance. He retired from the stage in June of that year, after a final performance at the Winter Gardens in New Brighton. 
Cinquevalli was then only in his fifties -- still relatively young for a variety artist even in his particularly demanding line -- and his decision seems to have been prompted at least in part by the political situation in Europe; with the First World War rapidly approaching he was already feeling the effects of anti-German sentiment. It had been 'discovered' in the popular press that he had been born with a Teutonic surname and was therefore potentially an enemy subversive. Although publicly acknowledging the name he was at pains to show that his family were Polish, his training Russian, and his sympathies entirely British. This argument seems, however, to have been rather too subtle for the mob, particularly when the war began in earnest two years later. 
First-hand reports of this period in Cinquevalli's life are scarce but his experience has been vividly evoked by a much later imaginative writer; Edwin Morgan's poem from the 1980s 'Cinquevalli', prompted by the chance discovery of a postcard showing the juggler in his leotard, includes this description as the eighth of a series of ten snapshots of his life: '
Cinquevalli broods in his armchair in Brixton Road. 

He reads in the paper about the shells whining 

at Passchendaele, imagines the mud and the dead. 

He goes to the window and wonders through that dark evening 

what is happening in Poland where he was born. 

His neighbours call him a German spy. 

'Kestner, Paul Kestner, that's his name!' 

'Keep Kestner out of the British music-hall!' 

He frowns; it is cold; his fingers seem stiff and old. 
(Morgan, 114)' Cinquevalli died at his home -- 5 Mostyn Road, Brixton, London -- on 14 July 1918, just fifty-nine but apparently only a shadow of the variety-stage strong man that he had been. He was broken in both spirit and body by the constant verbal attacks of a persistent 'patriotic' mob, and his death, of heart failure, only a few months before the armistice would seem the consequence of a much more widespread failure of 'heart': his betrayal by the ungrateful country that he had entertained for nearly thirty years and to which he had given, unasked, the gift of his allegiance. 


@@@@@


doc= 56365


Edgar, William (1790/91-1869), haberdasher, was born at Kirk St Andrew, Cumberland, the son of a farmer. Nothing is known of his schooling, but it was said that Edgar came to London where he had a stall in St James's market, Westminster, under which he used to sleep at night. He then joined forces with George Swan (1777?-1821), who had established his own haberdashery business at 10 Fore Street, in the City of London. Swan may have moved by 1814 to 20 Piccadilly, where Edgar became his manager in 1815 and a partner in 1818. Swan may have opened more than one shop, as a Sun Insurance policy in 1819 locates him as a haberdasher at 236 Piccadilly, where his stock (lace excepted) was valued at $5000. By 1820 Swan and Edgar were at 10 Piccadilly, their stock (again excepting lace) now valued at $6000 at no. 10, and at another $1000 in an adjacent warehouse. Swan died at 10 Piccadilly in 1821. 
Edgar continued to trade as Swan and Edgar, expanding his business. As 10 Piccadilly had earlier been the site of the Bull and Mouth public house, he kept the licence and was able to operate a restaurant in the store without having to confront the opposition of nearby hostelries. He married Frances Leyburn on 21 November 1822 and settled in a house at Kingston Hill, Surrey, where the couple raised six children. Of their three daughters, Margaret Maria Edgar (1828-1884) married Sir Henry William Peek, first baronet; their son, Cuthbert Edgar Peek, second baronet (1855-1901), became a noted amateur astronomer and meteorologist. Of Edgar's three sons only William Schindler Edgar ('b'. 1824) and another son followed him into the firm. It is probable that the other children rose socially and considered haberdashery beneath them. Swan and Edgar was rather more than a mere haberdasher; it developed into the classic London department store, and by the 1850s occupied nine houses and had extended into a prime position between Piccadilly and Regent Street. The store kept up with fashion, both in the items sold and in its customers, in 1866 adding an extension to accommodate a showroom for fashion displays and a mourning department. Edgar rode in from Kingston Hill and always assisted when Queen Victoria's family visited the store. He later moved to Eagle House, Clapham Common, Surrey, where he died on 25 September 1869, aged seventy-eight. He was buried at West Norwood cemetery. 
No members of the Edgar family were listed among the shareholders on 11 December 1886 when Swan and Edgar was bought out and amalgamated with Halling, Pearce, and Stone as Waterloo House, reverting to Swan and Edgar Ltd ten years later. The company went into liquidation in 1926, but survived on the corner of Piccadilly and Regent Street until its closure on 9 January 1982. 


@@@@@


doc= 56367


Hackenschmidt, George (1877-1968), wrestler and philosopher, was born on 20 July 1877 at Dorpat, Estonia (then part of the Russian empire). Little is known about his parents, other than that his father was a dyer, and despite his Germanic-sounding name, was of Swedish origin. Hackenschmidt trained as an engineer's draughtsman, but excelled in weightlifting, and became Russian champion in 1899. His strength became apparent in 1896, when he reputedly picked up a milkman's horse and carried it around on his shoulders. 
However, it was as a wrestler that Hackenschmidt became famous. His first big tournament was in Vienna, in 1898, when he won the amateur heavyweight championship of the world, wrestling in the Graeco-Roman style. He soon established a reputation as one of the strongest and most skilful wrestlers in Europe. In 1900 he turned professional, and until his retirement in 1911, he was never defeated in this style. 
In 1902, speaking little English, Hackenschmidt arrived in Britain to advance his career in music-hall wrestling, and met the impresario C. B. Cochran, who became his manager. With Cochran's guidance, he became 'the Russian Lion', and introduced showmanship into his performances, which usually involved allowing local wrestlers to look good for a while before throwing them, or using a paid 'villain' before throwing him. As he fought every challenger, he claimed the championship of the world, since there was no international wrestling body to award titles. Within a year he and Cochran had between them created a music-hall boom in wrestling, with wrestlers arriving in Britain from around the world. 
Hackenschmidt's most famous match, which elevated him to hero status, was against Ahmad Madrali, 'the Terrible Turk', at Kensington Olympia, London, on 30 January 1904. With Cochran's flair for publicity the match became the sporting event of the year, although the outcome itself was an anticlimax; Madrali was thrown in forty-four seconds, dislocating his arm in the process. 
With his popularity at its zenith, Hackenschmidt toured Britain drawing huge houses wherever he went, wrestling five challengers a night, and defeating them all in twenty minutes. He had now adopted the free or catch-as-catch-can style, which the public favoured over the Graeco-Roman style, and was twice defeated by the American wrestler Frank Gotch, in 1908 and September 1911, in Chicago. The latter defeat prompted his retirement. 
After retiring from wrestling Hackenschmidt lived for a short time at Lancing, Sussex, and then travelled internationally, giving exhibitions. In 1913 he married a Frenchwoman, Rachel Marie Lucienne (1892/3-1987) and took French citizenship. He was in Berlin at the start of the First World War, when he was interned by the Germans as an enemy subject, and at the end of the war returned to his French home in Nice. Turning to writing and lecturing on physical culture, psychology, and philosophy, he occasionally visited Britain. In 1935 he published 'Man and Cosmic Antagonism to Mind and Spirit', the first of several books describing his system of personal philosophy, which he formulated during his wartime internment. His ideas influenced many sportsmen, particularly the Australian athletics coach Percy Cerutty. 
In 1945 Hackenschmidt came to Britain from France, and was living at Adelaide Road, Hampstead, when he won a libel action in October 1950. In July 1950 he became a naturalized British subject and in 1951 he settled at 21 Chestnut Road, West Norwood, where he lived until his death. He successfully ran a physical culture school. He abstained from both alcohol and tobacco, and after his retirement became a strict vegetarian. He died in St Francis Hospital, East Dulwich, London, on 19 February 1968, following a short illness, at the age of ninety. He was cremated at Norwood cemetery, where his ashes were scattered. His papers, given by his widow, form part of the Todd-McLean library at the H. J. Lutcher Stark Center, University of Texas at Austin. 


@@@@@


doc= 56370


Jennings, (Josiah) George (1810-1882), sanitary engineer, was born at Eling, Hampshire, on 10 November 1810, the eldest son of Joseph Jennings (1771-1824), plumber, and his wife, Mary Dimmock (1771-1860). He was educated at a school run by an uncle and at the age of fourteen, following the death of his father, he started work with his grandfather, a lead and glass merchant. About three years later he went to serve his uncle, John Jennings, a plumber at Southwick, near Southampton, where he gained considerable practical knowledge of the trade. In 1831 he found employment in London with Messrs Burton, plumbers of Newcastle Street. He was married on 27 August 1836 to Mary Ann Coates Gill (died 1844), daughter of John Gill, a military contractor. They had four children. Following his wife's death he married, on 1 May 1849, in Twickenham, Sophia (1832-1919), daughter of Henry Budd, builder, with whom he had eleven children. 
By 1838 Jennings was in business on his own in Paris Street, Lambeth, funded by a small inheritance from his grandmother, who had carried on her husband's lead and glass business. In 1838 he moved to Great Charlotte Street, Blackfriars Road. His career coincided with a critical period in the development of public health in Britain. From the 1840s the need to provide better drainage, sewerage, and water supply, and adequate sanitary facilities was laid down in local and national legislation and it was to this that Jennings responded with extraordinary energy and inventiveness. 
During the 1840s Jennings's occupation was usually given as a plumber and builder, yet one of his first inventions to bring him success was an improved fastener for shop window blinds. But in 1847, describing himself as a brass founder, he took out a patent that covered improvements to the valves of valve water closets and improved methods of making joints and connections between two pipes. The following year he took out a second patent for taps and water closets utilizing a relatively new material, india rubber. He was quick to see that with its natural flexibility rubber had great potential as an effective sealant in plumbing work. His india-rubber tube taps were a success and for these he received his first public award -- the medal of the Royal Society of Arts -- which was presented to him personally by Prince Albert. 
When the preparations for the Great Exhibition of 1851 were under way, Jennings offered to install public conveniences in the Crystal Palace. The exhibition commissioners initially turned him down but then changed their minds. For the superior retiring rooms, Jennings installed his 'india-rubber tube' valve closet, but for the second-class facilities he introduced an all-ceramic basin and trap closet of an entirely new design. The basin contained a wide shallow pool of water held behind a weir or lip separate from the water seal in the trap below. By providing two levels of water Jennings created a closet that would immerse solid waste while providing a simple and effective seal from the soil pipe without the use of mechanics. Jennings later claimed to have devised this closet before the exhibition although he only sought patent protection a year after the exhibition in 1852. It went by various names, including the Jennings basin, the monkey closet, and the complete closet, but it was as the wash-out closet that this type of water closet became generally known when other manufacturers launched their own versions from the mid-1870s. The wash-out closet enjoyed considerable success in the 1880s, and although its popularity in Britain waned after 1890 it remained in widespread use in some parts of the world throughout the twentieth century. 
A penny was charged for using the retiring rooms at the exhibition (except for the men's urinals, which were free) and when it closed in October 1851 receipts totalled $2441. The principle of paying to use public toilets was established. When the Crystal Palace was removed to Sydenham Jennings eloquently persuaded the commissioners to allow him to continue providing public conveniences. In 1858 he recommended the building of underground public toilets in the City of London but this was rejected, and none were built until 1885, after his death. 
Jennings also exhibited some of his inventions in the general hardware section of the Great Exhibition. These included his india-rubber tube cocks, an improved cistern valve, the patent pipe joint, and the patent india-rubber tube water closets as fitted in the superior refreshment courts of the building. His reputation was made and shortly after the start of the Crimean War in 1854 he was called upon by Isambard Kingdom Brunel and Sidney Herbert, the secretary of war, to construct the sanitary arrangements for the British hospitals at Varna and Scutari. 
Jennings continued to patent important developments of sanitary ware during the 1850s. One of his most successful innovations was the tip-up washbasin, which had appeared by 1851 and was the subject of patent protection in 1860. Quickly and easily emptied by tipping the front rim, tip-up basins were cheap and effective, and were widely used throughout the second half of the nineteenth century. 
Responding to growing concern from water companies over the excessive use of water in flushing water closets, Jennings devised one of the first water closet (WC) cisterns to regulate the consumption of water. Patented in 1852, his cistern used a vertical spindle to hold the ball cock up -- thus preventing the admission of fresh water -- while the outlet valve to the flush pipe was open. Like all early WC cisterns -- or 'water waste preventers' -- Jennings's version relied on a simple lifting or weighted outlet valve. In 1854 he patented the first syphonic cistern, which used the principle of water displacement to raise the water over the top of a syphon pipe -- charging the syphon -- which then emptied the tank independently of any further tugging of the chain. This invention ensured that an adequate given quantity of water (usually two gallons) flushed the closet while at the same time preventing uncontrolled waste of mains water. By the 1870s the superiority of syphonic cisterns over valve operated types was clear and their adoption was soon enforced by water authorities. 
At the same time Jennings turned his attention to drain pipes, taking out a patent in 1854 for a stoneware drain pipe with an improved connection. But it was 'coldly received' by the London stoneware potters and, unable to find anyone prepared to make them, he purchased extensive clay beds at Parkstone, near Poole in Dorset, built a pottery, and about 1856 began their manufacture himself. The patent drain pipes were a success and were followed by the introduction of other stoneware drainage fittings such as bends, junctions, and intercepting traps. He secured government contracts with the War Department and the Admiralty for the supply of his pipes and other drainage equipment in Britain, India, and other British overseas possessions. He supplied all the drain pipes for the main drainage project of Portsmouth and undertook drainage schemes in Vienna, Frankfurt, Warsaw, and Adelaide in South Australia. 
As the South Western Pottery, the works expanded to become the second major site of Jennings's business operation. From the 1850s he was in a unique position among sanitary ware manufacturers, controlling the production of goods made both of metals and earthenware. It was several decades before other major sanitary ware manufacturers -- notably Doulton and Shanks -- combined iron and brass founding with pottery manufacture. While some of his ceramic sanitary ware was made by Twyfords of Hanley, Stoke-on-Trent, and Sharp Brothers of Swadlincote, Derbyshire, it is clear from contemporary advertisements that Jennings made at least some of his own water closet basins and traps at Parkstone. 
Jennings built another works close by for the production of bricks and terracotta products, which included air bricks, special bonding bricks, combined smoke and air flues, and facing blocks. Capitalizing on the coastal location of the Parkstone works he constructed a pier and tramway across the mud banks of Poole harbour to facilitate the loading of vessels in deep water and even acquired his own ships to bring in coal and other material to the works. 
In 1857 Jennings transferred his London operations to Holland Street, Blackfriars. Moving into the field of hydraulic fittings, he constructed the waterworks for the supply of water to Wilton, Wiltshire, and supplied similar equipment to other towns including Grantham in Lincolnshire. He also returned to the development of the water closet with a patent of 1858 for a twin-basin closet. The secondary basin at the rear or side contained a plunger or piston which was depressed to discharge the waste. When the plug was raised, the flush water was released at the same time, washing the contents of the basin through a connection to the rear chamber and then through the trap. There were few metal parts and the plug cylinder, basin, and trap were made of one piece of earthenware. In 1866 he altered the design of the discharge valve to a hollow piston that acted as an overflow from the basin to the trap. They were widely commended for their simplicity and enjoyed considerable success, and by 1882 some 100,000 had been sold. 
Jennings also further explored the potential of goods made of rubber. In 1863 he took out a patent for the moulding of rubber and erected improved machinery for its manufacture. He used it chiefly in the construction of valves but he also introduced an improved form of elastic band and patented rubber seals for fruit jars. He took out patent protection in 1863 for tubes, rings, and coverings of telegraph cables and the following year for a flexible hose. For several years his production of rubber goods was very great, both in London and at a branch factory in Birmingham. 
In 1863 Jennings relocated to Palace Wharf, Stangate, Lambeth. These works, however, were largely destroyed by fire in March 1865. Jennings had allowed his insurance to lapse just a few days earlier and suffered considerable financial loss, but undaunted he built new, larger works close by at Palace Wharf facing the houses of parliament across the Thames. 
Jennings maintained an association with international exhibitions and trade shows. These included the International Exhibition held in London in 1862 and then in March 1865 the Dublin Exhibition, where he oversaw the installation of sanitary facilities. In 1867 he carried out the sanitary work for the Paris Exhibition, where he was awarded a silver medal, and did the same for the Vienna Exhibition of 1873, which involved the laying of nearly 5 miles of drainage pipes and the installation of more than 600 sanitary appliances. He carried out similar works at Paris in 1875 and at the Centennial Exhibition held at Philadelphia in 1876. He exhibited at the Paris Exhibition of 1878 and then added to his tally of exhibition medals following appearances at Sydney in 1879, Melbourne in 1880, and Adelaide in 1881. He was a member of the Royal Society of Arts and was also a freemason and a member of the Glass Sellers' Company. 
Jennings supervised the building of his own home, Ferndale, in Nightingale Lane, near Clapham Common, using materials from the Parkstone works. The house was remarkable for its terracotta ornament. He also developed the Ferndale Road estate at Clapham, building nearly all the houses and then subsequently another six in his own road. He also grew attached to the area around Parkstone, where he acquired a farm and, with his usual energy, went about making improvements that included land drainage and building model farm buildings, cottages, and even a village school. He also bought a property nearby, Castle Eve House, which he used as an occasional summer residence. 
Jennings died of bronchitis at Ferndale on 17 April 1882, having fractured his collar bone four days earlier when he was thrown from his gig while crossing the Albert Bridge after his horse reared up causing the vehicle to collide with a large van. He was buried at Norwood cemetery, London, on 23 April. The business was carried on by his sons, who introduced one of the very first pedestal water closets, the 'pedestal vase' in 1884 and the 'closet of the century', one of the best-known British syphonic water closets, in 1894. The firm continued in business until 1967. 
Although some of Jennings's ideas -- for tip-up washbasins, twin basin water closets, and even the wash-out or monkey closet, for example -- were overtaken and to some extent even discredited, his innovations in the field of sanitary ware and public health have earned him an enduring reputation as arguably the leading sanitary engineer of his age. 


