@@@@@


doc= 56373


Knowles, James Thomas (1806-1884), architect, was born on 23 September 1806 at 41 Bell Street, Reigate, the premises of his parents, the Surrey glaziers James Knowles (1778-1813) and Maria, 'nee' Gale (died 1836). One of six children, Knowles probably attended the local parish school before being apprenticed as a glazier and plumber, possibly in or around London. This London experience, his membership of the freemasons (1834), and local connections probably helped him gain access to his first clients. For example it was probably through his family's association with Reigate landowner the earl of Hardwicke that Knowles met Captain the Hon. George Francis Wyndham, later the fourth earl of Egremont and an important client. 
On 18 January 1831 Knowles married Susannah Brown (1810-1876), and in 1836, on the death of his mother, he inherited the family business. But he was already styling himself 'architect', and since around 1833 had been establishing himself as a designer of large classical country houses; for example, he rebuilt Bramley Park, Surrey, for the fourth earl of Egremont in 1837. Following his unbuilt design for a vast country house (Egremont Castle, Somerset, 1838), the smaller, 'Greco-Lilliputian' ('Country Life', 7 Sept 1945) Silverton Park, Devon (1839-45) achieved its grandeur through architectural treatment rather than dimensions. Knowles also designed country rectories, and churches, for example St John the Evangelist, Redhill, Surrey (1842-3; extensively remodelled by J. L. Pearson, 1889). 
The architecturally and socially ambitious Knowles entered the Houses of Parliament design competition in 1836. In 1840 he severed his links with the glazier's trade, moving to Clapham with his wife, three daughters, and two sons (both of whom were apprenticed to him by 1848). Though practising from 1 Raymond Buildings, Gray's Inn, since 1839 at least, Knowles only became a fellow of the RIBA in 1847. Knowles's own palazzo-style house, Friday Grove, Clapham (1845), marked his social arrival and advertised his architectural style. In 1851 he entered the Great Exhibition competition, and was selected for 'honourable and favourable mention' ('The Builder', 8 June 1850). His reputation was further enhanced by his houses and business premises for London commercialists, particularly the fashionable palazzo-style warehouses for draper William Cook at St Paul's Churchyard (1853) and for bookseller Hodgson at Chancery Lane (1854). 'The Builder' described Cook's as 'more like a Walhalla than a warehouse' (19 Feb 1853), and praised Hodgson's (which exhibited hallmark 'eyelid' window hoods and openwork decoration) as 'a substantially beautiful... business pile' (18 Aug 1885) designed to be both aesthetic and functional. 
Knowles's connection with the Cook family led to his only known foreign travel and commission -- the rebuilding of Villa Monserrate at Cintra in Portugal ('c'.1858-63), as an elaborate and exotic villa of corridor-linked pavilions, topped with 'oriental' cupolas. An 1870 poem praised this imaginative 'Knowlesian' architecture and, though a later commentator criticized it as 'barbarous orientalism... built in a moorish delerium' (Macaulay, 137), it is now a national monument. 
The blending of styles and favourite motifs in an attempt to synthesize a particularly English contemporary style is Knowles's hallmark, and is nowhere better illustrated than in one joint commission with his eldest son, James Thomas Knowles (1831-1908), the Grosvenor Hotel (1859-63), serving London's Victoria railway station. Here the spatially exciting interior, external 'eyelid' windows, and vigorous applied decoration, beneath the complex curving roof-forms, give the 'Knowlesian' flavour. The 'Grosvenor style' fused Gothic, Moorish, and classical in the elder Knowles's search for what was 'truly grand, and beautiful, and original in design' ('The Builder', 8 June 1850). His son's biographer describes the Knowleses as 'eclectics and reconcilers both' (Metcalf, ix): the 'rumbustious' decoration (M. Girouard, 'The Victorian Country House', 1979, 294), which earned the Grosvenor the accolade of having 'the largest swags in London' ('Building News', 20 March 1863, 210-11), perhaps demonstrates the influence of the younger Knowles, as his father's later style was more conservative. 
Knowles was evidently a practical man who valued convenience, 'fitness in design... and durability... in construction' ('The Builder', 15 June 1850). His pragmatic approach and willingness to engage theoretical issues are demonstrated by his 1850 address to the RIBA on 'The propriety of the application of cements... to the exterior of buildings', which was vigorously debated against a background of Ruskinian notions of honesty in architecture. 
Knowles, dignified, 'determined', and 'self-reliant' (Metcalf, 19), largely practised alone in the later 1860s, his last commercial work being Tarn's drapers at Elephant and Castle, Southwark (1863), after which he returned to domestic practice, with Hedsor House, Buckinghamshire, for Lord Boston (1865-8). He retired from Raymond Buildings in 1869, but in 1872-3 designed a memorial fountain at Wigton, Cumberland, for long-standing client textile magnate George Moore. In retirement Knowles remained a dedicated and active member of the RIBA council (a record of his activities may be found in RIBA 'Transactions', 47, 1884, 619, and 'The Builder', 3 May 1884, 604). He died on 23 March 1884 at 49 Russell Square, Bloomsbury, where he lived with his younger son, George, after Susannah's death in 1876. He was buried with her at Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 56374


Lanner, Katharina Josefa (1829-1908), dancer and choreographer, was born in the parish of Laimgrube, Vienna, Austria, on 14 September 1829, one of the two daughters of Josef Lanner (1801-1843), a violinist and waltz composer, and his wife, Franciska, 'nee' Jahns. Her brother August (1834-1855) was a violinist and orchestra leader. She trained at the ballet school of the Vienna Court Opera, and made her debut in 'Angelica' at the city's Karntnertortheater on 4 August 1845. For ten years she danced with the Vienna Court Opera Ballet, where her parts included Fenella in 'Die Stumme von Portici' (1847), and the title roles in 'Elina' (1847) and 'Giselle' (1856). She also danced in Berlin, Munich, and Dresden. 
In 1862 Katti Lanner took the position of ballerina and ballet mistress at the State Theatre, Hamburg, where she choreographed ten successful ballets, including 'Uriella, der Damon der Nacht' (1862) and 'Sitala, das Gaukler-Madchen' (1863). On 11 February 1864, in Hamburg, she married the composer Johann Alfred Geraldini; they had three daughters -- Sofia, Katharina, and Albertina. In the late 1860s she toured Scandinavia and Russia, and by 1869 she was leading her own company, the Viennese Ballet Company, which performed in Bordeaux (1869), New York (1870), and Lisbon (1870-71). She appeared in London at Drury Lane in 1871, and made her Paris debut at the Theatre Italien in May 1872. In 1873 she travelled again to America, with the Kathi Lanner Coreographic Combination ['sic'], and toured for the next two years. She made several appearances at Niblo's Garden, New York, in 'Azrael' (1873) and 'Tom and Jerry' (1875). 
Lanner returned to London in 1875, and made her family's home at 40 North Side, Clapham Common. The following year she was invited to take charge of the National Training School of Dancing, which had been set up by the opera impresario James Mapleson, at 73 Tottenham Court Road. She later became sole owner of the school, with the object of 'the resuscitation of the faded glories of ballet, and to bring a thorough knowledge of the choreography art within the range of those classes among whom talent most abounds'. She was an affectionate but stern disciplinarian. From 1877 to 1881 she was ballet mistress at Her Majesty's Theatre, London, where she staged ballets for the Italian Opera Company, including 'Les papillons' (1878). Lanner continued to dance herself, one of her last appearances being as Elena in 'Robert le diable' at Her Majesty's on 16 July 1878. She also choreographed the ballets in Augustus Harris's pantomimes at Drury Lane and for pantomimes at the Crystal Palace. In 1887 she became ballet mistress (choreographer) at the Empire Theatre, which was then a variety theatre, and over the next twenty years she put on more than thirty ballets, some modern, some preserving classical traditions, with Adeline Genee as her principal ballerina. The music for most of these ballets was written by Herve and Leopold Wenzl, successive musical directors at the Empire, among them being 'The Sports of England' (1887), 'Cleopatra' (1889), 'Orfeo' (1891), 'The Girls I Left Behind Me' (1893), 'Faust' (1895, to music by Meyer Lutz), a new version of 'Les papillons' (1901), and 'The Milliner Duchess' (1903). Lanner was succeeded by Fred Farren, but was called out of retirement in 1906 to put on 'The Debutante', and the following year she choreographed 'Sir Roger de Coverley' to music by F. O. Carr. 
Lanner was an honorary member of the Imperial Society of Teachers of Dancing and of the Society of German Dance Teachers, and was one of the first women to choreograph regularly. Her training of young dancers was perhaps her most important contribution to the profession in Britain, though she was later rather eclipsed by the arrival of Diaghilev's Ballets Russes. She died at her home at Clapham Common on 15 November 1908, and was buried at Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 56376


Muir, Sir Richard David (1857-1924), barrister, was born at 16 Kelly Street, Greenock, Renfrewshire, on 8 March 1857, the son of Richard Muir, leather merchant, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Burleigh. One of sixteen children, he did not proceed to university and was originally destined for one of the Glasgow merchant trading houses. Not finding that work congenial, he made his way to London where a brother, Burleigh, was a barrister. Obtaining employment on the parliamentary staff of 'The Times', he took classes in shorthand, attended law courses at King's College, London, read for the bar at the Middle Temple, and became a barrister in 1884. He entered the chambers of Forrest Fulton, predominantly a criminal practitioner. Like many a tyro, impecunious barrister, Muir struggled to make do between devilling in chambers and continuing late night parliamentary work, shedding the latter as his practice grew. Fulton's, and therefore Muir's, practice was mostly in the London sessions courts, and Muir himself first became a junior Treasury counsel at the north London sessions. By 1889 he was in a position to marry Mary Beatrice Leycester (1859-1933), daughter of William Leycester, barrister and doyen of the 'Times' parliamentary staff. They had a son and a daughter. 
In 1892 Fulton became common serjeant, one of the judges at the central criminal court (Old Bailey). Muir took over Fulton's chambers and stayed until his death, becoming an expert on criminal law and procedure. Muir had few interests outside the law and his family. Like his younger contemporary Archibald Bodkin, Muir worked long hours, including at weekends, until towards the end of his life when, firmly established as the most senior court prosecutor, he relaxed somewhat, if short of actually retiring. 
Muir's best-known cases were heard at the Old Bailey. He became a specialist in murder, though he undertook a wide range of prosecutions including complex financial frauds. He moved successively up the ranks of Treasury counsel, becoming a senior counsel in 1901 and senior Treasury counsel at the Old Bailey in 1908. 
Muir's most famous case was the prosecution of Hawley Harvey Crippen in 1910. Muir was never, it was said, 'in all his long career as a criminal prosecutor more formidable and unflinching than in his masterly weaving together of the web which bound Crippen to his ultimate fate' (Young, 22). Almost equally well known was his prosecution in 1911 of Stinie Morrison for the murder of Leon Beron on Clapham Common. Procedurally at least as complex as the Crippen case because, although Morrison probably had an accomplice, that accomplice was never found, Muir was able through a misjudgement of defending counsel (Edward Abinger) to introduce evidence of Morrison's considerable criminal past. In addition there was a dramatic turn towards the end of the trial when a police constable's late testimony appeared to contradict some telling though not crucial detective evidence. Muir was able swiftly to discredit the evidence and secure a conviction. However, the home secretary, Winston Churchill, commuted the sentence of death to life imprisonment because, among other things, the court of criminal appeal had unintentionally cast doubt on the conviction. Muir's belief that the conviction was sound was later vindicated after Morrison's death in unusual circumstances. 
Although appointed recorder at Colchester from 1911, Muir never otherwise attained the judicial office that might have been expected and for which it seems generally agreed he was fitted (Biron, 121). It is also clear that when the post of director of public prosecutions became vacant in 1920 Muir was passed over in favour of Bodkin, when it was believed that Muir had been the retiring director's preferred successor. At the time members of the criminal bar did not usually take silk. By itself that would not have been an impediment: Fulton, for example, took silk only on becoming common serjeant in 1892. It may have been that timing was against him. In addition, though he was said to advise his juniors to take silk, he remained attached, some thought too attached, to his function as a Treasury prosecutor, which he would have had to give up on taking silk himself. 
There were likely to have been other considerations in play. Since Muir was senior to Bodkin, there must have been a deliberate decision to reject him. Jackson has speculated that Muir was thought to 'lack humanity' and that Bodkin was considered by Sir Gordon Hewart, the attorney-general, and Lloyd George, the prime minister, as 'the strong yet flexible' director of public prosecutions that was needed (Jackson, 169). Rufus Isaacs, the lord chief justice, a former attorney-general and a great confidant of the prime minister, had views on the appointment and it must be presumed that those views prevailed. 
Isaacs would have known Muir well, having led him in the Seddon case in 1912 and encountered him on other occasions. Muir's court style was, though effective, not generally appreciated. Retaining throughout his life a Scottish accent and somewhat dour manner, he went to great, some thought excessive, lengths to prepare his cases. Operating a system of cards and coloured pencils, he left no stone unturned in a manner quite opposite, for example, to Horace Avory, who was said to read through the papers once and thereafter conduct proceedings without further reference to them (Hastings, 96). Biron alleged that Muir's 'speeches made infinity intelligible' (Biron, 118) and that he was the only advocate who ever sent a witness to sleep. A long-serving Bow Street clerk claimed Muir was the only man to have sent him 'to sleep, actual heavy slumber, in court' and, agreeing with Biron, that Muir pressed his cases too hard against the accused (Lieck, 59-60). 
These are in the end questions of style and overlook the higher prosecutorial standards Muir espoused as distinct from the Old Bailey's former poor reputation for indifferent criminal practice, not to mention the louche social behaviour of Old Bailey practitioners. In the days before Muir a defence barrister characterized the trial as 'a formal preliminary to passing sentence upon the accused who had the effrontery to plead not guilty' (Purcell, 39). Muir played his part in raising practitioner standards and behaviour, especially in the rebuilt Old Bailey from 1908 when he succeeded Charles Mathews as chair of the bar mess. But his day passed and, with later generations itching to make their way, he was dismissed as out of touch. A young Norman Birkett defending against Muir in a complicated financial fraud prosecution described him as 'a silly, pompous, self-opinionated, vain, hard, emotionless, despicable ass!' (Hyde, 98). On the other hand, Humphreys, who knew Muir well, thought him 'as good a lawyer as any of the Treasury Counsel since the time of Poland... Judging from the references to him which I have read... I think Muir has been underrated and misunderstood' (Humphreys, 81). Muir became a bencher of the Middle Temple, and was for some years its treasurer. 
Muir never made great riches. His biographer thought that 'if it had not been for a number of lucrative defences he undertook towards the end of his life -- mainly income-tax cases -- he would have died a poor man' (Felstead, 67). He was a useful workhorse to the authorities who never brought themselves to reward him with the judicial office to which he aspired. They did, however, award him a knighthood in 1918, the year of the death of his only son at the western front from influenza just seven days before the armistice. He was said never to have recovered from that blow, mellowing into a less unbending figure in his last years, even taking up golf. He died in harness at his home, 30 Campden House Court, Kensington, London, on 14 January 1924, from pneumonia -- his last two opinions unsigned. He was buried at West Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 56379


Peek, James (1800-1879), biscuit manufacturer, was born on 8 June 1800, the sixth and youngest son of John Peek (1735-1847), farmer and landowner of Loddiswell, Devon, and his wife, Susanna. He was educated locally and then joined his brothers Richard and William in a tea, coffee, and spice dealers' business in Coleman Street, London. The firm became Peek Bros. and Winch in 1895. 
The brothers worked extremely hard. James Peek as a partner is said not to have taken even one day's holiday for many years, maintaining the books in the counting-house and keeping a weather eye on all sides of the firm. However, he found time to marry Elizabeth (died 1867), only daughter of James Masters, a Londoner, in 1824; she was the last in line of the Lemaitre family, Huguenots who had emigrated from Dieppe after the edict of Nantes was revoked in 1685. They had three daughters and three sons; the eldest, Henry William (1825-1898), headed the tea firm, served as an MP, and was created a baronet in 1874. 
By 1857 Peek had enough capital to consider setting up his younger sons in a separate business. That year he therefore established a biscuit manufactory, Peek Frean & Co., at Bermondsey in London, jointly with his nephew by marriage, George Hender Frean, a flour miller and engineer. Although both sons left the business, Peek stayed to become the driving force and main investor, exerting influence mainly from his nearby residence in Blackheath. His detailed instructions for managers show the bent of his mind. He insisted on the most thorough checks to avoid employee fraud. 'Suspicion is necessary in large establishments; 'thousands are ruined for want of it'' (Davis, 1.23). 
Peek's substantial investment of $30,000, plus the factory buildings he bought and leased to the firm, allowed it to start on a far more extensive scale than was usual; in 1858 it produced thirty-five different types of fancy biscuit. However, it incurred losses until mid-1861, partly through a decision to make under licence the aerated bread invented by Dr John Dauglish. This did not catch on; once it was discontinued, the firm moved into profit. John Carr, brother of Jonathan Dodgson Carr, was invited in 1860 to work for Peek Frean; in 1872 his son Arthur Carr joined the firm. 
Peek Frean gained much publicity from its contract with the French government to supply ship's biscuits during the Italian campaign of 1866, and again during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71; the latter contract also helped to relieve hunger during the siege of Paris. In mid-1871 the firm ceased producing ship's biscuits and concentrated on the fancy varieties; the Garibaldi, Pearl, and Marie biscuits were particularly popular. The original factory was destroyed by fire in 1873, and its successor's clock tower near London Bridge Station remained a landmark for many decades. 
Frean ceased to be an active partner in 1875, and Peek brought in as partner his son-in-law Thomas Stone. The latter's two sons subsequently became partners, but the Stone trio were not very progressive. While turnover in 1879 totalled $475,000, net profit was only $20,000. 
Peek was described as a little, dried-up man, clean-shaven and detesting beards; only the full beard sported by Frean was tolerated. Peek was invariably dressed in black, with an old-fashioned stock instead of a collar. Baptized in an independent chapel, throughout his life he held strong evangelical views, conducting business strictly but fairly, though somewhat over-anxious to chase the last halfpenny. In the year following his first wife's death in 1867, he married Jane, daughter of Sampson Trehane of Exeter, on 13 October 1868; they had no children. He died on 23 January 1879 at Watcombe Lodge, near Torquay, survived by his second wife, and bequeathing $50,000 to help poor people in Devon. 


@@@@@


doc= 56380


Noble, Francis (d. 1792), publisher and proprietor of a circulating library, and his brother 
Francis opened a bookshop at the Otway's Head, St Martin's Court, Leicester Fields, London, in the autumn of 1737, and began collaborating in minor publishing ventures. He moved to larger premises in the same street about 1743, and in the same year John opened his own bookshop at Dryden's Head, also in St Martin's Court. In the winter of 1744-5 the two brothers went into partnership at the new Otway's Head, where they began to advertise one of the earliest circulating libraries in London. A catalogue, 'The Yearly and Quarterly Subscriber', was produced soon afterwards, listing about 1400 titles and with an engraved frontispiece by Bonneau, depicting a library. In 1749 the partnership was ended and the brothers maintained separate businesses, though frequently collaborating with one another. Having moved to yet further premises in St Martin's Court, John resurrected his earlier trade sign and established his own bookshop and library, where he remained throughout his career. Francis stayed in their previous shop until 1752, but moved to larger premises in nearby King Street, Covent Garden. His new library was illustrated on a trade card engraved by Simon Ravenet. In 1759 he moved once again to larger premises on the south side of High Holborn, where he remained until his retirement. 
In the years prior to his partnership Francis Noble had published more than fifty titles, usually in collaboration with other booksellers. These were mainly works of a popular nature, such as collections of tales, reprints of existing imaginative works, or else books designed for children. John began publishing similar works on his own account in 1744, but from the following year the imprint F. & J. Noble begins to appear. During the five years of their partnership the rate of publishing declined, and the brothers appear to have rather concentrated upon developing their circulating library business. However, from about 1750 the brothers began once more to develop a programme of publishing popular imaginative literature, both individually and in collaboration, including authors such as Defoe, as well as a host of anonymous and pseudonymous works. Although many of their books are difficult to date accurately, there appears to have been two main periods of publishing activity: between 1754 and 1757, and between 1766 and 1773. A survey by James Raven indicates that the Noble brothers may have been 'responsible for a tenth of all prose fiction titles published in the 1750s and 1760s', and that 'over one hundred and seventy novels and fiction miscellanies (and further editions) were issued jointly for F. and J. Noble between 1744 and 1778' (Raven, 303). 
The brothers also occasionally reissued remaindered works by other publishers and library suppliers under their own imprints. These publications were supplied in large numbers to satisfy a growing demand for such works from their own and also from other circulating libraries in London and the provinces. By the mid-1760s Francis alone claimed to hold a library stock of 20,000 volumes (although only a third as many titles), which had grown to 30,000 by 1787. Subscribers were charged half a guinea (10's'. 6died) a year and were allowed to borrow two books at a time for six days. 
The mediocre literary quality of the Nobles' productions, combined with the undoubted success of their publishing enterprises, led to criticisms in the literary journals and among other members of the book trade. According to the 'Critical Review', they 'never paid to any author for his labour a sum equal to the wages of a journeyman taylor', and others regarded their works as formulaic and likely to debauch the young female customers of their libraries. The brothers responded to their critics in a series of advertisements appearing in their volumes, and in their 'Appeal to the Public', which accused the 'London Magazine' of having traduced 'every novel we publish,... frequently without reading them'. These disputes did not damage the reputations of the brothers or the growing popularity of circulating libraries, and served rather to publicize their activities. 
At some point Francis Noble married Ann, and the couple moved to Kentish Town, Middlesex. They had two sons, both of whom died young, and two daughters: Elizabeth married Henry Mann, and Clarissa remained unmarried. Francis retired from business in 1789-90 after his daughter won a share in a $30,000 state lottery prize. He died in Kentish Town in June 1792; probate of his estate was granted to his daughters on 28 June 1792, his wife having died. John Noble had retired from business in 1778, and likewise lived in Kentish Town. He died there in September 1797, apparently unmarried and without any surviving children. 


@@@@@


doc= 56381


King, Mary (1696-1747), businesswoman, was born on Vine Street in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields, London. Her father, Crispin, was a cobbler, and her mother peddled fruit, greens, and fish. At a young age Moll began to sell fruit from a barrow and earned a reputation for industry and good temper. She married Thomas King (1694-1739), who had been educated at Eton College and admitted to King's College, Cambridge, in 1717, and the two of them saved enough money to open a stall in Covent Garden. After a few years they bought a house in Covent Garden market in which she sold coffee, tea, and chocolate. Soon they owned three adjoining shacks, and the business flourished; it became, in fact, 'a feature of the Piazza itself' (Chancellor, 62). They catered to the early morning market crowd, daytime shoppers and idlers, and, in a tavern atmosphere, to the evening pleasure-seekers, who ranged from actors from the nearby theatres and fashionable couples seeking slightly risque experiences to ladies of pleasure and their clients. Among the services she offered was sending a servant bearing a light with her customers to the bagnios she recommended. 
The Kings benefited from upper-class acquaintances, Tom from his time at school and Moll from her brief affair with William Murray, first earl of Mansfield. A common legend is that George II once came with Viscount Gage and was almost drawn into a fight. 'Noblemen and the first 'beaux'... after leaving Court would go to her house in full dress, with swords... and in rich brocaded silk coats, and... conversed with... chimney-sweepers, gardeners, and the market-people' (Chancellor, 63). Visitors described playing fashionable card-games and enjoying 'the best of conversation' (Shelley, 208). 
Moll and Tom bought land at Haverstock Hill near Hampstead and built a large, comfortable country house. They had a son born on 30 August 1730 and named for his father, whom they sent to Westminster School. For over twenty years King's was the most notorious and successful meeting-place in Covent Garden. William Hogarth depicted Moll's coffee house in his 'Morning'; her building and sign are clearly visible, and a fight is going on inside. Ronald Paulson points out that Hogarth places it to the other side of the square from its actual location so that it partially obscures Inigo Jones's St Paul's and forms the juxtaposition he wanted. Henry Fielding refers to it in 'Pasquin', and the prologue to his 'Covent Garden Tragedy' asks 'What rake is ignorant of King's Coffee House?'. 
Throughout her career, King was prosecuted for keeping a disorderly house. 'The Life and Character of Moll King' says she was indicted nearly twenty times but very rarely convicted. For example, in May 1736 she was censured for allowing the men who disrupted a mass to get drunk at her house, and in November 1737 she was fined for keeping a 'Disorderly House at which sexual offences were committed' (Burford, 58). She was in king's bench prison briefly in June 1739 for refusing to pay a $200 fine for beating a young man in her coffee house; she insisted she was keeping order and said 'if she was to pay Two Hundred Pounds to all the insolent Boys she had thrash'd for their Impudence, the Bank of 'England' would be unable to furnish her with the Cash' ('Life and Character', 15). 
King retired to Hampstead in 1745, rented a pew in a church, and lived her last years quietly. She died at Hampstead on 17 September 1747. Some time afterwards, possibly that year, an anonymous account of her life and character was published. 


@@@@@


doc= 56382


Seilern und Aspang, Count Antoine Edward (1901-1978), art historian and collector, was born at Frensham Place, Farnham, Surrey, on 17 September 1901, the youngest of three sons of Count Carl Seilern und Aspang (1866-1940) and his American-born wife, Antoinette, 'nee' Woerishoffer (1875-1901), who died five days after his birth. Brought up by his adored grandmother Anna Woerishoffer (1850-1931) in New York and Vienna, Seilern was educated at the third district Realgymnasium, Vienna (1912-20), and at the Wiener Handelsakademie (1920-21); he studied engineering at the Technische Hochschule (1922-4). He later worked in the timber industry in Yugoslavia and at banking in Vienna. As a wealthy young nobleman, he was a keen horseman, racehorse owner and breeder, and became a qualified air pilot. He went big game hunting in Africa, Mongolia, Indo-China, and Yukon between 1930 and 1933, and made a world tour in 1930-31. 
At the suggestion of his father and his stepmother, Countess Ilse, he enrolled at Vienna University (1933-9) to study principally art history; an art historian family friend, Count Karl Wilczek, recommended him to Johannes Wilde for private tuition, thus beginning a lifelong friendship. His university teachers were Karl Swoboda, Julius Schlosser, and Hans Sedelmayr; but his interest in collecting was prompted by Count Karl Lanckoronski, himself a noted collector. Seilern's doctoral thesis on the Venetian influences on Rubens's ceiling paintings was accepted on 9 June 1939. Like his father and brothers Seilern had dual Austrian and British nationality, but he renounced his Austrian citizenship after the First World War, and was thus able to remove his collection and library (and that of Wilde) from 6 Brahmsplatz, Vienna, to London, in the summer of 1939. Seilern enlisted in the British army, becoming a private in the Pioneer Corps before volunteering for the Russo-Finnish campaign in March-April 1940. After escaping from occupied Norway to Sweden, Seilern joined the Royal Artillery and was eventually commissioned as an interpreter. During the war he acquired the lease of 56 Prince's Gate, South Kensington, London, a gloomy Victorian mansion which was to remain his London home for the rest of his life; he had bought a farm near Chesham, Buckinghamshire, in 1939. 
On his grandmother's death in 1931 Seilern inherited his share of a large fortune made from railways and the liberal German-language newspaper 'New Yorker Staats-Zeitung'. He had begun collecting in the late 1920s, his taste shaped by the collections of the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna, and by his growing interest in Rubens. Guided by Ludwig Burchard and Wilde, to whom he constantly turned for advice, Seilern had by 1939 built up a substantial collection of paintings and drawings: these included the Rubens 'Landscape by Moonlight' (which Sir Joshua Reynolds once owned), Rubens's 'modelli' for the wings of the Antwerp 'Descent from the Cross'; and four 'modelli' for the Jesuit church at Aranjuez by his other great love, Giovanni Battista Tiepolo. He eventually owned thirty-two paintings and twenty-two drawings by Rubens, and twelve paintings and twenty-nine drawings by Tiepolo. Superb drawings by Giovanni Bellini, Brueghel, Durer, Hugo van der Goes, Michelangelo, Rembrandt, Watteau, Degas, Picasso, and Cezanne, as well as by contemporary Austrian artists, indicate the range of his taste, which also extended to Chinese bronzes. His greatest coup was the purchase, in 1942, of 'The Entombment with Donor and the Resurrection' by the Master of Flemalle, which had been wrongly auctioned as by Adriaen Isenbrandt; rivalling this in splendour is Bernardo Daddi's 'Virgin and Child with Saints', 1338, which he bought in 1956 from the Collalto family, the only major Florentine work in the collection. In 1950 he commissioned Oskar Kokoschka to paint the three 'Prometheus' panels for the ceiling of the anteroom in his Prince's Gate house. Seilern was a very generous benefactor to the museums, notably the National Gallery, London, and the British Museum, but insisted his gifts remain anonymous. He shunned publicity and abhorred dealers, the exception being James Byam Shaw of Colnaghi's, whose scholarship, judgement, and integrity he trusted. Through his friendship with Wilde, by 1948 deputy director of the Courtauld Institute, Seilern decided to bequeath his magnificent collection of 127 paintings and some 300 drawings to the Courtauld, and in deference to his wishes that it was not to bear his name, it is now known as the Prince's Gate collection. Between 1955 and 1971 he privately published a catalogue of his collection in seven volumes. 
Of medium height and square-built, Seilern could be, by turns, an ebullient Viennese aristocrat at ease in society and charming to women, or a reclusive, serious scholar, eager to discuss art with other students and scholars, to whom he was generous in showing his 'little collection', as he called it. He amassed his treasures with a keen eye for quality, but was also deeply aware of the historical significance of the works he acquired. He never married, and died of heart disease at 56 Prince's Gate on 6 July 1978. He was buried in Frensham churchyard on 13 July but later exhumed and removed to the family vault at Aspang, south of Vienna. 


@@@@@


doc= 56383


Young, Andrew McLaren (1913-1975), art historian, was born on 19 September 1913, at the manse, Southend, Argyll, the eldest child and the only son of three children of the Revd Robert Comingo Young (1882-1946), Presbyterian minister, and his wife, Olga Parsons (1890-1939). From 1926 to 1930 McLaren Young was educated at Jamaica College, in Kingston, where his father was a missionary, and his speech always retained a distinctive Caribbean drawl. Later he attended George Watson's College, Edinburgh (1931-2), and the University of Edinburgh (1932-8). Originally intending to follow his father into the ministry, under David Talbot Rice's influence he became interested in the history of art, and although matriculating in 1933, left in 1938 without taking his degree. After a year's temporary attachment at the Tate Gallery, he was commissioned in the King's Own Yorkshire light infantry in 1939, served in Burma and north Africa, being wounded in Sicily. He was demobilized as a captain in 1945. He had married Margaret (Margie) Heath Halse ('b'. 1919) in 1940; they had a daughter, Caroline ('b'. 1944), and a son, Robert ('b'. 1951). 
From 1946 to 1949 McLaren Young was assistant curator at the Barber Institute of Fine Arts, University of Birmingham. Then, in 1949, he was appointed senior lecturer at the University of Glasgow, with the task of establishing an art history department. He fostered high academic standards, and in 1965 the university awarded him an honorary MA on his appointment as Richmond professor of fine art. He began his life's work on James McNeill Whistler while at Glasgow, where the Birnie Philip collection -- given by Whistler's sister-in-law -- formed an important adjunct both to the eighteenth-century foundation collection of William Hunter and to two fine print collections. McLaren Young also planned, and fund-raised for, the new Hunterian Art Gallery, demonstrating his flair as a museum curator. The Whistler and Charles Rennie Mackintosh exhibitions which he organized in 1960 and 1968 respectively were models of scholarship and sensitive re-creations of period ambience. An inspiring leader, McLaren Young was widely read and generous towards younger scholars. Wittily caustic, he was a large man in every sense: one moment he could explode in fury, and the next, invite one to share a fine malt whisky. 
On 4 February 1975 McLaren Young collapsed from a heart attack at the Royal Academy J. M. W. Turner Exhibition, and died on the way to hospital. He was buried at Keil Com Keil, Southend, Argyll. His memorials are the Whistler oil paintings 'catalogue raisonne', finished by three colleagues and published in 1980, and the new Hunterian Art Gallery, much enriched by acquisitions and benefactions secured by him. 


@@@@@


doc= 56384


Sir Geoffrey William Gerald Agnew (1908-1986) became first a salesman, then a partner, at a most unpropitious time. Geoffrey, born on 11 July 1908 at Knutsford, Cheshire, was the elder son of Gerald Agnew (1882-1954) and his wife, Olive Mary (died 1946), daughter of William Danks, a canon of Canterbury. Educated at Eton College, where he was an oppidan scholar in 1923, he read history at Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating in 1930. As a fifth generation member of Agnews, he was proud of the family tradition; on 25 April 1934 he married art historian the Hon. Doreen Maud (1908/9-1990), younger daughter of Herbert Merton Jessel, first Baron Jessel; they had two sons and a daughter, and the younger son, Julian ('b'. 1943), eventually succeeded his father as chairman. In his 'Agnew's, 1817-1967' (1967) Sir Geoffrey recalled the difficulties of selling even the top-quality pictures; Agnews was overstocked, and only staved off bankruptcy by making several important, highly profitable, private sales in the late 1930s. He became managing director in 1937, and revived the practice of exhibiting works by contemporary British artists, although keeping more to the safely established and orthodox rather than the avant-garde. 
Unfit for military service during the Second World War, Geoffrey Agnew returned to Eton as a memorable history master and officer training corps company commander. A man of great energy, and bluff, commanding presence, his booming voice and showmanship masked an innate taste and sensibility, which, combined with wide knowledge, a formidable memory, and great perseverance, made him a dynamic leader and masterly negotiator. Returning to Agnews, he was chairman from 1965 to 1982, and quickly re-established its international pre-eminence, winning the confidence equally of museum directors and wealthy collectors, some of whom, like his best client, Paul Mellon, became personal friends. He sold Mellon in 1966 Turner's 'Dort or Dordrecht: the Dort Packet-Boat from Rotterdam Becalmed (1818)', one of the finest earlier works still privately owned. Turner was an artist of whom he spoke with great warmth and understanding. He became founder chairman of the Friends of the Courtauld Institute in 1970, chairman of the Society of London Art Dealers in 1970-74, an adviser to the trustees of Chequers, and was involved in many charities. Knighted in 1973, he died at his home, Flat 3, 6 Onslow Square, London, on 22 November 1986, and his body was cremated at Putney. The firm still flourishes and remains an essentially family concern: it has played a major role in the English art world for nearly two centuries. 


@@@@@


doc= 56387


Mackay, Helen Marion McPherson (1891-1965), paediatrician, was born on 23 May 1891 in Inverness, Scotland, the second of three children and only daughter of Duncan Lachlan Mackay, of the Indian Civil Service, and his wife, Marion Gordon Campbell Mackay ('nee' Wimberley), the daughter of Douglas Wimberley JP of Inverness. Her early years were spent in Burma, where she was educated at home. She entered Cheltenham Ladies' College at the age of fifteen and went on to study medicine at the London School of Medicine for Women (Royal Free Hospital) and qualified MRCS, LRCP, and MB BS (London) in 1914. It was very difficult at that time for a woman to pursue a career in a medical speciality but there were some opportunities in paediatrics and she managed to obtain an appointment as house physician and surgeon at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital for Children in Hackney. She belonged to a generation of paediatricians who took part in the development of paediatrics as a speciality distinct from adult medicine and was one of the first women to be appointed as a hospital consultant in any speciality. She became MRCP and MD (London) in 1917. 
In 1920 Mackay became the first woman to be appointed as physician to the Queen Elizabeth Hospital. Soon after her appointment she went to Vienna with a team of British scientists from the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine, led by Harriette Chick, to research into the cause and prevention of rickets, an extremely common disease in the famine which occurred in the aftermath of the First World War. This study provided important evidence for the role of cod liver oil and sunlight in the prevention and cure of rickets in childhood. The Medical Research Council's 'Special Report' 77 summarized their work in Vienna. While in Vienna Mackay observed that anaemia was even more common than rickets and became interested in finding the cause. Having found that many of the anaemic infants in Vienna improved with iron therapy, she returned to London and made further studies on anaemia in childhood. Using the same scientific rigour that characterized the study on rickets and working with a medical statistician, Major Greenwood, she became the first person to show that iron deficiency is the commonest cause of anaemia in children, to study its epidemiology, and to draw attention to the importance of its prevention. Her 'Nutritional Anaemia in Infancy' was published in 1931, and the findings of her studies still summarize fairly accurately much of our present day knowledge of iron deficiency anaemia in infancy. 
Mackay worked as a consultant paediatrician to the Mother's Hospital, Clapton, and to Hackney Hospital until her retirement in 1959 and made many research contributions into the nutrition of new-born babies and young children. In 1934 she became the first woman to be made a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. Her widest reputation came from her research work but the deep respect and affection with which she was held locally came from her unfailing commitment to her clinical work in the East End of London. She encouraged and inspired many young paediatricians, notably Ciceley Williams, who described the nutritional disorder of kwashiorkor. Mackay recognized the importance of social factors in child health and was one of the first paediatricians to take paediatric care outside hospital into the community. She leaned to the left in her political views but was not politically active. She had no conspicuous religious beliefs. 
Dressed in the familiar brown suit and tie she wore every day, and sometimes sporting a trilby hat, Mackay had a somewhat severe physical presence but her smile was warm and kind. She had an engaging honesty and lack of self-importance. She was reserved, with a quiet voice, and had little small talk but could be firm and show disapproval when necessary. She never married. Lorel Goodfellow (died 1988), a laboratory scientist, with whom she wrote one of her first papers on anaemia, became her lifelong companion. Visitors to their home were amused to find that they always called each other 'Mackay' and 'Goodfellow'. Outside medicine, her abiding interest was ornithology and she belonged to more societies concerned with this pursuit than with medicine. Mackay died of a stroke in the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital in London on 17 July 1965 and was buried on the 20th at Golders Green crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 56389


Pite, Arthur Beresford (1861-1934), architect and educator, was born on 2 September 1861 at 9 South Terrace, Grosvenor Park, Walworth, Surrey, the second son of Alfred Robert Pite (1832-1911), architect, and his wife, Hephzibah Starkey, and was baptized on 27 February 1862 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. 
For Pite architecture was an 'ancestral' calling, his earliest memories being of the distinctive aroma of tracing paper in his father's London office. His father's work, at the time of his birth and later, in partnership with W. G. Habershon, consisted mainly of churches and domestic buildings, including work for various London estates. Before his marriage, however, in the late 1850s, he had worked in Brazil as an architect to the ambitious Dom Pedro Railway project. Arthur's education began in London at King's College School, and the National Art Training School in South Kensington. From 1876 to 1881 he was articled in the Cardiff office of what was at first Habershon Pite and Fawckner, his father leaving the partnership in 1878. His architectural studies continued meanwhile at University College (where he received the Donaldson medal in 1879) and the Architectural Association in London. He came to the notice of the profession at an early age due to his controversial and brilliantly accomplished Gothic design for a West End club house -- apparently intended as a 'humorous travesty' of its subject (W. A. Pite, 131) -- with which, in March 1882, he won the Soane medallion of the Royal Institute of British Architects. He then travelled for a year in France and Germany, with his architect brother William, who was Architectural Association travelling student, later to find renown as the architect of King's College Hospital, Denmark Hill, London. 
The club house design came at the end of a period when Gothic -- particularly in the work of George Edmund Street, William Burges, and E. W. Godwin -- had begun seriously to challenge classicism as the style for civic buildings. Pite's design may, indeed, have been intended to pay homage to Burges, who died while he was preparing it. If Burges's Cardiff Castle -- the towers of which Pite would have seen rising while articled in that city -- might be said to have given the club house its architectural character, it also gave the young and spiritually minded Pite a deeper sense of a 'golden city', which he felt it should be the ambition of every architect to help bring into being. Significantly, he attached to his club house design the Spanish motto 'El Dorado, yo he trovado' ('I have found the Golden City'). In 1884 he worked briefly as a draughtsman for 'The Builder' magazine, responsible for a series of brilliant illustrations at a time when its new editor, H. H. Statham, was trying to inject new energy and vision into the paper's coverage of architectural topics. 
Pite's independent buildings were relatively few. From 1883 (the year he was also admitted as a student to the Royal Academy) to 1897 he was first improver, and then managing clerk, in the office of the leading London architect John Belcher, his finest contributions of this period being to the Institute of Chartered Accountants building in the City of London (1888-93), a key design in the revival of a more sophisticated version of classicism. With Belcher he early became involved with the Art-Workers' Guild (founded in 1884), later becoming its master. After 1900 much of Pite's time was spent teaching, following an invitation from his friend, and founder of the Art-Workers' Guild, W. R. Lethaby, to become the first professor of architecture at the newly formed Royal College of Art, a post he held until 1923. He was also architectural director of a pioneering educational project bringing together architects, artists, and builders, at the London county council's School of Building in Brixton, and, from 1909 to 1931, a member of the University of Cambridge board of architectural studies. 
The relative security he obtained from teaching enabled Pite to choose his own architectural projects carefully, and he appeared to choose those which provided an opportunity to establish new models for a variety of different building types. He was regarded in his day as experimental and avant-garde, seeming to ignore conventional stylistic boundaries. H. S. Goodhart-Rendel said that 'What was good enough for the best people at any time... seems always to have been something of which he had tired ten years before' (W. A. Pite, 125). As a devout Christian he particularly favoured the development of new forms in connection with church buildings, incorporating these later in his secular buildings. Sometimes his visionary compositions, in particular his proposal for a 'tower of healing' of 1904, closely combined secular with sacred imagery. 
The finest of Pite's churches is Christ Church, Brixton Road, London (1896-1902). It represents an early example of a return to Byzantine sources, incorporating innovations such as a studious 'layering' of the walls, using different intensities of brick polychromy. With Lethaby he attempted a much larger version of a Byzantine church in an unsuccessful entry for the 1902 competition for a new Anglican cathedral at Liverpool. An idiosyncratic Wesleyan church at Gospel Oak (1899; dem.) and a chancel added to the eighteenth-century church of Holy Trinity, Clapham Common (1905), both in London, reveal a later affection for the work of Sir Christopher Wren -- which was not uncommon among younger English architects at this time. Outside England, Pite was involved in work which included missionary buildings in Palestine, and a notable cathedral in Kampala, Uganda (1911-13). 
Pite was a lover of Dickens and appreciated his vision of London, and it was as architect to the Howard de Walden estate in St Marylebone that he came closest to realizing his vision of a 'golden city'. Pite produced for the estate a fine series of houses (including 82 Mortimer Street, 1893, with its Michelangelesque sculpture), apartment blocks, a hostel, a church house, medical buildings, a restaurant (Pagani's), a warehouse, business premises, and a day school. Not far from St Marylebone stands the building considered by many to be Pite's masterpiece: built in 1906-8, the London, Edinburgh, and Glasgow insurance offices on Euston Square. Like some of the buildings on the estate, these offices show the influence of Michelangelo, but the earlier literal references to the sculpture of the Medici tombs were superseded here by a plastic manipulation of load-bearing masonry, with little applied decoration. Another contemporary example of the influence of Michelangelo can be seen in the garden architecture of Burton Manor in Cheshire (1909-13). Pite's sense of place and attention to history are shown in the way in which the insurance offices echo the Greek revival style of nearby important early nineteenth-century structures, such as St Pancras Church and Euston Arch. In the same way, his ebullient facade for the Burlington Arcade on Piccadilly (1930-31) seems designed to echo the very different commercial and cultural exuberance of that thoroughfare. In the Euston building, and later ones such as the primitive, 'aboriginal' branch library in Thornhill Square, Islington, Pite's architecture might be compared with that of his Slovenian contemporary Joze Plecnik. 
On 20 April 1887 Pite married Mary Kilvinton Mowll (died 1905) at Whitfield in Kent. In private he was reserved and meditative. Only in his lectures and other public utterances was his dry wit given free rein. He made light of his own pinched features in one of his early competition pseudonyms, Chichevache, Chaucers's thin-faced and voracious monster. Through his drawing, teaching, and lecturing he attracted a number of young admirers, some of whom were themselves to be influential in later years, although none ever adopted anything like a 'Pite style'. They included Charles Holden, A. E. Richardson, H. S. Goodhart-Rendel, William Curtis Green, and H. Berry Webber. It was Richardson who compared Pite, near the end of his life, to the Roman twin-faced god 'Janus bifrons', for his ability to look with equal passion into the past and the future (W. A. Pite, 134). Pite died at home, at 22 Manor Way, Beckenham, Kent, on 27 November 1934, and was buried in Norwood cemetery in south London on 30 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 56394


Kennon, Sidney (d. 1754), midwife and collector, whose family background and education are obscure, distinguished herself initially in her services to the royal family, especially to Queen Caroline and Augusta, princess of Wales. The infant George III was delivered by her. Kennon was highly respected for her professional acumen and, at the time of her death, could command 50 guineas for attending the birth of a child. Her connections at court gave her some degree of influence. Dinner guests at her home in Jermyn Street, London, often included the titled; Frederick, prince of Wales, is said to have dined with her regularly. 
As a result of her professional interests and financial success, Mrs Kennon (as she was known) became an avid collector, beginning perhaps in the early 1740s. The earliest records of her holdings refer to natural history material. She owned worms and polyps and traded them with Martin Folkes, president of the Royal Society, with whom she also engaged in discussions regarding their microscopical anatomy. Her collection also contained human anatomical material, a unique claim for a woman collector of her century. 
Kennon's collection expanded to include a great variety of subjects. Horace Walpole laughed about the historic and ethnographic items he purchased at her posthumous sale but then displayed them at Strawberry Hill, noting in the catalogue both her ownership and virtuosity. Mary Delany, an avid collector herself, admired Kennon's collection of shells. Richard Mead, physician-in-ordinary to George II, gave her one of a set of three crocodiles which he received about 1745. Her coins and medals were esteemed very fine by both dealers and collectors. 
Kennon died at her home, Clifford Street, Burlington Gardens, London, on 11 December 1754. Her belongings were bequeathed to the Revd Dr Arthur Young, author of 'Historical Dissertations on Idolatrous Corruptions in Religion' (1734) and father of Arthur Young (1741-1820), the agricultural writer. He sold the natural history books to a relative, while the coins, natural history specimens, and historic and ethnographic curiosities were sold at public sales through the auctioneer Abraham Langford in 1755 and 1756. The sales were frequented by many collectors. The shells alone were valued by one observer at $2500, while another estimated the whole of the estate to be worth about $5000. 'It is said that on her deathbed Kennon gave the physician Frank Nicholls a bank note for $500 for his services to the midwives' cause ' (Donnison, 32). 
Kennon was an acknowledged expert on childbirth and an opponent of man-midwives and their use of instruments. Despite this apparent acknowledgement of distinct gender roles, Mrs Kennon in both her profession and collections successfully negotiated a territory between such separate spheres. 


@@@@@


doc= 56401


Stoughton, Thomas Wilberforce (1840-1917), publisher, was born at Windsor, Berkshire, one of the eleven children of the nonconformist theologian John Stoughton DD (1807-1897), and his wife, Mary Vyse, 'nee' Cooper (died 1879), daughter of George Cooper of Windsor. Only Thomas and three of his sisters survived to adulthood. Stoughton's education and experience included a year's study in Berlin, where he found friends among the Moravians. He worked in a London shipping office before being apprenticed to the evangelical publishing house of James Nisbet & Co. On 16 June 1868 he went into partnership with Matthew Henry Hodder to establish the publishing house of Hodder and Stoughton at 27 Paternoster Row, London. Dr John Stoughton's acquaintance with E. V. Walford, of his publishers Jackson, Walford, and Hodder, may have forwarded the link between Thomas and M. H. Hodder. Various occasions have been suggested for Stoughton's acquaintance with Hodder: both were in the orbit of the Congregationalist Dr Thomas Binney, and both fathers had lived in Windsor. 
On 5 November 1868 Stoughton married Maxwell Gordon Lindsay Graeme ('bap'. 1842, died 1927), only daughter of Alexander Rae Thomson, then deceased. The marriage was performed by John Stoughton in Kensington Chapel. They had two sons, John and Cecil, and a daughter, May. 
From the firm's inception Stoughton paid attention to its finances and travelled the west of England and Scotland; in 1885 he recruited the Revd William Robertson Nicoll, Free Church minister at Kelso, as editor of 'The Expositor' in place of Dr Samuel Cox, whose doctrine of eternal punishment was unacceptable to the partners. Stoughton's affinity for things Scottish brought to the firm's lists kailyard fiction and Scottish theology and, with trepidation, George Adam Smith's 'The Book of Isaiah' (2 vols., 1880-90), which first established that there were two Isaiahs. The firm acquired influence in affairs through its periodicals, especially the 'British Weekly' (1886-1946). Stoughton's politics were Liberal-nonconformist but imperialism was his chief conviction; he argued that Britain should prepare for attack by Germany. He built a mission room at Norwood, and from this congregation came many employees of Hodder and Stoughton. 
Thomas Stoughton was rotund with a falsetto voice, fastidious in dress, universally courteous, wary but persistent. He enjoyed cricket at Lord's, and drove a horse carriage to town, refusing to own a motor car. After the death of Matthew Hodder, and already suffering from severe arthritis, he withdrew from active business. He died at his home, 34 Beulah Hill, Upper Norwood, London, on 20 February 1917. After a memorial service in Auckland Hall, his mission room, he was buried in Norwood cemetery on 24 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 56402


Sutton, William Richard (1835x7-1900), entrepreneur and housing philanthropist, was born in Kennington, Lambeth, the youngest son of five children born to Frederick Wilson Sutton (1798-1852) and his wife, Mary Head Matts (1811-1866/7). His father was a partner in the stationery firm of Shepherd and Sutton, based in Foster Lane in the City of London. In 1851 Sutton was living with his family in Foster Lane, next door to the stationery firm. His grandmother headed the household and ran the adjacent Fountain inn, in which his father assisted as a barman. Sutton was educated at the City of London School between 1845 and 1850, when he left aged fourteen. After the death of his father in 1852, his eldest brother emigrated to New Zealand and Sutton moved with his sister Mary and their mother back to Mrs Sutton's birthplace in Merton, Surrey. 
Sutton would seem to be an example of a self-made millionaire and according to an obituary showed signs of business ability early in his career ('City Press'). In the mid-1850s he established the business of Sutton & Co. Carriers from The Fountain inn, exploiting the inn's existing function as a receiving and distribution house for goods and parcels. The company expanded rapidly and the firm's head offices moved, first to Aldersgate Street and then in 1878 to purpose-built premises in Golden Lane. Sutton profited from using the railways to distribute large parcels at lower 'tonnage' rates than would have been due if the parcels' smaller constituent packages had been sent individually. The expansion of this business during the 1860s brought Sutton into conflict with the South Eastern and Great Western railway companies which tried to recover some of their 'lost' income through repeatedly imposing surcharges on Sutton's goods. After several years of litigation an appeal to the House of Lords ultimately settled the case in Sutton's favour in 1868. On the occasion of Sutton's legal success his employees presented him with a testimonial paying tribute to his 'energy, tact, forethought and straightforward dealing' (Butcher and Butcher, 9). A former employee recalled him as strict and honest, but rather humourless and sometimes hasty (ibid.). Nevertheless, his employees pledged their 'earnest co-operation' and by 1900 the carrying company possessed some 600 branches throughout the UK, the colonies, and elsewhere. 
Important though Sutton & Co. Carriers was as the foundation of Sutton's business success, it was not the only source of the multi-million pound fortune which he amassed. Sutton's many property investments included a $200,000 scheme of office and factory development in the St Luke's area of the City of London and a variety of commercial and residential premises in London and Brighton. Other areas of investment included some eleven brewing, bottling, and distilling firms. Sutton was a founder, director, and major shareholder of two of these companies -- the gin, whisky, and brandy distillery, Sutton, Carden & Co. based in Finsbury, and the New London Brewery which manufactured ale, port, and stout in its Kennington premises. Both firms were founded in the early 1880s and later diversified their operations to meet changes in demand by supplying wines, cordials, mineral waters, tea, coffee, and tobacco as well as acquiring hotels and inns. 
Sutton married his first wife, Ann Eleanor (1836x8-1891), daughter of Thomas Archdeacon Lewis, on 15 October 1864. By 1871 the couple had moved to their new house, Sunnydene, West Hill, near Crystal Palace in Sydenham. Sutton appreciated fine design in his surroundings and commissioned J. F. Bentley, the architect of Westminster Cathedral, to design both his head office in Golden Lane and his house. Sutton also sponsored his brother-in-law, the organ builder Thomas Christopher Lewis, who was a friend of Bentley's. Lewis lived with the Suttons at Sunnydene and worked from business premises provided by Sutton, but there is no other evidence of links between Sutton and the wider artistic circles of his day. 
In 1891 Ann Sutton died and four years later Sutton married again, on 14 December 1895. His second wife was Eliza Anna Venus White (died 1937), widowed daughter of William Dobson, surgeon. Sutton had no children of his own, although both of his wives brought children with them to their marriages. Ann had an adopted daughter, Kate, and Eliza a son and two daughters. After the death of his first wife, Sutton withdrew from his business affairs for a few years due to ill health. Although he retained his house in London, he took up residence with his second wife in Hove, Sussex. In 1899 Sutton resumed his business activities which he continued to pursue until a few days before his death. On 20 May 1900 Sutton died, from bronchitis and cardiac failure, at his Sussex home, 6 Adelaide Crescent, Hove. He was buried at Norwood cemetery, London, on 24 May. 
Sutton's obituary in the 'City Press' stressed his business prowess and noted that 'He took but little interest in public affairs' as he 'confined his attention mainly to his business' (23 May 1900). At his death, however, Sutton left the bulk of his estate to establish a trust for the provision of dwellings for the poor in London and other populous places in England. After a limited number of additional bequests were paid to his brother Charles, certain business associates, and his second wife, who lived until 1937, the assets left to found the trust were valued at over $2 million. 
In 1913, when speaking of his brother's intentions, Charles Sutton said that he had had 'one great idea, and that was to crystallise the old proverb that prevention was better than cure. He believed that healthy homes and pure air and sanitation were better than all the hospitals that could be built' ('Liverpool Courier', 24 Sept 1913). Despite having lived his life in a society which emphasized voluntary activity, there is no evidence of Sutton or his immediate family having been actively involved in philanthropy. He did, however, work in close proximity to well-known public figures and Sir Sydney Waterlow, lord mayor of London and founder of the Improved Industrial Dwellings Company, owned business premises adjacent to those of Sutton, Carden & Co. in Finsbury. 
The trustees nominated by Sutton to establish his housing trust were his elder brother Charles, his solicitor, Charles Edward Tranter Lamb, and Thomas Watson, manager and inheritor of Sutton & Co. The task of realizing the estate and administering the trust was extremely onerous and difficult. The will was contested by some disinherited family members, while the prospect of so large a housing charity alarmed public authorities, the attorney-general, and other would-be administrators of the trust. They were concerned that so large a sum of money could have detrimental effects on existing labour and property markets if the provision of low-rented housing for the poor by the Sutton Dwellings Trust were not carefully controlled. Despite these administrative difficulties, however, the trust undertook its first building activities in 1907 and by 1919 had built 1783 dwellings on six estates in London, Bimingham, and Newcastle. It was not until 1927 that a scheme for the administration of the trust was finally agreed, by which time almost all of those directly associated with William Sutton and his trust had died. The trust had the largest endowment of all the philanthropic housing organizations and by 1939 had built nearly 8000 dwellings in fifteen towns and cities. The William Sutton Trust, as it is now known, still ranks among the largest housing associations in England. 


@@@@@


doc= 56408


Barrow, John Henry (1796-1858), journalist and writer, was born on 4 January 1796 in Cheapside, London, the sixth of the ten children of Charles Barrow (1759-1826) of Bristol, a partner with his father-in-law in a firm of musical instrument makers, and his wife, Mary (1771-1851), daughter of Thomas Culliford and his wife, Mary. In 1801 Charles Barrow entered the navy pay office and rapidly became chief conductor of moneys in town, a position he systematically abused by embezzling over $5500. In 1810 he had to seek permanent refuge from English law in Douglas on the Isle of Man. Details of John Barrow's formal education have proved elusive, but Dickens was to describe him in November 1845 as 'an excellent scholar', capable of translating from both the French and Italian newspapers ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 4.434). He built on the experiences of his youth in his two collections of poems and songs from the Manx tradition: 'Manks Legends' (1818), of which no copy is known to survive, and 'The Mona Melodies' (1820). 
From his appointment in 1819 as reporter for 'The Times' in the ecclesiastical and maritime courts at Doctors' Commons, J. H. Barrow became, in his own words, 'one of the most extensive contributors of my day to the Political and Literary Journals, Reviews and Periodicals of the Metropolis' (Royal Literary Fund archives). His reporting of the trial of Queen Caroline for that paper in 1820 increased his reputation as a shorthand writer. Admitted to Gray's Inn in 1823, Barrow was called to the bar in 1828 but never practised. On 16 August 1817 he had married Kitty Collins (1791/1794-1864) at St George's, Hanover Square. The marriage was childless, and Barrow left her in 1828 for Lucina Arabella Fidelia Pocock (1804/5-1851), daughter of Major Luke Pocock; they had ten children, six of whom survived their father. 
Barrow founded and edited the 'Mirror of Parliament' in 1828 as a rival to 'Hansard'. It purported to provide a full record of the debates in both houses of parliament, and to this end, he employed his nephew Charles Dickens as a gallery reporter and general assistant (1831-4), thereby considerably advancing Dickens's journalistic career. Barrow petitioned unsuccessfully for official recognition of the 'Mirror of Parliament' in May 1834; the 'Mirror' lost its fight with 'Hansard' and ceased publication in 1841. Barrow estimated that he lost $5000 by the venture. Both he and his journal received a posthumous tribute from Gladstone who asserted, during a Commons debate in April 1877, that: 'I do not hesitate to say, that Barrow's 'Mirror of Parliament' is the primary record, and not 'Hansard's Debates', because of the greater fullness which Barrow aimed at and obtained' ('Hansard 3', 233, 1877, 1576-7). 
Barrow was the leader writer for the 'Morning Herald' (1839-42), 'The Sun' (1842-5), and the 'Hampshire Advertiser' (1848-55). He was appointed Indian correspondent for the 'Daily News' (1846-7), and arrived in Calcutta in January 1846, shortly after the outbreak of the First Anglo-Sikh War. His first dispatch, printed in February, gave an account of the battles of Mudki and Ferozeshahr, and in March he reported the defeat of the Sikhs at Aliwal. Later dispatches were sent from Bombay and China. He had never restricted himself to journalism, however; he also wrote 'Emir Malek, the Prince of Assassins' (1827), a historical novel of the thirteenth century, published anonymously, and the text to accompany Thomas Landseer's engravings in 'Characteristic Sketches of Animals, Principally from the Zoological Gardens, Regent's Park' (1832). 
In his final year Barrow experienced severe financial distress and on 2 March 1858 he applied for assistance from the Royal Literary Fund. In his submission he reported that in the previous year, while engaged on the preparation of a work to be entitled 'Memoirs of the professional life and times of the editor of the Mirror of Parliament', which sadly was never published if indeed it was ever completed, he had contracted: 'a combined Malady that has ever since disabled me from all possibility of completing my outstanding engagements or undertaking new ones. I can neither write, except at the cost of intolerable pain, with my own hand or read, owing to the position required for either pursuit. (Royal Literary Fund archives)' The general committee of the fund voted him $50 on 10 March, a bequest which 'shed a gleam of sunshine over the clouded and inauspicious end' to his career (Royal Literary Fund archives). Nevertheless Barrow died of liver disease on 29 March 1858 at his home, 18 Francis Street, Newington, London. He was buried on 3 April at Norwood cemetery in a common grave, near Lucina Pocock, who had been interred there in May 1851. After his death his widow, who had been ignorant of his whereabouts, herself appealed for aid from the fund and received an award of $25. She had previously been receiving financial assistance from friends, including Charles Dickens. She died in Clerkenwell on 9 March 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 56409


Bradbury, William Hardwick (1832-1892), publisher, second son of William Bradbury (1800-1869), co-owner of the printing and publishing firm Bradbury and Evans, and his wife, Sarah, was born in London in December 1832. After attending a private school in Brighton, he attended University College School in Gower Street, London, from 1843 to 1848. Originally intended for the bar, Bradbury soon gravitated to the family business, spending two years working in publishing and bookselling in Dublin before entering the Bradbury and Evans publishing house in Bouverie Street, London. It is said that Bradbury and his brother Henry Riley Bradbury joined Frederick Evans, son of their father's partner Frederick Mullet Evans, in printing the sheets of Charles Dickens's 'David Copperfield' (20 parts as 19, May 1849-November 1850), being careful to let no other employees know what the next instalment would contain. 
Until summer 1858 the firm's relations with Dickens, one of their most profitable authors, remained cordial; they continued to publish his novels and his weekly serial, 'Household Words'. But during spring that year Dickens separated from his wife, Catherine, and in June he published in 'The Times' (7 June) and in 'Household Words' (12 June) a statement declaring that his 'domestic trouble' had been 'amicably composed', and that rumours involving other people 'are abominably false'. Though he never asked his publishers to insert the announcement in 'Punch', Dickens felt so aggrieved because it did not appear there that he initiated what proved to be a long and complicated severing of his contractual relations with the firm. In March 1859 Dickens announced a rival journal, 'All the Year Round', into which he folded 'Household Words' when Bradbury and Evans auctioned it off two months later on 16 May. Dickens purchased the copyright and stock for $3500. He estimated that the stock was worth about $1600; he sold it, with some other stock and plates, to Chapman and Hall on 19 May for $2500. Bradbury and Evans countered with a new periodical of their own, 'Once a Week', edited by Samuel Lucas and illustrated by many of the leading 'Punch' artists. But after encouraging initial sales and contributions from Harriet Martineau, Alfred Tennyson, and George Henry Lewes, among others, the circulation sank to about 35,000 by the mid-1860s. (It was eventually sold in 1869.) During this period Bradbury and Evans were entangled in complicated legal suits with Dickens, and Dickens's eldest son, Charley, was engaged to Evans's daughter Bessie 
(Elizabeth Matilda Moule Evans, died 1907)
, whom he married on 19 November 1861. 
In the midst of these troubles, on 2 September 1860, Bradbury's older brother Henry committed suicide. The family house at 13 Upper Woburn Place, Dickens reported to W. H. Wills, 'looked grim and dry, with all the blinds down, brooding in a hot, dusty, tearless, frozen kind of way, at the unsympathetic street' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 302, 4 Sept 1860). Henry had gone into business for himself as a 'nature printer', but he had often worked as well in his father's firm. After his brother's death W. H. Bradbury crossed over from the publishing side of the firm to assume the supervision of its extensive and demanding printing business. It was a bad time for the firm. Dickens cut his former publishers. He did not attend Charley's wedding and he never again spoke to Frederick Mullet Evans. When Dickens learned that Charley was going into partnership with Bessie's brother Frederick Moule Evans in the Postford Paper-Making Company, he was unhappy (ibid., 508 and n. 3). During the 1860s several of the firm's periodicals, including the 'Gardener's Chronicle and Agricultural Gazette' and 'Once a Week', were sold off. And the founding partners grew weary. In 1865 both retired. W. H. Bradbury and Frederick Moule Evans took over from their fathers. Shortly after Henry's death Bradbury had married Laura, sister of the art dealer William Agnew (1825-1910) ['see under 'Agnew family]. The couple had three daughters and one son. When Evans decided to withdraw from the firm in 1872, refinancing with Agnew money produced new family partners and a new company name: Bradbury, Agnew & Co. 
Bradbury, who assumed the position of chairman, kept 'Punch', but otherwise ceased to publish books and periodicals, although until 1885 he maintained the tradition of an annual dinner at the Bedford in September celebrating the publication of 'Punch's Almanack'. He died at his home, Oak Lodge, Nightingale Lane, Clapham, Surrey, on 13 October 1892. His estate was proved on 9 December at $33,034 0's'. 6died His son W. Lawrence Bradbury succeeded as joint managing director alongside William Agnew. 


@@@@@


doc= 56410


Overs, John A. (1808-1844), author and cabinet-maker, was born in Birmingham, the eldest of the three sons of Richard Overs (1778-1851) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Mykins 
(or Meakins; died 'c'.1814)
. His father was descended from a staunchly Roman Catholic family of copyholders in the manor of Knowle, with a family home at Chesset Wood. The home that he inherited on the death of his brother Charles was heavily mortgaged, yet Richard Overs managed to pay off the debts through business interests which are now, unfortunately, unrecorded -- he is described only as 'yeoman' at the Knowle Manor court. John Overs's two brothers died when he was five, and his mother died a year later. Richard Overs remarried, but there is no evidence of any further children before his second wife died. 
John Overs was apprenticed to a cabinet-maker, and slowly rose through the profession. He harboured dreams of being recognized as a writer, however: a manuscript notebook of his poetry from the 1820s is extant, including some striking love poems to his fiancee. On 4 August 1828 John Overs married Amelia Horton (died 1885), the eighth of the fourteen children of Daniel Horton, a gold-cutter who had lived near the centre of Birmingham, and his wife, Mary Wilkinson. This marriage caused a rift in the family, as Amelia was an Anglican; John Overs's father disowned him, and continued to remain distant from the family, even after his son's death. 
By 1834 John Overs and Amelia were living in Hoxton, London. Overs was working as a cabinet-maker, but continued to educate himself and to write in his spare time. He acquired several influential friends who assisted him in his attempts to publish his poetry and short stories. Charles Dickens, in particular, provided him with feedback on his writing, with introductions to newspaper editors, and with practical and financial assistance when Overs became seriously ill. Overs first wrote to Dickens in January 1839, hoping to have some poetry placed in 'Bentley's Miscellany'. Dickens, who had just resigned as editor of the publication, thought several of Overs's pieces were rather fine. He went on to recommend them to his successor, and continued to correspond with Overs, recommending his writing to editors in his circle, reading and commenting on his work, and even going so far as to meet him: 'I have... sat down to alter your story. I find it, however, almost an impossible job without having you at my elbow... If you can be with me at '12 exactly' next Sunday, I can spare an hour and a half, and I have no doubt that will be quite sufficient for our purpose. ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 2.19)' They corresponded on other matters as well: on one occasion, Dickens sent Overs a copy of Carlyle's 'Chartism', with the aim of obtaining a working man's view of the work, and Overs wrote back, giving his opinion of its strengths and weaknesses. 
Dickens also assisted Overs when he became ill. He sent him $5 on at least three occasions, arranged for his friend Dr John Elliotson to provide treatment, and in the autumn of 1841, when Overs's lung complaint became too grave for him to continue as a cabinet-maker, even found him a job as an administrator in William Macready's new Drury Lane Theatre. This latter assistance led to some friction between the two men, as Overs was dissatisfied with his working conditions and salary -- the letters to him from Dickens at this time are quite heated, and interesting for their condemnation of Overs's ostensible tendency to 'vaunt [his] independence too much, and to flourish it rather unnecessarily in the eyes of a stranger' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 2.408). After a remonstrative letter from Overs, Dickens calmed down, and continued to offer him assistance, for instance in recommending him as a writer to Murdo Young, proprietor of the 'Sun Newspaper'. 
Perhaps more importantly, however, Dickens advised Overs on the publication 'Evenings of a Working Man' (1844), and wrote the preface to the work. This collection was dedicated to Dr Elliotson, and contains one story, 'The carpenter', which bears signs of a response to W. H. Ainsworth's advice that Overs should write from his own experience. In his preface Dickens is careful to emphasize Overs's autonomy, stating that although he had given advice to the author on this collection of short pieces, he 'never altered them, otherwise than by recommending condensation now and then', and assuring the reader that the volume's sketches represented Overs's 'genuine work, as they have been his sober and rational amusement'. Dickens described him as 'a simple, frugal, steady, upright, honourable man' who had 'risen superior to the mere prejudices of [his] class... without losing his sympathy for all their real wrongs and grievances'. He also calls upon the reader to sympathize with Overs in his ill health and to recognize that the publication of the volume was largely motivated by the desire to make 'some temporary provision for his sick wife and very young family' (Dickens, preface, 'Evenings of a Working Man'). Overs was paid $25 for the book by T. C. Newby, the publisher whom Dickens had recommended; the money went through Dickens's account, and was forwarded to Overs by him. The book ran into two editions. 
John Overs died at 55 Vauxhall Street, Lambeth, London, on 28 September 1844. According to Dickens: 'When poor Overs was dying he suddenly asked for a pen and ink and some paper, and made up a little parcel for me which it was his last conscious act to direct. She [Amelia Overs] told me this and gave it me. I opened it last night. It was a copy of his little book in which he had written my name, 'With his devotion.' I thought it simple and affecting of the poor fellow. ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 4.240)' John Overs was given a pauper's burial in a public grave, no. 576, West Norwood cemetery, London. 
Dickens was out of the country at the time of Overs's death, and so it was T. C. Newby who arranged for a subscription to be taken up for the relief of Overs's destitute widow and six children (Amelia, John Richard, Harriet, Geraldine, Editha, and John). Newby himself gave $20 and, among other contributions, Amelia and her children received $25 from the Royal Literary Fund, after recommendations from Newby, Elliotson, and D. A. Mullock. Dickens interested Angela Burdett Coutts in the case of Overs's family, and she sent Amelia 'at different times, sixteen pounds... sent a doctor to her children, and... got one of the girls into the Orphan School' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 4.293). Help from Overs's friends enabled Amelia Overs to set up in a 'small millinery and fancy stationery business' ('The Examiner', 24 May 1845) at 16 Carthusian Street, Charterhouse Square. In February 1846 she married Robert John King, a bookbinder and widower. They lived in London for the rest of their lives; Amelia King died in 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 56413


Cross, Edward (bap. 1774, d. 1854), zoo proprietor, was born in London and baptized on 3 February 1774 at St Andrew's, Holborn, the son of Walter Cross and Jane ('nee' Callow). Nothing is known of his life until he became proprietor of the Exeter 'Change Menagerie in the Strand, following the death of Stephen Polito in 1814. This menagerie had been in existence since about 1780 on the first floor of a complex of small shops. The animals were mostly big cats and birds, but there were also ungulates and reptiles. Cross established relations with painters such as Edwin Landseer and Jacques-Laurent Agasse, as well as scientific figures such as Joshua Brookes and J. E. Gray (who named 'Rhinoceros crossii' after him). George IV patronized him both as a dealer and adviser on his own animals. He also befriended and encouraged the future superintendent of London Zoo, Abraham Dee Bartlett (1812-1897), who was allowed to walk about the beast room and developed his skill in taxidermy by mounting birds which Cross gave him when they died. Even in the late Georgian period, the 'disgusting receptacles' for animals at the Exeter 'Change had been the subject of criticism. This became particularly vocal after the bloody destruction of the bull Asiatic elephant Chunee in March 1826, which took more than an hour and some 180 musket shots by soldiers from Somerset House. Shortly after this Cross attempted to sell his collection and offer his services to the newly formed Zoological Society of London, an offer which was repeated in 1828, but which failed because the society required only certain specimens. 
The Exeter 'Change was demolished to widen the Strand and Cross found temporary quarters in the King's Mews (on the site of the National Gallery). Then, in 1831, he held a public meeting at the Horns tavern in Kennington at which the Surrey Literary, Scientific and Zoological Institution was founded. Cross sold his animals to this body for $3500 and became superintendent of the enterprise. The grounds of Walworth Manor House, Kennington, were laid out as a zoological garden and the patronage of Queen Adelaide and the archbishop of Canterbury was granted. In addition to a 3 acre lake, there was a circular glass house, 300 feet in diameter and with 6000 square feet of glass, housing the big cats. In 1832 these gardens were said to be both more suitable and more imposing than those at Regent's Park. The collection increased: an Indian rhinoceros in 1834, an orang-utan in 1835, and three giraffes in July 1836. Other attractions included firework displays, flower shows, Promenade Concerts, and balloon ascents. Cross retired in 1844 and died a widower at his home, 45 Newington Place, Kennington, on 26 September 1854, just over a year before the animal collection was auctioned. His wife's name was Mary but nothing more is known of her. 


@@@@@


doc= 56416


Bloxam, Charles Loudon (1831-1887), chemist, was born on 23 March 1831 at Meriden, Warwickshire, the third son of William Bloxam, surgeon. The family subsequently moved to 28 Duke Street, London. He attended King's College School in 1842-3, and from 1845 trained in chemistry under A. W. Hofmann at the Royal College of Chemistry, London, becoming full assistant in 1849. In 1852 he became a full-time private tutor and chemical analyst at 28 Duke Street, London. With Frederick Abel he published 'A Handbook of Chemistry' in 1854. In the same year he became demonstrator in chemistry in King's College, London. In 1856 he succeeded J. E. Bowman as professor of practical chemistry there, becoming full professor on the death of W. A. Miller in 1870. Simultaneously, he was lecturer in chemistry at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich (1855-82), and the Royal Artillery College, Woolwich (1864-87). In 1882, he resigned from the Royal Military Academy following gross indiscipline of the cadets and poor teaching conditions, an incident which highlighted the unsatisfactory arrangements for science teaching in military establishments at this time. 
Bloxam's earliest researches were on the determination and qualitative separation of tin, antimony, and arsenic, and such analytical investigations, including his electrolytic test for arsenic, constituted most of his research during 1852-87, published mainly in the 'Journal of the Chemical Society' and 'Chemical News'. His outstanding contribution was to the teaching of chemistry, to which end he published 'Chemistry, Inorganic and Organic' (11 edns, 1867-1923) and 'Laboratory Teaching' (6 edns, 1869-93). He also revised J. E. Bowman's 'Practical Chemistry' to 1885 and his 'Medical Chemistry' to 1862. These were outstanding and durable student texts. 
In early life, Bloxam kept detailed diaries. These are still extant, and form an interesting historical source. He was an indefatigable lecturer to medical, applied science, analytical, evening, and occasional students of chemistry at King's College, and to military academy cadets. He also trained his brother, Thomas Bloxam (1836-1872), who assisted him in his post at King's College before becoming assistant to Dr George Wilson at the Industrial Museum of Scotland in 1855. 
On 17 July 1856 Bloxam married Frederica Louisa (died 1901), daughter of John Leopold Abel, a musician, and sister of Frederick Abel. They had four daughters and four sons, one of whom, Arthur George Bloxam (1866-1940), was sometime head of the chemical department at Goldsmiths' Institute, London. Bloxam, who was suffering from emphysema, died on 28 November 1887, at 16 Endsleigh Gardens, Euston Square, following bronchitis, and was buried in Charlton cemetery, London, on 1 December 1887. 
Bloxam's nephew, William Popplewell Bloxam (1860-1913), chemist, was born on 9 January 1860 at 21 Mount Street, Grosvenor Square, London, the son of William Bloxam, surgeon, and his wife, Emma Caroline Kite. He was trained by his uncle at King's College. He became demonstrator in chemistry under Heinrich Debus (1824-1915) at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, researching especially sulphur compounds. He was briefly professor of chemistry in Madras, and he subsequently conducted research into improving the efficiency of indigo extraction from natural sources. He continued these and other colour chemistry researches at the Clothworkers' Research Laboratory, Leeds University, under A. G. Perkin, from 1904. 
On 6 August 1885 William Popplewell Bloxam married Jessie Christian, daughter of Edwin Low, a solicitor. He died, following a cerebral haemorrhage, in Guy's Hospital, London, on 26 December 1913. 


@@@@@


doc= 56421


Mayor, Joseph Bickersteth (1828-1916), philosopher and classical scholar, was born on 24 October 1828 at the Cape of Good Hope, as his parents were returning from Ceylon. He was the eighth of the twelve children of Robert Mayor (1791-1846), missionary and cleric, and his wife, Charlotte (1792-1870), daughter of Henry Bickersteth, surgeon apothecary of Kirkby Lonsdale, and his wife, Elizabeth. The family on the father's side was descended from the chief justice of the king's bench, Sir Matthew Hale (1609-1676). The mother's brothers included Henry Bickersteth, master of the rolls and friend of Jeremy Bentham, and Edward Bickersteth, a missionary. Several of Mayor's brothers and sisters followed their parents into evangelicalism. 
Mayor attended Rugby School under Thomas Arnold and later joined the school governors. In 1847 he entered St John's College, Cambridge, on a scholarship, joining his elder brothers Robert, a mathematician and author, and John Eyton Bickersteth Mayor, classical scholar and vegetarian. By networking and diligence they all achieved high honours, fellowships, and brilliant careers: Robert became a master at Rugby and rector of Frating; and John Eyton became president of college, university librarian, professor of Latin, and FBA. Joseph was placed second in the first class in classics in 1851 behind his great friend, Trinity fellow and author Bishop Joseph B. Lightfoot. He proceeded MA in 1854, and was ordained deacon in 1859 and priest in 1860. 
Mayor's network involved many of the best minds in mid-century Cambridge, including: George Downing Liveing, professor of chemistry; Edwin Abbott, philologist and author; Henry Roby, educational reformer, professor of jurisprudence and MP for Eccles; Fenton John Hort, author and Hulsean professor of divinity; Henry Sidgwick, philosopher; Sir John Seeley, who with Sidgwick established political science at Cambridge; and John Venn, logician and historian. He was drawn into a philosophical network, the precursor of the Moral Sciences Club, called the Grote Society after its leader, Professor John Grote, brother of the historian George Grote, whose adopted niece Alexandrina Jessie Grote (1831-1927), daughter of Andrew Grote of the Indian Civil Service, Mayor married on 29 December 1863. Members included Sidgwick, Venn, John Rickards Mozley, W. Aldis Wright, and John Batteridge Pearson. Friendship, discussion, and judicious criticism, the hallmark of later Cambridge philosophy, were developed here and earlier in The Society, whose members included Leslie Stephen, Henry Fawcett, Sidgwick, and Roby. These networks lasted for life, with the exception of Stephen, who engineered the election of Fawcett over Joseph Mayor for the chair in political economy in 1862. The Mayors, Grote, Sidgwick, Venn, Roby, Hort, and Stephen were among the great Cambridge college and syllabus reformers of the period. They helped establish the moral sciences and became the subject's college tutors, with Mayor writing the famous 'The moral sciences' in the 'Student Guide to the University of Cambridge' (1862). 
Mayor had to surrender his college living on marriage, and left Cambridge in 1862 to become a master at and then headmaster of Kensington School (1862-8) before moving to Twickenham and then becoming professor of classical literature (1870-79) and later professor of moral philosophy (1879-83) at King's College, London. His major contribution to philosophy was his lifelong endeavour to publish the work of his mentor John Grote. He edited three of Grote's major philosophical works (1870, 1876, 1900), a collection of 'Sermons' (1872), and eight articles, assisted by Sidgwick and Hort. Here, as in his own life, he displayed a conversational style, acute criticism, and care for the truth, shared with his network and revealed further in his 'Sketch of Ancient Philosophy' (1881). Informed by German scholarship, he favoured idealist philosophy and opposed in particular positivism, materialism, scepticism, and the utilitarianism of Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill. Like Grote, he moved with the romantic current, but he favoured an eclectic moral philosophy, built an ethics around duty, and embellished the Stoic qualities and philosophy of Cicero, whose work 'De natura deorum' he edited in three volumes (1880-85). He published several classical books, including 'Greek for Beginners' (1869), 'Guide to the Choice of Classical Books' (3rd edn, 1885; suppl. 1896), and 'Virgil's Messianic Eclogue' (1907) with R. S. Conway and W. Warde Fowler. His interest in philology and a desire to counter the corruption of language led to several books, including 'Chapters on English Metre' (1896; rev. 2nd edn, 1901) and 'A Handbook of Modern English Metre' (1903; rev. 2nd edn, 1912). His efforts to use critical and liberal Anglican scholarship for restoring credibility to Christianity led to 'The Epistle of St James' (1892; rev. 3rd edn, 1910), 'Clement of Alexandria: Seventh Book of the Stomaties' (1902), 'Epistle of St. Jude and Second Epistle of St. Peter' (1907), 'Selected Readings from the Psalms, with an Essay on the Growth of Revelation' (1908), 'The World's Desire, and other Sermons' (1906), and a revealing sermon, 'The End of the Century' (1901). He took a leading role in founding and running the 'Classical Review' and was made FBA and honorary fellow at St John's in 1902. 
Mayor was grave, serious, and strict as a tutor and parent, but like his friend William Whewell he used his charm, empathy, a sense of justice, reading sessions, and invitations to walk in the Lakes, to find men out and bring them into intellectual networks. He became the fellow editor at the founding of 'The Eagle'. His children included a brilliant King's College scholar and Apostle, Robert John Grote (Robin) Mayor (1869-1947), who was a pioneer of teacher training and a friend of Moore, Russell, Keynes, and McTaggart. Of his other three children, Henry Bickersteth Mayor (1870-1948) was a master at Clifton College, Flora Macdonald Mayor (1872-1932) went to Newnham College and wrote several novels, and Alice (1872-1961) kept the family archive. A granddaughter, Teresa Georgina Rothschild, wife of Victor Rothschild, third Baron Rothschild, played a significant role in MI5. Of her three children who survived infancy, Amschel became a banker, Victoria a university lecturer, and Emma a fellow at King's College, Cambridge, and the wife of the economist and master of Trinity College, Cambridge, Amartya Sen. Little is written about the Mayor network though extensive archive material, notebooks, letters, and photographs of them all are now in the Mayor papers in the Wren Library, Trinity College, Cambridge. Mayor died at Kingston upon Thames on 29 November 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 56431


Stevens family (per. c.1830-1925), natural history auctioneers, whose name was synonymous with natural history and curiosity auctions for over a century, became involved in this business when John Crace Stevens became a partner in a long-established Covent Garden auction house. The company had been founded about 1759 by Samuel Paterson, primarily to sell books although he conducted a few natural history auctions in his first decade. After several changes of ownership the business was taken over in 1824 by Thomas of Foster Lane, whom 


@@@@@


doc= 56433


John Crace Stevens (bap. 1809, d. 1859) joined as a partner in 1831. He was the first son of John Stevens ('c'.1772-1836) and Augusta Crace, who had married at St Anne's, Soho, on 4 June 1808. Another son, 


@@@@@


doc= 56435


Samuel Stevens (1817-1899), was also destined to enter the business, and they had at least one other child, a daughter, Ann, born on 22 August 1812, and baptized on 20 September at St Paul's, Covent Garden. 
John Crace's first sale was the extraordinary collection of 40,000 insects belonging to pioneer entomologist Adrian Hardy Haworth. The company name changed to J. C. Stevens in 1834 and remained so thereafter, even surviving John's death. Samuel joined him as a partner in 1840 after a serious illness had compelled him to abandon his chosen career as an artist. About 1841 the first of the famous Stevens live sales was introduced -- the sales subsequently specialized in items as diverse as orchids and Lord Derby's menagerie. Samuel withdrew from the family business in 1848 and established the Natural History Agency at 24 Bloomsbury Street, Bedford Square, London, but took up the hammer temporarily after John's sudden death at the age of fifty, until John's son 


@@@@@


doc= 56438


Hall, Ronald Owen (1895-1975), bishop of Hong Kong, was born on 22 July 1895 at 7 St Thomas Square, Newcastle upon Tyne, the second of nine children of Cecil Gallopine Hall (1868-1938), curate of St Andrew's, Newcastle, and his wife, Constance Gertrude (1868-1936), daughter of the Revd Henry Berners Upcher and his wife, Lucy. Three of his brothers became priests or missionaries; another, Sir Noel Hall, was principal of Brasenose College, Oxford, and his sister Faith was headmistress of St Hilda's School, Ootacamund, India. 
Hall was educated at the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne, and at Bromsgrove School before serving in the First World War in the Northumberland Fusiliers, becoming the youngest brigade major in the army with an MC and bar. He then took a shortened degree course as a scholar of Brasenose College, Oxford, and studied at Cuddesdon College before being ordained deacon in 1920 and priest in 1922. On 24 April 1923 he married a distant relative, Nora Kathleen Suckling-Baron (1897-1982); they had two sons and one daughter. After serving as missionary secretary of the Student Christian Movement from 1921 to 1925, he spent a year with the Young Men's Christian Association in China, working under T. Z. Koo, who became one of his heroes. From 1926 to 1932 he was vicar of St Luke's, Newcastle, where he felt a burning sympathy with the unemployed and their families in the depression of 1931, in which he initiated housing and food distribution schemes. 
In 1932 Hall was appointed bishop of Hong Kong and until 1951 of southern China also. He early made clear his attitude that foreigners exercised too much authority and that in differences of opinion between European and Chinese he would back the Chinese. In a remarkable book, 'The Art of the Missionary' (1942), he advised anyone who aspired to be a missionary in China to sell his books on religion and make friends with Chinese artists to learn the secrets of the saints (pp. 9-12). His criticisms of the administration from the cathedral pulpit caused the governor to describe him as the Pink Bishop. 
When the Japanese took Hong Kong in December 1941, Hall happened to be attending a conference in the USA. On his return he lived in parts of his diocese still under Chinese control. It was then that the incident occurred which made him notorious. In 1944, after informing William Temple, archbishop of Canterbury, he ordained as priest a deaconess, Florence Li Tim Oi, in order that the congregation of Macau, which was cut off from the mainland, should be able to continue to receive the sacrament. Temple seems not to have been wholly unsympathetic (Paton, 130-35), but on his sudden death his successor, Fisher, accused Hall of obstinately refusing the advice of his friends to suspend the woman, and successfully called on the Chinese house of bishops, who were heavily dependent on outside aid after the war, to repudiate his action. Hall's own diocesan synod supported him and appealed to the Lambeth conference of 1948 to allow the experiment. The conference refused: Florence Li Tim Oi gave up her priestly function but not her indelible holy orders. The precedent was to be of great importance in the long battle within the Anglican church on the ordination of women. Ironically, Hall was not primarily interested in feminism; coming from a Tractarian background his motivation had been the supreme importance of enabling his flock to receive the sacrament from a priest, not a layman. 
After the war Hall, who was always a disciple of F. D. Maurice, worked ceaselessly for social justice in his diocese, particularly through voluntary agencies. In partnership with the government he established church schools on the new housing estates and was a principal architect of the Chinese University which, unlike the existing Hong Kong University, used Cantonese, not English, as the medium of instruction. He encouraged trade unions and looked forward to a situation in which his diocese would be entirely staffed by Chinese priests, many of them self-supporting. 
Hall's expressed views on politics appeared to some impetuous. In 1943 he described the Chinese nationalist leader Chiang Kai-shek in a pamphlet as 'a man of God whose achievements are tremendous' ('China's Fight', 20). When however the Kuomintang's corruption and defeat became evident he referred in a further pamphlet to 'the splendid efforts of the People's Republic of China' ('Hong Kong: what of the Church?', 11). Strong sympathy for the aspirations of Asia and its poor was not altogether unusual in a contemporary colonial ecclesiastic, but Hall's writing on other questions was also striking. He maintained that international commerce was the handmaid of the kingdom of God, and that there was no better school of charity than the bar of a public house. In a fashionably ecumenical age he declared that a divided church helped rather than hindered the spread of Christianity. He delighted that politicians no longer felt easy in claiming that God was on their side, and said that God preferred enjoying people to improving them (Hall, 'Hong Kong: what of the Church?', 11; 'Family', 25; 'Art', 49). His principal hobby was to breed Anglo-Nubian goats whose milk, unlike that of cows, could be digested by the Chinese. Some admirers felt that his charismatic qualities might very profitably have been exercised in an English diocese, but his alienation of the establishment in ordaining a woman precluded such a move. In 1966, on retirement, he became CMG. 
A handsome, attractive, but somewhat shy man with a keen sense of humour, Hall preferred to work through an inspired choice of assistants rather than by setting up committees. Occasionally peremptory, he was quick and humble in apologizing. Deeply, though informally, devout, he was widely revered as a saint. He retired in 1966 to Lewknor, Oxfordshire, where he played a modest but helpful part in church and village life until his final illness, dying on 22 April 1975 at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford. He was cremated at St Margaret's, Lewknor, Oxfordshire, three days later. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 56440


Eileen Kathleen O'Casey (1900-1995)], daughter of Edward Reynolds, of Athlone, Westmeath, and Kathleen Carey (died 1962), from Belmullet, co. Mayo. She was born in Dublin on 27 December 1900, when the family returned from Johannesburg with the outbreak of the South African War. She was chiefly educated as an orphan at an Ursuline convent school in Brentwood, Essex, after her father was institutionalized on account of his increasing mental instability, forcing her mother, a fiercely indomitable woman, to work for their security. After various forms of employment, Eileen Reynolds began her theatrical career in London in the chorus of the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company (1923) and then worked increasingly in musical comedy ('The First Kiss' in 1924, 'Love's Prisoner' and 'Rose Marie' in 1925) before attempting to find employment in America. She and O'Casey met on her return, after a performance of the London production of 'Juno and the Paycock'. In 1926, though contracted as understudy, she took over the role of Nora Clitheroe for the initial performances of the first English staging of 'The Plough and the Stars' (a part she believed O'Casey was instrumental in her getting). Later she was directed by Barry Jackson as Minnie Powell in 'The Shadow of a Gunman' at the Royal Court. The couple were married at the church of All Souls and the Redeemer, Chelsea, on 23 September 1927. 


@@@@@


doc= 56444


Oldcastle, Hugh (d. 1543), schoolmaster and author of a text on double entry accounting, was the third and youngest son of Richard Oldcastle (died 1520), a shearman carrying on his trade in the city of London, and his wife, Joan (Johane). The date of Hugh's birth is unknown but he was alive in 1510 when he is mentioned in his father's will written that year. Richard Oldcastle bequeathed to Hugh property at Almeley in Herefordshire which formerly belonged to Sir John Oldcastle, an ancestor of the family. Hugh Oldcastle was involved in legal actions relating to the property, suggesting, as does his own failure to make a will, that he was unable to take possession of it. He died intestate early in 1543 in Hart Street (off Mark Lane) in the parish of St Olave, Hart Street, next to the Tower of London, where he had been a teacher of arithmetic and bookkeeping. Administration of his estate was granted to his widow, Anice, on 28 February 1543. 
Oldcastle's widow arranged the publication in book form by John Gough on 14 August 1543 of the manuscript from which Oldcastle may have taught bookkeeping; the title was 'Here ensueth a profitable treatyce called the instrument or boke to learne to knowe the good order of the kepying of the famouse reconying, called in Latyn dare et habere, and in Englyshe debitor and creditor'. No copy of the book is extant (the last certain reference is in a sale catalogue of 1799) but a revised edition was published in 1588 by John Mellis, a schoolmaster and teacher of arithmetic of St Olave Southwark. Mellis retitled the book 'A briefe instruction and maner how to keepe bookes of accompts after the order of debitor and creditor'. He did not state the title of his original but, unusually for that period, wrote in his preface that he was 'but the renuer and reviver of an auncient old copie... collected, published, made and set forth by one Hugh Oldcastle Scholemaster', adding that he had 'bewtified and enlarged' Oldcastle's text. Although Mellis does not acknowledge it, he also borrowed from the works on bookkeeping of James Peele, father of George Peele the poet, and of John Weddington. Yamey argues that Mellis's work is 'not to be treated as an even approximately faithful reproduction of the Oldcastle text' (Yamey, 216). Mellis added an illustrative set of account books. 
Oldcastle's book owed much to the first printed exposition on double entry by Luca Pacioli, 'Particularis de computis et scripturis', which formed part of his 'Summa di arithmetica geometria proportioni et proportionalita' published in Venice in 1494. The extent to which Oldcastle's work is a translation of Pacioli is a matter on which historians of accounting have disagreed. It has been argued that both are based on a source which existed only in manuscript form and perhaps in Latin rather than Italian but no such manuscript has been discovered. Oldcastle occasionally mistranslates from the Italian (confusing, for example, 'cassa' and 'casa') and shows a preference for Latin terms ('dare & habere, capsa, lucrum et damnum') rather than their Italian equivalents. 
Oldcastle may be responsible for the adoption of the word 'ledger' to describe the principal double entry book of account rather than 'great book' as in other European languages. His importance in the history of accounting is as the first expositor in English of double entry, the main technique of modern accounting. Neither he nor his 'reviver' Mellis was an innovator. Both were plagiarized in part by John Carpenter in his 'A most excellent instruction' (1632). 


@@@@@


doc= 56445


Anne Elizabeth Ball (1808-1872), algologist, and the elder of Robert Ball's sisters, was born at Cobh. About 1818 she moved with the family to Youghal, and there, when she was in her early twenties, she started to collect and study marine algae. From 1837 she collected algae from around Dublin, where she had gone to live with her sister and father. 


@@@@@


doc= 56446


Peele, James (d. 1585), writer on bookkeeping, whose origins are obscure, described himself in 1569 as 'Cittizen and Salter of London, Clercke of Christes Hospitall, practizer and teacher of the same' (that is, bookkeeping). He was appointed clerk of Christ's Hospital, London, in 1562, and continued working there until his death in 1585. His duties included those of bookkeeper. He introduced the double-entry system in the hospital's bookkeeping, and entries in several of the surviving ledgers are in his hand. There is indirect evidence that he was called in by merchants to settle disputes that involved accounts; and that he also taught bookkeeping. 
Peele wrote two books on double-entry bookkeeping. The first, 'The maner and fourme how to kepe a perfecte reconyng, after the order of the moste worthie and notable accompte, of debitour and creditour', was published in London in 1553. It is a short book, dedicated to Sir William Densell, governor of the Company of Merchant Adventurers. Its treatment of the subject owes much to earlier published works, but includes some novelties. The second book, 'The Pathe Waye to Perfectnes, in th'Accomptes of Debitour, and Creditour', was published in London in 1569. It is a larger book than the earlier work, and is of much greater originality. The didactic part is presented in the form of a dialogue between a schoolmaster and a scholar, the latter a servant sent by a merchant to acquire a knowledge of double-entry bookkeeping. Peele displayed a thorough understanding of merchants' accounts, and he included a fully worked-out example of the division of the ledger between a secret or private ledger and the ordinary ledger for use in the ordinary course of business, on the lines proposed by John Weddington two years earlier. 
Though some later authors, notably John Mellis in his 'A Briefe Instruction' of 1588, borrowed from Peele's books, their influence seems to have been limited in spite of the high quality especially of his second book. However, Richard Dafforne recalled his name in 1635: 'Want of love to this Art [double-entry bookkeeping], is the cause why James Peele, and others that have written in English upon this subject, are known by Name only, & not by Imitation' ('The Merchants Mirrour', 1635, epistle dedicatory). 
The title-page of Peele's second book includes an illustration of a man seated at a table; on the basis of the coat of arms displayed, this is said to be a representation of the author. His son George Peele (bap. 1556, d. 1596), from his marriage to his first wife, Anne (died 1579), became well known as a playwright and poet. 


@@@@@


doc= 56447


Mary Ball (1812-1898), zoologist, and younger sister of Robert Ball, was born at Cobh on 15 February 1812. She engaged in natural history pursuits from her youth. By the age of twenty-one she had an impressive cabinet of Irish butterflies and subsequently collected a wide range of insects, shells, and other marine invertebrates. Her perceptive observations were passed to her brother and his naturalist friends, including William Thompson, of Belfast, who named a mollusc, 'Rissoa balliae', after her in 1856. Through field and indoor studies she assembled information on insect habits and made the first record of stridulation in corixid water bugs, published by Robert Ball in 1845-6. Baron de Selys-Longchamps, the European authority on dragonflies, visited her collection and subsequently published her notable observations and records in 1846. Like her sister Mary Ball maintained a lifelong interest in gardening, but her natural history studies waned in the 1850s following the deaths of her brother, Thompson, and other close friends. Although in 1834 Thompson had rated Mary's among thirty notable Irish collections of shells and invertebrates, only a small part remains in the National Museum collections. She did not marry and survived Anne Ball by more than twenty years. She died on 17 July 1898 at the home the sisters had shared in Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 56448


Ympyn, Jan (c.1485-1540), merchant and author of a text on double entry accounting, was born in the Low Countries (but not in Antwerp), the son of Christoffel Ympens, a merchant. He was sent to Italy to work and to learn commercial practices, spending twelve years there, mostly in Venice where he studied and practised double entry. He also travelled in Spain and Portugal. There is no record that he ever visited England. In 1519 he returned to the Low Countries, settling in Antwerp, of which he became a citizen and a member of the Mercers' Guild. He prospered as a retailer and wholesaler, importer, and exporter, of silks, woollens, and tapestries, and owned several properties. About 1525 he married Anna Swinters; there were three children. He died in Antwerp in 1540, between 12 August and October. 
Ympyn is remembered today for his posthumous treatise on double entry accounting, 'Nieuwe instructie ende bewijs der looffelijcker consten des rekenboecks' (Antwerp, 1543), which was translated into French as 'Nouvelle instruction et remonstration de la tresexcellente science du livre de compte' (Antwerp, 1543), and into English as 'A notable and very excellente woorke, expressyng and declaryng the maner and forme how to kepe a boke of accomptes or reconynges' (London, 1547). The Dutch and French versions, which were published under the supervision of his widow, are the earliest texts on accounting in their respective languages. The English version of Ympyn, almost certainly printed by Richard Grafton, is the oldest extant text on accounting in English. Its title-page states that it has been translated 'with greate Diligence out of the Italian toung into Dutche, and out of Dutche, into French and now out of French into Englishe'. The text of Ympyn's book is in many places close to that of the first published exposition of double entry, in Luca Pacioli's 'Summa di arithmetica' (1494), but is a substantial improvement on it, with rearrangements, additions, and omissions. Unlike Pacioli's text an illustrative set of account books, probably based on Ympyn's own business, is appended, although this is missing in the only known surviving copy of the English version (held in the Lenin Library, Moscow). 
The title-page of the journal (account book) of Sir Thomas Gresham, begun on 26 April 1546, follows very closely the title-page of the illustrative journal of the French version of Ympyn. This strongly suggests that Gresham, who was resident in Brussels in 1543, was familiar with Ympyn's book. It has been further suggested that it was he who translated it from French into English, but this has not been proved. More certainly, Ympyn influenced James Peele's 'The Maner and Fourme how to Kepe a Perfect Reconyng', printed by Grafton in 1553, and the chapter on merchant's accounts in Gerard Malynes's 'Lex Mercatoria' (1622). Peele's book in its turn was an influence on John Mellis's 'A Briefe Instruction' (1588) which is mainly a revision of Hugh Oldcastle's 'Profitable Treatyce' of 1543. It is because Oldcastle's book survives only through Mellis that the English translation of Ympyn is the oldest extant text in English on double entry. 


@@@@@


doc= 56449


Weddington, John (b. c.1525, d. in or after 1593), writer on bookkeeping, was born in London. He was a citizen of London, a grocer, and member of the Merchant Adventurers of the English Nation in Antwerp. He spent many years in Antwerp as a merchant and, for a period, as factor of Sir Thomas Gresham. He also worked as a professional bookkeeper. He brought an action against one Baptist van Achelen for payment for more than a hundred days' work on his account books. He probably taught bookkeeping as well, Antwerp being the commercial centre which served as training ground for many youths, including young Englishmen bent on a mercantile career. 
In 1567 Pieter van Keerberghen published in Antwerp Weddington's 'A breffe instruction, and manner, howe to kepe, marchantes bokes, of accomptes after the order of debitor and creditor'. This rare work, of which only one copy is known (St Mary's College, Blairs, deposited in the National Library of Scotland), has several distinctive features. The major feature is the arrangement of account books in the double-entry system. In the standard procedure described in most of the early accounting manuals, all transactions were entered in a journal in which the entries in each case identified the ledger accounts to be debited and credited. From the journal, entries were then made in the relevant accounts in the ledger, Weddington's 'great boke or lidger'. Weddington, in effect, dispensed with the journal and broke it up into several separate books, one for each of several categories of transaction. Entries in the ledger were to be made directly from the entries in those various books of first entry. Weddington explained that dismemberment of the journal as the ledger-posting medium was desirable 'because marchantis of great dowingis ought to have many servantes to helpe them to write'. 
Weddington also introduced the use of a secret ledger in the literature on accounting. In this ledger the merchant segregated those accounts, such as the capital account, that he wanted to keep secret from his employees who would, of course, need access in the ordinary course of business to the other non-secret ledger. In this way 'no man shall understande or knowe his estate, but hym selff only, or suche as he shall apoint to kepe' the secret ledger. Weddington, 'for breviation', did not give an example of a secret ledger. James Peele, in his 'Pathe Waye to Perfectnes' published two years later, provided a worked-out illustration. 
It is not known how far Weddington was describing practices and procedures that he had encountered or had himself implemented in practice. However, his innovations in the literature, and indeed his book itself, had little influence on subsequent books on the double-entry system, though John Mellis did use some of Weddington's examples in his 'A Briefe Instruction' of 1588. In 1564 Willem Silvius, an Antwerp printer, was granted a licence to publish a book, apparently in Dutch, on bookkeeping, by 'Jan Wadington ende Noel N'. No book corresponding to this description has been recorded. Weddington was, however, certainly responsible for a short book on arithmetic for merchants. It was a translation into English by Weddington of a book by Francois Flory in French, first published in Antwerp in 1577. 'The Practize of Cifering Made by Fraunces Flory of Lyle' was published in London in 1593. This work, like his book on bookkeeping, Weddington dedicated to the governor of the Merchant Adventurers of the English Nation. In the preface Weddington described himself as a poor member who was receiving support from the company. The publication of the book is the last known date in Weddington's life. 


@@@@@


doc= 56450


Bury, Priscilla Susan (1799-1872), botanical artist, was born on 12 January 1799 in Rainhill, Lancashire, the daughter of Edward Dean Falkner (1750-1825), a wealthy Liverpool trader, who had been high sheriff of Lancashire in 1788, and his wife, Bridgett Tarleton (died 1819), only daughter of John Tarleton, merchant and shipowner; Priscilla Falkner was named after her maternal grandmother, Susan Precilla Bertie. 
Priscilla Falkner drew plants raised in the greenhouses of her family home, Fairfield (demolished 1913), 2 miles east of Liverpool and, by 1829, had enough studies of lilies and allied plants for publication, a venture promoted by her friend, William Swainson. She modelled her proposed book, then tentatively named 'Drawings of lilies', on William Roscoe's 'Monandrian Plants' (1824-8), with the plates to be accompanied by brief letterpresses based on her notes. Indeed, she even used Roscoe's book prospectus as a model for her own. In it, she advertised her 'Drawings of Liliaceous Plants arranged by Botanists in the genera Crinum, Amaryllis, Pancratium...', to appear in ten numbers, each of five plates to be lithographed by Hullmandel, subscribers paying a guinea a number, others 27's'. 
On 4 March 1830, at Walton on the Hill, Priscilla Falkner married Edward Bury (1794-1858), a railway engineer; the couple had at least three sons, born between 1831 and 1835. In 1831 Priscilla Bury's drawings began to be published as 'A Selection of Hexandrian Plants', the large (64 cm x 48 cm) plates being engraved by Robert Havell; the work had only seventy-nine subscribers. Fifty-one plates appeared in ten fascicles, the last in 1834, but whether or not the text is Bury's is unclear. The plates are fine-grained aquatints, partly printed in colour and retouched by hand: the original drawings later went to Dumbarton Oaks, Washington. The published work has been praised as 'certainly one of the most effective colour-plate folios of its period' (Blunt and Stearn, 248). 
After 1836 Priscilla Bury contributed eight plates to (originals now in NHM) Maund and Henslow's 'The Botanist' and, in 1860-1, brought out 'Figures of Remarkable Forms of polycystins, or Allied Organisms, in the Barbados Chalk deposit', with twelve plates of photographic prints of drawings made from microscopic preparations mounted by Christopher Johnson (1782-1866) of Lancaster, from specimens collected by John Davy (1790-1868). About 1865 there was a second edition with twenty-four plates with a photograph of diatoms by Bury and she seems to have issued further separate plates. M. C. Cooke (1825-1914) brought out another edition in 1869 and that included another plate of diatoms, signed P. S. Bury 1869. 
In 1860 Priscilla Bury issued a memoir of her husband, 'Recollections of Edward Bury', privately published by John Garnett of Windermere, and by 1866 she was living at Fairfield, Thornton Heath, Croydon. She died at Fairfield, of bronchitis and cerebral congestion, on 8 March 1872. 


@@@@@


doc= 56451


Russell, Anna (1807-1876), botanist, was born in Arnos Vale, Bristol, in November 1807, one of five daughters and at least two sons of Philip John Worsley (1769-1811), a sugar refiner in that city. Brought up in a Unitarian family in which the children were given every encouragement to develop their talents, she and her brother Samuel (1803?-1888) showed a keenness for natural history. While he collected fossils, her interest lay initially in insects; after some years, though, she turned increasingly to botany, perhaps influenced in this by a brother-in-law, the Revd Thomas Butler (1806-1886), a keen amateur botanist and father of the novelist Samuel Butler, to whom she was to become godmother. A long list of localities for the rarer plants of her home district contributed by her, indirectly, to H. C. Watson's 'New Botanist's Guide' (1835) first brought her botanical ability to wider notice and won her the respect of its unsparingly critical author, who in later years was to acclaim her diligence and accuracy with unwonted warmth. Visits to the Butlers in Nottinghamshire and to another botanist relative, Dr Joseph Bunny (1798-1885), at Newbury in Berkshire extended her acquaintance with the British flora and led to her producing a list of plants local to Newbury which was published in 1839 as an appendix to an anonymous history of that town (since revealed to have been edited by Edward William Gray). More than sixty species in this were first records for the county. Soon after, both she and Butler joined the Botanical Society of London and for many years she was active in contributing specimens to its annual exchanges of herbarium material. Some of these were collected for her by a friend, Frederick Russell; their botanical friendship culminated in marriage in 1844. 
After some years at Brislington, on the outskirts of Bristol, the couple moved, in 1856, to Frederick Russell's home town of Kenilworth in Warwickshire. There Anna's interest turned to fungi, on which she brought to bear an early facility with pen and brush, eventually building up a collection of over 730 drawings, most of them of Warwickshire species. 
As able and as quietly productive as her several female contemporaries who won comparable distinction in marine algology, Anna Russell nevertheless shared their diffidence at venturing into print, preferring to restrict knowledge of her work to a limited circle and leave it to intermediaries to publish her discoveries. She died at Kenilworth on 11 November 1876, her husband having predeceased her. Her herbarium and a collection of birds' eggs were bequeathed by her to the Birmingham and Midland Institute, but neither can now be traced. 


@@@@@


doc= 56453


Gregory, Alice Sophia (1867-1946), midwife, was born on 22 November 1867 at St Mary's Parsonage, Princes Road, Lambeth, the youngest of three daughters of Robert Gregory (1819-1911), Church of England clergyman, later dean of St Paul's, and his second wife, Charlotte Anne, daughter of Admiral Sir Robert Stopford. Alice was educated at home by a governess and was very close to her sister Christiana, who was nearest to her in age. Alice led an uneventful life, sketching, making visits at home and abroad, attending lectures on cooking and health, until, at the age of twenty-six, she began to train as a general nurse at the Cottage Hospital, Paulton, Somerset, where Mrs Lelia Parnell, a widow, was matron. In 1895 Alice became a pupil at the Clapham School of Midwifery, where she studied under Dr Annie McCall (1859-1949), and after attending eighty confinements she obtained her diploma as a trained midwife from the London Obstetrical Society. Alice then returned to Somerset where she worked as a district midwife for eight years. She supported herself from fees, amounting to 8's'. for a confinement, and an allowance of $50 from her father. In 1899 she met Maud Cashmore, seven years her junior, who accompanied Alice on her district rounds before studying obstetrics at the Clapham Maternity Hospital and qualifying as a midwife. Lelia, Alice, and Maud became close friends and remained inseparable companions for the rest of their lives. As Marks observed: 'Much of their work stemmed from a strong belief both that women could achieve independence through a professional career such as midwifery, and that women should be given the best possible maternity care. Their views and actions were also inspired by a deep sense of Christian morality and the need to help the poor, as well as a strong feminist orientation. (Marks, 73-4)' Alice Gregory and her friends were typical of a small number of middle-class women who took examinations in midwifery at a time when there was no requirement that midwives should be trained. However, there was growing pressure in the 1890s to raise the status of midwifery, which culminated in the 'Midwives Act' of 1902. Thereafter no woman could use the title of midwife unless she was registered. Hence there was now a new emphasis on the need for training. Alice Gregory, along with Lelia Parnell and Maud Cashmore, began to develop a training scheme for midwives which would involve a year's training in general nursing and then six months' specialized midwifery training. The Midwives' Institute, which represented the interests of qualified midwives, thought that the plan was unrealistic and that training should increase by degrees. Undaunted, Alice Gregory acted on her own initiative. With the help of Charles Escreet, a clergyman who was chairman of the local board of guardians and the Charity Organization Society, she established a Home for Mothers and Babies in Woolwich in order to train educated women to work among the poor. The hospital was opened in May 1905 with six beds which quickly increased to twelve. Lelia Parnell was matron, Maud Cashmore head midwife, and Alice Gregory secretary and district nurse supervisor. Alice also founded the Council for Promoting the Higher Training of Midwives. 
In 1915 the mothers' and babies' home was amalgamated with the lying-in hospital for married women in Long Acre and the name was changed to the British Hospital for Mothers and Babies. Further expansion was made possible when Alice Gregory was successful in gaining funding from the Ministry of Health to build a new hospital which was opened by Queen Mary on 22 May 1922. Lelia Parnell again acted as matron until her death in 1931 when Maud Cashmore took her place. By the 1930s the hospital had become so large that it passed out of the hands of the original founders into those of a hospital committee. 
Alice Gregory made a significant contribution to the development of the training of midwives at a time of transition in the profession and this was recognized when she was made CBE in 1929. Many of her pupils found her to be an inspiring and supportive teacher, but she was also a controversial figure in the profession. She was a member of the council of the Midwives' Institute and was often at odds with the officers, in particular over her forthright criticisms of untrained 'handywomen' and her assertion during the First World War that the majority of midwives were uninterested in antenatal care. None the less, in 1911 she was asked to represent the institute on the advisory committee for the 'National Insurance Bill'. 
Alice Gregory continued to work in the Woolwich hospital throughout the Second World War, when there was extensive damage to the building from air raids, and was instrumental in ensuring that a new wing was opened by the princess royal in 1944. In January of the next year she reported a troublesome cough and then hurt her back in a fall. In March she was diagnosed as having an enlarged heart and a congested lung which led to her resignation from the hospital in June. She retired with Maud Cashmore to The Sanctuary, a cottage on the south Downs, overlooking Alfriston, Sussex, which had been built for her by her father so that she could take short breaks in the countryside. It was here that she died on 8 November 1946 as a result of a cerebral haemorrhage. 


@@@@@


doc= 56454


Acland, Alice Sophia, Lady Acland (1849-1935), co-operative movement activist and advocate of women's advancement, was born on 3 February 1849 at Heath Lodge, Petersfield, Hampshire, the eldest daughter of the Revd Francis Macaulay Cunningham (1815/16-1899) and his wife, 'nee' Alice Charlotte Poore. Alice was educated at the local church school, and work as a district visitor, following her father's appointment as rector of Witney, Oxfordshire, fostered her concern for the poor. Her interests were shared with the Oxford don Arthur Herbert Dyke Acland (1847-1926), whom she married on 14 June 1873. They had two sons and a daughter. 
The Aclands' circle included Christian socialists and co-operators, particularly E. V. Neale and Thomas Hughes. However, Alice Acland attributed her interest in co-operation to contact with working people of the northern industrial centres, whom she met while accompanying her husband on speaking tours from the mid-1870s onwards. Her admiration for the working-class women that she met was reflected in her sketches 'Women's lives', published in the 'Co-operative News'. Struck by the lack of opportunities for women beyond the domestic sphere, Acland participated in discussion of increased female involvement in co-operation during the movement's 1882 congress. Her friendship with Samuel Bamford, editor of the 'Co-operative News', enabled her to overcome initial opposition and establish a weekly 'Women's corner' in the paper from January 1883. She advocated greater female participation in co-operation through women's meetings and discussion groups, and intended the 'Corner' as a link between women throughout Britain. Conscious of male resistance, Acland called not overtly for women's rights, but for a greater sense of self-worth: 'We trade too much on our weakness as compared to men.... We cause our womanhood to be despised -- not to be respected. It is our own fault, and men have not, perhaps, been unwilling that it should be so.... England can never be all it might, when more than one-half of the nation hangs behind the other part. ('Co-operative News', 6 Jan 1883, 25)' The suggestion of co-operative women's meetings stimulated several responses, most significantly Mary Lawrenson's plan for a Women's League for the Spread of Co-operation -- later the Women's Co-operative Guild. Acland agreed to lead the guild, inviting prospective members to write to her, but she resisted more active propagandism, particularly platform speaking, in her concern not to offend male sensibilities. The guild was not immediately successful, and only three local branches were established during 1883. The year also saw the first national meeting of the guild at the Co-operative Congress, which confirmed Acland as organizing secretary. 
Acland's health was, however, failing. Illness hampered her work for the guild, and her editorial duties on the 'Women's corner' were deputed to her assistant, Amy Sharp. In 1884 Acland retired as guild secretary and her tenure as national president (1884-6) was similarly curtailed. She also resigned as editor of the 'Women's corner' in 1886. She retained a limited involvement with the guild, chairing a meeting at the 1892 Manchester Festival. However, for the remainder of her life Alice's poor health precluded an active public role. 
Alice became Lady Acland in 1919 when her husband succeeded as thirteenth baronet. The title passed to her eldest son, Francis, when Sir Arthur died in 1926. Lady Acland was a complete invalid for the last twelve years of her life, but she retained the affection of co-operative women who granted her the freedom of the guild in 1931. She died on 5 July 1935 at home at 85 Onslow Square, London, survived by one son and her daughter. She was cremated at Golders Green on 8 July and her ashes interred with those of her husband at the Columb John Chapel, on the family estate at Killerton, Devon, on 10 July. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 11 July. 
Alice Acland worked for greater equality between men and women; her vision was apolitical and consistent with nineteenth-century notions of distinctions between male and female traits. She contended that women's lack of business knowledge militated against their participation in co-operative management; rather, female spirituality and gentleness should be applied to the moral salvation of both the co-operative movement and national life. Drawing strength of purpose from her own Christian convictions she insisted that quietness need not make women ineffectual: 'There are moments when speaking up is needed, and these we must not miss' ('Co-operative News', 9 June 1883, 532-3). 


@@@@@


doc= 56455


Fryer, Alfred (1826-1912), botanist, was born at Chatteris in the Cambridgeshire fens on 25 December 1826, probably at 87 Park Street, the younger son and at least fifth child of Daniel Fryer (died after 1861), a gentleman farmer and later also partner in a brewery, and Elizabeth Fortescue (died after 1861), of Leighton, Huntingdonshire. Sent to a boarding-school at Billesdon, near Leicester, he formed a close friendship with Henry Walter Bates, who shared his fondness for poetry and natural history. However, Fryer could not be persuaded to join Bates and another Leicester friend, Alfred Russel Wallace, when those two left for the Amazon in 1848; by then Fryer's literary tastes were (temporarily) dominant and he was also married, on 1 January 1848, to Sally Negus Rose (died 1850). 
In the town reading-room at Chatteris, Fryer had come across Coventry Patmore's 'Poems' (1844). He sought Patmore out at the British Museum, and won his friendship (and subsequently that of the Rossettis and other figures on the London artistic scene). Whether these connections were the product of periodic visits to London or a period of residence there is unclear: however, it was in Chatteris that his wife gave birth in the spring of 1849, and he was doubtless tied to Chatteris more firmly when the child was left motherless a year later. He married for a second time, probably in 1858; his wife was Clara (1829/30-1899), and they had a family of six children. 
Led to expect a substantial inheritance from an aunt, Fryer had been encouraged by his father to follow his interests and not trouble to train for a profession. Indeed, that aunt had already settled on him the freehold of 4 Wood Street in Chatteris and there he made his home for the rest of his life. About this time Fryer began to abandon his literary ambitions and return to studies in natural history. His initial interests in birds, molluscs, and lepidoptera were gradually replaced by a preoccupation with the local flora, resulting in his sending many records to the region's foremost botanist, C. C. Babington (1808-1895), at Cambridge. However, the list of Huntingdonshire plants he contributed to the 'Journal of Botany, British and Foreign' in 1884 never grew into the book-length flora of that county that was for a time in prospect. This was because he had been diverted into studying, from 1880 onwards, the perplexing array of broad-leaved representatives of the pondweed genus 'Potamogeton' which occurred in exceptional diversity in the waterways within walking distance of his home. 

'Potamogetons' are subject to much confusing modification by subtle environmental differences and until then had defied satisfactory classification. Fryer was uniquely well placed to follow their growth over several seasons and observe their response to changing water-levels, and he supplemented prolonged fieldwork with cultivation experiments in his garden. As a result he proved that several named entities were merely impermanent growth states. After nine years he also reluctantly came to the then novel conclusion that hybrids occur in this genus, some of them even fully fertile (though, regrettably, neither he nor anyone since has proved this by synthesizing them artificially). A keen student of Darwin's work, Fryer was readier to accept this degree of plasticity in a plant group than most botanical contemporaries; unfortunately, though, his concept of a species was very narrow and almost all of the twelve new ones he described are now disregarded, subsumed within broader entities which bear prior names or else considered hybrids. 
In 1898, a year after he was elected an associate of the Linnean Society, Fryer's definitive monograph, 'The Potamogetons (Pond Weeds) of the British Isles', began to appear in monthly parts. After two years, however, while the work was still only half-way, friction with the publisher caused him to break off and it was not until 1913-15, after his death, that it was taken to completion by other hands, without the benefit of his own profound knowledge of the group. 
Though Fryer was invincibly buoyant and cheerful by nature, a deeper reason for that disengagement was probably the acute financial straits to which he had been unexpectedly reduced. He was bequeathed nothing by his father in the belief that the aunt would provide for him, but on her death in 1885 she proved to have left her money elsewhere. Unwilling to forfeit his independence, Fryer subsisted thereafter on the little that selling the produce of his large garden, with its five glasshouses, brought in. Luckily, his physique was equal to the hard physical labour this involved: until late in life he thought nothing of walking 12 miles to see a cricket match, standing all day, and then walking the 12 miles home again, with one ginger beer as his only sustenance. Even so the struggle for a livelihood could not help but be a distraction and, with a view to moving the monograph forward, a small grant from the Royal Society was obtained for him. Eventually, in 1909, he gave in to repeated attempts by friends to induce him to seek support from a charity, but he only lived to enjoy the resulting small pension for three years: he died on 26 February 1912 from heart failure following what was probably his first illness, an attack of influenza. He was buried in Doddington, the next village, next to his second wife. He had outlived his second wife by about thirteen years and their six children had long since moved to other parts of England, leaving him to live latterly quite alone. 
Fryer's large herbarium, mainly of pondweed specimens, superlatively prepared and impeccably documented, was posthumously divided between the British Museum (Natural History), Cambridge University, and Owens College, Manchester. 'Potamogeton fryeri', an oriental species, was named in his honour by a fellow specialist in the genus, Arthur Bennett. 


@@@@@


doc= 56459


Martindale, Louisa (1839-1914), women's activist, was born on 25 June 1839 at 9 York Place, City Road, London, the eldest child of James Spicer (1807-1888), head of a wholesale stationers, and his wife, Louisa, 'nee' Edwards. The Spicers' was a homoeopathic, Congregationalist household (eventually Louisa was joined by five brothers and five sisters), which, while conforming to the patriarchal structure typical of Victorian families, also allowed space for self-development in which Louisa revelled. At fourteen years of age she was sent to a fashionable private school near Hyde Park, which did little to instil in her anything but a sense that the formal education she received was wanting in breadth, scope, and inspiration. Travels abroad, and there were many in her life, were more fulfilling, and at eighteen she accompanied her parents on her first venture to Europe, a religious jamboree organized by the Evangelical Exchange. Upon her return to the family's Elizabethan home on Woodford Green, she founded a small society, the Mutual Improvement Association, and threw herself into a 'lady bountiful' role by founding Sunday schools and the Ray Lodge Mission Station in 1865, a 'democratic' working-class alternative to the often alienating experience of organized religion. On 2 May 1871 she married a 37-year-old widower and father of four, William Martindale, a merchant. Their marriage ended abruptly after only a few years when he succumbed to heart trouble about 1874, and Martindale was left a widow with two small daughters, Louisa and Hilda (a third daughter, Mary, had died in infancy). From this time onward mother and daughters lived a peripatetic life that took them from Penzance to Germany, Switzerland, Lewes (which proved too conservative and intellectually stultifying for Louisa), and finally to Brighton. There Martindale held open houses for governesses and shop assistants, became a moving force in establishing the Women's Liberal Association in 1891, the Women's Co-operative Movement, and a dispensary for women staffed by women (later the New Sussex Hospital for Women and Children). She also worked on behalf of her brother Albert Spicer, who had been elected to Monmouth Boroughs in 1892, and involved herself with the British and Foreign Bible Society, the Women's Suffrage Society, and the German church. 
Louisa Martindale had become interested in women's rights in 1867, and firmly believed that the Liberal Party would enfranchise women. In the 1890s she spoke in her brother's constituency on the topic of women's admission to county councils, wrote lectures on the 'rights' of women (personal, property, and as citizens), on women in India, and co-operative kitchens, and corresponded with Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy. She supported women's right to preach, and built a Congregational church in Horsted Keynes, Sussex, where she moved in 1903, to serve this end. She welcomed the arrival of the suffragettes as a breath of fresh air, but always believed that the vote would be won by non-militant means, and worked within the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies. As a pacifist she believed that women should become public and political creatures in order to promote peace. On 15 March 1914, a few months before the First World War erupted, Louisa Martindale died from pneumonia at Cheeleys, her home in Horsted Keynes; she was buried in Horsted Keynes. She was 'saved', her daughter Hilda writes, 'from what would have been a great sorrow to her' (H. Martindale, 39) -- war, and the realization that women would get the vote in 1918 arguably as a result of their war work. The careers of her two daughters, Louisa Martindale as a gynaecologist and Hilda Martindale in the civil service, were a personal testament to Martindale's commitment to the cause of women's rights. 


@@@@@


doc= 56460


Phipson, (Mary) Edith Pechey- (1845-1908), physician and women's rights activist, was born Mary Edith Pechey on 7 October 1845 in the village of Langham, near Colchester, Essex, the sixth child and third daughter of the Revd William Pechey (died 1888), Baptist minister at Langham Chapel, and his wife, Sarah Rotton (died 1879). Both parents came from upper middle-class families: her mother descended from an attorney's family and her father had an MA in theology from Edinburgh University. It appears that Edith was mainly tutored at home by her father and that she later worked as a schoolteacher and governess for a while in Langham before she left for Edinburgh. 
At the age of twenty-four Edith Pechey began to take an active part in the struggle for women's right to study and practise medicine. In 1869 she responded to a request from Sophia Jex-Blake and became one of the six women who joined Jex-Blake in the fight for the right to study medicine at the University of Edinburgh ['see 'Edinburgh Seven]. In October 1869 Edith won the right to sit the preliminary examination in arts which was a requirement for all medical students. 
In 1870 Edith passed the matriculation exams with honours, which allowed her to proceed to register as a student of medicine. She received the highest marks in chemistry, which entitled her to the prestigious Hope scholarship, which carried a cash prize and free entry to laboratory facilities. The prize was withheld from her and awarded to a male student who had come second. Edith was instead offered a bronze medal. She appealed against this discrimination but the university senate upheld the decision of the faculty of medicine. The next two years continued to be a trying time for Edith and her colleagues. They met with antagonism and hostility from some male students and academics. In the autumn of 1870 they won the right to attend mixed classes (since separate classes for female students were considered as inadequate for qualification to take the professional exams). However, the very first mixed class they attended turned into a disturbance, known popularly as the Surgeons' Hall riot. Edith and her friends were verbally and sexually harassed by the students and some lecturers. 
In December 1873 Edith wrote to the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland asking them whether they would admit women to the exams and grant them a licence in midwifery. Meanwhile Edith was able to gain employment as a house surgeon at the Birmingham and Midlands Hospital for Women. She held this post for a year from July 1875 to 1876. Her new employer knew that Edith was not in a position to obtain a diploma but she was nevertheless hired on the basis of her impeccable certificates and testimonials. While the college in Ireland was considering the issue of licensing women to practise medicine Edith, along with Sophia and Annie Clark, went to the University of Bern in order to undertake further medical study. Edith's biographer records that she passed her medical exams in German on 31 January 1877 and acquired the degree of MD. In the same month the Irish college became the first British examining body to issue licences to women to practise medicine. On 9 May 1877 Edith took the medical exams in Dublin and became a licentiate of King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland. 
From 1877 to 1883, the year she left for India, Edith practised medicine in Leeds. She also became involved in women's education, lecturing to women's groups on subjects as diverse as nursing, hygiene and sanitation, and women's physical well-being. Edith helped to set up the Medical Women's Federation of England in response to the International Medical Congress's exclusion of women from its membership. She was elected president of the federation in 1882. 
Pechey was one of the prominent British female doctors who took advantage of the opportunities created by empire. In 1883 Elizabeth Garrett-Anderson wrote to Edith asking her if she would be interested in going to Bombay to take charge of the projected Cama Hospital for Women and Children. Edith was offered the post of senior medical officer at a guaranteed salary of Rs 500 per month, with free living quarters and a first-class return fare. She was also allowed the privilege of private practice. The Medical Women for India fund was to pay her salary for the first three years with the government of India guaranteeing her employment thereafter. 
Edith arrived in Bombay on 12 December 1883 and, according to her biographer, she learned to speak and write in Hindi within a year of her arrival. Edith was also put in charge of the Jaffer Sulleman Dispensary for Women. In 1892 the surgeon-general reported that the Cama Hospital served 1399 in-patients while 9885 out-patients were served at the Sulleman Dispensary. 
On 10 December 1886 Edith accepted the government's offer to continue her employment on the condition that she was allowed to continue private practice and also to be granted a six months' vacation in England from 6 May to 19 November 1887. Her private clientele included minor princesses such as the rani of Udaipur and also members of the indigenous elite of Bombay. In March 1889 Edith Pechey married Herbert Musgrave Phipson (1849-1936), a wine merchant and the secretary of the Medical Women for India fund. After her marriage she adopted the surname of Pechey-Phipson. 
During her time in India, Edith strove to improve the position and status for women in the medical profession, but faced reluctance from officials to grant equality of treatment between male and female medical officers. She also played a prominent part in the social reform movements of late nineteenth-century India and was well known for her active part in the campaign against the institution of child marriage. Edith participated in full measure in the social and intellectual life of Bombay. She was often asked to address public gatherings on the question of extending educational facilities and professional training for women. She was invited to sit on the visitors' committee for the prestigious Alexandra Native Girls' English Institution, Bombay, in 1890. In 1891 she was elected to the senate of the University of Bombay, the first woman member of this institution. In 1892 she became the vice-president of the Bombay branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, a distinguished honour since no woman had ever been elected on the board of this elite organization. In the same year she was elected to the executive committee of the Bombay branch of the National Indian Association. 
Pechey-Phipson resigned in 1894 from her post as first physician in the Cama Hospital due to ill health. Between 1894 and 1896 she continued her private practice which she found more manageable while struggling to cope with diabetes. What is perhaps less well known is her contribution to public health measures when bubonic plague struck Bombay in 1896. In February 1897 the 'Bombay Gazette' published a letter from Pechey-Phipson criticizing the official management of the plague operations. The letter proved to be widely influential and was consequently reprinted, and quoted by officials who took note of her criticisms. 
Early in 1905 Edith, together with her husband, sailed from Bombay for England, spending some time along the way in Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. Her thoughts had turned to women's participation in the world of public affairs and on her return she was asked to represent the Women's Suffrage Association of Leeds at the third conference of the International Women's Suffrage Alliance to be held in Copenhagen in August 1906, which she accepted. Her last public appearance was in the famous mud march organized by the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies in February 1907. Very soon after this march she underwent surgery for breast cancer and died on 14 April 1908 at her home, 29 Grimston Gardens, Folkestone, Kent. She was buried in Folkestone. 
Two years after her death, in 1910, Herbert Phipson established a scholarship in her name at the London School of Medicine for Women valued at $40 per annum (increased to $100 in 1919) to be awarded annually to a medical student 'preferably to one coming from India or going to work in India' ('Edith Pechey Phipson scholarship register, 1912-1948'). The memory of Edith's work lived on in India in the form of the Pechey-Phipson Sanatorium for Women and Children which she had built with her husband in 1895 in Nasik, Maharashtra, India. This institution, which was designed to treat ailing poor women who could not afford expensive convalescent homes, remained in use until 1964. 
Surviving records convey little about Edith's personality. Sophia Jex-Blake described Edith as a strong and determined woman who combined great ability with a wonderful sense of humour. An oil portrait of her in full academic regalia was hung in the senate of the University of Bombay. Edith is portrayed as 'stiff', 'thin-lipped', and 'stern' in this portrait and her biographer directs us to look at another oil portrait of Edith which hangs in the Cama Hospital as one which brings out her 'real beauty, warmth and softness' (Lutzker, 211). 
Revisionist work on the medical movement in the empire and colonies helps us to present a more complex picture of women such as Pechey-Phipson. While some are critical of her depictions of Indian society and her overt use of pseudo-scientific racial theories which denigrated Hindus, others read it as a strategy employed by her to further the emancipation of women, chiefly British women. However, scholars agree that she was a tireless campaigner for equal rights for women in the medical profession. 


@@@@@


doc= 56461


Stansfeld, Caroline (1816-1885), radical, was born in London on 28 January 1816, the daughter of a wealthy lawyer, William Henry Ashurst (bap. 1791?, d. 1855) and his wife, Elizabeth Ann, 'nee' Brown (died 1854). She had three sisters, Eliza Ashurst (Bardonneau), Matilda Biggs, and Emilie Venturi, and one brother, also William Henry Ashurst. Her father was a well-known radical who lent his support to many progressive causes, such as Owenism, anti-corn law agitation, Chartism, and anti-slavery. His daughters were consequently brought up in a highly stimulating and unconventional environment: their home in Muswell Hill was a magnet for many of the radical thinkers and reformers of the day, including Robert Owen, William James Linton, and Clementia and Peter A. Taylor, and maintained close links with the American abolitionists. Stansfeld's father was extremely progressive on the position of women's rights and allowed his daughters a freedom which many contemporaries found shocking, particularly their habit of smoking cigars! 
On 27 July 1844 Caroline Ashurst married a wealthy young lawyer, James Stansfeld (1820-1898), the only son of James Stansfeld, a county court judge, and Emma Stansfeld ('nee' Ralph), the daughter of a Unitarian minister. Caroline and James were married by the radical Unitarian minister William Johnson Fox at South Place Chapel in Finsbury. The ceremony perfectly expressed their radical concept of marriage. They repeated only 'the two sentences rendered necessary by the Act' and exchanged rings to symbolize their recognition that marriage was a union of equals. James Stansfeld was one of a group of young radical lawyers (others included William Shaen and William Case) and reformers who formed an intimate set with the Ashurst family, the Muswell Hill brigade. James Stansfeld, who entered parliament in 1859, became one of the country's leading male activists in the women's rights movement, and in 1880 he was not included in Gladstone's cabinet because of his prominent role in the campaign against the 'Contagious Diseases Act'. 
Rather less bold and flamboyant than her sisters, Caroline Stansfeld provided a vital supporting role to the feminist work of her husband and her sisters. She was closely associated in the 1840s with the activities of the earliest organized feminists, working for such causes as the Associate Institution (to reform the laws relating to prostitution) and sitting on the executive council of the Whittington Club (a radical experiment in equal adult education). Caroline Stansfeld retained her commitment to the women's movement as it matured, and between 1867 and 1883 played an important role on the executive of the London Society for Women's Suffrage, as well as participating in the struggle to repeal the 'Contagious Diseases Act'. She was closely involved in the work of Clementia Taylor, whose home, Aubrey House, functioned as a centre of organized radicalism. In 1863 Stansfeld and her sisters assisted Taylor in establishing a society aimed at disseminating propaganda in support of the Union in the American Civil War. 
Caroline Stansfeld was a staunch supporter of the unification of Italy. She and her husband were leading members of the Society of the Friends of Italy, and Caroline worked tirelessly to raise money for the Italian cause, through the organization, for example, of large-scale bazaars. More importantly she was intimate with the Italian revolutionary and republican Giuseppe Mazzini, who had become extremely close to the Ashurst clan (as they were known) in the 1840s. Mazzini referred to Caroline as 'his ministering angel': she assisted him in a variety of capacities, helping not only with his personal and domestic affairs but aiding him with his literary work, as well as becoming involved in more dangerous activities, such as securing money and documents for Italian revolutionaries and providing secret places of refuge for them. (James Stansfeld had to resign a government post in 1864 after being implicated in an Italian plot to assassinate Napoleon III.) She assisted her sister, Emilie Venturi, in setting up a private postal system between Italian insurrectionists in Paris and London. Caroline and James named their only child, Joseph James Stansfeld ('b'. 19 April 1852), after Mazzini. They later became closely associated with Giuseppe Garibaldi. 
Caroline Stansfeld was connected with some of the leading novelists of the age, becoming a good friend of George Meredith and earlier impressing George Sand (whose novels her sister, Eliza, translated) with her fervent support for Louis Blanc and also her personal charm and prettiness. From 1881 Caroline Stansfeld began to suffer from a debilitating illness, which affected both her mental state as well as her physical health, and she died of a cerebral haemorrhage at her home, Stoke Lodge, Hyde Park Gate, London, on 29 March 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 56462


Hardwicke, Robert (1822-1875), publisher, was born on 2 October 1822 at Dyke, near Bourne, Lincolnshire, the third son of William Hardwicke, farmer (or butcher) and his wife, Mary. Nothing is known of his early education, but by 1897 he had obtained his articles as a printer. In that year he became a partner in the firm of Salisbury and Bateman, printers, of 4 Clement Court, near Lincoln's Inn in London. By 1850 the firm had moved and become Bateman and Hardwicke, printers, publishers, stationers, and booksellers, and in 1852 Hardwicke set up on his own at 192 Piccadilly. 
Initially Hardwicke published general titles, but he had a lifelong interest in natural history, especially botany. His older brother William, a surgeon in private practice, introduced him to Edwin Lankester (1814-1874). Lankester was very active in the contemporary movement for the popularization of science and Hardwicke subsequently published a number of works by him, and by his botanist wife, Phebe. Lankester introduced Hardwicke to the Ray Society (established in 1844 for the publication of works concerning natural history), for which he eventually published thirty-six titles. Lankester also introduced Hardwicke to M. C. Cooke, then about to start his remarkable mycological career. Hardwicke subsequently commissioned Cooke's first book on fungi, an example of his 'judgement [to which] many valuable and popular books owe their existence' ('Journal of the Quekett Microscopical Club'). However, he had a hard head for business too, and both Cooke and T. H. Huxley complained of his treatment of them on occasion. Most of Hardwicke's publications were in the popular field, but his medical list was almost entirely professional and technical, the authors doubtless having been recommended to him by his brother. 
In 1861 Hardwicke started a quarterly journal, the 'Popular Science Review', and three years later Cooke proposed an even more popular magazine, the monthly 'Hardwicke's Science Gossip' which flourished for many years. Hardwicke's growing contribution to biological science was recognized in 1863 when he was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society for his interest in 'the progress of natural history, especially botany'. 
A number of Hardwicke's authors had been meeting regularly on his premises for several years for informal discussions and in 1865 Cooke, Hardwicke, and his manager, Thomas Ketteringham, formalized this arrangement by setting up the Quekett Microscopical Club with Lankester as president and Hardwicke as treasurer. Membership rose rapidly, excursions were organized, and a journal published, and the club still flourishes. 
Hardwicke was reported to be a warm and attractive character, portly, but with a pleasant face. His genial temperament allowed him to make friends easily. He had a wife, Harriet Martha; no details are known about her, and the couple had no children. Hardwicke died suddenly on 8 March 1875 at the age of fifty-two, following a stroke suffered while travelling to work from his home at 1 Versailles Villas, Upper Norwood. He died at 24 Queen Square, Bloomsbury. 
In 1863 Hardwicke had made an error of judgement, undertaking the publication of Smith and Sowerby's multi-volume 'English Botany' which, with its numerous hand-coloured illustrations, was extremely expensive for so small a firm to produce; indeed, it almost bankrupted it, so that on his death Hardwicke left under $1500 and leaseholds. The combination in Hardwicke of a sound knowledge of biology, encouragement of promising new authors, and an enthusiasm for popularizing natural history make his contribution to the science of his time a unique one. 


@@@@@


doc= 56464


Brownlow, Jane Macnaughton Egerton (1854/5-1928), educationist and suffragist, was born in Paisley, the daughter of Captain George Bernard Morgan. Her father was town major at Gibraltar when she married Captain Edward Francis Brownlow (1839-1875), of the 71st highland light infantry, at King's Chapel, Gibraltar, on 20 August 1872. Her husband was a distant connection of the family of Baron Lurgan; after his early death she returned to Britain, and in 1881 was living in Grantchester, near Cambridge, as a student. She subsequently moved from Cambridge to London, where she brought a feminist perspective to the issues of state schooling and the position of women in the labour market. She was also an uncompromising supporter of women's suffrage and it seems likely that she joined a suffrage society. 
A member of the Fabian Society, the Humanitarian League, the Pioneer Club for Women, the Teachers' Guild, and the Women's Progressive Society, Mrs Brownlow could draw on almost twenty years' experience in the educational world by the time she became manager of an elementary school in Finsbury (1891). Within two years she was criticizing the domestic curriculum for working-class girls in a Pioneer Club debate covered in the feminist journal 'Shafts'. In 1896 she condemned the uneven provisions of the 'Technical Education Act', commenting in a letter to 'Shafts' that: 'framed by men in the interests of men, they make it impossible for instruction to be given in any trade to persons not already working at that trade' ('Shafts', 1896, 84). 
In the autumn of 1894 Jane Brownlow put herself forward as a candidate for the London school board. Campaigning as a Progressive in Finsbury, she was a strong supporter of higher elementary schools and argued that a great injustice had been done to the really intelligent children. At the same time she did not endorse socialist proposals to provide maintenance for school children out of public funds. As a Liberal she advocated a charitable solution to the problem of school feeding. Speaking at a campaign meeting in Horsleydown, Mrs Brownlow acknowledged the work of her predecessor, Helen Taylor, who represented Southwark between 1876 and 1885: having heard much praise of Taylor's involvement with the local schools she vowed to 'strive to follow in her footsteps' ('Southwark Recorder', 10 Nov 1894). With the support of the London Nonconformist Council she polled 7121 votes, finishing fifth in the contest for four divisional seats on the board. 
An active member of the Women's Liberal Federation, in 1896 Jane Brownlow supported an attempt to withdraw female support for anti-suffrage parliamentary candidates. She seconded a resolution to this effect moved by Mrs W. Grove of Southport, in the absence of Mrs Eva McLaren, at the annual council meeting in June ('Woman's Signal', 18 June 1896, 189-90). In the end the proposal was defeated, after a turbulent debate that raised the spectre of more party secessions. Six months later she reiterated her position during a public debate at Trinity Hall, London: 'I will not', said Mrs Brownlow, 'lift a finger to help any man who will not help my sisters' ('Woman's Signal', 3 Dec 1896, 357). 
Jane Brownlow was an outspoken critic of protective legislation which restricted or prohibited women's work in certain fields or limited their duties or hours of work. In her view the link between lack of political rights and potential economic disenfranchisement was clear, since the new 'Factory Acts' applied only in areas worked also by men. As she put it in 1896: 'No legislator has yet attempted to make laws which shall prevent women from taking night work when nursing, or acting, or dancing' (Brownlow, 'Women and Factory Legislation', 4). However, she also took up the issue of child labour, working with Margaret Macdonald and Ruth Homan on the committee on wage-earning children, which was formed by the Women's Trade Union League to increase the efficiency and promote the reform of the existing legislation. 
Quite apart from her political commitments, Mrs Brownlow was an accomplished author and linguist, whose works included a translation entitled 'The English Woman: Studies in her Psychic Evolution' from the French work by David Staars (1909). The book starts by providing a general introduction to the idea of character, moving on to look at the English mind, English women during the Renaissance, and the position of English women in the eighteenth century. Final sections describe the advent of organized feminist campaigns in the nineteenth century. At the start of the twentieth century she turned naturally to the Women's Local Government Society as a political organization; she made a significant contribution to its agitation against the 'Education Act' of 1902, which restricted the opportunities for women in local educational administration. A decade later, fresh legislation meant her handbook for women seeking elected office (1911) was used to promote women's work in local government. Jane Brownlow died on 14 November 1928 at her home, 59 Seymour House, Compton Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 56465


Shearer, Helena Paulina (1839x47-1885), socialist and suffragist, was born in Dublin, the daughter of Washington Downing, journalist, and his wife, Mary Frances, 'nee' McCarthy; she was the niece of McCarthy Downing, MP for County Cork. Nothing further is known of her early life or education, but her family settled in London, where a sister was born in 1848 and a brother in 1850. An experienced suffrage lecturer with a special interest in factory legislation and the employment of women, from 1875 she served on the committees of the Women's Protective and Provident League (formed by Emma Paterson in 1874 to encourage the organization of women into trade unions) and the Vigilance Association for the Defence of Personal Rights and for the Amendment of the Law in points wherein it is Injurious to Women. Formed to fight the 'Contagious Diseases Act' in 1871, the Vigilance Association was a women's rights organization made up primarily of middle-class egalitarian feminists and libertarians, who also opposed the introduction of further factory legislation specific to women. 
Much later, in his 1923 memoir of a life in the organized labour movement, Francis Soutter recalled that Helena Downing also helped keep 'The Radical' (the organ of the Anti-Coercion Society) financially solvent in its early days. In particular, he paid tribute to her reputation as a speaker at a time when the practised woman orator was a rarity. Looking back, he attributed her success to the fact that she always understood her audiences and paid careful attention to their composition when considering questions of style and delivery, all of which effectively ensured that her ideas were accessible to all her listeners. As a consequence he suggested Helena Downing was always 'at home' with her audience, even when they did not share her views: 'This happy faculty, in conjunction with the most charming Irish brogue, made her one of the most successful speakers I have ever met' (Soutter, 123-4). 
In the autumn of 1879 Helena contested the division of Tower Hamlets in the third triennial elections for the London school board. Standing on a programme of free secular education and greater democratic control of the board schools, her electoral address included a pledge to secure 'a fair proportion of working men and women on the local school management committees' ('Englishwoman's Review', 15 Oct 1879, 444). At the time her most prominent supporters were Herbert Burrows (a trade unionist and leading member of the Social Democratic Federation, who contested Tower Hamlets six years later) and Helen Taylor (the socialist and feminist, who represented Southwark in 1876-85), both of whom campaigned vigorously on her behalf. None the less, Helena Downing finished bottom of the poll, and the feminist press attributed this unexpected defeat to over-confidence among her friends, who split their votes rather than casting them as a block as they were entitled to do. On 24 November 1881 she married John Ronald Shearer, a 32-year-old accountant. It seems likely that she was the Mrs Shearer who in 1881-2 served as an executive committee member of the Married Women's Property Committee. Undeterred by her failure at Tower Hamlets she turned her attention to the administration of the poor law, and in 1884 was returned as a guardian of the poor in Islington. However, her success was short-lived because she was disqualified from serving. Conscious of the fact that poor-law guardians had to be ratepayers, the couple placed their London home in Helena's name, but when she tried to pay the rates they were refused, and her election was disallowed. Less than a year later she died of consumption at Cold Blow, Queen Elizabeth's Walk, Stoke Newington, on 8 March 1885. Her death certificate gave her age as forty-five; on her marriage in 1881 she had given her age as thirty-four. 


@@@@@


doc= 56466


Evans, Matilda Maria (1843/4-1909), local politician and social reformer, daughter of Richard Webb, herald chaser, emerged from an obscure background. Nothing is known of her early life, but on 17 March 1870 she married Henry Evans, a photographer's publisher. She was widowed by 1881 and returned to live with her mother, Rachel Webb, at 53 Sidmouth Street, St Pancras, London. She had children from the marriage and earned her family's living as a photographic publisher and print seller from commercial premises at 4a Duncannon Street, in the Strand, London. The earliest reference to any political activity on the part of Matilda Evans relates to the 1886 election for the Strand poor-law union, in which she polled 813 votes, finishing eleventh in the contest for the ten positions as guardian for the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields. She contested the election again in 1887, this time with success: she became the first woman guardian on the Strand board. Attending her first meeting on 19 April, she was elected to serve on the finance committee and general purposes committee and soon became a high-profile figure in London government, one who was especially interested in the need to ensure sound financial management of the ratepayers' money and the welfare and training of girls. Indeed, by 1893 Louisa Tempe Mallet (member of the inner circle of the Women's Local Government Society) was quoting her example in an article promoting women's work in local government written for the 'Women's Herald'. According to Mrs Mallet, 'everybody knows the story of the Strand workhouse school, where the first woman guardian discovered that one bath, with water unchanged, was considered adequate for the ablutions of sixty girls, and one brush and comb for their toilet' (Mallet, 10). In 1889 Mrs Evans was joined by Emma Stevens, a fancy goods importer, and Margaret Painton. 
Apart from her poor-law work, in 1888 Mrs Evans also stood as an independent candidate for Westminster in the triennial election for the London school board, but finished at the bottom of the poll. Unlike most of those serving on the board she was not relying on the support of any association, political or otherwise, neither did she enter the fray as a supporter of free education or free school meals. In fact, her main concern was to avoid excessive expenditure. Consequently, in the autumn of 1888 the feminist 'Women's Penny Paper' paid tribute to her sound business ability as a guardian and her 'eagle eye' for abuses: 'To the pauper children she is an invaluable friend, and, if returned to the larger Board, the interests of the rising generation will be safe in her hands' ('Women's Penny Paper', 1). Despite her lack of success, it was in the same year that she was approached by Annie Leigh Browne of the newly established Society for Promoting the Return of Women as County Councillors (which became in 1893 the Women's Local Government Society) to allow herself to be nominated as a candidate for the London county council, an invitation which she refused. In 1891 she was again unsuccessful in the elections for the school board, but three years later was invited to join the vestry for St Martin-in-the-Fields. 
Oddly enough Mrs Evans had attended vestry meetings regularly for ten years owing to her misgivings about the over-assessment of her rates. Indeed she told the 1896 conference of the Women's Emancipation Union that the driving force behind her interest in municipal affairs was a sense of injustice, reinforced by anger at her subsequent treatment by the male judiciary and local vestry (Ignota, 387-9). Initially excluded from all committees except the housing of the working classes committee, hard work and consistent attendances at vestry meetings were rewarded when on 28 May 1896 Mrs Evans was elected to serve on the works and general purposes committee, the finance committee, the improvements committee (dealing with issues arising from the 'Strand Improvement Bill'), and the lighting committee. By 1899 she was serving on all vestry committees except one; the most important of those on which she acted was the works and general purposes committee, which determined the planning implications of road works, gas and water pipes, new sewers, and electric and telephone wires. 
Down to the turn of the century Matilda Evans devoted herself to her work as a vestrywoman and poor-law guardian until she was unseated as a result of a petition lodged against her in July 1899 by an unsuccessful candidate, John Theodore Audy, for a technical infringement of the 'Corrupt Practices Act'. In the event she was found guilty of illegal practices under the 'Municipal Corporations Act' of 1882 (because she paid a certain F. Barrow 10's'. for the conveyance of electors to and from the poll at the election on 15 May) and her election was declared void. It seems that the decision not only caused much local indignation but precipitated much comment in the press concerning the severity of the penalty imposed by comparison with other election petitions. By the judgment of the commissioners Mrs Evans was compelled to resign her seat on the Strand board of guardians, and in the opinion of the Women's Local Government Society, the 'withdrawal of her able and disinterested work as Guardian, as member of the Vestry, and as Overseer, is a very serious loss in the local administration of the Strand' (WLGS report, 1899-1900, 17). In 1909 she was an unsuccessful candidate for the London county council. She committed suicide at 17 Panton Street, Haymarket, London, on 14 June 1909. Her work illustrated both the difficulties and the achievements of women entering local government in the late nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 56471


Lanchester, Edith (1871-1966), socialist and feminist, was born at 1 St John's Terrace, Hove, Sussex, on 28 July 1871, the fifth child in the family of eight children of Henry Jones Lanchester (1834-1914), an architect, and his wife, Octavia Ward (1834-1916). Her brother Frederick William Lanchester (1868-1946) formed the Lanchester Engine Company in 1899 and introduced the Lanchester motor car in 1901; another brother, George Herbert Lanchester (1874-1970), was also prominent in the firm. After attending the Birkbeck Institution and the Maria Grey training college, Edith (known to her intimates as Biddy) was first a teacher and then a clerk-secretary. When she came to prominence in October 1895 she was working for a firm in the City of London. 
Edith Lanchester was a convinced socialist and a member of the Social Democratic Federation (SDF), Britain's leading Marxist body, lodging in Battersea with working-class SDF comrades. Her celebrity or notoriety resulted from events which followed her announced intention to live with her lover, James Sullivan (died 1945), without marrying him. Her view was that marriage reduced a wife to the position of a chattel. Sullivan, who was also an SDF member, worked in a black lead factory but he had intellectual ambitions and worked hard at self-education. He later became a short-hand typist and bookkeeper. 
One can speculate on Edith's family's reaction had her lover been of a higher social class and not borne an Irish name. As it was, they were determined to stop the union. At the behest of her parents and brothers she was interviewed at her lodgings on 25 October 1895 by George Fielding Blandford, a leading mental specialist and the author of 'Insanity and its Treatment' (1871; 4th edn, 1892). Although Blandford had warned in the book against mistaking immorality for irrationality he signed a medical certificate to confine her to a mental institution. Under section 11 of the 'Lunacy Act' of 1890 a single certificate was adequate for seven days' compulsory incarceration in cases of urgency, but a second certificate was obtained shortly afterwards. Dr Blandford explained that as he would have certified her if she had threatened suicide, he was justified in preventing her from trying to commit 'social suicide'. Edith forcibly resisted her father and brothers, but in the end she was dragged off to a carriage and driven to The Priory institution, Roehampton. 
The affair led to enormous publicity and the intervention of John Burns, MP for Battersea and formerly a member of the SDF. The 'New York Times' commented (3 November 1895) that the affair had 'rivet[ed] the attention of three kingdoms' and that '[n]o penny paper had printed less than ten columns on this engrossing subject during the week'. But according to the report of the commissioners of lunacy, when the papers on the case were put before them on Monday 28 October it was the first they had heard of Edith Lanchester. They took care, however, to visit her at Roehampton the same afternoon, conducted an 'interview of some duration' and 'satisfied themselves that she was not then insane'. She was freed the following day under section 75 of the 'Lunacy Act', as a patient 'detained without sufficient cause' ('Report', 53). She had been in the institution for four days. 
Lanchester and Sullivan continued to live together without ever marrying, though socialist and feminist opinion in 1895 suggested that in the conditions of existing society it would have been more sensible to do so. For a period Edith was employed in a clerical capacity by Karl Marx's daughter Eleanor. 
The couple paid a considerable price for their refusal to observe the conventions. According to their daughter Elsa Lanchester (1902-1986), the actress whose autobiography is the source for her mother's later life, Edith never saw her father again. (Perhaps she would not have done so even if she had married Sullivan.) She did, however, re-establish friendly relations with her mother, who left her $400. Her socialist, vegetarian, and atheist beliefs may have contributed to alienating her daughter, who wrote that she was never able to like her mother (Lanchester, 5, 11, 32, 49, 314). 
Edith Lanchester was a militant though apparently not very active supporter of women's suffrage. She was a pacifist during the First World War and afterwards joined the Communist Party. She assisted her son Waldo, who after release from prison as a conscientious objector became a puppet maker and weaver. After James Sullivan's death in 1945 Edith moved to Brighton where she spent the remainder of her long life. Elsa wrote that she remained a communist, displaying posters outside her Brighton flat, and attending political meetings so long as she was physically active enough to walk to the bus (ibid., 316-17). Edith Lanchester died at her home, 18 Highcroft Villas, Brighton, Sussex, on 26 March 1966. 
The Lanchester affair had no immediate impact on the lunacy laws, for there was no major legislation until 1959. After the public obloquy to which Dr Blandford had been subjected in 1895 the laws may have been interpreted with more care, at least where middle-class women were concerned. Edith Lanchester's action in defying social convention and her own family at whatever cost was one of many gestures by women in the 1890s to increase their freedom and civil rights. As such she deserves to be remembered as a pioneer of the freedom of her sex. 


@@@@@


doc= 56472


Lidgett, Elizabeth Sedman (1843-1919), poor-law guardian and suffragist, was born on 26 August 1843 at 20 Arbour Terrace, Mile End, London, the daughter of John Lidgett of Hull, a London shipowner, and his wife, Ann Jacob, 'nee' Hyett. Her elder sister was the women's activist Mary Hyett, who in 1869 married Percy William Bunting (editor of the 'Contemporary Review'); John Scott Lidgett (warden of the Bermondsey settlement and nonconformist member of the London school board) was her nephew. However, nothing further is known of her early life and career. 
In April 1881 Elizabeth was elected a poor-law guardian in St Pancras, where she served alongside Sarah Ward Andrews, who helped form the Society for Promoting the Return of Women as Poor Law Guardians in February that same year. Both women belonged to the Charity Organization Society, which organization was the formative influence in Lidgett's ideas of morally inspiring philanthropy: in 1909 she declared 'We may devise schemes, we may appoint officials, but it is only the living human soul that can save a soul alive' (Hollis, 27-8). In 1883 they were joined by Florence Davenport Hill, who later served on the central committee of the National Society for Women's Suffrage. Overall, women were represented on committees dealing with the workhouse, visiting boarded-out children, and poor-law schools, and they were clearly encouraged to deal only with matters relating to female and child inmates. As a member of the Ladies' Reference Committee, Elizabeth was able to support the work of her sister on the Metropolitan Association for Befriending Young Servants, and the minutes for 19 April 1894 record that the male guardians welcomed women's contribution in finding employment for many female paupers. They also supported her active involvement in the emigration of pauper children to Canada in her capacity as member, and subsequently chair, of the boarding-out committee in 1894-1906, 1913, and 1916. On many occasions she was asked to represent the board on a variety of bodies, including the National Poor Law Conference in 1896 and the Distress Committee for St Pancras with Hilda Miall-Smith (a former member of the London school board) in 1905. She also spoke of her work as a female guardian at the annual conferences of the National Union of Women Workers. 
Both Elizabeth Lidgett and her sister were prominent in the National Vigilance Association, and the first meeting 'to promote the return of Women as County Councillors' was held in the house of Mr and Mrs Percy Bunting on 17 November 1888. Although Elizabeth declined an invitation to stand for election to the London county council Mary Bunting was placed on the first general committee of the Women's Local Government Society (1893), and in the words of her obituarist 'ever continued a steadfast friend to the cause' ('Women's Local Government Society Report', 29), as did Elizabeth. 
Elizabeth Lidgett also took a keen interest in the work of the London school board. For instance, in 1889 she became a manager of the Gray's Inn Road group of schools, serving alongside Margaret Eve, who went on to represent Finsbury on the school board. In 1894 she campaigned on behalf of two Progressive candidates in Greenwich -- Henry Gover and a nonconformist minister, Mr Wilson (school board for London; 'Blackheath Gazette'). Finally, in 1912 she gave evidence to the royal commission on divorce. 
Then living at 40 Gordon Square, Elizabeth Sedman Lidgett died at home of a pulmonary malignant disease and secondary abdominal growths on 8 April 1919. Aged seventy-five, she had been a member of the St Pancras board of guardians for nearly forty years. It is impossible to judge whether she was missed by the local poor, but in the opinion of the Women's Local Government Society 'Miss Lidgett was an ideal Guardian, and spared no effort to help young and old' ('Women's Local Government Society Report', 29). 


@@@@@


doc= 56473


Mallet, Louisa Tempe (1837-1904), women's activist, was born on 15 April 1837 in Calcutta, the daughter of Bengal civil servant George Udny, of Udny in Aberdeenshire, and Frances Hannay. Little else is known of her private life, other than that on 3 March 1859 she married Charles Mallet ('b'. 1824/5), a civil servant, and in December 1862 she gave birth to a son, Sir Charles Edward Mallet, a Liberal MP and historian. 
In the early 1870s Mrs Mallet supported the activities of the sisters Maria Grey and Emily Shirreff to establish a greater number of schools for academically oriented girls, and for a five-year period from 1876 she served on the central committee of the Women's Education Union. The union had two main objectives: firstly, to raise academic standards and to increase provision in the field of secondary education, and secondly, to promote the training and status of women teachers. Mrs Mallet also took a practical interest in the education of the working classes, serving as a manager of the Lisson Grove elementary schools in Marylebone from November 1880. Here the chair of managers was Alice Westlake, an early supporter of Bedford College who was elected on to the London school board in 1876 and, like Louisa Mallet, had connections with the Langham Place circle of feminists and the trade union organizer Emilia Dilke. In 1891 Mrs Mallet stood as a Progressive Party candidate for West Lambeth in the triennial election for the school board, but was narrowly defeated in an election campaign dominated by charges of excessive expenditure from the tory majority. Indeed, her close friend Emma Maitland lost her seat in Marylebone. They shared a concern with the education of girls and women and were active in questions of local government and women's suffrage. 
In November 1888 Mrs Mallet helped found the Society for Promoting the Return of Women as County Councillors, with the countess of Aberdeen (president of the executive of the Women's Liberal Federation) as president and Eva McLaren as first honorary treasurer. As joint secretary with Annie Leigh Browne, Louisa supported Jane Cobden in the 1889 election campaign for the London county council and joined the executive of the renamed Women's Local Government Society in 1892. This upper-middle-class, liberal, London-based women's organization was established on a non-party basis for promoting the eligibility of women to elect to and serve on all local governing bodies. Its inner circle included Lady Aberdeen, Annie Leigh Browne, Emma Cons, Emma Maitland, and Eva McLaren. Mrs Mallet defended female involvement in local politics at a number of important meetings in the 1890s, as well as writing articles in the feminist press and producing a campaign leaflet ('Shall Women be Eligible to Serve on County Councils?') on behalf of the Women's Local Government Society. 
By 1893 Mrs Mallet was a well-known figure in London politics, a Liberal Party worker who served on the executive committee of the Women's Liberal Federation, and president of the Guildford, North Kensington, and Mile End women's Liberal associations. Like Annie Leigh Browne, she was also a member of the Albemarle Club. Louisa Mallet remained on the executive committee of the Women's Local Government Society until 1901. She died at the Hotel Burlington, Boscombe, Bournemouth, on 2 July 1904. 


@@@@@


doc= 56477


Maitland, Emma Knox (1844-1923), suffragist and educationist, was born on 17 May 1844 at 7 Croft Terrace, Tenby, Pembrokeshire, the only child of John Rees JP, gentleman, and his wife, Emma Brown. Her father died when she was young; her mother was a strong Liberal and she shared her political convictions. Little else is known of her early life other than that she was educated by governesses until she was twelve and then went to a boarding-school. Aged eighteen, she married in Cheltenham, on 22 July 1862, Frederick Maitland (1822/3-1902), a retired clerk at East India House, the son of Joseph Maitland. They settled in London, first in Kensington, then in Hampstead, and had a family of three sons and three daughters. 
Emma Maitland had little time for public work until her children were grown up, by which time her eldest daughter ran the family home at 18 Primrose Hill, Hampstead, during her absence. None the less, she did attend one of the first drawing-room meetings to discuss the issue of women's suffrage, held by Mrs Riley Taylor in 1866. A firm believer that the vote should be extended to married women, she refused to join the Women's Suffrage Society (which had sanctioned a partial measure of franchise on the grounds of political expediency). Interviewed by the feminist 'Women's Penny Paper' in 1890, she referred to her strong belief that women should work with men, another reason for her refusal to join a women's suffrage society. Three years later she joined the executive of the Women's Local Government Society, a non-party feminist group established to promote the eligibility of women to serve on all local government bodies, serving from 1893 to 1904 and again from 1910 to 1914. She also served as convenor and chair of the organization committee for a three-year period from 1910. A hard-working Liberal Party worker, Emma was president of the women's branch of the Hampstead Liberal and Radical Association and went on to represent that body on the National Liberal Federation and the London Liberal and Radical Union. Finally, by 1890 she was vice-president of the Women's Liberal Federation, formed at the home of Sophia Fry in 1886. 
Mrs Maitland always took a keen interest in education, canvassing for Elizabeth Garrett at Marylebone in 1870 during the first triennial election for the London school board. She was also a school manager in the early years of the board and took a practical interest in the administration of a college for working women. Asked to stand as a candidate for Marylebone in 1888, she consented to do so, and was returned in third place (behind Edward Barnes and Lyulph Stanley) with 17,790 votes. Her chief demands were for free education, a more generous curriculum, and simplification of the needlework requirements for girls in order to leave more time for Slojd hand and eye training and Swedish exercises to aid the children's physical development. Unlike her colleagues Margaret Eve (represented Finsbury, 1891-1904) and Rosamond Davenport Hill (longest serving female member, represented the City between 1879 and 1897), who gave special interest to girls' subjects, Emma Maitland spread her work over a larger sphere so that she might offer a female perspective on all aspects of the board's work. 
Displaced by the moderate faction, headed by the Revd Joseph Diggle, in 1891, during the furore over the purchase of pianos for board schools, in 1894 Mrs Maitland was returned head of the poll in Chelsea and held the seat until her retirement in January 1903. By 1896 she was responsible for nine schools in Kilburn and Shepherd's Bush and took a keen interest in the education of blind and deaf children, which had been placed under the control of the school board rather than the poor-law guardians in 1893. Like Ruth Homan (represented Tower Hamlets, 1891-1904), Emma Maitland acted on the principle of finding blind children foster homes near their school centres, widening their curriculum, and sending the most able on to training colleges. Mrs Maitland usually spent three days a week at the board's headquarters on the Embankment, as well as alternate Wednesdays, while the rest of the week was devoted to constituency work. Further, she even took advantage of visits to the continent to investigate German and Austrian methods of caring for deaf and deaf mute children. 
Elected by her peers to represent the London board on the Association of School Boards (alongside Dr T. J. Macnamara, Mr Thompson, and Graham Wallas), in February 1901 Mrs Maitland attended a special meeting called to discuss the developing crisis over secondary education, after Lord Justice Cockerton ruled that much of the school board's work in this area was unsanctioned and illegal. By the turn of the century education reform was moving up the political agenda and both Mrs Maitland and the Women's Local Government Society played a key role in the campaign to protect the position of women, likely to be disqualified by sex for election to the new local education authorities. As a token of their esteem, her colleagues presented Mrs Maitland with a pair of silver candlesticks on the occasion of her retirement from the board. The chairman, Lord Reay, hoped they 'would help to spread the light around them upon her dining table, as she had spread the light around her' ('School Board Chronicle', 31 Jan 1901, 86). Although the feminists won a concession enabling women to be co-opted as specialists onto the new institutions, female exclusion from elected office ended with the 'Qualification of Women (County and Borough Councils) Act', 1907. Emma Knox Maitland, who was widowed in 1902, died at her home 43 Howitt Road, Hampstead, on 13 June 1923. 


@@@@@


doc= 56483


Gordon, Seton Paul (1886-1977), naturalist and photographer, was born at 26 Rubislaw Terrace, Aberdeen, on 11 April 1886, the only child of William Gordon (1839-1924), advocate and town clerk of Aberdeen, and his wife, Ella Mary, daughter of the horticulturist William Paul of Waltham Cross, Hertfordshire; she wrote poetry. As well as a family house in Aberdeen, the Gordons had a chalet (Auchintoul) at Aboyne on Deeside, which played a big part in developing the young boy's love of wildlife, fishing, climbing the hills, and photographing birds; he wrote so well about what he was discovering that the first of his twenty-seven books, 'Birds of Loch and Mountain', illustrated with ninety of his photographs, was published in 1907. In October 1908 he matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, and took a second-class honours degree in natural sciences in 1911. At Oxford he met (Evelyn) Audrey Pease (1893-1959), an undergraduate at Lady Margaret Hall, studying the same subjects. She not only matched him in ornithological knowledge, but had photographed a variety of birds from hides in her home county of Northumberland. They were married on 19 August 1915, had a son and two daughters, and their partnership lasted until her death. 
In 1912 Gordon published 'The Charm of the Hills', which remained in print almost a century later. During the First World War he was given the job of organizing a secret coastguard service, based on the Isle of Mull and with his own boat. For Gordon a whole new world opened up as he recruited a corps of over 100 Hebrideans on different islands to watch out for enemy submarines. He was conscious of the inequality which meant that he could go where he pleased among the islands and wildlife that he loved while his friends were being killed in the trenches in France. 'The Land of the Hills and the Glens' (1920) and 'Hebridean Memoirs' (1923) drew on these experiences. Indeed, his wartime career launched him on a career as a naturalist, writer, and photographer, for, as he discovered in the 1920s, there were more qualified former officers than appointments. He observed, 'After the war we visited much of the Highlands and the Hebrides, staying with crofters, camping on the islands, some of them uninhabited, living the hard way, thus getting to know the crofters and their outlook on the world.' In 1922 he published 'Amid Snowy Wastes', an account of the wildlife on the Spitsbergen archipelago, and in 1927 'Days with the Golden Eagle', the first of many volumes on birds which bridged the gap between ornithology and environmentalism. His 'Edward Grey of Fallodon and his Birds' (1937) was an affectionate account of the former foreign secretary's interest in the subject. 
Seton Gordon had a disciplined approach to his work, routinely writing for three hours in the morning and three in the evening. In February he went on lecture tours, travelling all over the British Isles to show his slides taken with a half-plate camera; the tours always finished in time for him to return to his home, Upper Duntulm, on the island of Skye, to catch the nesting of the golden eagle. The routine produced some thirty or more books, many illustrated with photographs by both Gordon and his wife. Among them were 'Thirty Years of Nature Photography' (1936), 'Highways and Byways in the Central Highlands' (1948, with illustrations by Sir David Young Cameron), and 'Afoot in the Hebrides' (1950). Gordon was appointed CBE in 1939. Audrey Gordon died in 1959, and the following year (2 June 1960) Seton married a family friend, Elizabeth Maud ('b'. 1899/1900), widow of Colonel Reginald Badger and daughter of George Murray Smith, landowner. Gordon's discipline now relaxed somewhat, and they divided their time between Upper Duntulm, his wife's cottage in Kintail, and Biddleston Manor, Northamptonshire, where Seton Gordon died on the night of 18-19 March 1977. His ashes were scattered in the Cairngorms. 
Adam Watson summed up Gordon's life in 'Scottish Birds', the journal of the Scottish Ornithologists Club: 'With his passing ends the period of wholly exploratory naturalists in Scotland and their extraordinary breadth of interests. He was the long last practitioner, overlapping for decades the modern period when scientific method dominated ornithology. Astride two centuries, Seton had a timeless attitude, exemplified by the patched, decades-old kilt he wore on every occasion, sun or snow, mansion or bothy.' 



@@@@@


doc= 56485


Bull, Phil (1910-1989), racehorse owner and punter, was born on 9 April 1910 at 3 Cemetery Road, Hemsworth, West Riding of Yorkshire, the only son and eldest of the three children of William Osborne Bull ('c'.1870-1954), a coalminer who later became a sanitary inspector, and his wife, Lizzie Jessop (Dolly) Watson (1884-1972), schoolteacher. He was educated at Hemsworth church school and then, by way of scholarships, at Hemsworth grammar school (1921-8) and Leeds University (1928-31), where he took a degree in mathematics. He worked first as a schoolteacher in London but left that profession to devote himself to racing. He specialized in betting and selling advice to other punters, either directly or via his own racing publications, initially under the 'non de plume' William K. Temple. His meticulous accounts show that when he gave up serious betting about 1974 he had taken the equivalent (in early twenty-first-century terms) of over $5 million from the bookmakers. He was not a gambler but a rational placer of bets who gained intellectual stimulus from the challenge of the new set of horses that appeared each year. 
The basis of Bull's betting was past racing performance, but not merely the relative finishing positions used by most students of form. He maintained that a moderate horse could never become a great one but that any horse which ran a fast time was capable of replicating the feat when conditions were propitious. From this idea came his development of 'Timeform', which he introduced to the racing public in 1948. In this detailed publication every racehorse in Britain was rated according to achieved speed. This major original contribution to racing became internationally recognized, and was eventually mirrored by the Jockey Club in its handicapping system. 
Although Bull always maintained that for the public racing was about betting, not breeding, he was himself interested in the latter aspect of the sport. He founded the Hollins Stud in 1947, though this was not a tangible entity but a corporate name for his breeding operations. He was unusual for an owner-breeder in that every year he offered all his stock for sale. Perhaps this contributed to his never winning a classic, although his fillies Arietta and Aureoletta were third respectively in the One Thousand Guineas and the Oaks. 
A socialist by upbringing -- his uncle Gabriel Price (1879-1934) was Labour MP for Hemsworth -- and an egalitarian by conviction, Bull had little time for the racing establishment, especially for those members of the Jockey Club who had been public-school educated. Many of his writings were trenchant criticisms of the club's conservatism and of its failure to act in the interests of punters, who, as Bull often pointed out, made a major contribution to racing via the betting levy. Well before they were adopted he advocated electronic timing, Sunday racing, and prominently displayed betting odds boards. He was never invited to join the Jockey Club; in 1980, however, he was appointed to the chair of the horseracing advisory committee. He lasted just over four months before he resigned from what he termed a 'cosmetic charade' (Wright, 223), a body not treated seriously by either the Jockey Club or the Horserace Betting Levy Board, which were the key players in running and financing racing. In any event Bull was not by nature a compromiser and he found it difficult to curb his individualism to the needs of committee work. Although he felt that kindness was a virtue he had no such regard for tolerance, believing that one should speak out against people and policies with which one disagrees. 
Bull married three times. His first marriage, on 15 June 1935, was to a fellow teacher, Doris Astley, who was five months pregnant at the time with his son David. They soon separated and were divorced in June 1944. By then Bull had been living for almost four years with another teacher, Eleanor (Nell) Oxley, with whom he had two children, Anne and Raymond. On 4 November 1949 he married Wendy Carter, and on 2 September 1963 Patricia Scott Finlay. Patricia had replaced Wendy as his personal assistant at 'Timeform', and both eventually left Bull for younger men. 
Instantly recognizable with his ginger beard (first retained as a protest after a headmaster demanded he shave it off), heavy glasses, and ubiquitous cigar, Bull cultivated his image of bluntness and liked to play the showman. Away from the racetrack and the study where he spent hours working on his betting plans he indulged his passion for classical music, chess, and snooker. He was a humanist who maintained that all religions were superstitious nonsense and that the Christian faith in particular had brought immeasurable unhappiness to the world. He died at his home, The Hollins, Warley, Halifax, Yorkshire, on 11 June 1989. 


@@@@@


doc= 56486


Wooller, Wilfred (1912-1997), rugby player and cricketer, was born at Wentworth, Church Road, Llandrillo-yn-Rhos, Denbighshire, on 20 November 1912, the second of four children of Wilfred Wooller, a builder and contractor, and his wife, Ethel, 'nee' Johnson (died 1924). His parents had moved to Wales from Eccles in Lancashire. He was educated at John Bright School, Llandudno, Rydal School, and Christ's College, Cambridge, where he graduated in 1936 with a third-class degree in archaeology and anthropology. Wooller shot to fame in 1933, when, still at school, he played rugby for Wales against England. He later wrote that he was 'masquerading as a schoolboy' (Arlott, 73) for he was twenty and 'should have been up at Cambridge, but for an inability to master Latin in my entrance exam' (ibid.). He had already played minor counties cricket for Denbighshire and senior club rugby for Sale. His debut match was Wales's first win at England's Twickenham ground (in use since 1910). It introduced Wooller as one of the dominant figures of 1930s rugby, a dynamically unpredictable and individualistic three-quarter who combined size more normally associated with a forward -- he was 6 feet 2 inches and 14 stone -- with unusual speed and football skills. A powerful runner with 'a huge lengthening stride, he ran like a train' (Arlott, 71), feared by opponents for his high knee-action, he made a speciality of the kick-and-chase move. His skill in this was decisive in Wales's 13-12 win over New Zealand in 1935; he was twice deprived of a try by an unlucky bounce, but the ball fell on each occasion for his team-mate Richard Rees-Jones to score. He was an unusually prolific kicker of drop goals, at a time when they counted 4 points, as against 3 for a try. 
After arriving at Cambridge as an international player, Wooller won three blues. On graduating in 1936 he moved to Cardiff to work in the coal industry and joined Cardiff Rugby Football Club. He played seventy-one matches for them, and scored thirty-six tries and thirty drop goals, and he was captain in 1938-9. He won eighteen Wales caps, the last three as captain in 1939, and scored 26 points, including six tries. He also won two cricket blues, played occasional county cricket for Glamorgan in 1938 and 1939, represented Wales at squash, and appeared in friendly matches for Cardiff City Football Club. 
During the Second World War Wooller served in the 77th heavy anti-aircraft regiment, and reached the rank of lieutenant. He was captured in Java in 1942 and spent the remainder of the war as a prisoner of war. One of only 500 survivors from a group of more than 3000, he lost 3 stone in captivity. After returning to Wales he was employed in 1946 by Glamorgan County Cricket Club as assistant secretary, and became secretary and captain in 1947. He retained the captaincy until 1960. He was a highly competent cricketer. As a batsman he scored a total of 13,593 runs at an average of 22.58. A fast-medium bowler who could move the ball both ways, he took 958 wickets at an average of 26.96. In 1955 he completed the 'double' of 1000 runs and 100 wickets. A fearless close-to-the-wicket fieldsman, he took 413 catches. 
Wooller's greatest cricket skill was captaincy. He was an autocratic, abrasive leader who believed firmly in cricket's traditional division between amateur and professional. His combative aggression, more typical of Australian than British cricketers, led the Sussex player Alan Oakman to recall: 'Anything I had to do with Wilfred Wooller was confrontational -- never malicious, but always attempting to wear you down mentally' ('Glamorgan County Cricket Club Yearbook', 1998, 143). The journalist David Foot wrote that aggression was combined with 'a rare intuition, allied to a personal knowledge of the technique, and flaws, of the majority of batsmen' (Foot, 33). In 1948 he led Glamorgan, a first-class county since only 1921, to its first county championship. Success was founded on exceptional fielding. Wooller recalled 'We caught everything above the ground' (Foot, 31). While he never played test cricket, Wooller was asked about his availability to captain England's 1951-2 tour of India -- he could not go -- and was a test selector from 1955 to 1962. Always conscious of Glamorgan's role as 'a county serving a nation' (Jones, 171), he encouraged the development of young Welsh players. 
Wooller's dominant personality polarized opinion. Jim Pressdee, a young Glamorgan player, entertained RAF hutmates by cursing 'that bloody Wilf Wooller' (Foot, 18) in his sleep. Wooller, who as 'a conversational monopolist had few equals' (Foot, 22), attributed his strongly right-wing views to his time as a prisoner of war and was a fervent supporter of sporting contact with apartheid-era South Africa. The Welsh journalist John Billot recalled him as 'mixing exceptional charm with often brutal arrogance' ('Western Mail', 11 March 1997). In 1958 a botched attempt to displace him as captain of Glamorgan led to civil war in the club, which culminated in the resignation of most of the committee. He retired from playing, of his own choosing, in 1960 but continued as club secretary until his retirement in 1977. In 1991 he became president of the club. 
Wooller also worked as a journalist, reporting rugby for the 'News Chronicle' from 1946 until the paper's demise in 1960, then for the 'Sunday Telegraph' from 1961 to 1988. From the 1960s he was also a cricket broadcaster and was the man at the microphone when Gary Sobers became the first man to hit six sixes in a first-class over, at Swansea in 1968. His 1971 book, 'A History of County Cricket: Glamorgan', had a strongly autobiographical flavour. He also, for many years, ran his own insurance business. 
Wooller's first marriage, in 1941, to Gillian Windsor-Clive (1922-1961), was dissolved in 1946, and he married, secondly on 29 September 1948, Enid Mary James ('b'. 1924/5), optician, of Ogmore Vale, Glamorgan, the daughter of David William James, optician. His second marriage produced three sons and two daughters. He died in Llandough Hospital, Cardiff, on 10 March 1997 and was buried in Thornhill cemetery two days later. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 56488


Grant, Sir George Macpherson-, third baronet (1839-1907), cattle breeder, landowner, and politician, was born on 12 August 1839, probably at Ballindalloch, Banffshire. He was the eldest son of Sir John Macpherson-Grant (1804-1850) and his wife, Marion Helen Campbell (1810-1855). His father was the second baronet and grandson of Sir George Macpherson, the first baronet, who had inherited the estate of Ballindalloch, Banffshire, as heir to his father's maternal uncle, General James Grant, adding the additional surname of Grant. George was educated at Harrow School and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated in 1861. On 3 July 1861 he married Frances Elizabeth (died 1916), daughter of the Revd R. Pocklington, vicar of Wallesby, Nottinghamshire, and returned to take charge of the family's 125,000 acre estates at Ballindalloch and Invereshie on attaining his majority later that year. 
When Macpherson-Grant returned to his properties, the roots of breeding polled cattle were already well formed. While the fixation of specific breeds of cattle in England began about 1750, it was not until the beginning of the nineteenth century that Scottish farmers turned their attention to the perfection of pedigree livestock. Both his father and grandfather had been noted for taking a prominent part in improving the local breed of polled cattle at Ballindalloch, along with other landowners -- Hugh Watson of Keillor (1789-1860) in the county of Angus and William M'Combie of Tillyfour (1805-1880) in Aberdeenshire. In 1835 his grandfather had employed James Mackay as manager, a post which he held for the next forty-one years, during the whole of which time he was engaged in managing and improving the Ballindalloch herd for three generations of his employers' family. While there was thus already a solid base to build on at Ballindalloch, Macpherson-Grant's and Mackay's purchase of the cow Erica 843, for 50 guineas, at the Kinnaird sale on the dispersion of the Watson herd in 1861, is considered the commencement of the 'Ballindalloch era' for polled or Aberdeen Angus cattle. Erica became, as part of the Ballindalloch herd, the founder of the premier family of the breed, producing eight calves between 1862 and 1872, when she died of an abscess at the age of sixteen. Of these calves four were bulls and four were heifers, and it is from the latter that the three recognized branches of the Erica family are drawn and defined by the bull: the Chieftain Ericas, the Kildonian Ericas, and the Trojan Ericas. 
Aside from this breeding success that made Macpherson-Grant a world renowned figure, he was also instrumental in the general public presentation of the breed and in establishing its international reputation as the foremost producer of high-quality beef. About 1857 the 'Herd Book' was restarted, the original having been destroyed by fire in 1851, and Macpherson-Grant was the main agent in the formation of the Polled Cattle Society (30 July 1879). Because of the sensitivities of whether to place Angus or Aberdeen in the foremost position, it not being clear where the breed lines first formed, it was not until 1886 that the 'Herd Book' name of the breed became the Aberdeen Angus, and not until October 1907 that the society itself finally changed its name. Macpherson-Grant held office as president of the society for two terms in 1882-5 and 1891-3, his first term following Queen Victoria's acceptance of the role of patroness of the society in July 1881. She was followed in this office by successive monarchs. Macpherson-Grant was also president of the Highland and Agricultural Society in 1892, being the first 'commoner' president of that body. 
In the 1865 parliamentary election Macpherson-Grant contested the seat for the county of Inverness, losing to the sitting MP by thirty-nine votes, and it was not until 1879 that he was elected as Liberal MP for Elginshire and Nairnshire, defeating the Conservative Brodie of Brodie with a majority of 258 votes. He was re-elected as a Liberal again in 1880, this time unopposed, and once again in 1885, defeating Brodie of Brodie who stood for the Conservatives, and C. H. Anderson who stood as an independent Liberal. In the home-rule crisis of 1885 he refused to follow W. E. Gladstone, and in the 1886 election moved to the Unionists, losing his seat by 119 votes to C. H. Anderson, who now stood as a home-ruler. In local politics he was convener of the county of Banff from 1868 to 1881, when he resigned because of the pressure of his parliamentary duties. Following his departure from Westminster he was re-elected to the position of Banffshire convener in 1887, finally retiring in 1896. He also held, until his death, the position of convener of the Banffshire Commissioners of Supply. He was appointed deputy lieutenant of Banffshire in 1860, of Inverness-shire in 1861, and of Moray in 1866. He was also a director of the Highland Railway Company from 1877 to 1903, and its chairman from 1897. As a central figure in the local community Macpherson-Grant also sat on parochial and other local boards, but it was his work in agriculture that was his greatest interest. Besides his national work as a livestock breeder, at the local level he devoted much of his time to assisting his tenants during the depression years from 1873 to 1896 and supporting the Spey, Aven and Fiddichside Farmers' Club, of which he was president. 
In November 1907 Macpherson-Grant travelled south to Edinburgh, intending to winter in the south of England. While in Edinburgh he caught a chill, and remaining there a fortnight, died of heart failure on 5 December 1907. His body was returned to Ballindalloch Castle for the funeral, which took place on Tuesday 10 December. The numerous tenants and estate workers who turned out for the public funeral procession to the church at Inveravon were testimony not only to the high professional reputation he had earned by his work on the Ballindalloch herd but also to the great personal regard in which he was held locally as a considerate and caring landlord. There was no hearse, but a lorry, draped in the Grant tartan, drawn by two brown horses and flanked by gamekeepers, the piper piping 'Glengarry's Lament'. He was interred in the family vault in Inveravon churchyard, and was survived by Lady Macpherson-Grant, three sons, and a daughter. He was succeeded by Sir John Macpherson-Grant. There was still a herd of Aberdeen Angus cattle at Ballindalloch a century after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 56491


Cameron, Katharine (1874-1965), watercolour painter and etcher, was born on 26 February 1874 at 16 Sardinia Terrace, Hillhead, Glasgow, the eighth of the nine children of Robert Cameron (1825-1898), minister of Cambridge Street United Presbyterian Church in Glasgow, and his wife, Margaret Johnston ('bap'. 1839, died 1924), elder daughter of Donald Robertson, a surgeon in Perth, and his wife, Jessie. Although she was baptized Catherine, she spelt her name Katharine, signing her paintings K. Cameron or KC. She was a younger sister of the distinguished painter and etcher Sir David Young Cameron. Both inherited their artistic ability from their mother, a talented amateur watercolourist. 
Cameron attended the Glasgow School of Art intermittently from 1889 to 1901, which was then under the inspired direction of Francis Newbery. She was a member of a small circle of female students who called themselves The Immortals. Other members included the sisters Margaret and Frances Macdonald, the former marrying the architect Charles Rennie Mackintosh, a fellow student of Cameron in the early 1890s. In 1902 she studied at the Academie Colarossi in Paris. 
Apart from her etching, Cameron worked exclusively in watercolour. By the age of twenty she had achieved considerable maturity in terms of technique and composition. In 1897 she was elected a member of the Royal Scottish Society of Painters in Watercolour, then a remarkable achievement for a woman of twenty-two. Her early paintings are predominantly flower pieces. However, inspired by the Celtic revival and by the work of Edward Burne-Jones, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, and the Hague school painter Matthijs Maris, whom she met on several occasions, she also executed a number of romantic figure studies, illustrating characters or incidents from Scottish ballads and folklore. Landscapes feature in her work after 1900. She had the same love of the highlands as her brother, always striving to capture their magical beauty. 
In 1902 Cameron illustrated a book for children titled 'In Fairyland', the first of a number of such commissions. Her watercolour illustrations are varied and colourful, but are -- with a few exceptions -- unremarkable. She had little real commitment to illustration. What inspired her most was painting flowers; at her best her work is exemplary, combining acute observation with a sensitive painterly technique. 
Cameron began etching in 1898, but did not take it up seriously until 1911, when her first set of eight etchings of flowers was published. She went on to etch about seventy-three plates over the next twenty-five years. The majority are of flowers and/or insects, the remainder being landscapes. They are characterized by a strong, yet sensitive line. She was elected an associate of the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers in 1920, becoming a fellow in 1964. 
A prolific artist, Cameron painted with barely diminished vigour into her eighties. She was an assiduous exhibitor throughout her life, showing for the first time at the Royal Glasgow Institute in 1891 at the age of seventeen. She had a joint exhibition with her brother in London in 1897 and held the first of many solo exhibitions in 1900. 
On 17 April 1928 Cameron married, as his second wife, the collector 
In her younger days Cameron was petite, pretty, and vivacious, but she became rather stout in later life. She was noted for her distinctive clothes. Friends remembered her as a kind person who was very supportive of young artists. She died at 3 Marshall Crescent, Edinburgh, on 21 August 1965 after a fall. 


@@@@@


doc= 56492


Walton, Cecile (1891-1956), painter and illustrator, was born on 29 March 1891 at 203 Bath Street, Glasgow, the eldest child of Edward Arthur Walton (1860-1922) and his wife, Helen, 'nee' Henderson (1859-1945), who previously had been married to Thomas Law. The physiologist Arthur Walton was a younger brother. E. A. Walton was a landscape and portrait painter and was one of the so-called Glasgow Boys; Helen Walton had trained as an artist in Paris prior to her first marriage. Cecile was a child prodigy; she was able to draw at an early age and the artistic environment in which she grew up was remarkable. Her father moved to London in the 1890s and it was in his studio that Cecile met James Guthrie, John Lavery, James Pryde, and, not least, Whistler, who asked her to make a drawing of him. It was during these formative years that Cecile found the work of Holman Hunt and the Pre-Raphaelites more to her taste than the work of her father and his friends; she was beginning to drift into a world of fairy tale, poetry, and romance. After the turn of the century E. A. Walton moved to Edinburgh where Cecile was encouraged to work in watercolours and where Jessie M. King taught her to draw with pen and ink. But the most significant influence in her development as an artist came through her introduction to the Scottish symbolist painter John Duncan (1866-1945), whose Thursday afternoon 'at home' attracted many young artists as well as a fascinating cross-section of intellectuals and academics including the botanist and sociologist Patrick Geddes. It was Duncan who taught Cecile how to etch and no doubt Duncan introduced her to another aspect of Edinburgh society that revolved around Andre Raffalovitch and Father John Gray. 
When she was seventeen, Cecile Walton was sent to Paris to study at the atelier La Grande Chaumiere, but she considered its teaching methods old-fashioned and later moved to La Palette where Jacques-Emile Blanche was a visiting professor. After a year in Paris she returned to Edinburgh where she attended a limited number of classes at the Edinburgh College of Art, and she was commissioned by T. C. and E. C. Jack to illustrate 'Hans Andersen's Fairy Tales', which was published in 1911. She also met the young Scottish artist Eric Harald Macbeth Robertson ['see below'], whose rather flamboyant lifestyle raised a few eyebrows in certain Edinburgh circles. The Waltons, alarmed by this turn of events, promptly sent Cecile to Florence to stay with an uncle with the hope that she might forget Robertson. Her enforced exile was fortuitous, as she recognized in the work of the early Italian painters the path she would take as an artist. The year she spent apart from Robertson did not dampen her desire to know him better, and on her return to Edinburgh her close friend Mary Newbery and Robertson became the subjects of her first major painting in oils (on loan to the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh). 


Cecile Walton and Robertson were married in Edinburgh on 21 February 1914 and their first child, Gavril, was born the following year. In 1916 Robertson joined the Friends' Ambulance Unit and he spent the rest of the war in France. Cecile was engaged with a major work in oils, 'The Walking Tour' (1916), and she painted in watercolours more than twenty illustrations to a number of Polish fairy tales in translations by Maude Ashurst Biggs. These were published as 'Polish Fairy Tales' by the Bodley Head (1920). But during the years apart there were infidelities on both sides and their marriage was no longer as sound as it had once been, though their second child, Edward, was born in 1919. With the re-formation of the Edinburgh Group of artists, of which Cecile and Robertson were prominent members, Cecile produced her finest work. Major works in oils are 'Grass of Parnassus' (1919), 'And These Also' (1919), 'The Back of Beyond' (1920), 'Romance' (1920; Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh), and 'To Nobody Knows Where' (1921), which received the Royal Scottish Academy Guthrie award. But it is her painting 'Romance' that will be looked upon as her masterpiece; it is a self-portrait shortly after the birth of her second child, the midwife in attendance while her first child stands at the foot of the bed. The artist sees herself as woman and mother in the form of two iconographic traditions, the nude and mother and child. In terms of its subject matter the painting is unique in Scottish art and when it was first shown at the Edinburgh Group exhibition in 1920 it caused a furore. 
On his return to Scotland, Robertson painted a number of war subjects, the most interesting of these being 'Shellburst' (1919; City of Edinburgh Art Collection), painted in his expressionist style. Other works in the same style, though not war subjects, are 'Despair' (1921; Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum) and 'Cartwheels' ('c'.1920; on loan to the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh). In the early 1920s Robertson and Cecile Walton created a stir in Edinburgh with the paintings they exhibited with the Edinburgh Group at the New Gallery, and it was said that 'Half Edinburgh goes to Shandwick Place secretly desiring to be righteously shocked, and the other half goes feeling deliciously uncertain it may be disappointed not finding anything sufficiently shocking' (F. Quinton, 'National Outlook', November 1920, 102-3). Typical of the works exhibited is Robertson's 'Loves Invading' (1919; City of Edinburgh Art Collection). 
The achievements of Cecile Walton and Robertson lasted but a few years, as their individual lifestyles became untenable and in 1923 Robertson left Edinburgh for Liverpool. With the failure of their marriage they lost their way as artists, and for the remainder of the 1920s Cecile produced very little: some mural paintings, principally 'Suffer the Little Children to Come unto Me' (Wolfsonian-FIU Museum, Florida), and a series of black and white illustrations to a collection of poems by Dorothy Una Ratcliffe, published as 'Nightlights' by the Bodley Head (1929). 
In Liverpool, Robertson shared a studio with the artist Sydney Merrills and tried to establish himself as a portrait painter. He married again in 1927: his second wife was a nurse, (Agnes Catherine) Wynne Walker. By the early 1930s his efforts to maintain a wife and daughter ('b'. 1932) failed through lack of commissions, and though he turned briefly to commercial art his career as an artist was finished. He died on the Wirral, Cheshire, in 1941. 
Cecile Walton's career took a new turn towards the end of the 1920s, when Tyrone Guthrie was appointed to manage the Festival Theatre in Cambridge and engaged Cecile as decor artist for four seasons. Her work in the theatre led to her being invited by the BBC Scottish regional director, David Gleghorn Thompson, to apply for the position of organizer of the BBC Scottish 'Children's Hour' in Edinburgh. She was interviewed by Lord Reith and, following a three-week period working with the 'Children's Hour' team in London, she took over from Kathleen Garscadden who had been running both the Glasgow and Edinburgh 'Children's Hour'. But on 27 November 1936 she married the BBC producer (Robert) Gordon Thomson Gildard ('b'. 1899/1900), who was about to be transferred to Glasgow, and this move required her to give up her position at the BBC. 
With the commencement of the Second World War, Cecile Walton returned to Edinburgh (probably unaware that Robertson was dying of tuberculosis in a sanatorium near Liverpool) to work for the British Council in connection with Czechoslovakian refugees. In 1948, having divorced her second husband in 1945, she moved to Kirkcudbright and started to paint again; and though she did not regain the earlier stature she had achieved during the years she was married to Robertson, she did produce some interesting paintings during a number of visits to Algeria. In 1949 she published 'The Children's Theatre Book' (Adam and Charles Black, London) with illustrations by herself and her son Edward. A few years later she completed a number of illustrations for 'Jingling Lane' (Lund Humphries, 1954), an idyll set in a Yorkshire dale. 
Cecile Walton was admitted to Mortonhall House, an Edinburgh hospital, in 1956 where she died on 23 April of cancer. Her work is also represented in Perth Art Gallery and Museum, Aberdeen Art Gallery, and the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 56498


Woodburn, Arthur (1890-1978), politician, was born on 25 October 1890 in Edinburgh, the youngest among the eight children of Matthew Woodburn (died 'c'.1899), a brassfounder, and his wife, Janet, 'nee' Brown. He was given an education typical of the Edinburgh 'labour aristocracy' at Bruntsfield and Boroughmuir schools. While still at school he took a number of jobs, including work in his father's small foundry. He left Boroughmuir at fourteen and worked for a short time in the offices of the Free Church, though his own affiliation was to the United Free Church. He gained experience as a publicist while working on matters arising from the complex lawsuit between the two churches over the title to church properties. He later moved to the offices of Miller's London Road foundry in Edinburgh, and spent over twenty-five years of his career in engineering and foundry administration, specializing in costing and foreign contracts, in which he was aided by a good knowledge of German, French, Italian, and Spanish. Woodburn developed his language skills at evening classes at Heriot-Watt College, which he attended for twelve years after leaving school. He also studied commerce and accountancy, and later attended classes in economics at the extra-mural department of Edinburgh University, under the tuition of William Graham, president of the Board of Trade in the Labour government from 1929 to 1931. 
Parallel to this Woodburn developed as a classic 'ethical socialist' member of the Independent Labour Party (ILP), which he joined in 1916. Like many members of the ILP he took a very critical pacifist stand towards the First World War, though in the early days of the conflict he was willing, and even eager, to fight. Kidney trouble and the need to support his mother kept him from enlisting, and by 1916 he opposed the war and had joined the No-Conscription Union. He declared his intention not to fight, even though he was occupationally exempt, and when he addressed public meetings against conscription he was arrested, court-martialled, and imprisoned, at one stage being incarcerated in the Tower of London. Long periods were spent in solitary confinement. After his release in summer 1919 he returned to work at the London Road foundry, where his employers had been broadly supportive of his opposition to the war. In that year he married Barbara Halliday, a teacher, the daughter of Francis Halliday, a rubber worker. A Labour Party activist herself, she was one of the first women members of Edinburgh town council, on which she served for many years, and was the city Labour Party's educational expert. There were no children from the marriage. 
After the war Woodburn became associated with the labour college movement, although not with the communist and Scottish nationalist variant on it that was associated with John Maclean. He lectured on history, economics, and finance for the Edinburgh branch of the Scottish Labour College, of which he became honorary secretary in 1925. In 1937 he became president of the National Council of Labour Colleges. Like many other Scottish socialists and nationalists he was intrigued by Major C. H. Douglas's social-credit theories, and a mixture of these and 'counter-cyclical' public investment, along Keynesian lines, featured in his evidence to the Macmillan committee on banking in 1930. He wrote widely on financial matters, and his 'An Outline of Finance' (1931) went to four editions. He favoured state planning and regulation, and a visit to Stalin's Russia in 1932 convinced him that this was the 'land of hope' (Knox, 286). He was even willing to dismiss as propaganda the reports of the Moscow show trials, although his belief in the Soviet Union, as well as in state planning itself, began to fade after the Second World War. 
In 1929 Woodburn contested South Edinburgh at the general election, and in 1931 Leith, both without success. In 1932, not long after his return from Russia, he was appointed full-time secretary to the Scottish council of the Labour Party. This was an exceptionally difficult position, as the debacle of 1931 meant that Labour held only seven Scottish seats. The disaffiliation of the ILP during Woodburn's first year in office removed four of these members, as well as much of the individual membership and the property of the party, and he had more or less to set up a new organization from scratch. His task was complicated by the dominance of the Unionist right, which returned forty-five members out of seventy-four on 42 per cent of the vote in 1935, ably and not unprogressively led by the likes of Walter Elliot and Robert Boothby, and overwhelmingly supported by the Scottish press. 
In 1934 Woodburn was a candidate for the general secretaryship of the Labour Party but was narrowly beaten (thirteen votes to eleven) by James Middleton. Woodburn persisted with expanding the Scottish council's membership and control, for which he had the precedent of his friend William Elger's modernization of the Scottish Trades Union Congress after 1924. Hostile to the popular front touted by the communists and to the indiscipline of former ILP 'loyalists' in the Scottish Socialist Party, which stood in relation to the Labour Party as the ILP had done prior to disaffiliation, he became a relentless disciplinarian. In 1939, dogged by a lawsuit oddly similar to the Free Church case, the Scottish Socialist Party went under, leaving the Scottish council with a tolerable organization and growing membership. At a by-election in October 1939 Woodburn was elected member for East Stirling and Clackmannanshire, against opposition from Transport House; he won by nearly 15,000 votes in a straight fight against a pacifist candidate, and represented the seat until he retired in 1970. 
Woodburn had abandoned his pacifism, and during the war years served as parliamentary private secretary to Tom Johnston, secretary of state for Scotland from 1941 to 1945. As one of the Labour Party's finance spokesmen he sat on the select committee on national expenditure (1939) and chaired the subcommittee on finance and establishments from 1939 to 1945. He reached the Labour front bench in 1943, and between 1945 and 1947 in the Attlee government was joint parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Supply and Aircraft Production (Ministry of Supply from 1946). On 7 October 1947 he succeeded Joseph Westwood as secretary of state for Scotland, with a seat in cabinet. Westwood had been reckoned a weak minister who suffered from Whitehall's desire to recover powers that had leaked to Scotland during the powerful wartime administration of Tom Johnston. Woodburn was less dismissive of his predecessor, but his passage was little easier. 
Woodburn's main administrative concerns were the integration of Labour's nationalization and welfare legislation into the Scottish administrative structure; securing action on highland problems; and boosting a flagging housing programme, which was partly overcome by the industrialized production of pre-fabricated houses ('pre-fabs') at former aircraft factories. But a persistent political problem turned out to be the revival of Scottish nationalism. This stemmed from a split in the Scottish National Party in 1942, involving the secession of the followers of John MacCormick, party secretary. MacCormick's covenant movement got as many as 2 million signatures for a home-rule declaration, and demanded dominion status for Scotland. In part this was a regrouping of Scottish Liberals, once the country's major party and in the doldrums since the early 1920s. But it also drew on concern with over-centralization which the Conservatives themselves helped to fan, and Churchill mischievously denied that Scotland should be forced into the serfdom of socialism as the result of a vote in Westminster. 
In his first electoral contest in 1929 Woodburn had favoured home rule but he was now bitterly hostile, a view shared by most members of his party. A white paper of January 1948 proposed minor measures of administrative devolution, plus a Scottish economic council which was supposed to act as a quasi-representative forum. It was dismissed by most of Scottish public opinion. Woodburn did nothing to calm matters by seizing on a rhetorical flourish of MacCormick's to accuse him of advocating violence. MacCormick was an eloquent speaker given to dramatic gestures, the most effective of which was the theft of the Stone of Scone from Westminster Abbey on Christmas day 1950, but his commitment to non-violence was unyielding. In the reshuffle after the general election of 1950 Attlee offered Woodburn a sideways move to the Ministry of Fuel and Power. Woodburn viewed this as a criticism of his Scottish policy, and quit the cabinet in February 1950, being succeeded by Hector McNeil, member for Greenock and previously a high-flier at the Foreign Office. McNeil was equally hostile to devolution, but not as thin-skinned about it, and had killed off the Scottish economic council before Labour lost power. 
Woodburn remained on the back benches for a further twenty years. 'Solid, slow and deliberate in speech, yet not without a definite personal charm' ('The Times', 3 June 1978), not to speak of a rare command of languages and unmistakable eyebrows, he settled down as a model House of Commons man and was on the select committee on procedure from 1956 to 1968. He was active in the British Inter-Parliamentary Union, visiting numerous countries in Europe and South America, and led the first Westminster delegation to the 'Bundestag'. Unusually among Scottish Labour members Woodburn was always an enthusiast for the Common Market. After retirement he continued his international involvement and was elected in 1971 joint president of the British section of the Council of European Municipalities. He was a motorist into extreme old age, and his death in Edinburgh on 1 June 1978 was hastened by an accident while driving to visit his dying wife in hospital. 


@@@@@


doc= 56500


Backhouse family (per. c.1770-1945), naturalists and horticulturists, came to prominence with James [i] Backhouse (1721-1798), who founded the Backhouse Bank in Darlington, co. Durham, in 1774 with his sons Jonathan (1747-1826) and James [ii] (1757-1804). It was Jonathan Backhouse who initiated the family's connection with horticulture, by following the mid-eighteenth-century fashion for large-scale tree planting on his estates at Weardale in co. Durham. 
The tree planting of Jonathan Backhouse was an undertaking continued by three of his four sons: Jonathan Backhouse (1779-1842), better known as a supporter of the Stockton and Darlington Railway; Edward (1781-1860), founder of the Backhouse Bank in Sunderland; and William [i]. All three brothers were awarded medals by the Royal Society of Arts for their enterprise. However, the youngest of the three, 


@@@@@


doc= 56502


Frances Joanna Bunbury, Lady Bunbury (1814-1894), was born in London, the second of five daughters of Leonard Horner and his wife, Anne Susan (or Susanna) Lloyd (1786-1862). Frances was a talented linguist, having been brought up in Bonn, and was capable enough as a botanist for Robert Brown to enjoy her company on family collecting excursions in Switzerland. Her father's parliamentary concerns and affability meant that she was from an early age a well-travelled and cultivated young woman. After her marriage to Charles James Fox Bunbury her life was fully taken up with the extended network created by her sisters, father, husband, and brothers-in-law. Although often an invalid, she usually travelled with her husband, and several of their natural history expeditions were made with her convalescence in mind. In 1849 she visited Edinburgh for extended medical attention, and at about that time she began work on 'Life and Times of Dante Alighieri' (1852), a translation from Balbo's original. While in Edinburgh again in 1852 she became so ill that Bunbury feared to move her. However, he took her on a family expedition to Madeira in 1853, where she made barometric recordings for Lyell, and then in 1855 to Germany to see her sister Leonora Pertz. After her husband died she put his diaries and letters into publishable order, helped by her sister Katherine Lyell. A nine-volume set was privately printed at Mildenhall in 1890-93, and afterwards in three-volume form in 1894. A two-volume set was commercially published in 1906, after Frances's death, abbreviated by Katherine Lyell and with an introduction by their close friend Joseph Hooker. Lady Bunbury died at her home, the Manor House, Mildenhall, Suffolk, on 21 July 1894 and was buried at Great Barton church. 


@@@@@


doc= 56505


Hastings, Barbara Rawdon, marchioness of Hastings and 'suo jure' Baroness Grey of Ruthin (1810-1858), fossil collector and geological author, was born on 20 May 1810 at Brandon House in Warwickshire, the only child of Henry Edward Yelverton, Baron Grey of Ruthin (1780-1810), and his wife, Anna Maria Kelham (1792-1875). In 1811, following the death of her father, Barbara Yelverton became Baroness Grey of Ruthin. Little else is known of her early life or education. On 1 August 1831 she married George Augustus Francis Rawdon Hastings, second marquess of Hastings (1808-1844), with whom she had six children. On 9 April 1845 Barbara Rawdon Hastings married her second husband, Hastings Reginald Henry (1808-1878), a captain in the Royal Navy. (In 1849 her husband took, by royal licence, the surname Yelverton ['see 'Yelverton, Hastings Reginald].) The couple settled at Efford House, near Lymington in Hampshire, and had a daughter. 
Hastings's life was a mixture of social and scientific activity. During her first marriage she was nicknamed the jolly fast marchioness, and developed a taste for foreign travel and gambling. However, she was also a keen collector of fossil vertebrates, and during her second marriage established a private museum at Efford House for her specimens. The palaeontologist Richard Owen noted that among the thousands of fossils in the museum were some of the finest in the world (Owen, 'Life', 1.296). 
Hastings's fossil collection was a valuable scientific resource. 'Most of the specimens', she told G. R. Waterhouse of the British Museum in 1854, 'are figured in the Palaeontological work' (Archives of the British Museum of Natural History, Correspondence, 1851-5, DF 100/7). However, Hastings did more than simply amass raw material for research; her detailed knowledge of local geology (particularly of the Eocene beds of Hordle cliff), together with her painstaking reconstruction of fossil remains, gave her an expertise that was valued by her contemporaries. She was, said geologist Edward Forbes, 'a 'fossilist' and knows her work' (Wilson and Geikie, 423). Richard Owen named a fossil crocodile from Hordle cliff 'Crocodilus hastingsae' 'in honour of the accomplished lady by whom the singularly perfect example of the species had been recovered and restored' (Owen, 'Fossils', 66). 
Nevertheless, despite her expertise, Hastings occupied an ambiguous place in Victorian geology. At a time when science was the preserve of gentlemen scholars she often took on the role of female drudge: 'I have been six hours mending bones, & feel tired & stupid', she wrote to Owen in 1847 (Archives of the British Museum of Natural History, Owen correspondence, vol.14 NH 14:400). High birth and independent wealth, however, secured her access to the world of her male contemporaries, able to pursue their chosen specialism at leisure. In 1847 Hastings became 'a fixed star' (Owen, 'Life', 1.296) of the Oxford meeting of the British Association when she exhibited two crocodile skulls and a turtle shell excavated from Hordle cliff. Genuine significance was attached to these specimens, as Owen explained when he addressed the meeting. Some of the reptilian remains, he suggested, indicated that there was 'a new genus of Pachyderm' (Owen, 'Fossils', 65), named Paloplotherium by Owen, between the Palaeotherium and Anoplotherium. Hastings also addressed the meeting and argued that the presence of crocodile remains on both the Hampshire coast and the Isle of Wight revealed that the space occupied by the Solent had once been occupied by a freshwater lake or river (see 'On the freshwater Eocene beds of Hordle cliff, Hampshire', 'Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science', 1848). 
Hastings continued her studies of local geology and published papers on the stratigraphy of Hordle cliff in 1852 and 1853. Having spent six years on very minute researches of the strata she was well placed to assess the impact of phenomena such as cliff falls and sea erosion which might have eluded the short-term observer (see 'On the Tertiary beds of Hordwell, Hampshire', 'Philosophical Magazine', 4th ser., 1853, 1). Hastings's were the first accurate stratigraphical accounts of Hordle cliff to be published, and contributed to knowledge of the Tertiary period. 
In 1855 Hastings sold her collection of mammalian and reptilian fossils. Her gambling instincts seemed to come in to play for, after threatening to send the fossils to Paris (where 'they would be treated as immense treasures'), she secured $300 for the entire collection from the British Museum (Archives of the British Museum of Natural History, Correspondence, 1851-5, DF 100/7). The collection subsequently went to the palaeontology department of the Natural History Museum in London. Hastings died of apoplexy in Rome on 18 November 1858, and was buried in the English cemetery there a week later. She was survived by her second husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 56506


William [ii] Backhouse (1807-1869), probably born in Darlington, continued the family interest in botany, became a competent entomologist, ornithologist, geologist, and meteorologist, and developed a number of new varieties of 'Narcissus' (daffodils). Initially, however, William [ii] was employed in the family banking business; he worked in Newcastle following the opening of a branch of the Backhouse Bank there in 1825. While there his interests in natural history grew, and he became a founder member of the Natural History Society of Northumberland, Durham, and Newcastle upon Tyne in 1829. He was a competent entomologist, making extensive notes on Lepidoptera captured on the Backhouse estates in Durham. His interest in meteorology is revealed in diaries devoted to daily temperature and weather reports, and in requests from correspondents for readings from his 'weather gauge'. Watercolour drawings of local coastal sections, and extensive transcriptions, indicate a knowledge of geology. He formed a collection of stuffed birds and showed promise as an artist, producing watercolours, steel-engravings, and pencil drawings of a variety of subjects. After William [ii] returned to the Darlington bank he lived at St John's Hall, near Wolsingham, and there began his major horticultural work, the development of new varieties of 'Narcissus'. In 1833 he married Amelia Flyer (died 1837). In 1843 he married Katherine Aldam (1815-1868); they had four sons. William [ii] Backhouse died on 3 April 1869 at Chapeltown in Leeds. After his death his daffodil collection was purchased by Peter Barr and used in association with that of Edward Leeds (1802-1877) to establish a classification system for narcissi. 
Three of William [ii] Backhouse's four sons from his second marriage, Charles James, Henry, and Robert Ormston, maintained the family interest in daffodils. Charles James ('b'. 1848) continued to live at St John's, while Henry (1849-1936) reared daffodils in Darlington between 1895 and 1907 and in Bournemouth from 1907 to 1925. 


@@@@@


doc= 56507


James [iii] Backhouse (1794-1869). James [iii] Backhouse, who was born in Darlington on 8 July 1794, was encouraged to study plants by his elder brother. He was educated in Leeds but on his return to Darlington began to explore nearby Teesdale with the lead miner John Binks (1766-1817), who is credited with the discovery of many of the area's rare plants. Binks was undoubtedly a major influence on James [iii], as were his uncle Edward Robson, his cousin William [i] Backhouse, the Newcastle botanist Nathaniel John Winch, and William Hooker (1785-1865). 
In 1815 James [iii] Backhouse, together with his brother Thomas, purchased the York nursery of John and George Telford, and by 1821 the business was flourishing. In 1822 James [iii] married Deborah Lowe (1793-1827) of Worcester. He began missionary work in York in 1824 and on 3 September 1831, having the previous year obtained the necessary documentation and in the company of George Washington Walker (1800-1859), he boarded the 'Science', bound for Australia. He stayed there until 1838, carrying out missionary duties and humanitarian work, but also collecting plants and seeds which he sent back to the York nursery and to Hooker in Glasgow. On the return journey he visited Mauritius 'en route' for South Africa, where he continued his missionary duties until December 1840, finally arriving back in York on 21 February 1841. Backhouse described his travels in two books, his 'Narrative of a Visit to the Australian Colonies' (1843) and 'Narrative of a Visit to the Mauritius and South Africa' (1844), both illustrated with engravings by Edward Backhouse (1808-1879) of Sunderland, from original sketches by the author. Hooker and William Harvey (1811-1866) recognized the value of Backhouse's botanical observations, naming a myrtaceous shrub 'Backhousia' in 1845. 
Throughout his Australian journey James [iii] Backhouse had been in correspondence with his son, 


@@@@@


doc= 56509


William [i] Backhouse (1779-1844), born at Darlington on 17 November 1779, was much more than a tree planter, and had a considerable reputation as a botanist in the north of England. He had close contact with the Newcastle botanist Nathaniel John Winch (1768-1838), with whom he corresponded from 1805 until 1831 and to whom he forwarded a list of rare Durham plants in February 1805. He was interested in British grasses and cultivated specimens sent to him by friends and correspondents who included James Janson (I'Anson) (1784-1821), Edward Robson (1763-1813) (who was related by marriage to James [ii] Backhouse), William Brunton (1775-1806), the Revd James Dalton (1764-1843), and George Don (1764-1814). William [i] died suddenly on 9 June 1844 at the Quaker meeting-house in Darlington. His plant collection was considered of some significance; it was unfortunately destroyed by fire in 1865, when on loan to J. G. Baker. 
William [i] Backhouse had married Mary Dixon (1783-1874) on 27 March 1806; they had two sons and three daughters. Their eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 56520


John Colville (1852-1901) and 


@@@@@


doc= 56521


David [ii] Colville (1860-1916), who was born on 10 March 1860 at Coatbridge, Lanarkshire; and who married Katherine Harvey, daughter of Robert Greenlees, distiller, on 18 August 1887. They had one son and one daughter. The consequence of David [ii] Colville's training was that, having successfully established himself in iron making, his father, David [i] Colville, at an age when the majority of wealthy businessmen had retired to their country estates, decided to go into steel. 
A licence was obtained from William Siemens, the firm's capital (already enhanced by the retention of the profits resulting from the supply of iron bars for the rebuilding of the Tay Bridge) being doubled by a loan of $33,000 from J. S. Napier, a Glasgow iron merchant. Under the direction of David [ii] Colville five 10 ton open-hearth furnaces, a rolling mill, and ancilliary plant were erected at Dalzell. The first melt of steel was made in 1881. On this occasion the timing could not have been more auspicious: it was during the 1880s, when mild steel drove wrought iron from the Clydeside shipyards. The works prospered and were further extended (again partially with Napier's help), and net profits, which fuelled the expansion, rose to reach $50,000 in the second half of 1889. 
Not until the early 1890s did David [i] Colville allow control of his firm to pass to his sons; and not until the redemption of the loans from Napier and the election of his eldest son, John, to parliament as Liberal member for North-East Lanarkshire in 1895 would he countenance the conversion of the partnership into a private limited company. Three years later he died at Glasgow, on 29 October 1898, aged eighty-six. His wife predeceased him. A quiet, abstemious man, David [i] Colville devoted himself almost entirely to his business, taking little part in public life. A paternalistic figure, all the evidence confirms the accuracy of contemporary, eulogistic accounts of his high moral character. He was deeply religious, an ardent temperance reformer, and universally trusted. 'His manner', observed an anonymous obituarist in 'Engineering', 'was that of the old school -- courteous and gentle, and guileless to a degree, nevertheless he possessed great strength of purpose' ('Engineering', 4 Nov 1898, 581). 
David [i] Colville left his sons a thriving business and they pushed it forward. David [ii] Colville was the driving force behind the policy of expansion and continuous modernization which by the eve of the First World War made the firm the largest in the Scottish steel industry and second only to Dorman Longs in Great Britain. While his older brother John -- the first chairman of the limited company -- became increasingly absorbed by public works, serving the community by promoting the causes of religion, temperance, and social reform, and Archibald grappled with the commercial and financial implications of his brother's plans, David [ii] scoured Europe and America to investigate and adopt the latest steelmaking practices, dealt ruthlessly with the growing and increasingly well organized labour forces either personally or, with somewhat greater tact, through the Board of Conciliation and Arbitration of the Manufactured Steel Trade of the West of Scotland, and secured the loyalty of the senior managers by offering them shares in the company. 
David [ii] captured the imagination by his flamboyance and his grand manner. He was the master of the firm. His ambitions were constrained only by his older brother Archibald, chairman of the company after John's sudden death at Cleland House, Motherwell, Lanarkshire, on 22 August 1901. John's wife survived him. Archibald was shrewd and calculating -- reputed, as the labour leader John Hodge put it, 'to have an absolute knowledge of how many beans make five' (Hodge, 34). But the exigencies of the war gave David his chance to break free from the constraints imposed by his brother. He willingly agreed to meet the government's request for a massive increase of steel output and, with the backing of the Ministry of Munitions, took over the Clydebridge and Glengarnock works, gained control of Fullwood foundry, and purchased the ordinary shares of a major colliery company, Archibald Russell Ltd, in order to safeguard his fuel supplies. The physical and mental strain of such rapid growth proved too much. David Colville collapsed and died on 16 October 1916 at Jerviston House, Motherwell, Lanarkshire. His wife survived him. He was fifty-six. Two months later Archibald, utterly exhausted with the effort of implementing his brother's schemes, succumbed to a brief illness at the age of sixty-three and died on 11 December 1916 at The Moorings, Clyde Street, Motherwell. He also left a widow. 
The third generation of Colvilles were all either serving in the army or too inexperienced to assume the leadership of the company and the task fell upon one of the very managers whom David had admitted to the firm, John Craig (1874-1957). Not until Ronald John Bilsland Colville, second Baron Clydesmuir (1917-1996), John Colville's grandson, became a member of the board in 1958 was a member of the Colville family again to play a major role in running the concern, but within a decade Colvilles had passed into the hands of the state, becoming a major constituent of the British Steel Corporation. 


@@@@@


doc= 56523


Edward Baldwin (1803-1890). He had been educated at St John's College, Oxford (BA 1824, MA 1827), and one of his first acts on assuming control was to develop the 'Morning Herald', which he had recently purchased from the Thwaites family. In writing of the transaction, James Grant described Edward Baldwin as a thoroughly enterprising and enlightened trader in journalism, 'who, two decades after Dudley's death, bought the 'Morning Herald' from the little group of fifth-rate capitalists to which it had gone' (Griffiths, 'Encyclopedia', 86). He immediately entered on a course of spirited rivalry with 'The Times', which set all its resources in motion to crush the new competitor. With Giffard acting as editor in addition to his 'Standard' role, Edward's first task was to engage the best journalists and increase the honorarium paid for leading articles from 3 guineas to 5 guineas. 
After an initial loss, the railway mania of 1845 meant that, through the huge increase in advertising extolling new railway companies, the 'Herald' was running a twenty-page paper and making big profits. However, later that year, on 17 November, 'The Times' exposed the competing railway companies, showing that there were more than 1200 projected railways seeking to raise some $500 million. The bubble burst immediately, but Baldwin, still intent on overtaking 'The Times', continued to pay high wages. The average circulation dropped, however, from 6400 in 1845 to 3700 by 1854. 
It was a state of affairs that could not last, and in March 1857 there appeared a short notice in 'The Times' announcing the bankruptcy proceedings of Edward Baldwin -- and with it the end of almost 100 years of his family's involvement in the London newspaper world. Edward Baldwin himself moved to Streatham Green, London, where he died on 31 January 1890. His wife's identity is unknown, but at least two sons survived him. In his obituary it was noted that 'his connexion with the Press belongs to a past generation, but in his time he played a prominent part in the newspaper world and was an ardent supporter of the early policy of Lord Derby and Mr Disraeli' (Griffiths, 'Encyclopedia', 86). 


@@@@@


doc= 56524


Baldwin family (per. c.1760-1857), newspaper proprietors, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 56525


Henry Baldwin (1734-1813). Born on 26 December 1734 in London, he was the second son, in the family of three sons and four daughters, of Robert Baldwin, apothecary, of Faringdon, Berkshire, and his wife, Jane. Baldwin was apprenticed on 5 September 1749 as a printer to Edward Say, newspaper publisher, and admitted to the livery at the Stationers' Company on 27 December 1756. His first known venture as printer was the 'London Packet', but on 4 March 1761 he launched the 'St James's Chronicle' from Whitefriars as a thrice-weekly evening newspaper. 
Shortly before its debut, Baldwin purchased from fellow printer William Rayner the 'London Spy', 'Read's Weekly Journal', and the 'St James's Evening Post, or, British Gazette'. The 'Spy' and the 'Journal' were merged to form a Saturday paper, and the 'St James's Evening Post' became the 'St James's Chronicle'. To secure financial support, Baldwin formed a joint-stock company; the other proprietors included George Colman, David Garrick, and Bonnell Thornton. The meetings of the proprietors of the 'St James's Chronicle' were to span more than fifty years and its minute books are the most detailed of any eighteenth-century newspaper. 
Within a few months of the paper's launch, Baldwin was joined as editor by Nathaniel Thomas, fresh from Oxford University. And with writers of the calibre of Colman, William Cowper, Oliver Goldsmith, and Thornton involved, the early days of the paper were indeed heady, as John Nichols was to describe in his 'Literary Anecdotes' (1812): 'Baldwin with the aid of a phalanx of first-rate wits brought it to a height of literary eminence till then unobtainable in any journal' (Griffiths, 'Encyclopedia', 87). 
Under Baldwin, the 'Chronicle' was also to be an outspoken critic of the government; and on 21 May 1765, with Charles Say and Henry Woodfall, he was summoned to the House of Lords because of an article published three days earlier describing a mass meeting of impoverished weavers. Four years later, on 21 December 1769, he reprinted the Junius letter from the 'Public Advertiser' attacking the king and the government. As a result, Baldwin, with others, was charged -- and acquitted. One consequence of the Junius trial was that parliamentary debates were now reported increasingly and with great accuracy, leading the government, on 5 February 1771, to reaffirm that they should not be published. Notwithstanding, the debate was immediately published by Baldwin. As a consequence, with Wright, another publisher, he was made to kneel in penance before the speaker, the last ever to do so, and after being reprimanded was discharged on paying his fees. Baldwin rose in silence, ostentatiously brushed his knees, and in an audible aside remarked: 'What a damned dirty House' (Griffiths, 'Encyclopedia', 87). 
The following year, Baldwin, increasingly successful, moved to new premises at 108 Fleet Street. His marriage to Eleanor, 'nee' Graham, produced three sons, Robert, George, and Charles ['see below'], and three daughters. His remaining time as chief proprietor was to be less eventful, and in 1792 he served as master of the Stationers' Company. Henry Baldwin died on 21 February 1813, and the 'St James's Chronicle' of 20-22 February noted: 'Upwards of 40 years a Proprietor and Printer of this Paper: but who had long retired from business.... The firm rectitude of his mind, the real tenderness of his heart, and the sincerity of his attachments were best known in his domestic circle and to his chosen friends. ('St James's Chronicle', 20-22 Feb 1813)' Henry Baldwin was succeeded as proprietor of the 'St James's Chronicle' by his son 


@@@@@


doc= 56526


Baldwin, Richard (c.1653-1698), publisher, was probably born in Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, the son of Thomas Baldwin, a hemp-dresser. No further information survives about his family and education. On 5 August 1668 Baldwin was apprenticed to George Eversden, a bookseller then working in St John's Lane, London; he was made free of the Stationers' Company on 25 August 1675. 
Baldwin lived in London for the next six years, and apparently began his professional career as a bookbinder. On 7 December 1676 he married Abigail Mulford [
Baldwin, it seems, was still working as a bookbinder when he opened his premises in Ball Court, near the Black Bull, Great Old Bailey, some time before 1681. He rapidly expanded his trade, however, by diversifying into the publication of whig broadsides and pamphlets. As early as 1676 Baldwin was bound over to the Hereford sessions in connection with a certain 'infamous paper' ('CSP dom.', '1 March 1676-28 Feb 1677', 50); nevertheless, his first imprint did not appear until 1680. In 1681 he emerged suddenly as a major whig publisher, heading a second generation of opposition stationers precisely as the fortunes of their predecessors, including Francis Smith, declined. 
The political crisis of 1681-3 was a defining point for Baldwin. He was instrumental in the whig propaganda machine: in addition to incendiary tracts by Thomas Hunt and pamphlets supporting the earl of Shaftesbury, he also published a number of outspoken but short-lived opposition newspapers, including the 'London Mercury' and the 'Protestant Courant'. Baldwin quickly became identified as one of a small new breed of stationers -- 'publishers' rather than 'booksellers' -- who specialized in publishing and distributing works for others (Treadwell, 114-15). This professional development is reflected in the exceptional number of imprints to which the Baldwins lent their names over the next three decades. 
While Baldwin was not directly responsible for many of the works bearing his imprint, he was nevertheless subject, as a dedicated whig publisher, to surveillance and prosecution. In October 1681 he was summoned before the privy council for publishing seditious pamphlets. The following spring he was in constant trouble on account of his newspaper the 'Protestant Courant'. Repeatedly libellous comments in this publication provoked a search of his premises by the Stationers' Company. Having refused to co-operate, Baldwin was fined $10; he remained estranged from the Stationers' Company for many years. In May 1682 he was prosecuted for the same newspaper's misrepresention of a case against the earl of Shaftesbury. In addition to allegedly 'base and scandalous Reflections' upon the prosecution and its witnesses, the article cast doubt upon the very integrity of the court's proceedings ('Loyal Protestant', no. 155). At Baldwin's ensuing trial before the lord chief justice, he suffered an extended character assassination by Jeffreys, who was determined that Baldwin 'might be made an Example of' at all costs ('London Mercury', no. 13). Having refused to divulge the identity of the author of the libel, Baldwin was remanded to the king's bench prison; upon producing a number of recognizances, he was released on a bond of good behaviour a week later. 
Prosecuted again in the autumn of 1682, Baldwin nevertheless continued to publish undeterred, and Thomas Hunt's 'Defence of the Charter and Municipal Rights of the City of London' appeared in January 1683. This publication provoked the outrage of Roger L'Estrange, surveyor of the press, at the failure of both his agents and the Stationers' Company to monitor Baldwin adequately; it was common knowledge that Baldwin's publishing operation ensured the anonymity of those whose works he published and distributed. Baldwin's activities continued to be monitored closely throughout 1683, by which time the successful tory reappropriation of power had splintered an unofficial alliance of opposition stationers into a disparate number of mutually suspicious individuals. That summer Baldwin -- isolated, unbeholden to his fellow stationers, and under the pressures of close surveillance -- appeared, despite his whig convictions, as a government witness against opposition authors and stationers, including the family of Francis Smith. In July 1683 the attorney-general nevertheless decreed that warrants for searching Baldwin's premises might be granted upon the merest suspicion; the following month he was again investigated, as the publisher of a seditious work by Hunt. 
There is little evidence of activity on Baldwin's part throughout the reign of James II; he certainly lent his imprint to relatively few works in the aftermath of the tory reaction. This situation changed dramatically with the accession of William III, which he greeted with enthusiasm, publishing several works championing the cause of the revolution of 1688. He continued to publish whig tracts on a large scale until his death in 1698. Nevertheless, he was frequently questioned in connection with his work, and in 1690 a warrant committed him to Newgate prison for high treason upon publishing 'A Modest Enquiry into the Causes of the Present Disasters in England'. Despite the gravity of this charge, he appears, unusually, to have secured release on bail. In the same year the Baldwins moved to the Oxford Arms, Warwick Lane. Baldwin was summoned before the House of Commons the following year, when some blunt criticisms of parliament's prosecution of the French war were published, together with incendiary remarks about the king of France, in 'Mercurius Reformatus'. He finally entered into the livery of the Stationers' Company in 1692. In addition to his core business in political and satirical pamphlets and newspapers, his expanding stock included dramatic, scientific, and historical works; he also published a number of periodicals, including the 'Gentleman's Journal' and 'Miscellaneous Letters'. After a brief and acrimonious merger with the 'Post Boy', a rival publication, Baldwin's longest-lived newspaper appeared independently, as the 'Post Man', in 1695. In this organ, as with innumerable titles in his pamphlet stock, Baldwin's anti-papist and, more specifically, anti-French sentiments were undisguised. The 'Post Man' incurred the censure of state authorities when it carried further libellous comments on the French king and the duke of Burgundy in October 1697. Nevertheless, despite the arrest of the author and printer of the offending article, Baldwin himself appears to have escaped prosecution. 
Baldwin died in 1698, probably at his home, and, according to Dunton, was buried at his Buckinghamshire birthplace; he was said to have been forty-five years old. Dunton describes him as a man of 'Generous Temper', with a purse and heart 'open to all Men, that he thought were Honest', and whose 'Conversation was very diverting' (Dunton, 342). After her husband's death Abigail Baldwin continued to run their flourishing business in Warwick Lane, publishing and distributing a wide range of pamphlets and periodicals under the imprint 'A. Baldwin'. In addition to treatises on issues such as social welfare and the standing army, she published pamphlets by whig authors, including Defoe, and periodicals which ranged from the economic journal the 'British Merchant of Commerce Preserved' to the notorious 'Female Tatler'. A formidable businesswoman in her own right, Abigail Baldwin was remembered by Dunton for her remarkable bookkeeping skills. She died on or after 14 November 1713, and was buried in St Martin Ludgate on the 29th of that month. In addition to a flourishing business, which she bequeathed to her son-in-law, the printer James Roberts, Abigail Baldwin left some tenanted property in Parkers Lane, Middlesex, and a significant amount of money, silver, and jewellery. The business continued under Roberts for a further forty-one years. 
Richard and Abigail Baldwin are key figures in the history of publishing. Responding to the political pressures of their time, their business evolved pragmatically and influentially beyond the mandate of traditional 'bookselling'. Perhaps most renowned as agents of whig propaganda, they also influenced the developing role of newspapers and periodicals within the popular literary culture of the early eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 56527


Barrasford, Thomas (1859-1910), variety theatre entrepreneur, was born at East Jarrow, Westoe, co. Durham, on 2 November 1859, the son of Henry Barrasford, ballast keelman, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Sheraton. His father became a publican, and Thomas followed him into the licensed trade, taking a number of public houses in Jarrow in the 1880s and 1890s. He was also involved in boxing promotions and, for a period in the 1890s, he managed the black boxer Frank Craig, the so-called 'coffee house cooler' (Fairfax-Blakeborough, 161). His music-hall career began in the same decade when he purchased a circus building in Jarrow and re-opened it as the Jarrow Palace of Varieties. In 1899 he acquired the Leeds Tivoli and followed this with the rapid acquisition and refurbishment of a number of halls in the English provinces and Scotland, building up a syndicate of fourteen halls by the early 1900s. Barrasford formed his various interests into a limited company in 1903. 
Barrasford placed particular emphasis on the interior design and furnishing of his properties which were among the most luxurious of all British variety theatres. The Liverpool Hippodrome, which he opened in 1902, was, indeed, regarded by many as Britain's best equipped variety theatre and was probably the first to offer tip-up plush seats at what contemporaries termed popular prices. Barrasford was also among the first to introduce the cinematograph into the variety theatre, eventually using his own projection device, the 'Barrascope', which he developed with photographer Owen Brooks and engineer Fred Borland in 1902. 
The early twentieth-century variety industry was characterized by managements' use of so-called 'barring clauses', which prevented performers from taking engagements at theatres in close proximity to venues where they were already contracted for future appearances. Barrasford was especially assiduous in his recruitment of continental performers who were not usually bound by such restrictions and many leading European variety acts were introduced to Britain as a result. This also led to his developing considerable foreign interests and he eventually controlled variety theatres in Paris, Brussels, Barcelona, and Marseilles. 
By 1904 Barrasford looked set to become Britain's leading variety entrepreneur, but he overstretched his resources in the course of intense competition with a rival syndicate headed by Oswald Stoll. There was some personal animosity between the two men, probably related to contractual disputes, and this translated into a battle over which company could be the first to open a major West End variety theatre. In fact, Stoll's Coliseum opened two days ahead of Barrasford's Lyceum, in December 1905. Barrasford was unable to gain a drink licence from the London county council and this proved a barrier to profitability. Barrasford was forced to sell the Lyceum in 1906 and he moved the headquarters of his now rather less ambitious company to the Brighton Hippodrome. He contracted Bright's disease about 1907 and in 1909 control of his variety chain passed to the London-based syndicate operated by Walter Gibbons. 
Barrasford was married twice, his second wife being the music-hall singer Maud D'Almayne, who appears to have shared in some of his business enterprises in his final years. He had five children by the two marriages. 
During his lifetime Barrasford developed a strong interest in horse-racing. He was a heavy gambler and he owned a small string of racehorses which were trained at Malton in the North Riding of Yorkshire. His most significant contribution to the race world was his development of a starting gate, once again the result of collaboration with the Leeds engineer Fred Borland. A device first used at Newmarket in 1897, the starting gate was prone to create movements and shadows which caused panic among the horses and Barrasford's model, which had an underground mechanism, was deemed far superior in this respect to most other early versions. It was used extensively in the north of England and on training grounds in Britain and the continent in the early years of the century. Barrasford died on 1 February 1910 from diabetes and pleurisy at The Hippodrome, 50 Smiddle Street, Brighton, and was buried in Brighton. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 56528


Black, George (1890-1945), theatre manager and impresario, was born on 20 April 1890 at 3 Court, 7 Sutton Street, Birmingham, one of three sons of George Black, then a house-painter, and his wife, Mary Davies. In the late 1890s his father gave up a post as property master at the Theatre Royal, Birmingham, to tour the fairgrounds with a waxworks show, and George's first job was to collect the admission money. In 1905 the waxworks were exchanged for one of Robert Paul's Animatographs, an early cinema projector. Rather than touring, Black senior decided to settle down in Sunderland, his home town, turning a deconsecrated chapel into the Monkwearmouth Picture Hall, one of the first permanent cinemas in Britain. George worked the projector and sang songs in between the shows. The cinema prospered and more were bought. His father died in 1910 but George and his brothers Alfred and Edward Black built up a circuit of thirteen cinemas. In 1919 they sold them for $280,000 but immediately set about establishing another circuit. In 1928 this too was sold, to Sir Walter Gibbons's conglomerate, the General Theatre Corporation (GTC), but George insisted on being given a seat on the board of directors. By the end of the year GTC had been swallowed by a rival, the Gaumont-British Picture Corporation, and Black was the only one of the original directors to retain his position. He was given charge of GTC's non-cinema interests -- twelve provincial music-halls and the London Palladium. 
With the support of Val Parnell, a young showman who had worked as a booker for the London Theatres of Variety circuit, which had also been taken over by GTC, Black sought to revive music-hall as a popular form of entertainment. He argued that there was still a demand for live entertainment but that people were deserting the music-halls because they were dirty, old-fashioned, and badly run. He showed how the trend might be reversed by producing imaginative and lavishly mounted variety programmes at the London Palladium which filled the 2200 seat theatre to capacity. In November 1932 he expanded his operations when Gaumont-British bought a controlling interest in Moss Empires, the largest surviving circuit of music-halls. Black was able to combine his GTC halls with the thirty-odd Moss Empires -- which included the Leicester Square Hippodrome and the Holborn Empire. This meant that the London Palladium was at the apex of a substantial circuit of live entertainment venues. 
The Crazy Gang, the mainstay of the Palladium between 1932 and 1940, was essentially the brainchild of Val Parnell, but it was the powerful personality of George Black that managed to exert a measure of discipline over this anarchic team of zany comedians whose practical jokes often threatened to disrupt the smooth running of the Palladium. During the war, Black evolved a different strategy for the Palladium, presenting shows such as 'Garrison Theatre' and 'Happy and Glorious' designed to fit the different phases of the war. 'Happy and Glorious', starring Tommy Trinder, was the longest lasting show in the Palladium's history, and was still running early in 1945 at the time of Black's death. 
George Black was married to Hannah Mary Gibson, known as May Gibson, an actress who appeared in 'Dick Whittington' at the Palladium in 1914, long before Black's involvement with the hall. They had two sons, George and Alfred, and a daughter, Pauline Mary. The sons followed in their father's footsteps as theatrical impresarios, though they were also involved in film production and in the setting up of Tyne Tees Television. 
A man of decided views, George Black was once described (by lyric writer Henry Purcell) as 'a virile hurricane blowing across the stage, sweeping away all nonsense' (Bevan, 83). He was an outspoken critic of theatrical agents for their failure to foster new talent, and also of the BBC, which he regarded as a parasite sucking away his artists and his audiences. Nevertheless, he made few enemies and is generally regarded, along with C. B. Cochran, as one of the last great showmen committed to live entertainment. Black died at 40 Upper Grosvenor Street, London, on 4 March 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 56529


Black, Edward (1900-1948), film producer, was born on 18 August 1900 at 90 Hensham Road, Birmingham, one of three sons of George Black, then a house-painter, and his wife, Mary Davies. His father, subsequently an actor and stage carpenter, gave up his job as property master at the Theatre Royal, Birmingham, to run a hand-cranked children's roundabout, a touring waxworks, and then a cinematograph film show. In 1905 he rented a Presbyterian chapel in Sunderland and turned it into the Monkwearmouth Picture Hall, one of the first permanent cinemas in Britain. When George Black died in 1910 he had eight cinemas in operation and Edward was able to help his brothers, including George Black, to run the expanding circuit. 
In 1928 the Black brothers' cinemas were taken over by the General Theatre Corporation, which was itself quickly swallowed by the Gaumont-British Picture Corporation. Black was employed as a circuit manager but in 1930 he switched to the production side of the corporation, becoming assistant production manager at the Gainsborough studios in Islington. By 1936 he had become producer in chief, responsible for the production of around six films a year. The following year, the main Gaumont-British studio at Lime Grove, Shepherd's Bush, which was making heavy losses, was closed down, but Black's efficient Gainsborough unit continued to operate, turning out popular comedies like 'Oh Mr Porter' (1937) and thrillers such as 'The Lady Vanishes' (1938). When war broke out in September 1939, the Islington studio -- a converted power station with a huge chimney -- was considered too vulnerable to German bombs and Black moved the Gainsborough team into Lime Grove. There he produced highly successful films such as 'Millions Like Us' (1943) and 'The Man in Grey' (1943). 
Black's strategy was to build up a stable of stars and to put out a balanced production programme consisting of comedies, musicals, melodramas, thrillers, and serious war films. However, the phenomenal success of 'The Man in Grey' in 1943 destroyed the power balance at the studio. The nominal head of production at Gainsborough, Maurice Ostrer, was a director of Gaumont-British and the brother of its chairman, Isidore Ostrer (though by 1943 the company was in the process of being transferred to the Rank Organisation). Maurice Ostrer decided that the success of 'The Man in Grey' proved that Gainsborough had hit on a winning formula and henceforth the studio should concentrate entirely on costume melodrama. Black disagreed and when he was overruled, left to act as a producer for Alexander Korda. 
Black's tenacity was tested to the limit in producing Korda's unwieldy historical epic, 'Bonnie Prince Charlie' (1948), and he died of lung cancer on 30 November 1948 at his home, Flat 60, Fairacres, Roehampton, Putney. He was only forty-eight. His widow, Frances Clementine Black, survived him. Together the couple had two daughters. An indefatigable worker, Black was respected by actors, writers, directors, and technicians. He fostered the careers of Margaret Lockwood, Phyllis Calvert, Michael Redgrave, Stewart Granger, and James Mason, giving them the opportunity to develop as popular British film stars. He also encouraged the development of a talented scriptwriting team, ensuring that Gainsborough films were based on original scripts rather than adaptations of novels and stage plays. James Mason, who regarded producers as his natural enemies, made an exception for Black, whom he respected and saw as largely responsible for the success of Gainsborough as a studio. Sidney Gilliat, who worked under Black as scriptwriter and director, pointed out that he had 'the longest and most financially successful run any producer in Britain has ever had' (Brown, 112). Black staunchly protected Gilliat from studio politics while he was making his first film as a solo director, 'Waterloo Road' (1944). Gilliat admired his unflappability and described him as 'a man to go tiger shooting with' (ibid., 111). He was the sort of efficient but imaginative producer the British film industry sorely needed. 


@@@@@


doc= 56530


Box, (Frank) Sydney (1907-1983), film-maker and writer, was born on 26 April 1907 in Beckenham, Kent, the son of Frank Box, a career soldier who was wounded in the First World War, and his wife, a seamstress whose maiden name was Dowling. As the eldest, Sydney helped his mother bring up his four siblings, while his father served as a quartermaster at a distant camp. She persuaded the eleven-year-old to enter a prize-winning one-act play in a local arts festival and, two years later, encouraged him to become a cub reporter on the 'Kentish Times'. 
Having taken a job in the City of London, Box began writing and producing plays for the Beckenham Dramatic and Operatic Society, where he met his first wife, Katherine Knight; they were married in 1929. However, 'her match did not strike on Sydney Box' (M. Box, 132) and the marriage was subsequently dissolved in 1934. Box began an affair with Muriel Baker (1905-1991) ['see 'Box, (Violette) Muriel], a continuity clerk employed by film director Michael Powell, whom he met after his play, 'Murder Trial', won the Welwyn cup in 1932. 
Sydney and Muriel began collaborating on a series of playlets, six of which were published as 'Ladies Only' in 1934. In the following year 'Not this Man' won the National Drama Festival Award at the Old Vic, only for the press to denounce it as blasphemous. Box sued for libel, and the couple's lawyer advised them that living together would not impress the jury, so they married in Holborn register office on 23 May 1935. Their daughter, Leonora, was born on 5 November 1936. 
By 1939 Box had over fifty plays, several librettos, and the book, 'Film Publicity' (1937), to his credit. Yet, despite being invited to script commentaries for documentarist Ralph Smart, he remained a journalist. In addition to writing 'slightly imaginative news stories' (M. Box, 123) for 'Renter' and 'Today's', he also worked as a weekend sub-editor on the 'Christian Herald', the 'Evening News' and the 'Evening Standard', as well as contributing to several Beckenham journals. 
However, in 1940 he formed Verity Films, with Jay Lewis, to produce commercials and documentaries. Rejected for national service on account of a leg disability, he threw himself into making government-sponsored shorts such as 'The Soldier's Food' (1940). However, the War Office and similar agencies were notoriously slow payers, and the partnership dissolved acrimoniously in the spring of 1941. Undeterred, Box refloated the company with a loan from the Film Producers Guild and within a year it was the country's biggest producer of propaganda and training films. 
Having bought out Green Park Productions, Box moved into features, with 'The Flemish Farm' (1943) and 'On Approval' (1944). Following a spell at Two Cities, he took a lease on the Riverside Studios and resumed independent production with '29 Acacia Avenue' (1945). However, his greatest triumph was 'The Seventh Veil' (1945), a melodrama starring Ann Todd that not only became a huge commercial hit, but also landed Sydney and Muriel the Oscar for best original screenplay. 
Flushed with success, Box accepted the offer of fellow Methodist J. Arthur Rank to become managing director of Gainsborough Studios. Muriel was placed in charge of script development and they produced a number of successful and diverse pictures, including Ken Annakin's 'Holiday Camp' (1947), the Margaret Lockwood costume drama 'Jassy' (1947), and the Somerset Maugham adaptations 'Quartet' (1948) and 'Trio' (1950). 
In her autobiography 'Odd Woman Out', Muriel summed up their working relationship: 'Sydney has a sanguine, buoyant temperament which helped him take everything in his stride with the minimum of fuss. He was an incurable optimist, I am an incurable pessimist, which created a neat balance' (M. Box, 138). A contemporary profile painted a less idyllic picture, however, alluding to the creative tension engendered by his short temper. Yet it also admired his energy and commitment: 'He bites off large lumps of life. But there's a baby face, a soft voice, refinement, sensitivity and the odd paradox of urbane naivety' ('John Bull', 5 Oct 1946). 
Dismayed by a frustrating stay at Pinewood Studios (1949-50), Box took a year-long sabbatical to tour France and the United States. On his return he founded London Independent Producers to make Muriel's 'The Happy Family' (1952). 'Street Corner' (1953) and 'The Beachcomber' (1954) followed and, with his younger sister, Betty Box, also now making films, the Boxes seemed set to dominate the British film industry. Indeed, Noel Coward even dubbed them 'the Brontes of Shepherd's Bush'. 
In 1959, while negotiating a Hollywood deal to make 'William the Conqueror', Box suffered a cerebral haemorrhage and handed over his affairs to his brother-in-law, Peter Rogers. However, he made a surprise return to cinema in 1963, when he launched an unsuccessful bid to acquire British Lion Films after it was put up for auction by the government. He finally bowed out of pictures with Muriel's 'Rattle of a Simple Man' (1964) and devoted his energies to acting as a director of Tyne-Tees Television and managing his 300 acre dairy farm at Mill Hill. However, he still harboured hopes of turning London Independent Producers into an agency for small-screen talent and possibly even launching his own television station. But a series of heart attacks in 1967 persuaded him to emigrate to Perth, Australia. 
Divorced from Muriel in May 1969, Box married Sylvia Knowles in July. In the same year he published his first novel, 'Diary of a Drop-out'; three more books, all whodunnits, followed over the ensuing decade, during which time he also sat on the Western Australian Arts Council. Sydney Box died in Perth on 25 May 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 56531


Brady, William (1881-1960), bookmaker, was born in Yorkshire Street, Salford, son of John Brady, commission agent, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Hanoran. Known as Billy, he attended St John's Cathedral Boys' School in Salford and went to work with his two brothers at a local cable manufacturing business. He played rugby league for the factory team and later for Salford as a half-back. Brady and his brothers took bets at work, giving them to their father when they went home. 
Since the passing of the 'Betting Houses Act' in 1853 cash betting on horse-races away from the racecourse had been unlawful, but the activity remained popular among working-class people. In 1902 the Bradys were caught by the management and were sacked. Billy Brady then became a full-time illegal bookmaker. It is likely he took bets on the street, but in 1906 the 'Street Betting Act' forced bookies into spots more protected from the police. The housing in Salford was mostly two-up, two-down and at the rear of each terrace there ran a common entry or passage. Brady set up a pitch in the backyard of the family's home: his punters (or customers) came up the entry and handed him their bets and cash over the yard's wall. 
During the First World War Brady served with the Royal Army Service Corps, becoming a sergeant and taking part in the battle of the Somme. On leave in 1915 he married his fiancee, a shop assistant called Ellen Devine ('b'. 1883/4), on Christmas day; they had three daughters and two sons. His wife helped greatly in his bookmaking business, which he expanded after his discharge. He took over several pitches and was acknowledged as the biggest bookmaker in Salford. Most bookies protected themselves against large pay-outs by imposing a limit on the amount that could be won on a certain kind of bet. Brady was regarded as the founder of no-limit betting. He had a large notice painted on the end of his pitch proclaiming 'world record payout' to an old lady who had won several hundred pounds for an outlay of 6died 
Street bookies were decried by some people as immoral and unchristian. Others felt they drew the working class away from political action and encouraged wasteful spending. These negative images were reinforced by Walter Greenwood in his powerful novel 'Love on the Dole', written in 1933. Set in Hanky Park, Salford, it features the notorious bookie, Sam Grundy. Small and fat with beady eyes, sporting diamonds of a preposterous size and a collection of gold pendants, spade guineas, and masonic emblems, suggestively Grundy boasts that he has no limits. 
Many working-class people, however, looked on street bookies more positively. A former detective recalled Brady 'as a benefactor of the Catholic church rather than a criminal, despite the illicit status of his business' (Davies, 155). This opinion was widespread locally, and he was regarded as a good churchman and family man with a strong social concern, who sponsored parties and outings for the young and underprivileged. A governor of many schools, he was said to have an affable disposition and be unassuming and modest. He died at home at Southwood, Old Hall Lane, Worsley, Salford, on 12 September 1960, the year in which off-course cash betting was legalized. Following a requiem mass at St John's Cathedral, Salford, he was buried at St Mary's cemetery, Wardley. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 56535


Cohen, Elsie (1895-1972), cinema owner, was born in Amsterdam on 14 June 1895, the daughter and second child of Joseph Cohn (1865/6-1937), textile merchant, and his wife, Jenny (1868/9-1934). Her parents were of German nationality. She was brought up in London, where her father was a commercial traveller for a corset manufacturer, and was educated at Priory College and at Queen's College, London. She was sometimes known as Elsa, and used the surname Cohen. She entered the cinema industry in 1915 as a junior sub-editor on the trade paper 'Kinematograph Weekly', beating numerous male applicants who were liable to be called up in the war. She became deeply interested in films, particularly after conducting a long interview in 1916 with the director D. W. Griffith when he went to London for the opening of his epic 'Intolerance' (1916). In 1919 she accepted the post of publicity manager for the Hollandia film-making company in Holland, becoming the studio manager and its travelling sales executive until the owner died and it closed down. She then worked in Germany before becoming floor manager on a British film, 'His House in Order', starring Tallulah Bankhead, made in 1927. 
In 1929 Elsie Cohen discovered that an old cinema, the Palais de Luxe, in the West End of London was vacant for a short while prior to its reconstruction as the Windmill Theatre. She decided to use the building to show important foreign films which were not being seen in the centre of London, and achieved a great success. This became the first art cinema in the country. 
It was not until 1931 that Elsie Cohen found a new base for showing foreign films -- the Academy Cinema in Oxford Street, where she gained the support of cinema owner Eric Hakim. She started with one-week revivals of famous silent films from the continent and scored a huge success with the Russian 'Earth' (1930), followed by 'Turksib' (1929), 'The End of St Petersburg' (1927), and others, also reviving the British documentary 'Drifters' (1929). She then went abroad, acquiring new sound films from France, Germany, and Sweden, the Netherlands, and Russia to show at the Academy, supported by worthwhile shorts. Among her major successes were 'Kameradschaft' (1931) and 'Madchen in Uniform' (1931), of which 'Close-up' magazine in its June 1932 issue noted: 'Actually, we are becoming so accustomed to assisting at the best Cosmopolitan talkies at the Academy that we are apt to forget the initial miracle of having a specialised theatre in sleepy London'. 
Elsie Cohen was soon launching films with lavish premieres that attracted royalty and leading society figures, even persuading director Rene Clair to grace with his presence the opening in 1935 of 'Le dernier milliardaire' -- but she made a policy of providing a section of low-price seats within the reach of students and other impecunious film enthusiasts. Part of her marketing skill lay in building up a mailing list which was used to send detailed information about each new choice of film. 
The Academy was so successful that it encouraged other cinemas like the Boltons at Kensington to show foreign pictures, widening the market for quality subtitled releases. Elsie Cohen herself expanded operations to run foreign films at Cinema House in Oxford Circus for several years, and later at the Berkeley Cinema in Mayfair. 
After 1937 Cohen dropped German films and concentrated on French productions, introducing British audiences to such master-works as Jean Renoir's 'La grande illusion' in 1938 and 'Quai des Brumes' in 1939. She was managing director of Unity Films, which imported many of the productions. 
Occasionally there were censorship problems. Showing the documentary 'Spanish Earth' in the late 1930s, Elsie Cohen was forced to eliminate almost all the footage revealing German support for General Franco but alerted the press to the glimpse that remained, creating headlines. When she was refused a censor's certificate to show the Russian anti-Nazi film 'Professor Mamlock' (1938), she gained a special licence from the London county council and was playing the film at the declaration of war in September 1939. 
Elsie Cohen had planned to open a chain of Academy cinemas in the provinces until war intervened. The Academy itself was forced to close in October 1940 because of bomb damage and passed into the hands of a receiver. George Hoellering, an Austrian who had impressed Elsie Cohen with his film 'Hortobagy' and settled in England, becoming a director of the Academy before the war, was able to re-open the cinema in 1944. It was soon re-established as London's leading art house but Elsie Cohen, to her regret, was no longer involved. During the war and until 1947, she organized the recording of entertainment broadcasts for the troops and their distribution overseas. 
As Elsa Cohen she married, at Hampstead register office on 27 September 1933, Endre, or Andrew, Kellner (1901/2-1959), medical practitioner, son of William Kellner, a government official in Hungary. He was naturalized a British subject in 1935. They divorced in 1936. From 1939 she lived at Rottingdean, Sussex, and in 1968 moved to Saltdean, where she died at her home, 13 Heathfield Avenue, following a long illness, on 26 January 1972, and was cremated at the Downs crematorium, Brighton. 


@@@@@


doc= 56536


Forman family (per. 1784-c.1870), ironmasters, lived during the first half of the eighteenth century at Waltham on the Wolds in Leicestershire. 


@@@@@


doc= 56537


Thomas Forman (1692-1768) was a local landowner married to Jane, 'nee' Houton, but three of his sons, 


@@@@@


doc= 56538


Anthony Forman (1725-1802), 


@@@@@


doc= 56539


Henry Forman (bap. 1741), baptized on 14 January 1741 at Waltham, and 


@@@@@


doc= 56540


Richard [i] Forman (bap. 1733, d. 1794), baptized on 11 January 1733 at Waltham, left the county to take up employment in the ordnance department of the army. The brothers probably owed their appointments to the patronage of John Manners, marquess of Granby (1721-1770), eldest son of John, third duke of Rutland (1696-1779); the Rutlands were the most important landowners in the Waltham on the Wolds area. Granby was a soldier of note and became a lieutenant-general and colonel of the Royal Horse Guards. After distinguished service in the Seven Years' War he became master-general of the ordnance on 1 July 1763. 
The turbulent period of the Seven Years' War and the American War of Independence saw a great expansion in the ordnance trade. As a clerk in the Board of Ordnance Richard [i] Forman witnessed this increase in trade and the effects it had on the iron industry. He spent his working life at the Tower of London, where he became proof master during the American War of Independence. He married twice; his first wife was Mary Baines, his second, Elizabeth Crewe, and his six children were baptized in the church of St Peter ad Vincula, within the Tower precincts. 
Through his work for the Board of Ordnance Richard [i] Forman became associated with the Homfray family, who had been involved in casting cannon at the Calcutts ironworks in Shropshire, and at Cyfarthfa, Merthyr Tudful, in south Wales. In 1784 Forman advanced more than $10,000 to the Homfrays to assist in funding the Penydarren ironworks at Merthyr Tudful, and he became a partner in the concern. By 1796 the Penydarren partnership included members of the Homfray family, Henry Forman of Woolwich, and Richard [i] Forman's son William. Henry Forman had by this time risen to become first secretary of the royal laboratories under Colonel Congreve. 
Richard [i] Forman's sons and grandson also became employees of the Board of Ordnance. His son 


@@@@@


doc= 56541


Richard [ii] Forman (bap. 1763, d. 1830), baptized on 15 September 1763 at St Peter ad Vincula, was employed at the Tower of London before moving to the naval branch of the office. He married on 5 June 1786 Martha Skey of Harpenden. Their son, 


@@@@@


doc= 56542


Richard [iii] Forman (1795-1880), worked at his father's office at Chatham and later became chief storekeeper at Gibraltar, which ranked third in the garrison. He married Mary Heath (1810-1880) and died on 5 May 1880 at his home at Langley Road, Watford, Hertfordshire. 
Richard [i] Forman's fourth son, 


@@@@@


doc= 56543


William Forman (bap. 1767, d. 1829), baptized on 6 June 1767 at St Peter's, also combined the family's interests in the ordnance trade and the Welsh iron industry. After the Homfray family withdrew their business interests from Merthyr Tudful, William Forman became co-owner of the Penydarren ironworks with Alderman William Thompson of London, who had set up a merchant house in London in 1798 with the Homfray and Forman families. During the 1820s William Forman considerably expanded his iron-making interests, and on his death in 1829 he held a three-eighths share in the Penydarren ironworks along with shares in the Aberdar, Tredegar, Bute, and Rhymni ironworks. Part of the capital for this expansion had been acquired through his marriage on 8 September 1789 to Mary Seaton, the daughter of a Doncaster landowner. He died at Cornwall Terrace, Regent's Park, London, on 23 July 1829. 
After William's death the family's interest in the iron trade was continued through his sons, 


@@@@@


doc= 56544


Thomas Seaton Forman (1791-1850), 


@@@@@


doc= 56545


Richard [iv] Forman (d. 1882), and 


@@@@@


doc= 56546


Watt, Christian (1833-1923), fisherwoman and memoirist, was born on 24 February 1833 at 72 Broadsea, Fraserburgh, Aberdeenshire, the seventh of the eight children of James Watt (1787-1868), fisherman, and his wife, Helen Noble (1788-1860). Her family was distantly related to the Saltouns, clan chiefs of the Frasers. 
Christian Watt grew up in a tradition of nationalism, Jacobitism, and anti-Presbyterianism, and was greatly influenced by her maternal grandmother, Helen. Her family were poor and lived in a small house at Broadsea. She attended Broadsea School, and from the age of eight also helped the family with the work of the fishing. At the age of eight and a half, Christian worked as a domestic servant. In 1843 she became a maid to Lady Saltoun, and her diligence was rewarded with a dictionary. From 1844 onwards she accompanied the Broadsea fishermen on their summer expedition to the west coast to gut and cook herring. She recounts that subsequently she personally confronted Lord MacDonald of Sleat about his part in the clearances. She also described seeing Queen Victoria and Prince Albert in royal Deeside. 
In 1849 the duchess of Leeds arranged for Watt to work as a domestic servant in London, where she stayed for several months. In 1856 she travelled to America in order to receive money from the legacy of her recently deceased brother. She obtained a post as a tablemaid with a wealthy American family and spent time exploring New York. Eight months later she returned home and, on 2 December 1858 at Broadsea, she married James Sim (1831-1877), a fisherman. They had ten children. In 1874 her son Peter was drowned at sea, and Watt dated the onset of her mental breakdown from this point. Another son, Joseph, died of tetanus in 1876, and in the following year her husband was also drowned. Shortly afterwards, she lost another son and a daughter. 
In 1877 Watt was admitted to the Royal Aberdeen Asylum. On returning home the following month, she was shunned by the local population and it proved impossible to maintain a livelihood. She applied to emigrate to America but was turned down because of her history of insanity. She was readmitted to the asylum twice again. The last occasion, in 1879, proved permanent and she spent her remaining forty-four years there. The case-notes state that she suffered from 'mania' with 'religious delusions'. A tall, attractive woman of forthright opinions, in later years she was also said to have had an eccentric dress-sense. 
During her stay in the asylum, she was encouraged to write down her memoirs by two fellow patients. The asylum authorities ruled that all inmate writing was done in pencil, as there was a concern that patients might drink the ink or use the quills to injure themselves. Her manuscript is written in a confident, legible hand and the tone is forthright and opinionated. Watt often quotes from the 'Bible' but her prose is also enlivened by the use of local dialect. In addition to relating her own experiences as a long-term mental patient and giving a positive account of her care, the memoir gives a vivid insight into the social history of Watt's time, encompassing as it did the plight of the fishing industry and the effects of the highland clearances. 
Christian Watt died on 20 June 1923 in the Aberdeen asylum. The cause of death was chronic myocarditis and arteriosclerosis. She was buried at Kirkton cemetery, Fraserburgh. Watt's story was made known to the wider world by the publication of 'The Christian Watt Papers' in 1983, which represented an edited version of her handwritten autobiography, which is now the property of her family. The difficulty for any appraisal of the life of Christian Watt is that surviving knowledge of her is almost entirely based on her own account. Further, this appears to have been composed in her last years, making it susceptible to distortion and inaccuracy. Nevertheless, the published version aroused some interest and inspired a play, 'Precarious Living' (1985), and a drama documentary, both of which somewhat romanticized her plight. 


@@@@@


doc= 56555


Godwine, earl of Wessex (d. 1053), magnate, was probably the son of Wulfnoth Cild, a thegn of Sussex. In 1009 Wulfnoth was accused of unspecified crimes at a muster of the fleet; he fled with twenty ships and a force sent to pursue him was destroyed in a storm. The context is irrecoverable, but his accuser, Brihtric, was a brother of Eadric Streona, ealdorman of Mercia, and John of Worcester says that the allegations were unjust. A few years later, AEthelstan (died 1014), AEthelred II's eldest son, left Godwine son of Wulfnoth an estate at Compton, which had been his father's ('AS chart.', S 1503); the names are common, but Earl Godwine later held an estate at Compton, Sussex. Wulfnoth's appellation 'cild' ('child', 'young man', 'warrior') is normally used only of men of rank, and some of the lands in Sussex later in the possession of Godwine's heirs may have belonged to him. 
The life of King Edward, a work originally commissioned by Godwine's daughter, Queen Edith, as a history of her family, records Godwine's gradual rise to power under Cnut. Of all his English adherents, Cnut found Godwine 'the most cautious in counsel and the most active in war'. He took him to Denmark, where he 'tested more closely his wisdom', and 'admitted [him] to his council and gave him his sister ['sic'] as wife'. (Godwine's wife, Gytha ['see below'], was actually Cnut's sister-in-law.) On returning to England, Cnut made Godwine 'earl and 'baiulus' of almost all the kingdom' ('Life of King Edward', 5-6). This picture is confirmed from other sources. Although Godwine attests as earl from 1018, he can have held only eastern Wessex before 1020, when AEthelweard, ealdorman of the western shires, was banished. The visit to Denmark was probably in 1022-3, when Cnut fell out with his regent, Thorkell the Tall, earl of East Anglia. Thorkell vanishes from sight after 1023 and Godwine takes his place at the head of the earls signing Cnut's charters; it was probably then that he became earl of all Wessex, the first man to hold such authority. It is easy to see why Godwine was valuable to the new king. Sandwich, Kent, was the usual assembly place for the English fleet at the beginning of the campaigning season, as London was its permanent base and arsenal; and a man whose land and influence lay in the south-east would be of particular use to a king whose ambitions included Scandinavia as well as England. 
The only surviving charter of Cnut in Godwine's favour is a grant of land at Polhampton, Hampshire ('AS chart.', S 970, dated 1033), which included property in Winchester, but it was probably during Cnut's reign that he accumulated the many large, formerly royal manors which he held in Kent, Sussex, and Hampshire. His power is revealed in the succession crisis after Cnut's death in 1035. At an assembly in Oxford, Harthacnut (son of Queen Emma) was challenged by his half-brother Harold Harefoot (Cnut's son with his first wife, AElfgifu of Northampton), backed by Earl Leofric (died 1057), the thegns of Mercia and the north, and the royal fleet based at London. Since Harthacnut was in Denmark, dealing with a Norwegian invasion, his rights were upheld by Emma, supported by the royal housecarls at Winchester, 'and Earl Godwine was their most loyal man' ('ASC', s.a. 1035, text E). A compromise recognized Harold as regent for himself and his brother; according to John of Worcester, 'the kingdom of England was divided by lot' (John of Worcester, 'Chron'., 520-22), Harold holding the north and Harthacnut the south. 
In 1036 Emma's exiled sons with her first husband, AEthelred II, took advantage of this political instability. Only the Norman writers mention Edward's unsuccessful expedition, launched from Normandy, but that of Alfred, his brother, is widely reported. He landed in Kent and was intercepted by Godwine; he then fell into the hands of Harold I (Harold Harefoot), who had him taken to Ely and blinded, after which he either died of his injuries or was killed. The sources are divided between those which implicate Godwine in the betrayal of the atheling (the C version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', William of Jumieges, and John of Worcester) and those which throw the whole responsibility on Harold I (the 'Encomium', commissioned by Emma in 1041, the life of King Edward, and the D text of the chronicle: text E says nothing about it). Whatever its nature, Godwine's involvement in the death of 'the blameless aetheling' ('ASC', s.a. 1036, text C), was to cast a shadow over his future career. 
It must have been with Godwine's support that Harold I was recognized as king in 1037. Harthacnut 'was deserted because he was too long in Denmark' ('ASC', s.a. 1037, text C), and Emma fled to Bruges. Only when Harold died, on 17 March 1040, was Harthacnut accepted as king; his first act was to have his half-brother's body dug up from its grave at Westminster and thrown into the Thames marshes. John of Worcester includes Godwine in the party sent to oversee this operation. According to John, Harthacnut 'burnt with great anger' against Earl Godwine and Bishop Lyfing (died 1046), whom AElfric, archbishop of York, had accused of responsibility for his half-brother Alfred's death. Lyfing was temporarily removed from the see of Worcester, given him by Harold I in 1038; Godwine had to buy the king's goodwill with a ship manned by eighty fully armed warriors and was required to swear publicly that he had not advised nor desired the blinding of Alfred 'but that his lord King Harold had ordered him to do what he did' (John of Worcester, 'Chron'., 530-32). 
Harthacnut died on 8 June 1042 and was succeeded by Alfred's full brother, Edward the Confessor. Godwine's power continued to grow through the early years of Edward's reign. An earldom based on Hereford was created for his eldest son, Swein, in 1043; and in 1044, his second son, Harold, was made earl of East Anglia. One of his younger sons, Gyrth, later became earl of Wessex. On 23 January 1045 Edward married Godwine's eldest daughter, Edith; later the same year, Godwine's nephew Beorn Estrithson received an earldom in the east midlands. In 1044 Godwine helped his friend Eadsige, the ailing archbishop of Canterbury, to secure the appointment of Siward, abbot of Abingdon (died 1048), as 'chorepiscopus' (assistant bishop). Eadsige is said to have given Godwine the episcopal manors of Richborough, Sundridge, Saltwood, and Langport and the lands of the secular minster at Folkestone; in the last case in return for a hefty bribe. No date is given for these donations, but it was in Edward's time that Godwine acquired the third share of the revenues of Kent (the 'third penny'), formerly accruing to the archbishop of Canterbury. St Augustine's, Canterbury, later claimed that Godwine had seized their manor of Plumstead, Kent, though the partiality shown to Godwine and his family in the E version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', which was written at St Augustine's in the mid-eleventh century, suggests that this too had been granted by the abbey to the earl. The effect of these acquisitions, forced or voluntary, was to bolster Godwine's comital authority in the south-east. 
The 1040s offered Godwine and his elder sons the opportunity to increase their wealth and power. The only lands known to have been acquired by Godwine at this time are Fritton, Norfolk, bequeathed by the East Anglian lady Wulfgyth ('AS chart.', S 1539), Woodchester, Gloucestershire, which he bought for his wife, and Sandford-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, given by the king in 1050. Bosham, Sussex, was certainly in Godwine's hands before 1049 and many of the royal and comital estates entered in his or his wife's name in 'Domesday Book' were probably acquired from Edward in the 1040s. His second son, Harold, presumably held the comital manors in East Anglia, most of which he retained after relinquishing the earldom. Swein had similar opportunities in the west: his attempt to acquire the lands of the church of Leominster backfired, but by 1051 he held some of the estates of the defunct minster at Berkeley, Gloucestershire, and had interests in Bristol. 
Godwine's power would have been even greater if the monks of Christ Church had succeeded in electing his kinsman AElric as archbishop, after the death of Eadsige on 29 October 1050. In March 1051, however, the king quashed the election and appointed his own nominee, Robert of Jumieges, bishop of London from 1044. Robert immediately set about regaining the estates alienated to Godwine by Eadsige. The life of King Edward accuses Robert of poisoning the king's mind against Godwine, but Edward's favour to the earl was probably always a matter of expediency rather than choice. Throughout the 1040s the king was steadily building up his own following, drawn from the men who, like Robert, had accompanied him from Normandy, and he had already given the earldom of Beorn Estrithson, murdered in 1049, not to a son of Godwine, but to his own nephew, Ralph (died 1057), later earl of Hereford. It was probably Robert who, as he journeyed to Rome to collect his pallium, conveyed Edward's offer of the English succession to William, duke of Normandy. 
In 1051 the tensions between king and earl erupted. The life of King Edward concentrates on the role of Robert of Jumieges, but the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' gives a wider context. Osbern Pentecost, a Norman follower of Edward, had built a castle in Herefordshire, in Earl Swein's earldom, whose denizens 'inflicted every possible injury and insult on the king's men in those parts' ('ASC', s.a. 1051, text E). A second castle was established at Clavering, Essex, in the earldom of Harold, by another foreign favourite, Robert fitz Wimarc ('ASC', s.a. 1052, text E). It seems that a third castle was projected at Dover, in the territory of Godwine himself. Had it been completed the 'shires' of all three Godwinist earls would have been compromised. 
Edward may have intended to entrust the projected castle at Dover to his one-time brother-in-law Eustace (II), count of Boulogne. The fullest version of what occurred is that of the E version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', which is noticeably more hostile to Eustace, and more favourable to Godwine, than the D text. Eustace arrived in England in the late summer of 1051 and, after visiting the king, set out for Dover. He was clearly expecting trouble, for he and his men rode armed and in mail, and soon after his arrival a fight broke out in which nineteen of Eustace's followers and more than twenty townsmen were killed. Eustace went to the king 'and gave him a prejudiced account of how they had fared'. The enraged Edward ordered Godwine 'to carry war into Kent toward Dover', but the earl refused, and when the king called a council at Gloucester, 'the foreigners went beforehand to the king and accused the earls'. It was at this point, according to the life of King Edward, that Edward, urged on by Robert of Jumieges, formally charged Godwine with the murder of Alfred AEtheling ('Life of King Edward', 20-21). 
Godwine and his sons gathered their men at Beverstone, part of the manor of Berkeley, Gloucestershire, and the king summoned the levies of Earl Leofric and Earl Siward to Gloucester; Earl Ralph likewise brought the troops of his east midland earldom. The king's counsellors urged caution, saying that 'it would be a great piece of folly if they joined battle, for in the two hosts was most of what was noblest in England, and they considered that they would be opening a way for our enemies to enter the country and to cause great ruin amongst us' ('ASC', s.a. 1051, text D). A council was called to meet at London on 25 September. 
Godwine's support was now ebbing fast and when he was refused safe conduct to attend the London meeting, he decided all was lost. He and Swein, with Gytha and the younger members of the family, rode for their ships at Bosham and fled overseas to Bruges. Earl Harold, with his brother Leofwine, made for Bristol, where Earl Swein's ship was prepared, and went to Ireland, avoiding capture by the king's forces with the connivance of Ealdred, bishop of Worcester (died 1069). Edward repudiated his wife, Edith, Godwine's daughter, and appointed his own kinsman Odda of Deerhurst as earl of the western shires; it may be at this point that Herefordshire, in Swein's earldom, was given to his nephew Ralph. A contemporary chronicler comments that 'it would have seemed remarkable to everyone in England if anybody had told them that it could happen, because [Godwine] had been exalted so high, even to the point of ruling the king and all England, and his sons were earls and the king's favourites, and his daughter was married to the king' ('ASC', s.a. 1051, text D). 
Nothing shows more clearly the exceptional power of Godwine and his family than their successful return from exile in 1052. In Bruges Godwine made alliance with Baldwin (V), count of Flanders, cemented by the marriage of his third son, Tostig, to the count's half-sister Judith ('Life of King Edward', 24-5), while in Ireland Harold received aid from Diarmait mac Mael na mBo, king of Leinster. In the following year the family returned in force. Although Harold encountered strong opposition in the western shires, the south-east rose to support Godwine. The earls made for London, where the king had the support both of the royal ships and of earls Leofric and Siward; but once again, 'it was hateful for almost all of them to fight against men of their own race'. At a meeting of the king's council, Godwine cleared himself of the accusations brought against him, and the king restored him and his sons to land and office, and received Edith once more as his queen. Godwine's chief enemies, including Robert of Jumieges and Osbern Pentecost, were banished. Only Earl Swein did not return; he set off from Bruges on his pilgrimage to Jerusalem, dying on his return journey, on 29 September 1052. 
Earl Godwine followed his eldest son to the grave within the year. On Easter Monday, 1053 (12 April), he was dining with the king at Winchester, when: 'he suddenly sank towards the foot-stool, bereft of speech and of all his strength. Then he was carried to the king's private room, and they thought it was about to pass off. But it was not so. On the contrary, he continued like this without speech or strength right on to the Thursday and then lost his life. And he lies there in the Old Minster; and his son Harold succeeded to his earldom. ('ASC', s.a. 1053, text C)' Despite the glowing portrait in the life of King Edward, Godwine's posthumous reputation was not universally laudatory. He was widely accused of despoiling the church ('ASC', s.a. 1052, text C; 'Domesday Book', 1.5'v', 72, 186), though he was remembered as a benefactor of the Old Minster, Winchester, and of Abingdon Abbey ('Life of King Edward', 30; 'Chronicon monasterii de Abingdon', 1.469). After 1066 Godwine and his sons were an easy target for criticism, and some church land may have been acquired with the assent (or at least connivance) of his ecclesiastical contemporaries. No church claimed him as founder, but he may have been patron of the secular minster at Dover, refounded in the early eleventh century. The church, St Mary-in-Castro, which preserves its eleventh-century fabric, stands within the hill-top stronghold where Count Eustace had his battle with the townsmen in 1051. If this church was connected with Godwine, his reluctance to punish the townsmen is the more understandable. Perhaps the words of Walter Map ('fl'. 1154-1210), who admired his intelligence, courage, and generosity, though disapproving of his greed, may stand as his epitaph: 'I do not say he was a good man, but a mighty, and an unscrupulous one' (Map, 230). 

Gytha (fl. c.1022-1068), Earl Godwine's formidable wife, was the daughter of the Danish magnate Thorgils Sprakaleg. One of her brothers, Ulf, married Cnut's sister Estrith and was father to Swein Estrithson, king of Denmark ('r'. 1047-76), Beorn Estrithson, and Asbjorn. The other, Eilaf, was earl in Gloucestershire under Cnut. Gytha probably married Godwine about 1022. Her standing was high in the west of England; she was a patron of the Old Minster, Winchester, of Tavistock Abbey, and of St Olave's, Exeter. She made her husband buy her an estate at Woodchester, Gloucestershire, for her support when she stayed at Berkeley, since 'she was unwilling to use up anything from that manor because of the destruction of the abbey' ('Domesday Book', 1.164). The Worcester monk Hemming records her anger when her eldest son, Swein, claimed that Cnut and not Godwine was his father; Gytha assembled oath-helpers from the noble ladies of Wessex to witness Godwine's paternity ('Chartularium', 275-6). After the battle of Hastings, Gytha offered the victorious William its weight in gold for Harold's body; William of Poitiers says the duke would not give up the corpse, but William of Malmesbury believed that he gave the body unransomed to Gytha for burial at Waltham (William of Poitiers, 204-5; 'De gestis regum', 2.306). Gytha retired to live on her western estates. The earls of Wessex had a residence in Exeter, 'Irlesbyri', and Gytha seems to have been deeply involved in the events at Exeter in the spring of 1068. The citizens responded to a demand for their formal submission with an attempt to bargain with King William, who replied by besieging the city. In the event the citizens capitulated and were treated with remarkable clemency. Gytha and her companions escaped from Exeter before it was yielded. She took refuge on Flatholme in the Severn estuary, with 'many distinguished men's wives' ('ASC', s.a. 1067, text D). Their husbands had perhaps fled to Ireland, with the sons of Harold, to seek aid from Diarmait mac Mael na mBo of Leinster, their father's old ally. Two unsuccessful raids were launched from Ireland, one on Bristol and Somerset in the summer of 1068, and the other on south Devon a year later. It was about this time that Gytha left England for good, taking with her 'a great store of treasure' (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 2.224-5). She went first to Flanders and then to the court of her nephew King Swein. She was accompanied by her daughter Gunnhild (who may have died in Flanders) and Harold's daughter Gytha, who married Vladimir Monomakh (died 1116/1125), prince of Smolensk and (later) of Kiev. The date of Gytha's death is nowhere recorded. 


@@@@@


doc= 56563


Bolebec, Isabel de, countess of Oxford (c.1164-1245), magnate and monastic patron, was the eldest daughter of Hugh de Bolebec (died 'c'.1165), lord of Whitchurch, Buckinghamshire, and a patron of the order of Friars Preacher in England. She appears first in the records as the widow of Henry de Nonant (died 1206), lord of Totnes, Devon, her first husband. In 1207 she petitioned the crown for the right to marry whom she wished. The first instalment of her fine was paid by Robert de Vere, earl of Oxford (d. 1221), her second husband, who had made his own fine to marry Isabel if she consented. At the time of her remarriage she was coheir of her niece Isabel de Bolebec, countess of Oxford and Robert de Vere's former sister-in-law (with whom she is frequently confused). By 'c'.1225 Isabel had inherited all of the Bolebec honour of thirty knights' fees in Buckinghamshire. 
Isabel bore her only known child, Hugh de Vere, late in her reproductive years. She purchased his wardship and the guardianship of his inheritance upon her husband's death in 1221 for $2228 (6000 marks), and travelled with him on pilgrimage 'beyond the seas' in 1237 ('CPR', '1237-42', 175). A generally successful suitor at court, she engaged in a long-running dispute with Woburn Abbey. 
The countess was the chief benefactor of the Dominican order in Oxford. The friars sent to England in 1221 were assisted in their search for quarters in the Oxford Jewry by Isabel, who took a Dominican as her confessor and financed their oratory to the east of St Aldate's Street 'c'.1227. When the friars decided to expand, she bought land to the south of Oxford for them. On her death on 3 February 1245 her body was temporarily entombed in their oratory, then transported to the newly consecrated Dominican priory church in St Ebbe's for burial. A monument proclaimed Isabel their 'foundress'. Her other known charitable grants were to the hospital of St Mary Magdalene, Crowmarsh, Oxfordshire, and to Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire (a Bolebec foundation). 


@@@@@


doc= 56573


Berkeley, Elizabeth, countess of Warwick (c.1386-1422), magnate, was the daughter of Thomas, fifth Baron Berkeley (1353-1417), and Margaret (1360- 'c'.1392), daughter and heir of Warin de Lisle. In September 1392 an agreement was drawn up with Thomas Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (d. 1401), for her to marry the earl's son and heir Richard Beauchamp (d. 1439). The marriage took place before 5 October 1397, and Elizabeth became countess of Warwick when her husband was granted livery of the earldom in 1403. As the only child of Thomas Berkeley and Margaret de Lisle, Elizabeth was a considerable heiress. From her mother she inherited the Lisle and Tyes baronies with their principal estates concentrated in Wiltshire, Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and the south-west; her mother died 'c'.1392, and these lands were held by her father by the tenure of courtesy of England until his own death in 1417, when Elizabeth succeeded to them. During her lifetime most of Elizabeth's lands kept their own identity under her own receiver, and receipts were paid to the keeper of her household. 
Elizabeth was also heir-general to the Berkeley estates, but the castle, manor, and hundred of Berkeley and certain other manors had been entailed to the male line by her great-grandfather in 1349. She and her husband were not willing to accept this entail at her father's death on 13 July 1417, and this refusal initiated one of the longest lawsuits in England which was not concluded until 1609. The heir male was Elizabeth's cousin, James Berkeley. At the time of Thomas's death James was in Dorset, while Elizabeth and her husband were either at Berkeley or at Wotton under Edge, well placed to seize the entailed manors and also Thomas's records. Difficulties arose over carrying out Thomas's inquisition post mortem, and it was only on 1 December 1417 that the entailed lands were adjudged to James. His tenure of the lands was however by no means secure. Elizabeth was holding Berkeley Castle in 1420-21; James however succeeded in taking possession of Wotton by July 1421. At that time Elizabeth and James appeared before the king's council (the earl was in France), and Elizabeth presented her complaint against James. Earlier mediation involving Joan Beauchamp, Lady Bergavenny, had taken place, but no settlement was reached by the council. James by then had secured the backing of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, which put him in a stronger position. In fact it was only after Elizabeth's death that the earl and James reached a settlement, in 1425, which established peace between them until the earl's death in 1439. 
A considerable amount is known about Elizabeth's daily life as a result of the survival of her household accounts for 1420-21. The autumn and winter were spent at Berkeley, but at the end of March Elizabeth and her daughters travelled to Walthamstow in Essex to join her husband, and they spent two months there before the earl's return to France. Apart from a rapid journey to Wotton, presumably on business, she remained in London until her appearance before the council in July after which she travelled west to Salwarpe near Worcester. The accounts give details of the structure and organization of the household, the exercise of hospitality, costs and consumption of food, and standards of living. 
Elizabeth died on 28 December 1422, and was buried at Kingswood Abbey. Her husband provided in his will for a marble tomb to be built over her grave. The inscription described her as the daughter and heir of Thomas, Lord Berkeley and Lisle. She and the earl had three daughters: Margaret was born in 1404 and married John Talbot, afterwards earl of Shrewsbury, in 1425; Eleanor was born in 1408, and married Thomas, Lord Ros, some time after 17 December 1423, and, after his death in 1430, Edmund Beaufort, later duke of Somerset, before 7 March 1438; and Elizabeth was born 'c'.1417 and married George Neville, Lord Latimer, before February 1437. 
Elizabeth's daughters renewed their claim to the entailed Berkeley estates after their father's death in 1439, and the 1440s witnessed litigation and violence. Margaret, countess of Shrewsbury, was especially energetic in pressing the claim, and it was as a result of her action that Lady Berkeley was committed to prison at Gloucester in 1452 where she died soon afterwards. After the death of James, Lord Berkeley, eleven years later, Margaret carried on the dispute with William, Lord Berkeley. After her own death in 1467 her grandson Thomas, Lord Lisle, challenged Lord Berkeley to a military solution, but was killed at the ensuing battle of Nibley Green in 1470. 


@@@@@


doc= 56578


Sang, Edward (1805-1890), mathematician and civil engineer, was born on 30 January 1805 at Kirkcaldy, the sixth of eleven children of Edward Sang (1771-1862), nurseryman and sometime provost of Kirkcaldy, and his wife, Jean Nicol ('b'. 1773), a cousin of William Nicol (1770-1851) who invented the Nicol prism. He attended a subscription school founded by his father and others under a gifted headmaster, Edward Irving. At Edinburgh University during 1818 to 1824 he impressed professors William Wallace and John Leslie in mathematics and natural philosophy, despite periods of illness. Small for his age, he was first mocked by fellow students, then admired for his precocious talent. 
Sang first worked in Edinburgh as surveyor, civil engineer, and mathematics teacher, and lectured on natural philosophy. During 1841 to 1843 he was professor of mechanical sciences at the nonconformist Manchester New College, then went to Constantinople to establish engineering schools, plan railways and an ironworks. He lectured (in Turkish) at the Imperial School, Muhendis-hana Berii and gained fame by predicting the solar eclipse of 1847, thereby dispelling superstition. He resigned against the sultan's wishes, returning to Edinburgh in 1854 to teach mathematics. 
An active fellow of the Royal Scottish Society of Arts and the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Sang received awards from both and from the Institution of Civil Engineers, London (1879). He was a founder member and first official lecturer of the Faculty of Actuaries in Scotland, a corresponding member of the Royal Tunis Academy, an LLD of Edinburgh University, and an honorary member of the Franklin Institute, Philadelphia. In 1832 he married Isabella Elmslie ('b'. 1805?) and they had one son and four daughters. 
Mainly in Edinburgh-based journals, Sang wrote extensively on mathematical, mechanical, optical, and actuarial topics including vibration of wires, a theory of toothed wheels, an improved lighthouse light, railways, bridges, manufacturing, and life insurance. He published actuarial, annuity, and astronomical tables, books on elementary and higher arithmetic, and much used tables of 7-place logarithms (1871). But his most remarkable achievement is his massive unpublished compilation of 28- and 15-place logarithmic, trigonometric, and astronomical tables, filling forty-seven manuscript volumes. Compiled over forty years, latterly with assistance from two daughters, Flora and Jane, these surpass in accuracy the (also unpublished) French Cadastre tables of 1801. They were given to the nation in 1907 by Anna and Flora Sang. Sang died at his home, 31 Mayfield Road, Edinburgh, on 23 December 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 56581


Helen Beatrice Saunders (1885-1963) was born on 4 April 1885 at 10 Addison Road, Bedford Park, Chiswick, London, the daughter of Alfred Robert Henry Saunders, a solicitor, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Daley. After being educated at home, Saunders studied at the Central School of Arts and Crafts and at the Slade School of Fine Art (1906-7), and exhibited with the Friday Club in 1912. By then her interest in post-impressionism was evident, and she showed her work at the Allied Artists' Association in 1912 and 1913. One of the first in Britain to work in a non-figurative style, Saunders reached her most extreme stage as a painter in 1914 when she exhibited at the Whitechapel Art Gallery's 'Twentieth Century Art' exhibition and joined the Rebel Art Centre. Like Dismorr, she contributed a poem as well as an illustration to the second issue of 'Blast', and was included in the vorticist exhibitions in London and New York. But she came closest to Lewis when together they painted murals in the Vorticist Room at the Restaurant de la Tour Eiffel, Percy Street, London. At the end of her life Saunders was living at 39 Gray's Inn Road, Holborn, London. Following her accidental death by gas poisoning on new year's day, 1963, three of her works -- 'Monochrome Abstract Composition' ('c'.1915), 'Abstract Composition in Blue and Yellow' ('c'.1915), and 'Abstract Multicoloured' ('c'.1915) -- were that year presented to the Tate Gallery in memory of her sister by Ethel M. Saunders. 
The list of signatures in 'Blast' excluded several artists whose work had much in common with the vorticists. Frederick Etchells (1886-1973) certainly executed paintings and drawings which can confidently be described as vorticist. Jacob Epstein's (1880-1959) 'Rock Drill' (1913-16; Tate collection) put many vorticist ideas into compelling sculptural form. But he was almost as determined to distance himself from vorticism as David Bomberg (1890-1957), who adamantly rejected Lewis's invitation to contribute to 'Blast'. Bomberg also refused advances from the Italian writer and theorist Filippo Marinetti, who only succeeded in attracting the loyalty of one English artist: Christopher Nevinson (1889-1946). 
Most of the artists associated with the vorticist movement had previously been impressed by Marinetti and the Italian futurists, who first exhibited in London at the Sackville Gallery in March 1912. The vorticists sympathized with Marinetti's call for an art directly expressive of the new machine age, and they also admired the Italian leader's dynamic ebullience as a performer of his own poetry. But by 1914 they had begun to resent Marinetti's attempts to enlist them as members of the futurist movement. Pound, who had become dissatisfied with his earlier commitment to the imagist movement in poetry, was eager to involve himself with a new group. So was Wyndham Lewis, who explained his conception of the vortex by telling a friend to think 'at once of a whirlpool... At the heart of the whirlpool is a great silent place where all the energy is concentrated. And there, at the point of concentration, is the Vorticist' (D. Goldring, 'South Lodge', 1943, 65). 
The stillness of the 'great silent place' was far removed from Italian futurism, which preferred to rhapsodize about the machine age and convey its excitement through blurred, multiple images stressing the exhilaration of movement. Vorticisim valued energy, too, and Ezra Pound defined the vortex as 'a radiant node or cluster... from which, and through which, and into which, ideas are constantly rushing' (E. Pound, 'Vorticism', 'Fortnightly Review', 1 Sept 1914). But the vorticists preferred to define single forms rather than embrace flux, vagueness, and rapid motion. A vorticist picture is often explosive in its implications, using diagonal forms redolent of pistons and girders which reach out towards the edges of the composition. Alongside this restless energy, though, there is a counter-emphasis on firm, clear-cut forms, often enclosed by strongly defined contours. The vorticists were fascinated by the modern world, and wanted to incorporate its mechanistic structures in their work. But they tempered this enthusiasm with a cool, hard awareness of the machine age's impersonal harshness. They knew how dehumanized the modern urban world could be, and they saw no reason to echo the ecstatic romanticism of Marinetti's attitude towards twentieth-century dynamism. 
The vorticists wanted to place this 'modern world' at the very centre of their work. They filled their pictures with what 'Blast' described as the 'forms of machinery, Factories, new and vaster buildings, bridges and works'. But they had no desire to depict the world in too representational a style. Lewis criticized the futurists for 'their careful choice of motor omnibuses, cars, aeroplanes, etc.' (W. Lewis, 'Blast', 1, 1914, 144) and declared that 'the Automobilist pictures were too 'picturesque', melodramatic and spectacular, besides being undigested and naturalistic to a fault' (ibid.). Cubism, which had also influenced many of the vorticists at an early stage in their careers, was likewise criticized. Lewis announced that Picasso's cubist sculpture 'no longer so much interprets, as definitely makes, nature (and 'dead' nature at that)' (ibid., 140). 
The vorticists believed that their intentions could best be conveyed by a more abstract language. Not because they regarded total abstraction as a desirable end in itself: the vorticists thought that the machine age demanded a severely simplified, hard, bare approach. 'Blast' proclaimed that machinery 'sweeps away the doctrines of a narrow and pedantic Realism at one stroke' (W. Lewis, 'Blast', 1, 1914, 39), enabling the vorticists to develop a language which contained many layers of reference. A vorticist picture can therefore be read in several different but equally legitimate ways. It might be seen as a map, a vision, an aerial view of the earth, a diagram, a blueprint for a machine, or a distillation of an urban scene with buildings and robot-like figures. All these possibilities were contained in a single image, and Lewis had no desire to restrict them in any way. He wanted vorticism to be richly allusive even as it refined and simplified its formal vocabulary. In 1915 he explained that the vorticist work of art should be 'a hallucination or dream (which all the highest art has always been) with a mathematic of its own' (W. Lewis, 'Note', 'The First Exhibition of the Vorticist Group', 1915, exhibition catalogue, Dore Galleries, London). 
Despite the rivalries within the group, vorticism stood a good chance of establishing itself as a major force. So indeed it did, but only for a short time. A few weeks after 'Blast' was published, the First World War erupted. The militancy of vorticism was rapidly overtaken by the outright militarism of a call-to-arms. So the vorticists had little more than a year to develop their ideas. They enjoyed boisterous evenings at the Restaurant de la Tour Eiffel where Vorticist Room murals by Lewis and Saunders made an appropriately clangorous impact. The meetings were commemorated, nearly half a century later, in Roberts's monumental painting 'The Vorticists at the Restaurant de la Tour Eiffel, Spring 1915' (Tate collection). That year, which saw the first vorticist exhibition and the first issue of 'Blast', Lewis claimed in the magazine that 'we have subscribers in the Khyber Pass, and subscribers in Santa Fe' (W. Lewis, 'Blast', 2, 1915, 7), but Gaudier-Brzeska had already been killed fighting at the front. He was widely mourned by other members of the movement, and by 1916 most of the vorticists were fighting in France. 
Left at home, Pound persuaded the major American collector John Quinn to purchase vorticist work on a grand scale, and stage an 'Exhibition of the Vorticists' at the Penguin Club, New York, in 1917. But when the vorticists returned from the war, they soon discovered that the world had changed irrevocably. They could not recapture the pre-war context of heady experimentation, in a cultural climate dominated by the need for a 'return to order'. By 1920, despite Lewis's stillborn attempt to launch a third issue of 'Blast', the movement had ceased to exist. 


@@@@@


doc= 56583


Cornwell, Alice Ann (1852-1932), goldmining industrialist and newspaper proprietor, was born on 1 January 1852 at 18 Bakers Row, West Ham, Essex, one of at least three daughters of George Cornwell, railway guard, and his wife, Jemima Ridpath. At the age of nine she emigrated with her parents to Dunedin, New Zealand. She remained there until the age of seventeen when she left with her parents for Victoria, Australia. Her father became a builder and railway contractor and, later, a gold prospector. While in Victoria, on 4 December 1875 Alice married John Whiteman (died 1892), a politician and poet, and on 17 February 1877 she gave birth to a son, George Frederick Francis Carl. There was, however, a great disparity in age between Alice and her husband, and a formal separation took place subsequently. 
Alice Cornwell, as she was known, returned to England, and after studying at the Royal Academy of Music, where she won several gold medals and composed a number of popular songs and pianoforte pieces, taught music at Queen's College. Following the death of her mother, however, she went back to Australia where her father was then occupied in mining speculations and losing money. Alice Cornwell made herself acquainted with the geology of the goldfield, and convinced herself, and persuaded others, that payable 'reefs' underlay her father's property. Sufficient capital was raised and a shaft sunk: and a vein of gold was struck apparently within a foot of the point at which she had indicated its existence. This discovery was made in the teeth of strong local scepticism and proved to be one of the richest strikes in Victoria: the establishment of the Midas mine in Sulky Gully, Ballarat, led to her becoming known as 'Princess Midas'. The Midas Mine Company was later floated on the London stock market. 
With the riches from her goldmine, Alice Cornwell became a well-known and flamboyant figure in Melbourne and London. In late October 1887 'The Times' reported a private view of the Midas gold nugget that Alice Cornwell had arranged at 32 Queen Victoria Street, London. Called the 'Lady Loch', after the wife of the governor of Victoria, it weighed 617 oz, measured 1 foot by 8 inches, and was valued at $2537. 'The Times' reported that it was the seventh largest nugget found at Ballarat since 'the Midas gold field has been opened up through the perseverance of Miss Cornwall [as her name was popularly misspelt]' ('The Times', 29 Oct 1887). 
In 1887 Alice Cornwell bought the 'Sunday Times' from the FitzGeorge family. Her aim was partly to publicize her next mining venture, the British and Australasian Mining Investment Company, but the editorship was also intended as a present for Frederick Stannard ('Phil') Robinson, a war correspondent whom she was to marry in 1894. 
Returning to Australia in the following year, Alice Cornwell's next speculative venture was the purchase of the Wyong estate at a cost of $280,000. This covered 17,000 acres between Sydney and Newcastle and offered excellent prospects for coalmining. Alice Cornwell was also involved in the development of a harbour at Port Adelaide. 
In an interview published in Victoria in 1888, Alice Cornwell commented on the prospects for the newspaper she had bought. 'I bought 'The Sunday Times', a Conservative paper. It would be called Liberal out here, for mostly what is Conservative at home is Liberal in Victoria, and so 'vice versa'.' She added that when she had bought the paper it was only a scissors and paste affair, with hardly any original news, but after being placed under the management of Phil Robinson it began to be a splendid paper, 'and when I left its circulation was rapidly increasing' (Hobson, Knightley, and Russell, 50). However in reality although the price of the 'Sunday Times' was reduced to 1died in a bid to undercut 'The Observer' and to fight it out with a new rival, 'The People', also priced at 1died, the circulation remained unresponsive. Although a charming writer, Phil Robinson was a reluctant editor, and left to join Alice Cornwell in Victoria, where he also gave a series of lectures. While he was in Australia, the temporary editorship of the 'Sunday Times' was in the hands of Joseph Hatton. 
The late 1880s saw the height of Alice Cornwell's fame. She was the subject of a novel entitled 'Madame Midas' (1888) by Fergus Hume. This was later turned into a play, which led to a lawsuit in Australia by John Whiteman, then still her husband. Then in July 1889 Alice Cornwell was featured in 'Men and Women of the Day', where she was described as 'singularly earnest and sincere... a woman who has adopted a role unprecedented among her sex'. The article deemed her to be 'one of the most remarkable women of her time' (p. 80). 
After over five years as a newspaper proprietor, and having lost money through her mining failures, Alice Cornwell sold the 'Sunday Times' in 1893 to Frederick and Rachel Beer. She settled in England and, known formally as Mrs Stannard Robinson, became a successful breeder and exhibitor of pugs, and in 1894 founded the Ladies' Kennel Association. To give publicity to the organization she launched the 'Ladies' Kennel Journal'. A keen supporter of the organization was the princess of Wales, later Queen Alexandra. 
Alice Cornwell's son became a professional actor at the age of nineteen, changing his name to Sydney Carroll, and for many years was a well-known writer on the theatre, and film critic of the 'Sunday Times'. Alice Cornwell died of cancer of the kidney on 7 January 1932 at 19 Palmeria Square, Hove. Her second husband predeceased her. 


@@@@@


doc= 56584


Sturge, Sophia (1795-1845), slavery abolitionist, was born at Elberton, Gloucestershire, on 17 August 1795, the fifth of the twelve children of Joseph Sturge (1763-1817), grazier, and Mary Marshall (died 1819), only child of Thomas Marshall, steward of the marquess of Hertford. The two families had been members of the Society of Friends since the seventeenth century, and Sophia was brought up to observe the Quaker values of the day. 
A chronic invalid -- she described herself as a victim of disease and medicine from infancy -- Sophia Sturge was educated at a school in Wellington, an experience that she remembered as 'not the happiest of my life' (S. Sturge to John Sturge, 23 June 1829, Sturge family MSS). In the straitened circumstances of a large family her mother took a strong line against superfluous educational subjects and denied her the drawing and French lessons that she requested. The brothers and sisters subsequently compensated as best they could for their narrow education, and their correspondence shows them to have been a circle of autodidacts eagerly exchanging ideas on the literature and events of the day: Sophia Sturge's letters refer to the 'Edinburgh Review' and writers including Walter Scott and Lord Byron. During the political furore arising from George IV's attempts to divorce Queen Caroline, she wrote of her wish to see only moderate reform lest the cry of liberty might lead on to disorder and despotism. 
In 1815 Sophia Sturge joined her brother Joseph Sturge (1793-1859) at Bewdley as his housekeeper. For a time she was also the bookkeeper of the partnership J. and C. Sturge, which he had set up with one of their brothers after their move to Birmingham. From their earliest days her 'great love' for Joseph was evident (Mary Sturge to Thomas Marshall, 8 Dec 1803, Marshall MSS), and on her deathbed she spoke of her idolatry of him. His marriage to Eliza Cropper in 1834 was a breaking of 'tender bonds' for her (S. Sturge to Mary Darby Sturge [1834?], Sturge family MSS), when she was displaced from his household and unhappily took employment as a governess; but on Eliza's death in 1835 she resumed her position in his home, 64 Wheeley's Road, Edgbaston, where she remained for the rest of her life. 
Like many women Quakers of that era Sophia Sturge had a formidable personality; her obituary in 'The Pilot' described her as a woman with a 'vigorous intellect and understanding universally well informed'. As his secretary and confidante she was one of the mainstays of Joseph Sturge's public life as a reformer, and he deferred to her opinions. Although she was alarmed by his discussions with Feargus O'Connor and other militant Chartists in 1842, her views were radical enough to endorse his support of complete suffrage. 
For an invalid Sophia Sturge was surprisingly active in many benevolent projects. She was one of the founders of the Birmingham Ladies Society for the Relief of Negro Slaves, which was virtually the headquarters of a nationwide campaign by women during the 1820s. At a time when the male abolitionists could not decide between immediate and gradual emancipation, women campaigners opted for the former and organized a boycott of slave-produced sugar. Many years later Joseph remembered his sister calling on some 3000 families in Birmingham to seek their support. When the slaves were set free, as secretary of the Birmingham Ladies Negro's Friend Society, Sophia Sturge tried to help them to adjust to the conditions of freedom; in 1844, for example, a school for which she had raised funds was opened in Jamaica. Sympathizing with the American anti-slavery movement, she became a friend and correspondent of Lewis Tappan, one of the leaders. 
Sophia Sturge died on 6 June 1845 at 64 Wheeley's Road, Edgbaston, attended by Joseph throughout her last illness. Medical advice opined that she had died of lung disease. She was interred in the burial-ground of the Bull Street Friends' meeting-house, Birmingham, on 11 June 1845. Her death was the occasion of J. G. Whittier's poem, 'To my Friend on the Death of his Sister'. Quakerism, strongly influenced by evangelical ideals, was the mainspring of her life, enabling her to fulfil roles as a supportive sister and anti-slavery campaigner in her own right. 


@@@@@


doc= 56585


Cranston, Robert (1815-1892), founder of temperance hotels, was born on 9 August 1815, at East Calder, near Edinburgh, the son of James Cranston, mason and innkeeper, and his wife, Janet Garvie. His grandfather Robert had moved there from Jedburgh about 1778 to act as factor for the earl of Buchan. Robert's parents kept the Bay Horse inn in East Calder before moving into Edinburgh in 1822. 
Cranston was educated in Edinburgh and then apprenticed at the university printing office. After losing his left leg, however, following an act of bravado at the age of sixteen, he moved to a more sedentary apprenticeship with a tailor at 43 Princes Street (later the site of Cranston's first hotel). This proved a valuable extension to his education -- he was often chosen to read aloud to his fellow workers, and it was here that he developed his fondness for the novels of Sir Walter Scott. There was also much lively discussion of current affairs. It was following arguments about the newly prominent temperance issue that Cranston and two friends embarked on a trial dry period of three months, after which they assessed themselves as better off without drink, and became total abstainers. 
On 17 April 1838 Cranston married Elizabeth (1813-1873), the eldest daughter of John Dalgliesh, carter in Leith; they set up house at South Bridge where Cranston was partner in a tailor's shop. In 1843, however, following the lead of his friend John Aitken who had opened Edinburgh's first teetotal coffee house in 1837, he abandoned tailoring to establish a temperance coffee house and lodgings at 129 High Street. Well supplied with newspapers, and commended too by Elizabeth's excellent pies, this was a success, and soon became a particular meeting place for Chartists. Cranston himself was actively involved in this movement for political reform, editing its paper the 'North British Express' for some time, and was twice briefly arrested. 
Five years later in 1848 the Cranstons sold the coffee house and opened the Waverley Temperance Hotel at 43 Princes Street. Many thought its prime site and high-quality fittings commercial madness, but the Cranstons had shrewdly spotted a gap in the market. While the temperance rule was strictly enforced, the hotel aimed for the first class and was immediately successful. The roll of its notable visitors was proudly kept. Temperance hotels spread rapidly from these beginnings, especially in Scotland, in the second half of the nineteenth century. 
Despite heavy financial loss in the crash of the Royal Bank of London in 1849, Cranston recovered fast enough to exploit the opportunities presented by the Great Exhibition in 1851: he opened a Waverley in London at 37 King Street, Cheapside, and co-operated with Thomas Cook, another temperance man, to cater for his excursions to London. The next expansion was into Glasgow with the Waverley at 185 Buchanan Street in 1860. In 1868 the New Waverley was opened in Waterloo Place, Edinburgh, after which what became known as the Old Waverley on Princes Street was enlarged, and finally reconstructed in 1884. The scale of charges was the same in each hotel. 
The success of the hotels, which made Cranston wealthy and supported his political activity, was mainly due to the skills of Elizabeth Cranston, remembered in the family biography as 'a large-hearted woman, remarkably able and phenomenally rapid and accurate with figures' (Mein, 3). Elizabeth died in 1873. On 23 April 1877 Cranston married Mary Ann, daughter of James Ryan of Gullane; she also predeceased him, dying in 1890. 
Cranston was himself always ready to acknowledge the capacities of the women of his family. He was an early supporter of women's suffrage and spent freely on the education of his two daughters, Mary (1846-1932) and Elizabeth 
('Liebe'; 1848-1941)
, as well as on that of his two sons, Robert (1843-1923), later Sir Robert, lord provost of Edinburgh, and John Dalgliesh (1845-1916). He recognized Mary's business talents by giving her the Washington Temperance Hotel on Sauchiehall Street on her marriage to the Glasgow photographic dealer George Mason in 1872, and naming her in his will chief trustee, with his oldest son, of the Waverley empire. He also financed the business start-up of his cousin's daughter, Catherine (Kate) Cranston, whose Glasgow tearooms were renowned. 
Cranston brought his progressive views to bear on local politics, serving from 1868 to 1890 on Edinburgh's town council, interesting himself particularly in the reform of the fire brigade, and in efforts to provide public baths and wash-houses and improve housing. He became a burgess of Edinburgh and a freeman of London. His passion for improving was exercised on his home, Waverley Park, Abbeyhill, and he also put up model dwelling houses. He was a vigorous, charitable, and genial man, but stern enough if his wishes were crossed. From his long service on the bench, from 1875 to 1887 and again in 1889-90, he became widely known as Bailie Cranston. He was much respected for his integrity and intellectual clarity, and it was his boast on retirement that none of his judgments had ever been appealed. Cranston was several times pressed to stand for the provostship, and for parliament, but declined partly because of his inability to kneel on ceremonial occasions. 
Cranston died at his home, Waverley Park, 18 Spring Gardens, Abbeyhill, Edinburgh, on 11 May 1892 as a result of pneumonia and cardiac failure. Accorded a public funeral, he was buried at Grange cemetery, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 56586


Sturge, Mary Darby (1865-1925), medical practitioner, was born at Stoney Lane, Yardley, Birmingham, on 16 October 1862, the daughter of Wilson Sturge (1834-1899), corn merchant, and his wife, Sara, 'nee' Lloyd (1831/2-1922), a keen Quaker, progressive educationalist, and philanthropist. She was the eldest of ten children in a leading Quaker family in Birmingham -- her grandfather Charles Sturge was mayor of Birmingham when she was born. She lived in Birmingham for most of her life, much of it in Edgbaston. 
Known to her immediate circle as Maida, Sturge entered Edgbaston High School for Girls, the first such school for girls in Birmingham, on its opening day in 1877. Always in the highest class, she appreciated the wide academic curriculum and learning 'to think straight' while also loving poetry, music, and painting. Subsequently, she was one of the first four women scholars at the new Mason Science College, founded in 1880 and, despite some of the academic staff's unease at females studying science, offering women a rare chance of higher education, especially once its students could take the degrees of Victoria and London universities. Sturge helped form the students' union, before leaving in 1886 to study medicine at London University, open to women since 1878. While there she won many honours, including the Prideaux scholarship. She qualified at the London School of Medicine for Women in 1891, the prime institution for women's medical education, thence becoming resident medical director at the Clapham Maternity Hospital and, from 1892 to 1894, resident medical officer of the North Eastern Fever Hospital of the Metropolitan Asylums Board. Addressing the London School of Medicine for Women in 1894, she stressed the high professional demands of medicine. 
Obtaining such an education was a Herculean struggle for most women at this time, but Birmingham, albeit not entirely easily, offered more opportunities than most, particularly at the Birmingham and Midland Hospital for Women, established in 1871 principally by men and women from Birmingham's new liberal elite. This hospital was highly uncommon both in the control it gave to lay governors and in constitutionally having 50 per cent each of females and males on its committee of management. Unusually, it appointed qualified women doctors before they could be registered in Britain. Its first permanent woman appointee was Sturge's cousin Annie Clark, who had also worked at the Children's Hospital. The respect she earned smoothed the way for Sturge who, after a visit to Egypt and Europe with her father, returned to Birmingham in 1895 to take up general practice. From 1896 she took over the administration of anaesthetics at the Women's Hospital, becoming acting honorary surgeon in 1905, a position she held until February 1924, retiring through ill health although she remained as consulting physician. 
Sturge was also secretary of the medical board and involved closely with the Women's Hospital for eleven years, particularly valued for initiating the idea of the Taylor Memorial Home of Rest for older terminally ill women and working so wholeheartedly to ensure it materialized. Her siblings carried out her dying wish for them to support it, by successfully launching a memorial fund which allowed the building of the Dr Mary Sturge Memorial Wing as an extension to the rest home in 1926. Here poorer women could end their lives in quiet dignity. 
Aware of the low salaries that nurses earned, Sturge agitated both for a pension fund for staff working at the home and for proper accommodation of the nursing staff. She promoted opportunities for women medical students at the hospital and, on resigning, expressed her desire that a woman doctor should always be chosen as physician to the outpatients, teasingly adding the hope that the medical board would 'recognise my ideas as harmless'. She joined the Association of Registered Medical Women in 1892 when its low membership was just beginning to grow and played an active part in the more interventionist Medical Women's Federation (MWF) which evolved from this, becoming its second president from 1920 to 1922. In these years the MWF worked hard for justice for all medical women, achieving some success on equal pay but less on removing the marriage bar. According to Sturge, by 1922 the MWF had become a power recognized by government. Although some women medics questioned the need for a separate women's organization, Sturge had no doubts that it was the only way to stop the daily slights that were such a strain to them and to demonstrate the necessity of having medical women who could advise the state properly on matters such as infant welfare, venereal disease, and birth control. 
In Birmingham Sturge energetically promoted the local MWF branch. Indeed, she was at the centre of a growing community of women medics in Birmingham, within which she earned a high reputation as a skilful, devoted doctor who particularly loved being with and observing children. Revering scientific evidence, she promoted her belief in the importance of preventive medical care and the value of sleep, sunshine, and fresh air to treat illness. Described as 'much beloved', energetic, untiring, resourceful, with infectious humour which took the sting out of her 'home-truths', she was extremely generous to all and expected others to be the same. 
Ever conscious of women's position, Sturge, like her aunt Eliza Sturge, was a keen suffragist, becoming a doughty fighter for women's rights and an active member of the Birmingham Society for Woman's Suffrage. She was also known for her advocacy of temperance, a cause dear to many of her fellow Quakers. Her 1907 book, co-authored with Sir Victor Horsley, 'Alcohol and the Human Body', full of current scientific evidence and illustrations from across Europe, sold 85,000 copies in Britain and the USA and went into six editions. Their 'Introduction' stressed their desire to present up-to-date knowledge of alcohol solely based on experimental, anatomical, and statistical evidence, although realizing it also had 'grave socio-political and national importance'. The book nodded towards eugenics but was principally concerned with the health of all -- men, women, and children. Sturge, calling the cause of 'Scientific Temperance' her 'vocation!', lectured on it all over the country, using her medical knowledge to back her arguments. 
Similarly, like other women in her Quaker community, Sturge backed local nursery education and was much involved in both peace and refugee work during and after the First World War. In particular she did much to help Belgian refugees in Birmingham and on their return home. The success of the Birmingham Children's Home in north Tyrol in 1920 was attributed to her initiative, planning, sympathy, and untiring zeal behind the scenes, especially in collecting and transporting medical supplies across Europe. 
Sturge's last letter to the Quakers at Bull Street where she worshipped acknowledged her debt to Quakerism, the 'background to my life'. Certainly its values underpinned all her commitments. For example, as the sole woman in an audience of about 200 secretaries of friendly societies, she persuaded them and then the small but powerful medical committee on venereal disease backed by the war cabinet not to undo the work of Josephine Butler. She died at 39 Fox Hill, Selly Oak, Birmingham, from the painful and debilitating illness of Bell's palsy, on 14 March 1925. She left a legacy of goodwill to women doctors in Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 56587


Cranston, Catherine (1849-1934), tea-room proprietor, was born on 27 May 1849 at 39 George Square, Glasgow. Often known as Kate, she was the only daughter and youngest of the three children of George Cranston, hotel-keeper (1817-1899), and his wife, Grace Lace ('c'.1811-1867). She had two half-brothers, William ('b'. 1840) and Robert ('b'. 1843), the offspring of her father's first marriage, to Janet Gibson. George Cranston, previously a baker and pastrymaker, kept a succession of hotels in George Square (the Edinburgh and Glasgow, the Crow, and finally the Crown) from about 1849 to 1874 when the family moved to 91 Sauchiehall Street. From 1882, when her brother Stuart married and moved to Bearsden, Kate lived at 425 Sauchiehall Street with her widowed father and older brother George, who died in 1884, staying there until or just after her own marriage in 1892. By this time the Cranston name was well known in connection with tea-rooms. 
It was Kate Cranston's brother, 
Despite Stuart Cranston's vigorous self-promotion it was Kate Cranston who became identified as the pioneer of the tea-room phenomenon of Glasgow's golden age between 1888 and 1911. In 1878 Kate Cranston established her Crown Tea Rooms beneath a temperance hotel at 114 Argyle Street, with moral and financial support from her father's Edinburgh cousins, the Waverley Temperance Hotel Cranstons. She was also helped by her brother when she opened another branch at 205 Ingram Street in 1886. Confusion was inevitable, but after 1889 the distinction between Cranston's Tea Rooms and Miss Cranston's Tea Rooms was clearly drawn and the businesses were quite separately developed. Miss Cranston's more substantial catering (she described herself as a restaurateur) together with a feminine note in decor became the model for the typical Glasgow tea-room. In challenging social disapproval of middle-class women in business she paved the way to money-earning for many able imitators. 
On 7 July 1892 Kate married John Cochrane (1857-1917), owner of an engineering works and later provost of Barrhead, a quiet, pleasant, and artistically disposed man some eight years her junior. There were no children from the marriage. From about 1893 they rented East Park, Barrhead; then from 1904 Hous'hill, a fine house at Nitshill, south-west of Glasgow. Marriage marked not a termination of her career, but an era of expansion for 'Miss Cranston' as she remained in business, though she was Mrs Cochrane in private life. 
In 1894 Kate Cranston acquired property at 91-93 Buchanan Street, perhaps as a wedding present from her husband. On this site rose a lavish new building, opened in 1897. Its unconventional interior decoration by George Walton and Charles Rennie Mackintosh earned immediate notoriety. Work in 1898-9 by the same pair on the redevelopment of the whole building at Miss Cranston's original Argyle Street location (the extended lease was acquired about 1895), and by Mackintosh at Ingram Street in 1900, established a strongly 'artistic' house style for her tea-rooms. By 1901 when she catered at the Glasgow International Exhibition, 'Kate Cranstonish' had become a Glasgow term, as Neil Munro recalled, for 'domestic novelties in buildings and decorations not otherwise easy to define' (Munro, 198). Her reputation was confirmed by Mackintosh's glittering Willow Tea Rooms on Sauchiehall Street, opened in October 1903. The stream of smaller jobs which she gave Mackintosh right up to 1916-17 were of great importance through difficult times for this isolated architect. For her sustained patronage of Glasgow's most avant-garde designers Miss Cranston, as Pevsner says, 'deserves the art historian's unstinted gratitude' (Pevsner, 538). 
Kate Cranston's eccentrically old-fashioned style of dress -- mid-Victorian flounces and quirky hats -- betokened a characteristic readiness to flout convention in pursuit of what she liked. Described by Edwin Lutyens as 'a dark, busy, fat, wee body with black sparky luminous eyes' ('Letters of Edwin Lutyens', 56), she had a good sense of humour and was sociable and kindly, but could also be imperious and quite formidable. As a businesswoman she was naturally aware of the publicity value of her singular tastes. 
Miss Cranston became one of the most widely cherished and respected figures in Glasgow. It was she, not her brother, who entered 'Who's Who in Glasgow' (1909), one of seven women and the only businesswoman. She received another accolade in 1911 when she was the subject of the 'Men you know' profile in 'The Bailie' of 26 July, which accurately detailed her 'gifts of organisation, management, taste, originality, hard work, and perseverance, and her great shrewdness in judging as to what people want', crediting her with a catering revolution 'in which temperance, comfort, elegance, and economy are allied in a fine progressive form'. As an employer she was a perfectionist and disciplinarian who was keenly concerned for her girls' welfare. 
The death of her husband in October 1917 shattered her, as they were 'a most devoted couple' (private information), and Cochrane had been a considerable support in business. She disposed of the tearooms, took to dressing in black, and left Hous'hill with its Mackintosh interiors to live in the North British Station Hotel back in George Square for most of the rest of her life. In her last years she became vague and alarming, and died of 'senile decay' compounded by heart problems on 18 April 1934 at 34 Terregles Avenue, Glasgow, where she had gone to live with a companion. She was buried in Neilston cemetery. The bulk of her considerable estate was left to charity. 
Mackintosh's Willow Tea Rooms on Sauchiehall Street, heavily restored, in the 1990s were functioning again in part as tea-rooms. His interiors for the Ingram Street tea-rooms, neglected and finally dismantled in 1971, have since been partially reconstructed for display, the Ladies' Luncheon Room forming the centrepiece of the Mackintosh exhibition held in Glasgow in 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 56588


Stuart Cranston (1848-1921), tea dealer and tea-room proprietor, who claimed for Glasgow the 'invention' of tea-rooms. He entered the tea trade as a teenager, and in 1871 established his own business as Stuart Cranston & Co. A passionate champion of good tea, he opened a room in 1875 at 2 Queen Street, Glasgow, and charged for sampling at 2died a cup, 'bread and cakes extra'. This caught on and Cranston opened further suites of tea- and smoking-rooms alongside his dry tea business. With five branches in Glasgow's city centre, supported by substantial property investment, he formed Cranston's Tea Rooms Ltd in 1896. Further tea-rooms opened in 1898, 1907, and 1914, and fine coffee became another specialism. A restless entrepreneur with a slightly obsessive nature, Cranston was a keen musician, long-serving yeoman, a proselytizing fruitarian, and like his sister a practical if not paid-up abstainer. He retired from the business in 1915, and died on 17 October 1921 at 28 Bank Street, Glasgow, leaving a widow, Flora Mackinlay MacLachlan, and a daughter, Sybil. The company ran on until 1955. 


@@@@@


doc= 56591


Dodd, Anne (c.1685-1739), pamphlet shop keeper, was born Anne Barnes, but nothing is known of her before her marriage, on 18 March 1708, to the stationer Nathaniel Dodd, the licence allegation describing her merely as a spinster of St Bride's parish, London, aged upwards of twenty-two years. The couple were married in St Bride's and apparently lived in the parish for the next four years, two of their children being baptized there. 
In February 1708, just before his marriage, Nathaniel Dodd had purchased the freedom of the Stationers' Company, but what trade he or his wife carried on during these early years is not known. Some time in late 1711 or early 1712, however, the Dodds moved to the sign of the Peacock without Temple Bar in St Clement Danes parish where they established what quickly became, and for forty years remained, the best-known pamphlet shop in London. 
By law any wife's business was then legally her husband's, and this makes it difficult to determine whose business the shop really was. Nathaniel Dodd, testifying in 1718 after one of the many arrests which such a business involved, speaks of himself taking the offending newspaper, Mist's 'Weekly Journal', from the printer and supplying copies to a subsidiary distributor, while others later describe being his servant, or taking receipts from him. However, the shop itself is generally referred to as kept by Mrs Dodd, and even the witness who claimed to serve Mr Dodd testified that it was Dodd's wife who was the 'retailler of newspapers and pamphlets commonly called a Mercury' (TNA: PRO, SP 35/28/18, 12 Aug 1721). 
Whatever her husband's role, it was always Anne Dodd's name which appeared on the imprints of the hundreds of newspapers and pamphlets advertised as for sale at the Peacock. And even if for the first decade Anne Dodd was merely the nominal proprietor, all that changed with Nathaniel's early death in October 1723. Thereafter Anne had sole charge of the business, and the fact that it continued to prosper for three more decades strongly suggests that she had always been perfectly capable of running things on her own. 
Anne Dodd's success and renown should not, however, be confused with real importance in the publishing world, for she owned no copyrights and merely distributed those papers on which her name appeared, buying them in bulk from the actual publishers and supplying them wholesale to the hawkers or retail to the public. Pope's use of her imprint on the early editions of 'The Dunciad' (almost certainly without her consent) was thus mere parodic obfuscation. 
This subsidiary role did not, however, save Mrs Dodd from government harassment or even, in 1728, from imprisonment, though she pleaded in 1731 that: 'the business sometimes compels me to sell Papers that give Offense, but I must beg leave to Declare Sincerely that what Papers I sell in just Praise of our Happy Government, far exceed the other in Number. Hard Case! that I must either offend where I am shure I would not, or else starve my Poor Babes. (TNA: PRO, SP 36/23/134, 26 May 1731)' This was pure hyperbole for the youngest of Dodd's surviving 'Babes' was then at least seven and the eldest twenty-two. Nor were they near to starving, for when Anne Dodd died she left $500 to the children of her eldest daughter, Elizabeth, wife of the London surgeon Mileson Hingeston, and $600 each, besides jewellery and personal effects, to her two younger daughters, Anne and Sarah, who were also left the lease of the shop. They were strongly encouraged to carry on the business which continued, apparently unchanged, until the mid-1750s. Fielding's description in the 'Covent Garden Journal' of 21 January 1752 of 'Mrs. Dodd's shop' with 'all that vast and formidable Host of Papers and Pamphlets arranged on her Shelves' might have portrayed any moment over the previous forty years, though Fielding's 'Mrs. Dodd' was the younger Anne Dodd ('fl'. 1739-1756), in whose name the business was carried on, and who is thus often confused with her more famous mother. The older Anne Dodd died in April 1739 and was buried on the 22nd at Enfield in Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 56592


Gordon, Lucy Christiana Duff, Lady Duff Gordon (1862-1935), fashion designer, was born in St John's Wood, London, in July 1862, the elder of two daughters of Douglas Sutherland (1838-1865), a Scottish civil engineer, and Elinor, 'nee' Saunders (1842-1937), who came from a prosperous Canadian family of Franco-Irish descent. On Douglas Sutherland's sudden death in 1865 the family returned to the maternal home in Summerhill, near Guelph, Ontario. The household was strict, imbued with French formality, and Lucy reacted, becoming a rebellious tomboy. She expressed a nascent creativity in making clothes for her dolls and for herself, often adaptations of the quality French clothes sent by relatives. On her mother's marriage in 1871 to David Kennedy (1807-1890) the family moved to England, settling in Jersey. Unable to conform to the household requirements of her stepfather, an elderly penurious invalid, Lucy left at sixteen to stay with relatives. 
Attractive, with reddish brown hair, piquant features, and a neat figure, vivacious and strong-willed, Lucy Sutherland had many suitors but settled, rather precipitately, in 1884 on Douglas Wallace ('b'. 1844/5), a much older, socially well-connected, wine merchant. She divorced him in 1889 and moved with her only child, Esme (later Lady Halsbury), to stay with her recently widowed mother in London, supplementing their income by dressmaking from home. 
Social contacts through her sister, the novelist Elinor Glyn (1864-1943), and Lillie Langtry, allied to genuine creative ability, turned the dressmaking into a successful business. Lucy's designs proved congenial to socially more relaxed Edwardian society and included individually styled personality dresses and luxuriously informal tea gowns. The business enjoyed continual expansion: by 1895 Lucy had moved to 24 Burlington Street, working as Mrs Lucy Wallace; from there she went on by 1898 to 17 Hanover Square, assuming the trade name of Maison Lucile in 1902, and finally to 23 Hanover Square in 1904. 
It was at Hanover Square that Lucy realized her ideal, a prestige couture house, the prototype for her subsequent establishments. The costs involved were high -- the premises were redecorated in Louis XVI mode, in a scheme inspired by a close friend, American designer Elsie de Wolfe -- but the venture proved a success. Boasting such innovations as the Rose Room specializing in lingerie, personality mannequins, and a salon for theatrical-type fashion displays, it attracted stage and society clients. Fashionable weddings and popular theatrical productions such as 'The Merry Widow' in 1907 further boosted its appeal. By 1904 a limited company had been formed. Lucy retained the design responsibility and controlling interest, but her relationship with her partners, all of whom had invested in the company, was never easy. As well as members of her own family these included Sir Cosmo Edmund Duff Gordon (1862-1931), whom she married on 24 May 1900, and an accountant by the name of Miles. 
In 1909 a branch of the firm opened in New York amid such extensive publicity that Lucy was briefly dubbed Lady Muff Boredom. It proved a great success, however. Money dresses, so called because of their cost and the style consultations with the wealthy but sartorially insecure they entailed, were very popular. Lady Duff Gordon's relationship with the popular press came under pressure, however, when she, Sir Cosmo, and her secretary, were numbered among the few survivors of the sinking of the 'Titanic' in 1912. In the ensuing commission of inquiry, they were accused of bribing their way to a lifeboat and preventing its return to rescue further passengers. Although they were completely exonerated, the experience had a profound effect, particularly on Sir Cosmo. 
The opening of the Paris branch in 1912, at 49 rue de Penthievre, provided distraction. An immediate success, it was popular with visiting Americans, theatrical clients, and the 'demi-monde'. For Lucy it was a return to what she considered her spiritual home. Whether she received due recognition from the French couture establishment is less clear. 
In 1914 Lady Duff Gordon returned to America for the duration of the First World War from which, unlike her immediate family, she remained detached. Until the American entry into the war in 1917, demand grew and she expanded, moving to larger premises with a separate design studio. She employed good young designers, including Edward Molyneux and Howard Greer, and her popularity was boosted by work for the Ziegfield Follies and a touring semi-patriotic fashion show. Friction with her family and business partners, however, increased: to support a very extravagant lifestyle, she began to offer clients her personal fashion services, thereby diverting considerable earnings from the company. Her association with 'the Boys', a bevy of young male personal assistants, in particular Genia d'Agarioff, prompted Sir Cosmo's return to Britain later in 1914. The couple never again lived together, although they continued to be business associates. 
The opening of the Chicago branch (1915-17) was in particular bitterly resisted by the other directors whose overriding ambition had become entry not into the couture but into the mass market. A foray into this area with the US mail-order firm Sears Roebuck in 1914-15 proved unsuccessful, and in 1919 the partnership was bought out by John Lane Shuloff, a New York dress manufacturer, who leased back the name Lucile to the London branch. Although Lucy Duff Gordon retained a limited role as a designer, by 1924 her business was forced to cease trading. 
As a designer, Lucy Duff Gordon had always shown creative integrity and been technically adept, working both from sketches and draping on the stand. A ruthless perfectionist, she had fine judgement of colour blending and materials. None of this or her preference for romantic or exotic styling translated easily into ready-to-wear for an austere and depressed post-war world. Except for a brief period in 1923-4, when she wrote a lively column of dress advice as 'Dorothy' of the 'Daily Sketch', she retired from fashion. Her autobiography, 'Discretions and Indiscretions', was published in 1932. 
Lady Duff Gordon lived in London from 1923 to 1935. After the death of Sir Cosmo in 1931, she benefited from the income of a trust fund set up under the terms of his will. Despite disagreements, she retained close family links. She died at a nursing home at 100 West Hill in Putney on 20 April 1935. There are fine examples of her work in the main costume collections in the UK and USA. Her significant but often unwitting contributions to the fashion industry included the anticipation of a link between the American and the European markets, as well as a systematic exploitation of publicity and an appreciation of the importance of ready-made fashion. 


@@@@@


doc= 56594


Edward Emmanuel (fl. 1900-1930). He was regarded as 'a financial power' and as 'the guv'nor before Darby Sabini' (Chinn, interviews with Prince, 1). Little is known about Emmanuel's early life but it is believed that he once worked as a market porter at Spitalfields, where he became involved in spieling (illegal gaming activities). He came to notice in 1904 when he threatened to shoot an Islington street trader and was charged with possession of a loaded revolver. Emmanuel stated he was a salesman but the magistrate declared that he was 'a dangerous fellow' and imposed a high surety of $250 or twelve months' imprisonment (Samuel, 316). Four years later a John McCarthy attempted to kill Emmanuel in east London. Both men were described as market porters. Over the next few years Emmanuel established himself as a proprietor of spielers and as a fixer of boxing fights. It was also alleged that he was in collusion with certain police officers and that for a payment he could arrange lighter sentences for Jewish criminals. By the early 1920s he was regarded 'as in charge of the whole East End underworld -- or at least the Jewish part of it' (ibid., 204). 


@@@@@


doc= 56595


Giudice, Filippo del (1892-1962), film producer, was born in Trani, Italy. He studied at Rome University and established a successful law practice. By 1932 his anti-Fascist views made his position untenable and he fled to England (ironically his one film appearance was as a boastful Fascist air marshal in Leslie Howard's 'The First of the Few', 1942). Living in a basement flat in South Kensington, London, del Giudice made a living giving Italian lessons and established contact with the large community of European exiles working within the British film industry. In 1937 he set up Two Cities Films with fellow Italian Mario Zampi. The company's first film, 'French without Tears' (1939), typified del Giudice's approach, bringing together a promising young playwright, Terence Rattigan, with a promising young director, Anthony Asquith, and allowing them untrammelled creative freedom to make a film they were enthusiastically committed to. 
Two Cities' progress was halted by the outbreak of the Second World War. Early in 1940 del Giudice and Zampi were interned on the Isle of Man as enemy aliens. Zampi was shipped out to Canada but del Giudice was released in September. He brought in Anthony Havelock-Alan, a successful producer of 'quota quickies', to help him revive the fortunes of Two Cities and approached Noel Coward with the idea of making a film about the Royal Navy. Coward's experience with screen adaptations of his plays had been less than happy but del Giudice's willingness to allow him complete creative control tempted him to write a screenplay based on the naval experiences of his friend Lord Louis Mountbatten. Despite the opposition of the Ministry of Information to a film centring on a lost battle and a sunk ship, it was turned into a highly successful film -- 'In Which We Serve' (1942) -- directed by Coward in collaboration with David Lean. 

'In Which We Serve' was the top British box-office film of 1942 and was more successful in America than any other British film during the war. Del Giudice had had to struggle hard to raise the budget -- a much bigger one than that of any previous Two Cities film -- but he and his company were now firmly established. Critically and commercially successful films such as Leslie Howard's 'The Gentle Sex' (1943), Carol Reed's 'The Way Ahead' (1944), and David Lean's 'This Happy Breed' (1944), triumphantly vindicated del Giudice's policy of choosing talented film-makers and allowing them the freedom to make the best films they were capable of with as little interference as possible. In this he was fortunate in receiving the financial support of J. Arthur Rank who was pursuing a similar policy with his Independent Producers' company. Rank initially offered a distribution guarantee for Two Cities' films, but as del Giudice became more ambitious, he came to rely increasingly on Rank's financial support, and when the budget for Olivier's 'Henry V' (1944) soared towards $500,000 he was forced to cede control of Two Cities to Rank. 
Del Giudice remained at the helm of his company but the lavishness of his film budgets made him highly vulnerable to the criticisms of Rank's right-hand man, the accountant John Davis. In 1947, after protracted disputes over Olivier's second Shakespeare adaptation, 'Hamlet' (1948), del Giudice resigned to set up his own independent company, Pilgrim Pictures. Two Cities continued as a Rank subsidiary but produced very little of interest before being merged into the Rank Organization at the end of 1949. Pilgrim also fared badly. After two interesting and modestly successful films -- the Boulting brothers' 'The Guinea Pig' (1948) and Peter Ustinov's 'Private Angelo' (1949) -- Pilgrim produced a film written and co-directed by Bernard Miles, 'A Chance of a Lifetime' (1950). Its story, about a workers' co-operative, was hardly more radical than an Ealing comedy, but it fell foul of the cinema circuit bookers who decided it was too political and it was given a lukewarm and poorly publicized release. Pilgrim tilted into bankruptcy and del Giudice, disgusted with the way in which the British film industry operated, returned to Italy in 1950. 
Though in the early 1950s del Giudice was full of plans to make films with his friends Roberto Rossellini, Ingrid Bergman, and Errol Flynn, he was never able to re-establish himself and he died in poverty in Fiesole, near Florence, on 31 December 1962. Del Giudice's generosity and flamboyance had their counterparts in indulgence and extravagance. Rank's biographer, Alan Wood, presents an unforgettable image of del Giudice boating down the river to his luxury mansion in Buckinghamshire, imperiously ordering other craft out of his way. But an extraordinary number of British wartime classics were Two Cities films. Del Giudice's arguments for quality cinema, and his rage against the rigid exhibition system which allowed films only three days or a week in a cinema, before being moved on, fundamentally challenged the idea of film as ephemeral entertainment. The increasing erosion of cinema's mass audience as television continued to take hold lent weight to del Giudice's case for films which would attract discerning audiences to art house cinemas, and the approach he advocated can be seen as a viable and attractive option which might well have proved more fruitful than the inflexible course that the production, distribution, and exhibition of film in Britain actually pursued. 


@@@@@


doc= 56599


James, Charles Wilson Brega (1906-1978), fashion designer, was born on 18 July 1906 at Agincourt House, Camberley, Surrey, the son of Ralph Ernest Haweis James and his wife, Louise Enders Brega ('b'. 1874). His father came from a Cornish landowning family, and was a professional soldier, engineer, and instructor at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. His mother was descended from one of the wealthy founding families of Chicago. Charles James, as he was later to be known, was to retain his English nationality together with the right to reside permanently in America. 
After a childhood spent mainly in London, James attended New Beacon School, Sevenoaks (1914-18), and Hopkins School, Lake Placid, New York, USA (1919), before a brief spell at Harrow School in 1919. Although he achieved a certain artistic success, his career at Harrow was terminated after a year for what his father described as idleness, sloppy friends, and sexual escapades. James then spent a year in the architect's office of Samuel Insull, the utilities magnate of Chicago, for whom his father worked. Despite spending much of his time making batik scarves, he absorbed enough of the principles of technical design to provide a credible basis for his subsequent assumption of the role of architect or engineer of fashion. 
James's career in fashion began in 1926. Working with a friend, Mme de Launay, he opened a millinery shop, Boucheron, in Chicago, moving briefly to New York in 1929, 'en route' for London. He had expanded his range to include garments, made to order as well as retail. Mary Lewis, the fashion buyer for Best & Co., New York, had become a steady patron and was subsequently guarantor of his US work permit. His first London atelier, at 1 Bruton Street, lasted only a year before liquidation, and in the pre-war years James divided his time between London, Paris, and New York. 
James's skill with cutting and draping was well suited to the modes of the time and despite constant financial insecurity, eccentric business methods, and unreliable delivery times, both his retail and his wholesale clientele steadily increased. Two of his creations in particular were noteworthy: the Ribbon cape, created in 1937 at a time of financial crisis, and made from Colcombet of St Etienne; old stock ribbons, and his padded jacket of 1938, referred to by Salvador Dali as the first soft sculpture. Both items became fashion classics, unquestionably original as well as wearable. 
In 1939 James left for New York where his first significant commercial association was with Elizabeth Arden, of the cosmetics and fashion firm. In 1944 the partnership was dissolved amid complaints of design piracy from James and of extravagance from Arden. Subsequent contracts with many of the main American wholesale clothing manufacturers tended to run a similar course, despite the undoubted style and popularity of James's work. A lawsuit with Samuel Winston in 1954, though won by James, proved particularly costly to him. James's range was wide, from couture to supermarket uniforms, children's clothes to jewellery and furniture. His dress forms to a revised module were a cherished project. Original models were sold through quality department stores in the US and UK. 
Wealthy, socially notable private clients such as Mrs Millicent Huttleston Rogers and Mrs Randolph William Hearst doubled as patrons, ever willing to pay by retainer, and regarding the clothes as works of art, lending them for exhibition and donating them to museums. They shared Cristobal Balenciaga's opinion that James was 'America's greatest couturier, the world's best and only dressmaker who has raised it from an applied art to a pure art form' (Coleman, 9). 
The three-dimensional aspect of clothing, the interactions of body mass, movement, and textile, were salient features of James's designs. A significant innovation was his development of master patterns, used in a number of garment contexts over many years. A perfectionist, he developed this aspect with obsessional consistency, and he later claimed that a sleeve had cost him $20,000 and three years' work. His method involved drawing, flat-patterning, and draping on the model and on occasion on himself. He was tireless in exposition, to students, in films, and in exhibitions; and at his insistence preparatory work was given to museums, together with the clothes to which it relates. The designs were recorded in a series of drawings by Antonio Lopez. 
James's prices were high and, despite his own claim to be the most expensive dressmaker in the world (Coleman, 84), James never attained the $500,000 turnover that in 1950 he had estimated as necessary for the maintenance of a design studio. There were injections of family money but even chameleon-like changes of corporate identity proved inadequate to protect him from requests for back-taxes, and by 1964 he had retired from the commercial fashion world. 
Nevertheless, the New York years ensured James's recognition as a designer of great originality. In 1950 he received the Coty fashion award for 'Great mastery of colour and artistry in draping'; in 1953 the Niemann Marcus award for 'Distinguished services to the industry'; in 1962 a citation from Woolens and Worsteds of America Inc.; and in 1975 the first Guggenheim fine art fellowship awarded to a fashion designer. 
James had various male partners but on 8 July 1954 he married Nancy Leigh Gregory; they had a son and a daughter. In 1961 they parted, the family remaining in Chicago and Charles James returning to New York, where his last years were spent sporadically supported by former clients in an apartment in the atmospheric Chelsea Hotel. Cared for by his friend and associate Homer Layne, James was tirelessly willing to work with students and discuss new projects. Despite long-term ill health, the legacy of drug use, diabetes, and kidney disease, he remained superficially unchanged, small, spare, always dark haired, restlessly energetic, endlessly talkative, unforgetful of slights or triumphs, until his death from pneumonia at the Chelsea Hotel, New York on 23 September 1978. 
Although a projected autobiography was not completed, the Brooklyn Museum in 1982 organized a major retrospective of his work, and a pioneering study by E. A. Coleman, 'The Genius of Charles James', appeared in 1988. 


@@@@@


doc= 56601


William Kimber (1882-1945), was born at no. 55 Court, Summer Lane, Birmingham, on 7 February 1882, the second son in the family of at least four sons and one daughter of William Kimber (1854/5-1930), brass founder, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Farrell, a laundress who had previously worked as an electro-plater. He became a brass caster, but aged nineteen was imprisoned in Winson Green gaol for wounding. By then he had a child with Maud Beatrice Harbridge (1882/3-1926), a bedstead ornamenter, whom he later married on 1 November 1902; she was the daughter of John Harbridge, bedstead caster. They had another daughter (a further daughter died in infancy) but by 1911 Kimber had abandoned them. He described himself as a bookmaker and punter (better on horse-races) from Bordesley in Birmingham, but he was really a gang leader. Since the late 1800s 'roughs' from Birmingham had terrorized many racecourses, and especially those in the south of England, and in the early twentieth century it seems that they were joined by others from south London. 


