@@@@@


doc= 56607


Paterson, Andrew Barton (1864-1941), poet and journalist, was born on 17 February 1864 at Nyrambla station near Orange, New South Wales, Australia, the first of seven children of Scottish-born grazier Andrew Bogle Paterson (1833-1889) and his Australian-born wife, Rose Isabella Barton (1844-1893). Bartie, as he was known to family and friends, spent his early years with his family at Buckinbah sheep station near Yeoval, New South Wales, and then at Illalong, where he lived from 1870 to 1874. He rode a horse 4 miles to and from the school at Binalong. 
At twelve Bartie went to live with his widowed maternal grandmother, Emily Mary Barton ('nee' Darvall), at her house, Rockend, in Gladesville, Sydney, where he resided until he was twenty. Emily had lived in Yorkshire, Brussels, and Boulogne before migrating with her family to Australia and marrying Robert Johnston Barton, whom she had met on the ship from England. Emily, who wrote poetry herself, had a formative influence on her grandson's literary interests and skills. Paterson attended Sydney grammar school from 1875 to early 1881, when, after a severe bout of typhoid, he withdrew from the pursuit of university matriculation and sought entry to the legal profession. He commenced as an articled clerk in the Sydney office of Herbert Salwey in 1881 and in 1886 he was admitted as a solicitor to the supreme court of New South Wales. In 1888 he went into partnership with John William Street at 85 Pitt Street, Sydney. 
Paterson's first published poem, 'El Mahdi to the Australian troops', which appeared anonymously in the Sydney 'Bulletin' on 28 February 1885, signalled a young 'radical' prepared to criticize the British campaign in the Sudan and Australian involvement in it. In 1889 he published at his own expense his pamphlet 'Australia for the Australians', which argued the necessity for land reform combined with protection. In the 1880s and 1890s Paterson's poems were published in the 'Bulletin', the 'Sydney Mail', the 'Lone Hand', the 'Australian Town and Country Journal', and elsewhere. His first and most famous book of poems, 'The Man from Snowy River and other Verses', was published by Angus and Robertson in 1895, and 7000 copies were sold in a few months. Banjo, his pen-name, was borrowed from the name of a station racehorse. Reviews were positive in Australia, and in Britain the 'Times' reviewer compared its author to Kipling. The book's title ballad became Paterson's signature poem, though another ballad, 'Clancy of the Overflow', provided two of his most quoted lines: '
And he sees the vision splendid of the sunlit plains extended 

And at night the wondrous glory of the everlasting stars. 
('Complete Works', 1.105)' A manufactured 'debate' in verse between Paterson and Henry Lawson in the 'Bulletin' in 1892 accentuated differences between the two best-known Australian writers of their generation. Lawson presented himself as the realist, observing the harsh terrain of his homeland from on foot; Paterson offered a more romantic and adventurous landscape as if from horseback. 
There has been some dispute about the origins of 'Waltzing Matilda', but most evidence points to Paterson writing the words to the tune of the march 'Craigielea' (adapted from the Scottish song 'Thou bonnie wood of Craigielea'), when he visited Winton in north-west Queensland with his fiancee Sarah Riley (whom he did not marry) in 1895. The song was popularized in its modern form by Marie Cowan's adaptation of Paterson's words to her tune in 1903, and by its use as an advertising jingle for Billy Tea for the tea-distributing firm Inglis & Co. 'Waltzing Matilda' tells of a swagman who evades the law by drowning himself in a billabong; its anti-authoritarian sentiments have appealed to subsequent generations of Australians. A national poll in 1977 placed 'Waltzing Matilda' second behind 'Advance Australia Fair', which became the national anthem in 1984. 
Paterson was fascinated with war, but his crooked right arm, broken several times in childhood accidents, probably prevented any front-line action. On 28 October 1899 he set sail for the South African War on the 'Kent' with the first contingent of the New South Wales lancers and their horses as special correspondent for the 'Sydney Morning Herald'. In South Africa he was attached to General French's column and witnessed the surrender of Bloemfontein, the capture of Pretoria, and the relief of Kimberley. He was appointed as a correspondent for Reuters. He wrote twenty-two poems over this period, which are included in the posthumously published 'Boer War Dispatches' (1983). These writings reveal a developing sympathy for the Boers, but largely ignore the black South Africans and never question Britain's right to be in South Africa. In dispatches, articles, and memoirs Paterson wrote vivid pen-portraits of Olive Schreiner, lords Kitchener and Roberts, Sir Alfred Milner, Cecil Rhodes, and fellow journalist Winston Churchill ('the most curious combination of ability and swagger'). When Paterson heard of Harry (the Breaker) Morant's court martial and execution by firing squad in Pretoria in 1902, he could not at first believe the guilt of the carefree, theatrical young man he had met in Sydney in 1893, but as further evidence came his way from Morant's defence counsel in South Africa, he reluctantly acceded that justice had been done. 
Paterson returned to Australia in September 1900 and sailed for China in July 1901 to cover the Boxer uprising for the 'Sydney Morning Herald'. He met and interviewed there a fellow Australian, G. E. (Chinese) Morrison, the 'Times' correspondent for China. Paterson went on to England, where he was a guest of Kipling at his home in Sussex in the winter of 1901-2, and returned to Australia in time for the publication of his second book of poems, 'Rio Grande's Last Race and other Poems' (1902). 
Paterson married Alice Emily Walker (1877-1963) of Tenterfield station on 8 April 1903 and they settled into their first home at West Hall, Queen Street, Woollahra, in Sydney. A daughter, Grace, was born in 1904 and a son, Hugh, in 1906. Paterson had left his legal practice, and in 1903 accepted an invitation to edit the Sydney 'Evening News', where he remained until 1908, when he became resident part owner of a 40,000 acre property at Coodra Vale, near Wee Jasper, in the southern highlands of New South Wales. In 1911 the family moved to a wheat farm south of Grenfell called Glen Esk. He collected and edited an influential book of folk ballads, 'Old Bush Songs' (1905), and saw publication of his novel, 'An Outback Marriage' (1906), which had been serialized in the Melbourne 'Leader' in 1900. A treatise, 'Racehorses and Racing', was not published until 1983. 
When Britain declared war on Germany in August 1914 Paterson gained authorization to travel as 'special commissioner' for the 'Sydney Morning Herald' and honorary veterinarian on a ship of men and horses bound for Europe. He drove an ambulance for the Australian Voluntary Hospital in Wimereux before returning to Sydney in July 1915 and enlisting at the age of fifty-one in the remount service. As a lieutenant in the Australian military forces he travelled to the Middle East, where he served for three and a half years behind the lines, gaining promotion to major. Paterson returned to Australia in 1919, and he and Alice Emily (who had worked on voluntary hospital service in Egypt) moved back to Woollahra. He resumed journalism for Sydney newspapers, became a regular visitor to the Australian Club, and contributed occasional talks to the Australian Broadcasting Commission (founded 1932). He sat for a portrait by John Longstaff, which won the 1935 Archibald prize and hangs in the Art Gallery of New South Wales. He wrote a five-part series of reminiscences for the 'Sydney Morning Herald' in 1939 and was appointed a CBE in the same year. After signs of heart trouble he was admitted to hospital and died in Sydney on 5 February 1941. He was cremated at the Northern Suburbs crematorium after a brief Presbyterian service. 
Paterson's younger contemporary Norman Lindsay described him as an 'aristocrat' in body and spirit who took life as 'a high adventure in action, even to the risk of a broken neck' (Lindsay, 77, 82). Clement Semmler's study 'Banjo of the Bush' (1966; 2nd edn, 1974) explored his contribution to a legend of Australian identity forged in the bush. Colin Roderick's biography, 'Banjo Paterson: Poet by Accident' (1993), emphasized his abiding interests in sport and war and their interrelatedness. In a late essay, 'Looking backward' (1938), Paterson himself judiciously described his role in literary history as having provided 'footprints preserved for posterity' in 'a new country' ('Complete Works', 2.759). 


@@@@@


doc= 56611


Novello, (Joseph) Alfred (1810-1896), music publisher, was born in London on 12 August 1810, the eldest son of Vincent Novello (1781-1861), music publisher, arranger, and composer, and Mary Sabilla Novello, 'nee' Hehl (1789-1854). Apprenticed to the York music dealer, John Robinson, from 1824 to 1829, he commenced business in Frith Street, Soho, in 1830. Initially, he inherited the catalogue already established by his father and one of his most important early ventures was to complete publication of Vincent Novello's arrangement of Purcell's 'Sacred Works' (1832). In 1836 he both secured the copyright to Mendelssohn's 'St Paul' and launched the 'Musical World', perhaps England's first modern music periodical, actions which much enhanced his reputation. A fine bass singer, he performed in concerts and at provincial festivals and was a member of the Lincoln's Inn chapel choir. His 'Concise Explanation of the Gregorian Note' (1842) was a useful contribution to the growing interest in plainsong. 
Novello's reputation ultimately rests, however, on his work as a publisher of 'cheap' music. In 1842 he published Joseph Mainzer's sight-singing manual 'Singing for the Million' and the weekly 'Mainzer's Musical Times and Singing-Class Circular'. These were central texts of the mass singing-class movement, enthusiastically supported by those concerned with working-class morality in an age of political and industrial radicalism. He took over Mainzer's journal in 1844, including in its pages a musical supplement in the octavo format, adopted as the company standard from 1847. As the 'Musical Times', the journal eventually became a major periodical, especially for amateurs. These ventures propelled Novello's business toward mass production, a process encouraged by his growing awareness of the burgeoning amateur choral movement that he encountered on promotional tours in the provinces. In August 1846 he made the first of many price reductions, publishing the vocal score and keyboard accompaniment for 'Messiah' for 6's'. 6died: previously, a 'Messiah' piano score could cost up to 1 guinea. Further reductions followed and by 1859 a pocket edition of 'Messiah' and other major oratorios was available for 1's'. 4died, with shilling editions following from 1862. 
Novello established his own printing company in 1847 and, following the example of William Clowes, he opted to use musical type rather than engraved prints. This method, although expensive, facilitated the extended print runs upon which his pricing policy depended. He was opposed in this by London printing unions and he utilized non-union labour in order to circumvent their objections. In the late 1840s and 1850s he campaigned vigorously against the 'taxes on knowledge' (duties on paper, advertisements, and other tax burdens), although the claims made by later writers associated with the Novello Company that he was 'largely' or 'solely' responsible for their eventual abolition, were hugely exaggerated. 
After Novello announced his retirement in October 1856 the business gradually passed to Henry Littleton, a senior employee who became a partner in 1861 and sole proprietor in 1866. It has been suggested that Novello's appetite for business was largely fuelled by devotion to his mother and the desire to fulfil ambitions she held for him; her death in 1854 released him from any such obligations. Novello retired with his father and sisters Mary and Sabilla, first to Nice and then, in 1861, to Genoa. Although maintaining an editorial interest in the 'Musical Times' until 1863, he devoted ever more time to gardening and the scientific and technological experimentation that had long interested him. He died in Genoa on 16 July 1896, leaving an estate of $63,386, money accrued not only from his publishing business but from well-considered investment in the railway and steel industries. Hagiographic literature of the late nineteenth century tended to portray Novello as the philanthropically inspired inventor of the Victorian choral tradition. Rather, he was an extremely astute businessman, albeit one guided by a strong sense of moral purpose, who recognized the strength of an existing market and nourished and expanded it with determination and skill. 


@@@@@


doc= 56612


Ogden, William (fl. c.1790), bookmaker, is a figure whose life is obscure, but is nevertheless credited as the 'father of bookmaking' ('Bookmaking then and now', 78). 
For centuries horse-racing involved the matching of two horses by owners who wished to bet against each other. These contests were often foregone conclusions and were sterile for betting purposes. Consequently by the late 1750s sweepstakes had come into vogue. Such races included more horses and so had a variety of outcomes. The increased number of owners involved in a contest meant that there was a selection of odds against their horses winning. This meant that a clever owner could bet in a more sophisticated fashion. He could cover himself against the loss of his horse and the prize money by backing other runners to win. 
This system of hedging bets was adopted enthusiastically and it attracted professional betters who were called 'blacklegs'. With the owners they gathered at Hyde Park Corner at Tattersall's, where there was a subscription room for patrons 'to transact their Turf financial business' and to make bets well before a particular contest was run (Fairfax-Blakeborough, 7). At the racecourses betters gathered at a betting chair, as Thomas Rowlandson showed in a drawing in 1789. Their aim was 'to get round' in their transactions, to make sure that they did not lose whatever the result. These bets were laid on a one-to-one basis and no person stood up to take bets from all comers. 
It is believed that Ogden 'made his appearance about 1790 or thereabouts' (Hodgson, 2). Strictly speaking, he was not a bookmaker in the modern sense. He was a practitioner of 'betting one with the field', favouring a single horse in a race and offering one price for the rest of the runners collectively. Unlike a bookie he did not offer individual odds for each horse, but in contrast to other betters he was prepared to lay bets on all the runners. Ogden was nevertheless one of a number of men who were the architects of the final stage in the development of professional betting into bookmaking, as sweepstake racing became dominant in the early nineteenth century. Nothing is known about his death, but he was reputed to be 'the only betting man who was ever admitted to the club at Newmarket' (The Druid, 46-7). 


@@@@@


doc= 56615


Parnell, Valentine Charles (1892-1972), theatre manager and impresario, was born at 7 Trelawney Road, Hackney, London, on 14 February 1892, one of six sons of Thomas Frederick Parnell (1862-1957), journalist, and his wife, Elizabeth White. His father was for a time editor of the 'Hackney Gazette' but was better known as a ventriloquist who used the name Fred Russell to avoid association with the Irish politician Charles Parnell. With his puppet 'Coster Joe', he was much in demand as a music-hall act between 1896 and 1930 and was honoured with an OBE. 
Val Parnell was educated at Godwin College, Margate, but at the age of thirteen he began work in the offices of Sir Walter de Frece's expanding circuit of music-halls. In 1914 he enlisted in the Queen's Own 20th regiment and served with this throughout the war. In 1918 he rejoined de Frece, and when the circuit was taken over by Charles Gulliver's London Theatres of Variety (LTV) in 1919, Parnell became booking manager for ten of Gulliver's provincial theatres. Finding he was unable to book top acts because of the competition of the more powerful Moss Empires circuit, Parnell responded by booking a greater number of acts for shorter turns, thus providing a show which ran faster than those of his rivals. He was later to use the same 'high-speed variety' technique -- though this time with big names -- to revive the fortunes of the London Palladium. 
In 1928 LTV's circuit was bought by Sir Walter Gibbons who, with the financier F. A. Szarvasy, was establishing the General Theatres Corporation (GTC) as a nationwide circuit of cinemas and music-halls. Parnell became booking manager for GTC's variety theatres, but the corporation proved to be an ill-starred venture and was rapidly swallowed by the rival Gaumont-British Picture Corporation. George Black assumed responsibility for GTC's variety halls, and also from November 1932, for about thirty Moss Empires which Gaumont-British had bought up to forestall them being converted into cinemas. With Parnell as his assistant, Black set out to make the London Palladium, the most impressive of GTC's halls, the flagship of a substantial circuit devoted to live entertainment within a corporation set up to exploit the potential of the cinema. Together the two men kept alive the British music-hall tradition for a period of thirty years after the coming of the 'talkies' had seemed to spell its doom. 
After seeing a revue at the Nottingham Hippodrome where comedians Jimmy Nervo and Teddy Knox persistently disrupted the acts of the other performers, Parnell had the idea of teaming them with two other comic duos, Charlie Naughton and Jimmy Gold and Billy Caryll and his wife Hilda Mundy in a 'Crazy Week' at the Palladium. Other 'Crazy Weeks' followed and by the middle of 1932 the classic Crazy Gang team had been assembled with Bud Flanagan and Chesney Allen, and the French-talking juggler Monsewer Eddie Gray, replacing Caryll and Mundy. The Crazy Gang were to be the mainstay of the Palladium programmes until 1940 when for a time they went their separate ways and George Black introduced a series of wartime revue shows. 
In March 1945 Black died and Parnell succeeded him as managing director of Moss Empires and director of GTC in charge of their variety halls. At the Palladium Parnell restored classic twice nightly variety bills, but with a major innovation: most of his top of the bill artists were American and many of them were Hollywood film stars. The new policy began unpromisingly with Mickey Rooney, whose brash egocentricity offended austerity-ridden British audiences. It was triumphantly vindicated by Danny Kaye, in 1948 only a minor film star but one whose abilities as a live performer attracted great admiration in Britain. Parnell chose his acts carefully, relying either on performers who had a background in vaudeville as well as the cinema, or on artists like Frank Sinatra with a wide experience of live performance. Parnell was criticized for neglecting home-grown talent, but there were few British artists who could fill the 2200 seats of the Palladium, and Parnell was responsible for the return of one of those who could -- Gracie Fields. 
In 1955 Parnell began a new career as a television executive, becoming managing director and subsequently chief executive of Associated Television, for which company he produced the hugely successful 'Sunday Night at the London Palladium'. At its height in the early sixties the show reached an audience of over twenty million people. In September 1962 Parnell resigned from his television posts to give younger executives a chance. He was already over seventy and was succeeded by his deputy, Lew (later Lord) Grade. 
Val Parnell divorced his first wife, Dolly, in 1914 and married Helen Howell, a dancer, in 1938; this marriage was dissolved in 1963. Three years later he married the singer Aileen Cochrane. He also had a long-term relationship with the actress (and star of ATV's 'Crossroads') (Joan) Noel Gordon (1919-1985). Parnell had one adopted son. He died from a heart attack on 22 September 1972 at 64 Portsea Hall, Portsea Place, London, aged eighty. A big man -- 6 feet 2 inches tall with the stature of a heavyweight boxer -- Val Parnell was renowned as a tough but fair businessman. He dressed very modestly, and his appearance was said to suggest success in banking rather than in the theatre. A gift from Frank Sinatra bearing the inscription 'To the real star of the Palladium, Val Parnell' indicates the admiration he commanded in the field of show business. 
'For forty years', commented Parnell's obituary in 'The Times', 'much that was best in variety and light entertainment passed through his hands to be presented with skill, speed, slickness and panache' ('The Times', 25 Sept 1972). 


@@@@@


doc= 56617


Pickersgill, Joseph (1849/50-1920), racecourse bookmaker, grew up in Leeds, but little else is known about his origins. He began work as butcher's boy, after which he may have become an off-course bookmaker at 'The Midden'. This was an open space where bookies gathered because street betting was not banned in Leeds in the late nineteenth century. It is doubtful if Pickersgill did lay bets at The Midden, as one bookie recalled that it was used first in 1886, by which date Pickersgill was already a wealthy racecourse bookmaker. 
What is certain is that by the 1870s Pickersgill was one of a number of prominent layers (bookmakers) from Lancashire and Yorkshire. They were men who led the market not only on northern racecourses but also on those in the south of England. Pickersgill himself 'became one of the big noises in the profession' (Fairfax-Blakeborough, 'Memories', 105). He achieved a high reputation and was familiarly known as Honest Joe ('The Times', 24 August 1920). Edward VII always betted with him, as did many aristocrats. 
For a short time Pickersgill ran his own horses, training them with James Watson of Richmond, Yorkshire. His colours were registered as white, green seams, and black cap. Pickersgill had only one successful runner, Robbie Burns, which won several races as a three-year old in 1879. He 'enjoyed the fun and 'thrill' of having his own horses running, but found it was damaging both his pocket and his reputation because of the ill-unfounded suspicions of those who are so ready to assume that owners can arrange for their horses to win when the odds suit them, and to be down the course when the betting market was not favourable. (Fairfax-Blakeborough, 'More memories', 89)' In 1881 a reporter for the 'Sporting Mirror' accused Pickersgill of acting in an unsportsmanlike manner in managing his horses. He castigated the bookmaker for withdrawing his well-fancied horse, Dominic, from the Ebor handicap at York at five o'clock on the afternoon before the race. 
Wearying of such criticism and of the cost of owning horses, Pickersgill concentrated on his bookmaking activities. He was very successful and invested much of his profits in property and other businesses, founding the firm of Chorley and Pickersgill Ltd, printers and lithographers. A racing writer described Pickersgill as 'a very quiet, even cultured man' who 'possessed a personality and all the instincts of a gentleman' (Fairfax-Blakeborough, 'Memories', 105). Nothing is known about his wife, but Pickersgill's will stipulated that 'his son should never have any connection with the Turf or have a bet' (Hodgson, 3). Pickersgill died on 23 August 1920 at Bardon Hill, Weetwood, Leeds, aged seventy. His death certificate described him as a turf commission agent. 


@@@@@


doc= 56620


Charles Enderby (1797-1876), born on 21 November 1797, was admitted a freeman of the Coopers' Company on 23 November 1819. He was a founder fellow of the Royal Geographical Society and fellow of both the Royal Society and the Linnean Society. An enthusiastic promoter of trade with New Zealand, whose colonization he advocated, he also encouraged the commercial and scientific exploration of Antarctic waters. To this latter purpose he dispatched Captain John Biscoe on a voyage of discovery (1830-32), which resulted in Biscoe's circumnavigation of the Antarctic continent and made history with the discovery of Enderby Land and Graham Land, the latter being claimed for the crown. In 1836-9 another Enderby captain, John Balleny, discovered the eponymous Antarctic islands as well as land to the east of Sabrina Coast. These voyages, though commercially unrewarding, earned Charles Enderby considerable kudos. In 1847, at the suggestion of certain London merchants, Enderby published a plan for the reinvigoration of the British whaling industry by establishing a whaling station and colony on the Auckland Islands. The Enderby brothers' grant to the islands was subsequently transferred to the British Southern Whale Fishery Company, a royal charter was secured, and Charles Enderby was appointed as lieutenant-governor. In 1849 the settlement was established and whaling commenced. Few whales were caught, however, and as governor Charles Enderby proved a failure. The company was subsequently declared bankrupt and in 1852 the colony was abandoned. 
Commenting on this final phase of the Enderby history the historian Hugh Robert Mill wrote: 'There is, perhaps, no other instance of a private mercantile firm undertaking so extensive a series of voyages of discovery without much encouragement in the way of pecuniary returns' (H. R. Mill, 'Siege of the South Pole', 1905, 146). Charles Enderby died intestate on 31 August 1876, aged seventy-eight, at his sister's house, 12 Neville Terrace, West Brompton, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 56622


Robinson, Crutch (fl. 1804-1830), bookmaker, played an important role in the development of betting at horse races, but nothing is known about his life off the course. He was disabled, and dependent on a crutch (hence his nickname). 
In the early nineteenth century Robinson and others emerged as the first 'bookies'. They stood up at racecourses and made a book on particular contests, trying to ensure a profit whatever the outcome of a race. They offered odds against each horse winning the contest; they took bets from all comers; and they adjusted the prices available according to the weight of money betted on the different runners. Robinson was joined by men like Jemmy Bland and Richards. All were from working-class backgrounds: Bland had been a post boy, Richards started out as a Leicestershire stockinger, and of Robinson it was stated that his origin was of the lowest. There was a tradition that he had been a stable boy and that he been kicked by a horse, an injury which made him lame. Often illiterate, these bookies were nevertheless clever at mental arithmetic and their memories of odds and bets were 'as retentive as a vice' (Rice, 269). 
Robinson vied with Bland and Jerry Cloves as the leading figure among the first bookmakers, accepting bets as great as $1000. As professional betting men they were often winners against wealthy upper-class amateur betters. Their profits gained them prosperous lifestyles but their success also drew much opprobrium from writers connected with the aristocracy. Robinson was decried as a 'domineering, uncouth being', his detractor exclaiming that the spectacle of a disabled old man: 'blanched by time, shouting out his odds, and dealing in the lowest bitter sarcasm and racing slang, either mounted on a four-legged brute as rough as himself, or leaning on his trusty crutch in the midst of the crushing throng, was an irreverent and disgusting sight. (Sylvanus, 127)' Another writer felt that: 'nature must have broken the mould in which she formed the crafty Robinson, as he leant on his crutch, with his back against the Newmarket Betting Rings, and, with his knowing quiet leer and one hand in his pocket, argued about Staley Bridge Radicals with the then Lord Stanley, or offered 'to lay agin Plenipo'. (The Druid, 47-8)' Denigrated by some, Robinson was regarded by others as 'withal a straightforward man' (Thormanby, 26). 
Clearly a man of great intelligence, Robinson was knowledgeable about politics as well as horses, was alert and able to make complicated mathematical calculations in his head, and could be an 'amiable coloquist' ('Epsom Races', 385). Robinson had much in common with 'Hump' Chippendale, the bookmaker in Benjamin Disraeli's novel 'Sybil'. Both men had a physical disability -- the one a severe limp, the other a hunchback -- and each was 'a democratic leg, who loved to fleece a noble, and thought all men were born equal' (Disraeli, 6). Robinson spoke in a broad dialect, 'a cross between Lancashire and Yorkshire' (Thormanby, 26). When he retired he went back to the north of England, setting up home on the confines of Cheshire. It is not known when he died but in 1850 it was stated that he and Bland had 'for some years been gathered to their fathers' ('Epsom Races', 385). 


@@@@@


doc= 56624


Hasluck, Frederick William (1878-1920), archaeologist and ethnologist, was born at Eythan Lodge, Southgate, Middlesex, on 16 February 1878, the son of Percy Pedley Hasluck and his wife, Edith Louisa ('nee' Battley). He was educated at the Leys School, Cambridge (May 1893-July 1897), where he won a prize for his original drawings of Cambridgeshire antiquities. He then went to King's College, Cambridge, with a foundation scholarship, gaining a first in the classical tripos part one and (with distinction) part two, and thereafter a fellowship. He spent the years from 1899 to 1916 mainly in Greece and Anatolia. He was noted for his gentleness, refinement, and gift for friendship. His witty letters, very much influenced by the allusive style of Edward Lear, charmed his friends. Extracts of his letters to Richard Dawkins were published by his widow in 1926 as 'Letters on Religion and Folklore'. He was well known in the Levant as a traveller and latterly as a student of the Bektashi order of dervishes then to be found in Albania, Serbia, and northern Greece. He was widely believed to know more of their customs and history than they did themselves. 
In 1901 Hasluck became a student of the British School of Archaeology at Athens and in 1905 its librarian for one year. From 1905 to 1910 and again from 1911 to 1915 he was assistant director and librarian of the British School, building up the library holdings in early travellers and in medieval and post-medieval Balkan culture and history. On 26 September 1912 he married Margaret Masson Hardie (1885-1948) ['see 'Hasluck, Margaret Masson], who joined the British School in 1911, and who shared his interests in contemporary Balkan culture. They did not have children. In the same period he travelled widely in the Greek islands and in Anatolia with the school's director, Richard Dawkins. These travels resulted in more than fifty articles and three books, building on the fieldwork of Sir William Ramsay, with whom he often disagreed. Most of this work, dealing with medieval and modern Smyrna, the development of the monasteries of Athos, and Genoese and Venetian influences on the Aegean, remains of great value and some of it still the only work in the field. His study of the city of Cyzicus and its environs ('Cyzicus', 1910) was his only foray into classical archaeology and, for its time, a model of competent field archaeology. It is still a starting point for any research on that area. His other books were 'Athos and its Monasteries', published posthumously in 1924, and, with H. H. Jewel, 'The Church of Our Lady of the Hundred Gates at Paros' which appeared in 1920: both works are still consulted. In the spring of 1913 Hasluck visited Konia and became interested in the interrelationship of Christianity and Islam. The fruit of his labours was the monumental 'Christianity and Islam under the Sultans', published posthumously in 1929. It is a fine example of interdisciplinary research and writing notable not just for its arcane material but for the sensitivity, acumen, and sheer knowledge of its author. This was Hasluck's most important work. As a reference work it may be read as much for pleasure as for instruction. 
Hasluck's knowledge of the Levant was put to use in the summer of 1915 when he joined the intelligence department of the British legation in Athens, working among the refugees who came to the city. Something of his work in this role as well as insights into his character may be gleaned from Compton Mackenzie's 'First Athenian Memories' (1931). It was work which Hasluck did not enjoy and it certainly led to the breakdown of his health. In 1916 tuberculosis forced him to retire to France and in 1917 to a sanatorium, Beau Reveil, Leysin, Switzerland, where he died on 22 February 1920, a few days after his forty-second birthday. 
He was survived by his wife, Margaret. After his death she spent much time researching in Albania, living at Elbasan until April 1939, and editing Hasluck's manuscripts for publication, in addition to her own books. There is a wall monument in Hasluck's memory in the Penrose Library at the British School in Athens. 


@@@@@


doc= 56625


Cook, Samuel (1786-1861), Chartist, was born on 15 July 1786 at Trowbridge, Wiltshire, the son of Samuel Cook, a cloth manufacturer, and his wife, Amy. After his apprenticeship with a draper at Poole, Cook sought work in London, Birmingham, and Manchester. In 1810 he married Maria (1787/8-1827), the daughter of George Jones, a builder from Edgbaston, and they had six children. In partnership with his brother Joseph, Cook established a business in Liverpool, but it quickly ran into difficulties, and in 1818 the business was declared bankrupt. On 8 May 1819, following his release from debtors' prison, he moved to Gibraltar House, Dudley, where he established a draper's shop. The business was successful until 1843, when he was again declared bankrupt. In this shop Cook displayed a number of posters outlining political events, and the business became the focal point of radicalism in the Black Country. He was 'the radical conscience of middle-class Dudley, a dissident whose integrity was recognised by many who did not share his views' (Rowley and Taylor, 64). As a nonconformist Cook advocated the religious, social, and political rights of many fellow dissenters. He opposed church rates at Dudley from 1823 onwards, called for Catholic emancipation in 1829, and sought 'genuine democracy' in parochial administration and better working and living conditions in the town. 
In 1826, in his defence of the nailers' strike at Dudley and Lye, Cook accused the government of starving the local populace, and subsequently the Home Office arraigned him for seditious libel. He declined bail and was imprisoned at Worcester gaol. On 1 August 1827, in spite of the valiant efforts of his barrister, Sir John Campbell, Cook was convicted, forced to pay a $100 fine, and bound over to keep the peace. His release was greeted with great enthusiasm by a crowd reputed to be over 40,000 strong at Dudley. Tragedy, however, struck his family on 7 September 1827, when his wife died, aged thirty-nine, allegedly as a direct consequence of her last pregnancy. 
During the demand for parliamentary reform in the early 1830s, Cook expressed his middle-class radical sentiments with a series of reform posters and became the chairman of Dudley Political Union. In April 1832 he was accused of sedition, but the local magistrates found in favour of the defence, as there was insufficient evidence to convict him. In March 1836 Cook was not so successful, as he was accused and convicted of libel by Thomas Badger, an ardent tory magistrate, whom he blamed for corrupting the judicial process. 
After the passing of the 'Reform Bill' in 1832 Cook assisted the parliamentary career of Sir John Campbell, as well as expressing his views that the whig reforms had not gone far enough. In March 1834 he published 'Some of the Principles of Dudley Radicalism' -- a series of public statements which foreshadowed the Chartist demands of the late 1830s. Other publications from this period include 'To the Magistrates of the County of Worcester' (1830) and 'To All Genuine Reformers' (1835). On 19 July 1839, because of his association with the Chartist movement, Cook was arrested for holding an unlawful assembly at Dudley and was remanded on $300 bail. At his trial witnesses noted that Cook had encouraged a tumultuous crowd to take action against the Metropolitan Police, and had called for the abolition of the monarchy and the House of Lords. The jury convicted him, and Cook was imprisoned for six months. 
Released from prison in April 1840, Cook was 'quite unrepentant and vociferous in his criticisms of the conduct of the visiting magistrate in impounding letters he had written to his children' (Rowley and Taylor, 65). In January 1841 he was appointed as sub-treasurer of the Dudley National Charter Association and greatly assisted in the recruitment of new members. In support of the miners' strike of July and August 1842 Cook posted a number of purportedly inflammatory posters, and on 20 August he was arrested for advertising a Chartist rally in Birmingham. There is no evidence of any subsequent prosecution. 
In 1844 after his business had been declared bankrupt, Cook entered into a partnership with his son, Samuel Quartus Cook. From 1846 Cook became involved in the Chartist Land Company and in the following year contested the general election at Wolverhampton. Between 1845 and 1848 he supplied statistical information on mining accidents in south Staffordshire, helped promote the Dudley Mechanics' Institute from February 1848, and in the 1850s promoted the cause of trade unionism in the Black Country. Although Chartism had rapidly declined after 1848, Cook tried to revive its fortunes -- notably in August 1855, when he promoted the Staffordshire Chartist and Complete Suffrage Association. He continued to promote radical reform, helped to organize a miners' strike in May 1858, and petitioned for almshouses in 1859. He sponsored a number of self-help and discussion groups, particularly the Dudley Mutual Improvement Society, the Temple of Investigation, the Manhood Suffrage Association, and the Working Men's Institute, and remained committed to radicalism until his death on 8 December 1861. He was buried shortly afterwards at King Street Independent Chapel, Dudley, where his funeral was attended by a small number of mourners. It has been observed that Cook could have: 'lived a comfortable and prosperous life if he had, like most middle class people of the time, ignored the injustices and desperate poverty of the mass of the people. Instead he threw in his lot with the working class of Dudley, never flinching from the consequences. Tough, uncompromising... he is one of the local leaders entitled to a place of high honour in the annals of the British working class movement. (Barnsby, 61)' 



@@@@@


doc= 56627


Deakin, Joseph Thomas (1858-1937), railway worker and socialist, was born at Wednesbury, Staffordshire, on 11 August 1858, the son of Charles Deakin, a blacksmith, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Middleton, the daughter of a labourer. He was educated at Old Park British School, Wednesbury. On leaving at the age of twelve to start work at Wednesbury goods station, he was awarded the South Staffordshire Coal and Ironmasters' Association prize of a family 'Bible'. When he transferred to the ticket office at the passenger station in March 1890, his workmates presented him with copies of James Thorold Rogers's 'Six Centuries of Work and Wages: the History of English Labour' (1884) and J. J. Jusserand's 'English Wayfaring Life in the Middle Ages' (1889), 'in appreciation of his geniality and uniform kindness to all'. 
Deakin was an early convert to socialism and in 1887 he became a founder member of the Walsall Socialist Club. He was subsequently elected the club secretary and in this capacity attended the founding conference of the Second Socialist International in Paris in 1889 and its Brussels congress in 1891. 
Shortly after returning from Brussels, Deakin became involved with three fellow members of the Socialist Club and two others in the so-called Walsall anarchist plot. This was, in fact, a police trap organized by Inspector William Melville of Scotland Yard. His agent, Auguste Coulon, who claimed anarchist connections in France and England, lured the six men into a bogus scheme to produce bomb making equipment for use in Russia. The six were arrested in January 1892 and following committal hearings in Walsall appeared at Stafford assizes on 30 March 1892, on charges under the 'Explosive Substances Act' of 1883. 
The trial was badly flawed. The judge, Mr Justice Hawkins, ruled that the defence could not question Inspector Melville, who was the chief prosecution witness, about his relationship with Coulon and he admitted as evidence a confession by Deakin, which had clearly been made under duress. Consequentially, four of the accused, including Deakin, were convicted. Three of them were sentenced to ten years' imprisonment but the jury recommended clemency for Deakin and he was given a reduced term of five years. He served most of his sentence in Parkhurst prison, where he acted as prison librarian. He earned maximum remission and was discharged on Christmas eve 1895. 
On his release Deakin returned to his home, 238 Stafford Street, Walsall, which was a milliner's shop owned by two of his three sisters, Lucy and Elizabeth. His criminal record effectively made him unemployable so he acted as clerk to his sisters' business and supplemented the small income this provided by doing bookkeeping and similar work for friends. 
Deakin's belief in socialism remained unshaken and he became the intellectual driving force behind the rise of the labour movement in Walsall. He never held, or even stood for, any office himself but provided those who did with an endless supply of ideas and information, as well as conducting a relentless propaganda campaign in the local press. His reputation as a socialist thinker and advocate soon spread far beyond Walsall and he received a constant stream of requests for advice from all over Britain and from abroad. He always provided a comprehensive answer, either from his own encyclopaedic knowledge or from his cherished book collection. 
Deakin died at home on 7 September 1937 and was buried in Ryecroft cemetery three days later. He never married. His closest surviving relatives were his sisters, Lucy and Elizabeth, and a younger brother, Charles. In an obituary, the former Labour MP for Walsall, J. J. McShane, wrote that in all his experience in parliament and elsewhere he had 'never met another comparable with Joe Deakin, in range of knowledge, in ability, and in tenderness of feeling' ('Walsall Observer', 11 Sept 1937). 


@@@@@


doc= 56631


Cotton, John (1802-1849), pastoralist and ornithologist in Australia, was born at Balham Hill, Surrey, the third son of William Cotton (1759-1816), a prosperous clerk in the London custom house, and his wife, Catherine Savery (died 1803). An older brother was the art collector William Cotton (1794-1863). Cotton had a good education as a boy, attending Crediton grammar school, then travelling round Britain and later Europe with a tutor, and apparently attended Oxford for a short time, where he studied law without taking a degree. 
Cotton became attached to a firm of solicitors in Lincoln's Inn Fields but spent most of his time in art galleries, drawing and studying birds. In 1835 he published privately 'The Resident Song Birds of Great Britain', illustrated and hand-coloured by himself, reissued in expanded form with a new title ('The Song Birds of Great Britain') either in late 1835 or early 1836, as the title-page is usually dated. The book reveals considerable artistic and observational talent. In 1841 he became a fellow of the Zoological Society, having before then attended a lecture series by Nicholas Vigors on the quinarian system of classification (based on groups of five) and taken copious notes. Cotton continued to use this distinctive system of animal classification long after it was abandoned in Britain. In the same year his younger brother Edward emigrated to New South Wales and Cotton decided to follow his example, emigrating on 19 January 1843, with his wife, Susannah, 'nee' Edwards (died 1852), and nine children; their journey is commemorated in his 'Journal of a Voyage in the Barque 'Parkfield'' (1845) which includes several of his poems. He took properties on the Goulburn River, near Port Phillip, eventually amounting to 30,000 acres; the family camped on the site while building a house. 
Cotton lived for only six more years, during which time he wrote detailed, illustrated letters to his brother William in Devon, giving some of the most complete descriptions of bush life that have survived. These letters describe not only the hardship of a settler's life but also the natural history and indigenous population of the area. Cotton also remarks on contemporary events and literature, including scientific texts like 'Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation' in 1846. All his spare time was otherwise dedicated to preparing an account of the birds of Port Phillip. This was never published in his lifetime although the illustrations survive and were issued as 'John Cotton's Birds of the Port Phillip District' in 1974. Cotton seems to have felt the field was too well trodden by the famous ornithologist John Gould. The specimens he sent to his brother and to the naturalist Robert Hudson (possibly a cousin) were ungraciously received and did not sell. In 1848, however, he contributed a list of local birds to the 'Tasmanian Journal of Natural Science'. Some of his earliest paintings of birds were collected and published in three volumes after his death by Robert Tyas. 
Cotton was well known in Australian natural history circles and maintained a genteel interest in science and art. He experimented with daguerreotypes with Frank Gilbert, his children's tutor. Cotton died on 15 December 1849 on his farm after being ill for a few weeks. His doctor recorded acute rheumatism followed by brain fever as the cause. 


@@@@@


doc= 56636


Judd, John Wesley (1840-1916), geologist, was born on 18 February 1840 in Bath Square, Portsmouth, the son of George Judd, civil servant, and his wife, Jannette ('nee' Meldrum). After the family moved to London, where his father worked in Somerset House, Judd attended school at Camberwell before training as a teacher at Westminster College. In 1863 he enrolled at the Royal School of Mines, and later won a royal exhibition for advanced study. However, he decided instead to take a job as an analytical chemist in Sheffield, where in 1866 he met the eminent geologist Henry Sorby, who introduced him to the use of thin rock sections and the polarizing microscope in the study of rocks and minerals. 
Judd was involved in a serious railway accident in 1864, but after recovering from his injuries, in 1867 joined the geological survey as a temporary field officer and mapped much of the English midlands. Wishing for more freedom he became a school inspector in 1871, mapping the Wealden deposits of southern England in his spare time. He extended his study of Jurassic rocks to Scotland and studied the igneous complex of the Hebrides, producing many papers from 1873 onwards. 
Judd's published works attracted the attention of Charles Lyell, Charles Darwin, and George Scrope, who commissioned him to investigate the volcanic districts of Europe, which he did from 1874 to 1876. On his return to England he was appointed professor of geology at the Royal School of Mines, where he established an innovative and integrated course. In 1896 he was elected dean, a position which he held until his retirement in 1905. Two years after his return to England, Judd married on 10 August 1878 Jeannie Frances Jeyes, daughter of John Jeyes of Great Harrowden. The couple later had one son and one daughter. 
Judd was elected a fellow of the Geological Society in 1865, subsequently serving as both secretary (1878-86) and president (1886-8). He received the Wollaston medal in 1891. In 1877 he was elected FRS and later served twice on council. In 1885 he was president of section C when the British Association met in Aberdeen. In 1895 he was created CB, and, in 1913, was appointed emeritus professor of the Royal College of Science. 
During his career Judd published ninety-seven papers and books. Almost all appeared in either the 'Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society' or the 'Geological Magazine'. His earlier papers concerned the Neocomian (the earliest epoch of the Cretaceous), the most noteworthy correlating the Speeton Clays with the Neocomian of the Lincolnshire wolds and north central Europe. A number of other papers, resulting from his European travels, dealt with the volcanic regions of central Italy and Hungary, in addition to the older volcanic districts within the alpine system. A third group of papers investigated igneous rocks on both the Scottish mainland and the Hebrides and was part of the controversy over the Skye intrusions involving Archibald Geikie. Although Judd's papers were detailed and comprehensive, his findings were not accepted by the geological survey. Judd's 1885 presidential address to section C of the British Association dealt with this controversy over the north-west highlands of Scotland, and in it he was highly critical of the survey. 
Judd had a reputation as a specialist petrographer, and he wrote extensively in this area. As one of the new generation of vulcanologists, in 1888 he was asked by the Royal Society to write a report on the 1883 eruption of Krakatoa. Judd also produced important concepts in igneous petrology, modifying Bunsen's classification of acid and basic by the addition of 'intermediate' and 'ultrabasic' categories, and also the concept of 'petrographic provinces' to explain the presence of consanguineous rock types. He died of cancer on 3 March 1916, at 30 Cumberland Road, Kew. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 56637


Mounsey, James (1709/10-1773), physician and naturalist, was born at Skipmire, 3 miles west of Lochmaben, Dumfriesshire, the son of the merchant Thomas Mounsey (1658/9-1714) and his second wife, Mary Steel (1683/4-1747), sister of the Lochmaben minister. He studied medicine at Edinburgh University under Charles Alston (1729) and Alexander Monro 'primus' (1730) but did not graduate and was apprenticed on 20 March 1731 for three years to the Edinburgh surgeon Thomas Wood, and then signed a three-year contract in July 1736 with the Russian ambassador in London. After working at the St Petersburg Admiralty Hospital he was posted in March 1738, on an outbreak of the plague, to the Russian forces in Ukraine. Accompanying General James Keith, wounded in the Russo-Turkish War, to Paris for medical treatment in November 1738, he graduated MD at Rheims University on 9 November 1739. On his return to Russia he re-enlisted as a doctor to the land militia corps in August 1741, but transferred in 1742 to Keith's army at Abo, Finland, during the Russo-Swedish War. This was followed by service with the Livonian division, Prince Repin's corps in central Europe (where, as at Kalmar, Sweden, in 1744, he showed great capacity in organizing field hospitals), and, finally, with the 1st Moscow division (1750-56). 
In 1747 Henry Baker initiated a correspondence with him, resulting in six publications in the 'Philosophical Transactions', and fellowship of the Royal Society on 8 March 1750. Mounsey's papers included a summary of his very skilful operation at Abo in 1742 to remove a foetus lodged in a Finnish woman's Fallopian tube for thirteen years ('PTRS', 45, 1748, 131-7), outlined more comprehensively in the Swedish Academy's 'Handlingar' for 1744 (vol. 5, 102-14; in Sweden he had met and corresponded with Linnaeus, narrowly missing election to the academy); one on the 'quab', or 'frog-fish', 'Pseudis paradoxa', a frog from Surinam and the Guianas whose very large tadpoles develop into much smaller froglets ('PTRS', 45, 1748, 175-6; and see Klaver, 201-2); some excellent descriptions of the Karlsbad thermal springs and salt-mines near Cracow ('PTRS', 46, 1749, 217-32); and the detailed case history of an English wallpaper stainer whom he treated in Moscow for lead poisoning ('PTRS', 50, 1758, 19-22; 54, 1764, 15-23). On 1 May 1754 Mounsey married, as his second wife, Joanna Grieve, a relative of James Grieve (1708-1763), Moscow city physician. (He had a son and a daughter by his first marriage.) Two months later he escorted Grand Duke Peter and his wife Catherine to St Petersburg, obtaining microscopes and telescopes made by John Cuff and James Short, the London optical instrument makers. In September 1756 he was sent, on the empress's orders, to treat the former duke of Courland's wife at Yaroslavl, leaving the army, highly commended by the medical chancery, to engage in extremely successful private medical practice at Moscow. 
Elected one of the Society of Arts' earliest corresponding members, in April 1755, Mounsey sent it useful information in 1756 and 1760, respectively, about marketing British manufactures abroad and providing winter feed for livestock. Sir John Pringle, in his 'Medical annotations' (5.329 and 7.267-8), and in his November 1776 presidential address to the Royal Society, incorporated Mounsey's findings on the effectiveness of Russian kvass, a drink fermented with malt and rye, and rye bread leavened with malt, in combating scurvy on land, at sea, and in gaols (which Mounsey visited at Moscow and St Petersburg in the early 1750s after reading Pringle's 'Observations on the Nature and Cure of Hospital and Jayl Fevers' (1750)). He also mediated the election of Count Kirill Razumovsky, president of the Russian Academy of Sciences, to the Royal Society in 1755, supplying Baker and the society with large numbers of minerals (1749-57) and seeds (1752-5) from Russia, Siberia, Astrakhan, Persia, and Bohemia, and reciprocating with twelve Moscow birds for the twelve prints of birds and a copy of his 'Natural History of Uncommon Birds' sent to him in 1757 by George Edwards, to whose 'Gleanings of Natural History' he subscribed in 1764. In September 1760 Mounsey became the Empress Elizabeth's personal physician with the title of councillor of state; he tended her at her deathbed in December 1761, and his account of her final illness was printed in the 'St Petersburg Journal' on 28 December. Her successor, Peter III, appointed him his chief physician, privy councillor with the rank of lieutenant-general, and archiater, or director, of the medical chancery, responsible for all Russian medical affairs -- civilian, military, and naval. Within four months Mounsey had compiled, and the senate ratified, three significant pieces of medical legislation: a table of ranks, with a supplement, integrating military and civilian posts by rank and function for the first time, an extensive report on medicine in Russia, and a precept for doctors -- all evidence of his considerable knowledge, experience, and administrative flair. The tsar was poisoned and strangled on 17 July 1762 and the widowed Empress Catherine dismissed Mounsey, Russia's last archiater, on health grounds and with a pension, five days later. 
On arrival at Edinburgh in 1762 Mounsey gave Sir Alexander Dick, president of the Royal College of Physicians, a parcel of medicinal rhubarb seeds ('Rheum palmatum' L.), gathered from a single plant, sown at St Petersburg Apothecaries' Garden in 1754 from seed obtained on the Russo-Chinese border. John Hope, professor of botany, cultivated them at the Royal Botanical Gardens, describing the plant in a letter to Sir John Pringle which appeared in the 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1766. For introducing medicinal rhubarb, Mounsey was elected an honorary member of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh in November 1762 and received the Society of Arts' gold medal in 1770. Widely disseminated, the plant was successfully cultivated in Britain for the first time, and specimens grown by John Inglish, another gold medallist, from seed sent by Mounsey to Baker in 1763, produced further seed which Benjamin Franklin propagated in 1770 to John Bartram, the pioneer Philadelphian botanist. Mounsey purchased Killielung Farm near Dumfries and built a mansion in 1763 at Rammerscales, reputedly assassination-proof, on an estate 4 miles south of Lochmaben. He became an Edinburgh city burgess and guild brother in December 1762, and a member of the Philosophical Society of Edinburgh. As shown by his arms matriculated a year later, he was elected master of the Lochmaben masons in 1769 and the burgh's ruling elder to the general assembly in 1768, 1769, and 1772. Thirty-two letters (1747-72) in the Phillimore MSS at the National Library of Wales, Aberystwyth, reveal much about his medical practice, colleagues, and the merchant community in Russia, as well as his continuing interest in natural history. During 1771 he travelled to Latvia to arrange the duke of Courland's election to the Royal Society, whose dining club Mounsey attended on nine occasions between 1771 and 1772. Dying of a bowel infection at Edinburgh on 2 February 1773, before his petition for a baronetcy could be processed, and characterized by James Boswell as 'a very well informed man and communicative', he was commemorated by a 30-foot high monument in Lochmaben's old churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 56642


Scholefield, James (1790-1855), political reformer, was born at Colne Bridge, in the parish of Kirkheaton, near Huddersfield, Yorkshire, on 6 April 1790, the son of Daniel Scholefield and his wife, Rebecca. He attended the Salford Academy of Sciences in Manchester, established by William Cowherd, founder of a schismatic Swedenborgian sect known as the Bible Christians (Cowherdites). In 1813 Scholefield was ordained as a minister in the sect and served at Christ Church, Hulme, until 1823. 
Scholefield's radicalism developed in the aftermath of the French wars. He was reported to the Home Office as an 'ultra-radical' early in 1817 and he was present at the Peterloo massacre in 1819. He condemned the yeomanry cavalry and was appalled by the clergymen who supported them. When a Wesleyan minister published a 'patriotic sermon' in defence of the authority, Scholefield responded with a tract 'Remarks on the Sermon Preached by the Rev. John Stephens' (1819) in which he identified the 'Bible' as the pre-eminent source of the 'rights of man'. In March 1820 he gave evidence on behalf of Henry Hunt at his state trial and later in 1820 he was prominent among the local 'friends of Queen Caroline', touring Lancashire preaching sermons for her deliverance. In 1821 he married Charlotte Armstrong Walker (1805-1835), with whom he had eight children. 
In 1823 Scholefield founded the Round Chapel in Ancoats, remaining there until his death. He lived next to the chapel. Like Cowherd he gained a reputation as an apothecary with a special gift for healing, running a popular surgery dispensing medicines. He also shared with his mentor a deep commitment to education and operated a school at his chapel for many years, his son and daughter also taking part in the teaching. During a four-month period in 1835 he suffered the deaths of his wife and their three youngest children. 
In 1833 Scholefield was involved in the radical agitation which successfully denied the Anglican church in Manchester the power to levy a church rate. He represented Ancoats on the Manchester police commission between 1833 and 1836 and again between 1839 and 1842. He was known for his philanthropy, distributing poor relief and campaigning against the introduction of the new poor law, continuing to oppose it long after others had given up the fight. As an opponent of the corn laws, he attended the Anti-Corn Law League's national conference of ministers in 1841. 
In March 1835 Scholefield hosted a meeting of radicals who determined to erect a monument to commemorate Henry Hunt, which was subsequently erected in the burial ground of the Round Chapel. Feargus O'Connor's visit to Manchester in 1835, at the inaugural meeting of the Manchester Radical Association, marked the beginning of a friendship between the two men. Scholefield welcomed him, and was in turn labelled by O'Connor the 'chaplain of the Manchester Chartists'. He became most prominent as a leading figure in the Chartist movement in Lancashire. His chapel was the venue for a national Chartist conference during the 'plug' riots in August 1842. Although he was not an official delegate, he was tried for sedition and conspiracy along with O'Connor and others, but was acquitted in the trial held at Lancaster in March 1843. He remained an active Chartist, becoming a shareholder in the People's Hall in Ancoats and a promoter of the Chartist Land Company. 
Scholefield's rationalist heterodox theology and belief in public duty continued to draw him into reform causes. He promoted teetotalism and vegetarianism -- both of which were advocated by the Bible Christians -- becoming in 1847 a founder member of the Manchester Vegetarian Society. He was also a leader of the movement for reducing workers' hours. He remained active in local government: although he had criticized the inadequacy of Manchester's charter of incorporation in the late 1830s, he served two terms as an elected town councillor (1847-1853), concentrating on piecemeal objectives such as sewerage and street paving. 
In 1851 Scholefield was a founding member of the Manchester branch of the Parliamentary and Financial Reform Association, which sought an extension of the franchise and reduction in government expenditure and taxation. The association brought together middle- and working-class radicals, and led to a split in the ranks of Chartism. His involvement signalled a transition to the ranks of nineteenth-century liberalism, which caused him to quarrel with some of his former colleagues, but this did little to dent his popularity in the community that he served with distinction. He died in Manchester on 24 April 1855, and was buried in Every Street churchyard, Ancoats. 


@@@@@


doc= 56643


Buxton, Dorothy Frances (1881-1963), humanitarian and social activist, was born on 3 March 1881 at The Lyth, Ellesmere, Shropshire, the youngest daughter of Arthur Trevor Jebb (1839-1894), barrister and philanthropic squire, and his wife, Eglantyne Louisa Jebb (1845-1925), community worker and poet, the sister of Sir Richard Claverhouse Jebb MP, regius professor of Greek at Cambridge. Louisa ['see 'Wilkins, Louisa] and Eglantyne Jebb were her elder sisters. She was educated at Newnham College, Cambridge (1900-04). On 11 August 1904 she married Charles Roden Buxton (1875-1942), the third son of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, third baronet. The young couple deliberately set up house in the poor London district of Kennington to share those hardships they dedicated themselves as radicals to relieve, if not abolish. Charles Buxton was an educationist with political ambitions to reform the country via parliament; Dorothy was a high-minded social activist, a latter-day Dorothea Brooke, one, in Keats's words: '
to whom the miseries of the world 

Are misery and will not let them rest. 

' In 1916 she joined both the Independent Labour Party and the Society of Friends. 
When the First World War broke out with its concomitant propaganda war Dorothy Buxton could not bear the dehumanization of the German people in the British press which she knew would only worsen and prolong the war and make an eventual genuine peace settlement impossible. She determined to bring before English readers evidence of the fellow humanity of 'the enemy' and, in particular, evidence of the opposition to German chauvinism and militaristic imperialism within Germany. Therefore she set herself to translate and publish in leaflet form extracts from the foreign press, including twenty-five enemy papers which the Board of Trade allowed her to import from Scandinavia -- the board was perhaps not unwilling to have such 'intelligence' work done for it voluntarily. She was then invited by C. K. Ogden to publish her unpopular but influential 'Notes from the foreign press' in his weekly 'Cambridge Magazine', which she did from October 1915 to early 1920. She published the news of German socialist anti-war demonstrations and the evidence that the British hardline position on the destruction of Germany only increased support for that country's intransigent military leadership. To translate from French, German, Italian, Russian, Hungarian, Romanian, and Finnish -- 100 newspapers in all -- required a team of scores of expert linguists and translators and shorthand typists, not to mention specialists in foreign affairs; all of the work was supervised and edited by Dorothy Buxton in her own home, which was turned into the daily headquarters. Although she then had two young children, her 'austerity impelled her to make a sacrifice of home-life itself' (Bunsen, 49). 
From 1917 Dorothy Buxton received and disseminated the news of appalling privation in Germany. So intolerable did she consider the starving of Germans and Austrians by the allied blockade, even after they had surrendered, that she and her sister Eglantyne, together with Lord Parmoor, Kate Courtney, and Marian Ellis, co-founded the Fight the Famine Committee in 1919 to change that retributive economic policy. Out of the committee came the founding of the international Save the Children Fund. 
Dorothy Buxton continued to be a humanitarian activist all her life. During the 1930s she collected and circulated reports on Nazi concentration camps that she had received from the refugees she was aiding, only to have them pigeon-holed by the Foreign Office until after the Second World War had broken out and they were inefficacious. Her husband's peace witness made him an appeaser of Germany's claims to right the wrongs of the treaty of Versailles. But Dorothy insisted on publicizing Nazi atrocities; she even made a quixotic attempt to see Goering in 1935 to confront him with the abominations being perpetrated and so shame him out of his Nazism. He of course only started shouting at her in fury. Both before and during the Second World War she made contact with the Bekennende Kirche -- the underground protestant anti-Nazi Christians in Germany, including Bonhoeffer -- once again publicizing the existence of humane Germans for British readers. She died, twenty years after her husband, at her home, Whingate, Peaslake, near Guildford, Surrey, on 8 April 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 56644


Ellis, Marian Emily (1878-1952), philanthropist and political activist, was born at The Park, Standard Hill, Nottingham, on 6 January 1878, one of the twin daughters of the colliery owner and Liberal MP John Edward Ellis (1841-1910) and his wife, Maria Rowntree (1845-1941), philanthropist, both of whom were Quakers and radicals. She was educated at home and became her politician father's secretary at the time of the Jameson raid (1895). At the close of the subsequent South African War she was involved in Ruth Fry's Quaker relief projects for women victims of that war. 
When the First World War rallied young men on both sides to massacre one another for righteousness's sake, Marian Ellis was a steadfast voice against that madness. Not only did she and her twin sister Edith give huge sums of money to relieve the suffering of families of conscientious objectors and finance the No-Conscription Fellowship, but they also gave tirelessly of their moral and intellectual energy. Edith Ellis was imprisoned in Holloway under the 'Defence of the Realm Act' in 1918 for joining with other Quakers to print a leaflet, 'A Challenge to Militarism', without first submitting it to the government censor. Meanwhile Marian Ellis had made a major contribution to Quaker thinking on the issue of 'just war'. The collaborative, anonymous Quaker pamphlet 'Looking towards Peace' (1915), which she had helped to draft, stated: 'War, tyranny and revolt have produced tyranny, revolt and war throughout time... We maintain that the moral law is binding upon States as upon individuals... We hold that the fundamental interests of humanity are one... The time for absolute isolated sovereignty is gone by... Our aim should be a very loose international federation... the reasoned worship of force [is] the real devil-worship... We therefore keep alight the hope that, late or soon, the intercourse of nations will be carried on without armed force.' In 1917 Marian Ellis wrote: 'At the end of this war the world will have to decide which way it desires to go, towards disarmament or destruction... Disarmament is not merely scrapping our guns and our battleships. It is the working out of a national policy, which, being inspired by love for all men, cannot be antagonistic... it is the problem of India, of Ireland, of our relations with Russia and Persia, Germany and Belgium as God would have them to be. (M. Ellis, 'Disarmament', 'Friends' Quarterly Examiner', 1917, 182-3)' She testified to her unweaponed faith for the rest of her life.In 1919 Marian Ellis helped Kate, Lady Courtney of Penwith, to establish the Fight the Famine Committee. Lady Courtney later wrote of Marian Ellis: 'what a splendid worker she is -- capable and selfless -- a volunteer who does all the grind and most of the paying too' (Courtney, 177). On 14 July 1919, she married, as his second wife, Charles Alfred Cripps, first Baron Parmoor (1852-1941), politician; she became the respected sister-in-law of Beatrice Webb. There were no children of the marriage; Marian was, however, an influence upon the youngest son of her husband's first marriage, (Richard) Stafford Cripps. 
From 1924 to 1928 Lady Parmoor was president of the World YWCA and she helped found the Fellowship of Reconciliation. A founder member of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, she became president of its British section in 1950; she was treasurer of the Friends' Peace Committee and an active vice-president of the National Peace Council. But none of her official committee responsibilities adequately reveals the quality of her spirit. At every depressing turn of world politics she would follow the direction of her idealistic conscience and struggle for the implementation of those ideals in international relations. Thus she advocated the admission of communist China to the United Nations, she urged an end by negotiation to the Korean War, and at the age of seventy she began a serious study of nuclear fission in order to speak with some authority about the uses and dangers of atomic energy. Her last political act, two days before her death, was to help draft a Quaker message to the prime minister protesting against the aerial bombardment of North Korea. 
Marian Ellis was a gifted cellist and an attractive and eloquent speaker, whose 'obstinate optimism made her one of the most lovable of a notable generation of women' ('The Times', 18 July 1952). She died at her home, 1 Endsleigh Street, London, on 6 July 1952 and was cremated at Golders Green; her ashes were taken to Frieth, Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 56649


Wyon, Olive (1881-1966), translator and theologian, was born on 7 March 1881 at 53 Maitland Park Road, Kentish Town, London, the eldest of the two sons and three daughters of Allan Wyon ['see under 'Wyon family] and his wife, Harriet Gairdner. Her father, a medallist, was her majesty's chief engraver of seals, the eighth member of his family to hold that office. She was educated at home, at Hampstead high school (briefly), and at an Anglican private school. It was only in 1899 during a year in Munich that Olive Wyon discovered that she had a natural flair for languages. For the subsequent five years, however, from the age of twenty to twenty-five, she was kept at home, her duties being housekeeping, cooking, nursing, Sunday school teaching for infants and girls, sick visiting, and being missionary secretary for Haverstock Congregational Chapel. She herself had long wished to become a missionary -- ever since she had first read the life of David Livingstone in her early childhood. In the autumn of 1905, therefore, Olive Wyon went to the United Free Church Missionary Institute in Edinburgh, later St Colm's College, intending to offer herself for work with women in central Africa. After eighteen months her health collapsed and, despite successful recuperation in Switzerland where she mastered French, her application was finally rejected by the London Missionary Society on medical grounds. In 1910 she went for a course of religious study at Woodbrooke, the recently founded Quaker college in Birmingham, and she later went to work on the continent under Quaker auspices until the First World War broke out. 
The first indication of Olive Wyon's radical social interpretation of Christianity was her public membership, in April 1915, of the unpopular British committee of the Women's International Congress at The Hague, whose two aims were that international disputes should in future be settled by some other means than war and that women should have a voice in the affairs of the nations. Her peace witness continued through her membership of the International Fellowship of Reconciliation in the 1920s. Her other radical stance concerned women, her most explicitly feminist work being 'The Dawn Wind: a Picture of Changing Conditions among Women in Africa and the East' (1931) which is still of considerable interest and relevance today. She covered the situation of the educated minority of women in central and South Africa, India, China, Korea, Japan, and the Muslim world, in many cases her report being based not only on wide reading but on personal investigation during her travels. Olive Wyon believed that Christ 'gave to woman her charter of spiritual freedom' (Prologue to 'The Dawn Wind'), but that the church had been too slow through the ages to grant her that liberty. She herself served in the mid-1920s for a short time as minister of a small Baptist church in Rushford, near Ipswich; from 1925 to 1939 she helped the minister of the Kentish Town Presbyterian Church as the director of his Sunday schools; from 1939 to 1945, at the suggestion of Canon Charles Raven, she became unofficial chaplain to women students at Cambridge; in 1947 she was appointed to head the translation department of the World Council of Churches in Geneva, and while there helped to prepare the interim report, 'The life and work of women in the church'; finally in 1948 she joined the staff of St Colm's Missionary College, Edinburgh, becoming its principal in 1951 at the age of seventy. In other words her own life demonstrated the capacity of women for spiritual ministry -- as indeed did that of her sisters, one of whom was a Congregational minister and the other an Anglican deaconess. 
Olive Wyon's reputation in her lifetime centred on her work as an outstanding translator of contemporary protestant theology. In 1929 she translated the massive 'Social Teaching of the Christian Church' from the original by Ernst Troeltsch, and between 1934 and 1949 all Emil Brunner's primary contributions to theology. In her note to her translation 'The Divine Imperative: a Study in Christian Ethics' (1936), from Brunner, she took the unusual step of guiding the reader to Brunner's important note at the back on socialism. It was an extraordinary achievement for a woman with no university degree to be acknowledged as one of the world's ablest translators, and Emil Brunner made the remarkable admission that he himself found her translations of his books more intelligible at points than his own German. In 1948 the University of Aberdeen acknowledged her feat by awarding her an honorary doctorate in divinity. 
During the terrible period of Nazi tyranny and the Second World War, Olive Wyon testified to the supra-nationalism, supra-racialism, and anti-colonialism of the church. She was in close touch as long as that was possible with the anti-Nazi Confessing Church (Bekennende Kirche) in Germany, and her succinct summary of the revolutionary implications of applying Christianity to the socio-politics of the world in 'The Church and World Peace: Principles which Should Govern a Righteous Peace Settlement', with a foreword by Bishop George Bell (1940), based on her reading of the report of the Oxford Conference on Church, Community, and State, 'The Churches Survey their Task' (1937), testifies to her commitment to a church 'in' the world, that struggles to remedy the injustices and cruelties of the world. 
In her own personal spiritual life Olive Wyon was less a seeker than a finder. She was a pioneer of ecumenism, rejoicing to respond to the spiritual vitality and depth that she could find in religious communities as different as the Baptists, the Congregationalists, the Presbyterians, the Anglicans, the Franciscans, the Iona community, the Protestant Women's Religious Order at Grandchamp, the Catholics of Taize, or the Orthodox monastery at Tolleshunt. Between 1943 and 1966 she published more than a dozen works on prayer and the desire for God. It was said of her that she was a practical mystic, one of the great spiritual encouragers and explorers, at home wherever Christ was Lord. At the ages of eighty-four and eighty-five she was still asked to broadcast for the BBC's religious programmes, and she helped Dame Cicely Saunders plan St Christopher's Hospice for the dying. She herself died of a pulmonary embolism and pneumonia on 21 August 1966 at Bruntsfield Hospital, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 56650


Browne, William Charles Denis (1888-1915), composer and music critic, was born on 3 November 1888 at Lynnwood, 111 Lillington Avenue, Leamington Spa, the youngest of the five children of William Denis Browne (1836-1916), retired land agent and juror at the 1883 Phoenix Park murder trials, and his wife, Louisa Hackett (1843-1926). Both parents were Irish. His mother's family hailed from Moor Park and Riverstown, Birr, King's county. His paternal grandfather, the Very Revd Denis Browne, was dean of Emly, and his great-grandfather, the Rt Hon. Denis Browne, was MP for Mayo and younger brother of the first marquess of Sligo. Relatives called him Billy, while friends favoured Denis -- the first half of his composite surname. All remarked on a charming personality, inspiring yet unassuming. Portraits also project a serene gaze. 
Denis Browne won classics scholarships to Rugby School (1903) and Clare College, Cambridge (1907). Rupert Brooke, his contemporary and lifelong friend, wrote for him 'An Easter-day Song in Praise of Cremation' (1906) and 'The Dance' (1915), but no musical settings survive. Both men were active in student productions by the Marlowe Dramatic Society. For Milton's 'Comus' in 1908, Denis Browne helped E. J. Dent to combine Henry Lawes's songs with tunes from 'Elizabeth Rogers hir virginall booke' (BL, Add. MS 10337). One anonymous 'Allmayne' (fol. 32) pervaded 'To Gratiana Dancing and Singing' (1913). 'Diaphenia' and 'Epitaph on Salathiel Pavy' (1912) were also intended as 'Two Elizabethan Songs'. The influence of transcription on his creativity foreshadowed the work of Peter Warlock, as did his championship of ultra-modern music. But whereas Warlock was always a reluctant executant, Denis Browne excelled as pianist, accompanist, organist, and conductor. Dent rated him 'by far the cleverest of the musicians' (Dent, 86) at Cambridge, comparing him with Arthur Bliss, Armstrong Gibbs, Clive Carey, and Steuart Wilson. 
Denis Browne was intended for the civil service until a poor degree and pleas from family and friends convinced his father to countenance a career change. As Clare's organ scholar from 1910 to 1912, he studied composition with Charles Wood, the organ with Alan Gray, the piano with a former pupil of Ferruccio Busoni, Ursula Newton, and history with Dent. His 'Magnificat' and 'Nunc dimittis' (1911) and 'Two Dances' (1912) were premiered by Clare College choir and orchestra. Six songs (1908-1910?) are unremarkable, though two Tennyson settings, 'Move Eastward, Happy Earth' and 'The Snowdrop', were published in 1909. A seventh song, 'Dream-tryst' (1909), anticipated the experimental 'Arabia' (1914). 
Denis Browne sang in the chorus of Ralph Vaughan Williams's 'The Wasps', and played 'On Wenlock Edge' and 'Hugh the Drover' while they were still work in progress. Vaughan Williams's assertion in a reference that Denis Browne had 'a most musical nature and his artistic judgement and perception are remarkable' (1911, priv. coll.) helped to secure his appointment at Repton in April 1912. He dedicated the motet 'God is our strength and song' (1912) to the school and passed his MusB with distinction in May. 
After Denis Browne visited Busoni in Berlin, over-zealous piano practice caused neuritis and threatened paralysis. He resigned from Repton and succeeded Carey as organist of Guy's Hospital in December 1912. He supplemented his income by deputizing for Gustav Holst at Morley College, conducting choral societies in London and Surrey, and writing for John Middleton Murry and Katherine Mansfield's 'Blue Review'. He also contributed eight columns to 'The Times' (1913-14) and seven to the 'New Statesman' (1914), including shrewd critiques of Stravinsky and Skryabin. Denis Browne became the favourite of Edward Marsh's Georgian circle when Brooke was abroad between 1913 and 1914. He attended breakfast and supper parties, first nights, and private views with Mark Gertler and Wilfrid Wilson Gibson, and the latter commemorated him in 'Friends' (1916, 14). 
Denis Browne's eight-part 'Nunc dimittis' was performed at Westminster Cathedral on Palm Sunday 1914. He gave the London premiere of Anton Berg's sonata op. 1 on 11 May, and a lecture entitled 'Modern musical tendencies' before the Musical Association on 19 May. On 15 July he accompanied Wilson in a recital at 10 Downing Street. 'The Comic Spirit', a ballet-pantomime intended for Bristol's Theatre Royal, was unfinished when war began. 
Marsh engineered commissions for Denis Browne and Brooke in the Royal Naval division and, after the abortive Antwerp expedition, they sailed for the Dardanelles. Denis Browne passed the journey playing duets with F. S. Kelly and directing the Hood battalion band. He chose Brooke's Skyros grave, and his evocative account of the burial is widely cited. Shot through the neck on 8 May 1915, he recuperated in Egypt and insisted on returning to the front before he was fully fit. His prescient last message came from a trench at Kerever Dere on 4 June, the same day on which he was killed in action: 'I've gone now, too; not too badly, I hope. I'm luckier than Rupert, because I've fought. But there's no one to bury me as I buried him, so perhaps he's better off in the long run' (W. Denis Browne to Edward Marsh, 4 June 1915, priv. coll.). His body was never retrieved, and his achievement cannot be fully assessed. Dent feared another hysterical response to Gallipoli's 'second great loss to art' (Forbes, 1.264) and destroyed many manuscripts. 


@@@@@


doc= 56651


Cornwallis, Edward (1713-1776), army officer and colonial governor, was born in London on 22 February 1713, the sixth of seven sons of Charles, fourth Baron Cornwallis (1675-1722), and his wife, Lady Charlotte Butler (died 1725), daughter and heir of Richard Butler, first earl of Arran. His twin brother was Frederick Cornwallis (1713-1783), archbishop of Canterbury. He was educated at Eton College from 1725 to 1728. Two years later -- on 20 October 1730 -- he entered the army as an ensign. In July 1731 Cornwallis became a lieutenant in the 8th regiment of foot, a captain in April 1734, and rose to major in the 20th foot on 31 March 1742. On 9 December 1743 he was elected MP for the family seat of Eye in Suffolk. 
From 1742 until 1745 Cornwallis's regiment was in Flanders, where he joined it in 1744 after five years as a diplomatic courier. After Fontenoy he became lieutenant-colonel of Bligh's regiment, which was recalled to Britain to stem the Jacobite advance. After the fall of Carlisle Cornwallis was sent with a detachment to reinforce Chester, and the regiment was in the thick of the hand-to-hand fighting at Culloden. In 1747 Cornwallis's loyal service and connections made him groom of the bedchamber to George II, a sinecure he was to hold until ousted by political intrigue in 1763. More plums were on the way, for on 23 March 1749 he became colonel of the 24th regiment and resigned his seat in the Commons to become governor of Nova Scotia. This was to be a step to greater things, for he stipulated that he would serve for three years at the most. 
Indeed, Nova Scotia was no sinecure. The few white inhabitants, mainly French and Catholic, resented British rule and had intermarried with local Native Americans. Moreover, the long dispute over the borders with New France was nearing a crisis, just as the fortress of Louisbourg was being returned to France. Cornwallis was instructed to consolidate British claims by establishing a new base on the peninsula and plant posts within the contested region across the Bay of Fundy. 
Cornwallis threw himself into the task with all the vigour and directness of a soldier. He established Halifax on Chebucto Bay, planted posts at the St John's River and on the isthmus, and went to war with the Mi'kmaqs. The result was a little local war in which the British were effectively confined to the peninsula. Cornwallis campaigned successfully for military reinforcements, less successfully for naval ones, aimed to destroy the Mi'kmaqs and favoured expelling the Acadian settlers altogether -- a policy actually carried out in 1755. At the time the Board of Trade rebuked him for aggression and still more for overspending; but although Cornwallis was no diplomat and disliked financial administration, he was a conscientious and hard-working governor. In 1751 his health gave way under the strain and he resigned. 
At home Cornwallis returned to politics and to extending his family connections. In 1752, apparently at the king's request, he stood for and won one of the Westminster seats in the House of Commons. On 17 March 1753 he married Mary, daughter of Charles Townshend, second Viscount Townshend. Throughout the 1750s he was connected with Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle, with whose support he successfully defended his seat in 1761. 
Cornwallis's connections may have protected his military career during the Seven Years' War. His regiment had been posted to Minorca, but when war broke out Cornwallis was home on leave. He sailed with Byng, and was one of the fateful council of war which advised the admiral to abandon the relief of the island. Exonerated by a court of inquiry, he joined Hawke and Mordaunt's abortive raid on Rochefort -- which did little good to his reputation. Nevertheless, he became a major-general in 1757, a lieutenant-general in 1760, and governor of Gibraltar in 1762. Compared with Nova Scotia, Gibraltar was an enormous plum, but the work involved probably killed him. Tortuous diplomacy to guarantee food imports from north Africa, maintaining and improving the fortifications, collecting intelligence of Spanish military and naval forces, and counter-espionage all took their toll. He bombarded ministers with requests for more troops, and for warships to protect the rock from the sea. By 1765 he was suffering from 'a disorder in my head which has plagued me several years at times has grown so much worse as to often stupefie me...' (Cornwallis to the earl of Halifax, Gibraltar, 17 May 1765, CO 91/14) -- perhaps a brain tumour. He was allowed leave from June 1765 until October 1767, and again from June 1769 until January 1771. He left Gibraltar for the last time in June 1773 and died in England on 14 January 1776; he was buried at Culford, near Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk. He left his estates, including his house at Essington in Hertfordshire, to his nephew Charles Cornwallis, first Marquess Cornwallis (1738-1805), and all his personal property to his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 56653


Bateman, Mary (1768-1809), thief and poisoner, was born in Asenby, Yorkshire, the daughter of a small farmer named Harker. She evidently received a good education for one of her class, and could read and write proficiently. At the age of thirteen her father sent her into service in Thirsk. Seven years later she removed to York, where she learned the rudiments of dressmaking, and it was here that her life of crime began in earnest. After only one year she had to flee to Leeds after being caught in the act of robbery. During the next four years she worked as a mantua maker, and began to practise as a wise woman, telling fortunes and pretending to remove spells. In 1792 she married a wheelwright named John Bateman. 
Although her magical activities undoubtedly brought in a healthy income, Bateman displayed what may have been a pathological need to steal. She was, moreover, none too discreet in the manner of her robberies. Caught several times by lodgers and neighbours, she seems to have avoided prosecution by buying off her victims. There is no evidence that John Bateman was an accomplice in his wife's various frauds and thefts. Indeed in 1796 he was apparently motivated by shame to join the army, bringing Mary with him. They returned to Leeds within a year, however, and Mary resumed her criminal career. 
In 1806 Bateman hit upon a new scam that brought her to the attention of a wider public. Encouraged by the local popularity of the millenarian prophet Joanna Southcott, she joined and attended meetings of the Southcottians, a group of people she presumably saw as possible victims for her magical frauds. To seal her reputation among them, and also to exploit them, she publicly claimed that one of her hens had laid three miraculous eggs bearing the inscription 'Christ is coming'. Hundreds came to see these unusual vehicles of divine communication, with visitors having to pay a penny each to satisfy their curiosity. 
Considering her lack of discretion and tendency to take her frauds too far, it was perhaps inevitable that Bateman would eventually find herself before a criminal court. That day came in October 1808 after a Leeds clothier named William Perigo accused her of murdering his wife, Rebecca, by poisoning. Mrs Perigo had consulted Bateman about a pain she felt in her breast, and was informed that she was suffering from the effects of an 'evil wish'. Bateman commenced to extract large sums of money from the couple under the pretence of effecting a cure. 
Bateman was tried at the York assizes in March 1809, and found guilty of murder and fraud. She was hanged at noon on Monday 20 March. Her body was taken to Leeds General Infirmary for dissection, but, with an opportunism worthy of the woman herself, the infirmary publicly exhibited her corpse, charging 3died per person and thereby raised more than $30. 


@@@@@


doc= 56655


Hutchinson, (Christian) Victor Noel Hope Hely- (1901-1947), composer and music administrator, was born on 26 December 1901 at Newlands House, Newlands, Cape Town, Cape Colony, the youngest son of Sir Walter Francis Hely-Hutchinson (1849-1913), son of the earl of Donoughmore and last governor of Cape Colony, and his wife, May Justice (1861-1938). 
As an infant Hely-Hutchinson grew up in Kent, where his talent for music was recognized by Charles Hoby, director of music of the Royal Marines at Chatham. After he returned to South Africa in 1907 his training was undertaken by Barrow Dowling, organist of Cape Town Cathedral. Shortly after his father's retirement to England, he was taken to the Royal College of Music on 25 January 1910 to see Sir Hubert Parry, who recommended study with a former pupil, Donald Tovey. (In October 1918 he would be pallbearer at Parry's funeral at St Paul's Cathedral.) In order to be near Tovey, he was educated at Heatherdown preparatory school, Ascot, and he won a scholarship to Eton College in 1914. Having studied harmony and counterpoint with some thoroughness under Tovey, he took extra-mural composition lessons in the later war years from Sir Charles Stanford, who had moved to Windsor to escape the bombing of London, and later from Gustav Holst; he also studied conducting with Adrian Boult. 
In 1919 Hely-Hutchinson won the Lewis Nettleship memorial scholarship to Balliol College, Oxford, though his time at the university (September 1920 to December 1921) was curtailed by the offer of a lecturing post at the South African College of Music (later part of the University of Cape Town) from its director, W. H. Bell. In South Africa he married on 22 June 1925 Marjorie Anna Hugo (1900-1988), a capable violinist and a silver medal winner at the Royal Academy of Music in 1919. They had two sons, John and Christopher. Hely-Hutchinson's work as a lecturer was supplemented by broadcasting on 'Children's Hour' for the South African Broadcasting Corporation (where he was known as 'Uncle Porps'), experience which served him well when he returned to England in 1926 as a musical assistant for the BBC at Savoy Hill. 
Hely-Hutchinson's work at the BBC involved not only programme planning but also conducting, arranging, accompanying (he was an able pianist), and appearances on 'Children's Hour' as 'Uncle Bunny'. In 1933 he moved to Birmingham as the BBC's midland regional director of music and founded the BBC Midland Orchestra. A year later, in succession to Granville Bantock, he was appointed professor of music at Birmingham University, a post he held until 1944. In Birmingham, Hely-Hutchinson was active as the president of the Brass Bands Association and conducted the city orchestra. During the Second World War he enrolled as an ARP warden and joined the university cadet force, and in order to raise money for the city orchestra he gave a series of recitals of all Beethoven's piano sonatas; he subsequently repeated this at Oxford in aid of a memorial to Tovey. In 1944 he returned to London as the BBC's director of music, succeeding Arthur Bliss. During the severe winter at the beginning of 1947 he developed influenza, and he died of acute meningitis on 11 March at 26 Queen's Grove, St John's Wood, London; he was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. He was only forty-five. Months before, he had been involved in controversy when he oversaw the termination of Constant Lambert's connection with the Promenade Concerts and the appointment of Malcolm Sargent as chief conductor. 
Though his professional creative life was relatively short, Hely-Hutchinson was highly productive. He composed a wide range of incidental music for films and plays; the latter included productions of C. K. Munro's 'The Rumour', Laurence Housman's 'The House Fairy', and Walter de la Mare's 'Yes, and Back Again' (all 1930). Like Armstrong Gibbs and Herbert Howells, he evinced a penchant for the poetry of de la Mare, which is reflected in his many songs, but his most enduring settings are those of Edward Lear's nonsense rhymes (1927), 'Old Mother Hubbard' (1929), an amusing Handelian parody, and 'Ruthless Rhymes', to words by Harry Graham (1945-6). His chamber works include a piano quintet, a string quartet, and a viola sonata, none of which was published. The more impressive 'Variations, Intermezzo, Scherzo and Finale', dedicated to W. H. Bell, was published by the Carnegie Trust and first performed at a Promenade Concert in 1927. Described by the composer as a set of symphonic variations, the work exhibits a fresh, vibrant technique and a polished, colourful orchestral palette. An affinity for classical structures was foreshadowed in the 'Three Fugal Fancies' for strings (1925) and echoed with greater aplomb in 'The Young Idea' for piano and orchestra (1928), though it was in the popular 'Carol Symphony' (1927), a suite of movements based on popular Christmas carols, that his lighter style achieved a particular eloquence alongside passages of greater warmth and even pathos. Some of his film music was later reworked into a symphony for small orchestra. Undergoing revision at the time of his death, this was heard during the 1947 season of promenade concerts. 


@@@@@


doc= 56656


Gay, Noel (1898-1954), composer and lyricist, was born on 15 July 1898 at Park Terrace, Leeds Road, Outwood, Wakefield, the son of Harry Armitage, a colliery clerk, and his wife, Charlotte Elizabeth Moxon. Musically precocious, he won a scholarship to Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Wakefield, at the age of eight and subsequently often deputized for the choirmaster at Wakefield Cathedral. His original ambition was to obtain a choral appointment in a cathedral, but at the age of fifteen, in 1913, he took up a scholarship at the Royal College of Music in London, where he studied with Sir Frederick Bridge and Walter Parratt. By the time he was eighteen he was already director of music and resident organist at St Anne's Church in Soho. 
Armitage then went up to Christ's College, Cambridge, to study composition, again with a view to joining a cathedral, and graduated four years later with an MA and a BMus. At Cambridge, however, his interests had begun to turn more secular, specifically towards the world of undergraduate revues, to which he contributed many popular songs in the chirpy, colloquial style which became his hallmark. 
After coming down from Cambridge, Armitage began to contribute songs to such mid-1920s West End revues as 'Stop Press' with such success that the impresario Andre Charlot invited him to write all the words and music for his 1926 revue. He took his 'nom de plume' -- Noel Gay -- from a sign he read on a London bus in 1924: 'NOEL Coward and Maisie GAY in a new revue'. He also began writing for the successful husband-and-wife musical comedy team of Jack Hulbert and Cicely Courtneidge. On 26 April 1927 Armitage married Amy Marshall, daughter of Walter Marshall, a liquorice refiner. 
Altogether, Gay wrote the music for twenty-six London shows, twenty-eight feature films, and forty-five songs, one of which, 'Tondeleyo', was the first ever to be used in a British talking picture. His song hits included 'The Lambeth walk', 'Run rabbit run', 'There's something about a soldier', and 'Let the people sing', all of which bear the distinctive features of his work: an absolute simplicity of lyrical thought, the refusal to use a polysyllabic word if a monosyllable would do ('Run, rabbit, run, rabbit, run, run, run'), and the gift of a cheery melodic line which implanted itself almost involuntarily in the memory of its audiences (to that extent he was the closest Britain ever came to a local Irving Berlin). 
Like such near-contemporaries as Noel Coward and Ira Gershwin, Gay combined a solid classical musical training with a passion for Gilbert and Sullivan and an ability to write readily accessible songs with catchy lyrics. He later provided the music for such hit musical comedies as 'Clowns in Clover' (1927), by Ronald Jeans, 'Hold my Hand' (1931), by Stanley Lupino, 'She Couldn't Say No' (1932), 'That's a Pretty Thing' (1933), and 'Love Laughs' (1935). The most remarkable of all was 'Me and My Girl', written by L. Arthur Rose and Douglas Furber, which included Gay's celebrated 'Lambeth walk' number. 
Gay afterwards described how he deliberately employed 'everyday homely symbols, with simple repetitions, or otherwise new angles on old situations' (McKibbin, 407). The central figure, Bill Snibson, a cockney who inherits an earldom but still lives as a cockney, was played by Lupino Lane. He organizes a grand party, attended by 'toffs' as well as old friends. However, when Snibson begins to sing 'The Lambeth walk' the social classes intermingle: 'there is a terrific effect of social breakdown, everyone joins in and shouts 'Oi!' and the Duchess finally goes into dinner on Bill's arm, wearing his bowler on her head' (ibid.). 
The musical first opened in 1937 at the Victoria Palace, London. It was by no means an overnight success, but it was broadcast on radio by the BBC on 13 January 1938, live from the theatre, and this helped turn its fortunes around. Despite being bombed out of two different theatres, the show ran for five more years as the greatest of all Second World War London hits. A revival of 'Me and My Girl' in 1985, with its book revised by Stephen Fry, ran for more than seven years and made stars of Emma Thompson and Robert Lindsay on both sides of the Atlantic. 
Gay continued to write through the rest of the war and into the 1950s, but his later songs never lived up to the success of those in 'Me and My Girl' -- arguably the most successful London musical of the mid-twentieth century. The 1985 revival incorporated such other hit songs of Gay's as 'The sun has got his hat on', 'Love makes the world go round', and 'I'm leaning on a lamp post', the old George Formby hit. Among other leading performers for whom Gay wrote hit songs were Jessie Matthews, Sonnie Hale, the Crazy Gang, and Gracie Fields. But he had been going prematurely deaf for several years, and in the early 1950s his writing slowed down; the fashion for his especial kind of cheery London cockney song was also now on the wane. His last score was for the pantomime 'Aladdin' at Richmond in 1949-50, and he died from cancer at his London home, 48 Portland Place, on 4 March 1954, aged only fifty-five. 
A successful businessman, Gay established the Noel Gay Agency; run by his son Richard Armitage, this became one of the leading British and European musical and talent agencies. While one of his grandsons, Alex Armitage, masterminded the revival of 'Me and My Girl', another, Charles Armitage, looked after the equally successful music-publishing division of the agency. 
Gay never achieved the musical fame of such West End contemporaries as Noel Coward, Ivor Novello, or Vivian Ellis, but he rivalled them in terms of the colloquial, populist, and streetwise tenor of his songs. 


@@@@@


doc= 56657


Littler, Prince Frank (1901-1973), theatre proprietor and manager, was born Jules Horace Virgil Emile Richeux, at 5 Kent Terrace, Ramsgate, Kent, on 25 July 1901, the elder son in the family of two sons and three daughters of Jules Richeux (1863-1911), cigar importer, and his wife, Agnes May, 'nee' Paisey ('b'. 1874). His father became a theatrical proprietor, leasing the Ramsgate Victoria Pavilion from 1906, while his mother leased the Artillery Theatre, Woolwich, from 1909. After his father's death his mother married, in 1914, the theatre manager Frank Rolison Littler (1879-1940), who adopted the five children, the latter taking Littler's name. In addition to Prince (as he was known from childhood) two of the other children made careers in the theatre: the second son, Emile Littler (1903-1985), and second daughter, Blanche Littler, later Lady Robey (1899-1981), went into theatrical management. Prince was educated privately at Stratford upon Avon, and started his theatrical career in 1927 with his sister, Blanche, sending out small-scale regional tours and becoming resident manager of his parents' theatre in Woolwich. 
In 1931 Prince bought his first two theatres, both in Leicester. On 17 November 1932 he married a widow, Annie Leonora Maclachlan, 'nee' Delaney 
(the actress Norah Delaney; 'b'. 1893/4)
. During the rest of the thirties he acquired further theatres in Manchester and Norwich, and by the end of the decade he was also touring George Robey (whom Blanche soon married, as his second wife) in 'The Bing Boys are Here'. His first London ventures were pantomimes at the Coliseum, the Prince's, and Drury Lane, but in 1939 he scored his first great West End success with Ivor Novello's long-running operetta 'Glamorous Night'. 
With the coming of the Second World War Prince Littler was appointed chairman and managing director of first the Stoll (later Stoll Moss) and then the Associated Theatres chains, which effectively left him as resident manager of the Globe Theatre and (until it was bombed) the Queen's Theatre on Shaftesbury Avenue as well as the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, which in 1946 Littler reopened after its wartime occupation by the Entertainments National Service Association, with Noel Coward's 'Pacific 1860'. This was not a great success, and already it was becoming clear that, unlike his brother Emile, Littler had no special affection for plays or players individually; his interest was the business of showbusiness, and he remained throughout the rest of his life, despite a long and happy marriage, primarily a money-man, interested only in bricks and mortar and in the profits that could be made, either in London or on the road, with the right -- that is, long-running and star-led -- attractions. He was always a landlord and a manager, seldom a producer in the creative sense. 
By 1947 Littler was chairman of Moss Empires and a director of the Howard and Wyndham chain, a double responsibility which gave him unique powers as a landlord in London and the regions; he was also one of the first to import tried-and-tested Broadway hits, so that his post-war shows included such musicals as 'Carousel', 'Guys and Dolls', and 'Can-Can', as well as two straight plays which had also been great Broadway hits, 'Teahouse of the August Moon' and 'No Time for Sergeants'. He was a reasonably fair and decent landlord, and the case against him was principally that he felt no interest in investing in the unknown or in fostering local talent when his theatres could be filled with pre-existing hits of one transatlantic kind or another; he always played safe, but fought several prolonged board-room battles to protect and preserve his empire and of course his Empires. In 1960 he fought successfully a takeover attempt for Stoll by a formidable team which included Bernard Delfont and the property millionaires Jack Cotton and Charles Clore; later that year he merged Stoll with Moss Empires, thereby gaining control of sixteen London theatres, including the Palladium and the Victoria Palace, as well as a major shareholding in one of the founding ITV companies in Britain, Associated Television. As with the Grade organization, this concentration of showbusiness power led to several legal actions (in one of which he fought his own brother Emile, though privately the brothers remained on good terms) as rival managers tried to chip away at the Littler holdings. 
A passionate breeder of Guernsey dairy cattle in his spare time, Prince Littler always refused the limelight. He gave only one major press interview in 1961, in which he announced: 'I am not in the theatre for fun, but merely to keep my shareholders happy', and that was indeed always his credo. If a show failed to make money or pay its rent, Littler would close it as swiftly as possible and go in search of a more profitable tenant for his stages. He was, however, a chairman of the Denville Hall home for elderly thespians, a vice-president of the Variety Artists Benevolent Fund, and a member of both the South Bank Theatre and Opera House boards. His last three shows, 'The Black and White Minstrel Show', 'There's a Girl in my Soup', and 'Fiddler on the Roof' (all 1966) were considerable hits, and when he died seven years later, after a peaceful retirement, they dimmed all the West End theatre lights in tribute to one of its most dominant and successful landlords. 
Littler was made a CBE in 1957. He died on 13 September 1973 at his home, Chestham Park, Henfield, Sussex. After his death, one last legal battle was fought to clarify a complex series of bequests arising from two apparently contradictory wills; the estate had been valued at just over $1 million, and there were no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 56658


Africanus, Scipio (c.1702-1720), servant, was born of an African family that most likely came from west Africa, where many Bristol merchants bought or captured black men and women for transport to the American colonies. He became the servant of Charles William Howard, seventh earl of Suffolk and second and last earl of Bindon, who in 1715 had married Arabella, daughter and coheir of Sir Samuel Astry and his wife, Elizabeth Morse. The Morse family occupied the Great House in Henbury, Gloucestershire, near Bristol. Whether Scipio was acquired after the marriage or inherited from the family who previously occupied the house is unknown. He died at Henbury on 21 December 1720, closely followed by his master, in February 1722, and his mistress only four months later. 
Scipio's elaborate gravestone remains in the churchyard of St Mary's, Henbury, with its black cherubs and distinctive epitaph, perhaps a tribute to the regard in which his employers held him, in contrast to the general anonymity of servants at that date and the virtual invisibility of black people and their stories in the official records of society. His name implies some knowledge of classical history and literature by those who gave it to him. Polybius's account of his namesake's capture of Carthage by the Romans in the third century BC suggests that black slaves might expect freedom from servitude if they exhibited goodwill towards their conquerors. The words of the epitaph reinforce this attitude, recording the victory of Christianity over paganism: 'I who was Born a PAGAN and a SLAVE now sweetly sleep a CHRISTIAN in my Grave'. While aspects of Scipio's life remain unrecorded the status that he was accorded on his death is a monument to attitudes on race and colour in the colonial era; his is one of the very few marked burial places of the 10,000 black slaves and servants present in British society in the early eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 56662


Bach, Edward (1886-1936), homoeopathic physician, was born at The Hollies, Alcester Road, Moseley, Birmingham, on 24 September 1886, the son of Walter Best Bach, a brass-founder, and his wife, Ada Brenda Tipper. He was educated at Winterloe School, Moseley, Birmingham, but left aged sixteen and worked in the foundry for three years in order to collect the money to pay for his medical education. However, when his father realized that his ambition was serious, he agreed to give him a sufficient allowance for him to enter Birmingham University. In 1912 he qualified in medicine at University College Hospital, London, after which he served there as casualty house surgeon. He then took up a similar appointment at the National Temperance Hospital, but ill health prevented him from completing his term there. On 14 January 1913 he married Gwendoline ('b'. 1888/9), daughter of Eouery Caiger, a consulting engineer. After her death he married on 2 May 1917 Kitty Emmeline Jane ('b'. 1889/90), daughter of James Light, a company secretary. 
Bach became disillusioned by the way that conventional medicine concentrated on the curing of symptoms, and he came to believe that effective treatment depended upon knowledge of the causes of disease. Therefore, having been found unfit for military service, he returned to University College Hospital in 1915 as assistant bacteriologist, to develop his interest in immunology. He became well known as a bacteriologist among the orthodox profession, working in the field of intestinal toxaemia. In 1919 he moved to the London Homoeopathic Hospital. Here he demonstrated the presence of non-lactose-fermenting bacilli in the stools of many patients. These were similar to the typhoid bacillus but non-pathogenic. However, Bach believed that they caused toxins which could be absorbed into the bloodstream and produce ill health. He admired C. F. S. Hahnemann, the founder of homoeopathy, whom he considered had realized that disease originated above the physical plane. Bach regarded his own work in the laboratory as a natural sequel to homoeopathy and believed that he had demonstrated the validity of Hahnemann's theory of chronic disease. 
Together with Dr Charles Wheeler, a physician at the hospital, Bach prepared vaccines from the bacteria he had discovered, for treatment in accordance with the received wisdom of the time. In 1925 they published 'Chronic Disease, a Working Hypothesis', an account of their work in which they claimed remarkable successes in 500 cases that had received no treatment other than the vaccines. Wheeler was the first doctor to prepare homoeopathic remedies from the polyvalent vaccines, and Dr Dishington of Glasgow used these clinically. On hearing of this work in 1927, Bach set about preparing a new stock of polyvalent vaccines suitable for potentizing. He had the remedies prepared at considerable personal expense. These were some of the bowel nosodes which John Paterson, the then bacteriologist at the hospital, later showed could be associated with other homoeopathic remedies. But Bach was already seeking a better method of treatment. 
Because the load of routine work interfered with his research, Bach had left the London Homoeopathic Hospital in 1922. He continued his highly successful Harley Street practice and also treated the poor free of charge. In 1928 he is said to have realized at a dinner party that personalities could be classified into several distinct types, and he concluded that reactions to disease would also differ. That autumn he went to Wales and brought back two plants, 'Mimulus' and 'Impatiens', from which he prepared remedies by a similar method to that used for the vaccines. He later added 'Clematis' to his medicines. In 1930 he gave up his practice. He made another journey to Wales in search of more herbs. When walking through a dew-laden field he decided that a dewdrop, when warmed by the sun, could absorb the remedial properties of a plant. This led to his method of preparing remedies using only pure water. That year he wrote 'Heal Thyself', which was published in 1931 and has remained in print ever since. In it he summarized his theory that disease was due to soul and personality being in conflict. 
From 1930 to 1934 Bach lived in Cromer, Norfolk, seeking and preparing further remedies with which he treated patients successfully. He did not charge for this treatment and his financial resources dwindled. He therefore moved to Mount Vernon, a small house in Oxfordshire. Here he wrote, lectured, sought further remedies, and trained assistants to carry on his work. His advertising, and use of medically unqualified assistants, brought him into conflict with the General Medical Council. He received two warnings, though formal proceedings were never instituted. Having produced thirty-seven flower remedies, and a mixture known as 'Rescue remedy', he was satisfied that his work was complete. He now had medicines available to treat all the negative factors that he believed caused disease. 
Bach appears to have been a healer in the true sense and is reputed to have healed patients simply by touch. He had an intense unselfish desire to help others. He was a gentle man, an idealist yet practical. His tastes were simple; he loved the country, gardening, and carpentry. Nobody who knew him failed to admire him, however strongly they might disagree with his theories. Bach died as a result of cardiac failure and sarcoma on 27 November 1936 in the Ladygrave Nursing Home, Manor Road, Didcot, and was buried in St James's churchyard, Sotwell, Oxfordshire. The Edward Bach Centre was established at Mount Vernon in recognition of his work. 


@@@@@


doc= 56663


Cohen, Hannah Floretta (1875-1946), philanthropist and civil servant, was born at 63 Queen's Gardens, Kensington, London, on 25 May 1875, the only daughter of Sir Benjamin Louis Cohen, baronet (1844-1909). Her father was a great-grandson of Levi Barent Cohen, an Amsterdam merchant who had settled in London in the late eighteenth century, and whose twelve children formed the backbone of 'the cousinhood' -- the network of wealthy families which provided the lay leadership of Anglo-Jewry until the mid-twentieth century. Her mother, Louisa Emily Merton (1850-1931), was also a great-grandchild of Levi Barent Cohen. Benjamin Cohen, besides being a stockbroker, was active both in party politics (he sat as Conservative MP for East Islington from 1892 to 1906) and in Anglo-Jewish affairs, serving as president of the Board of Guardians for the Relief of the Jewish Poor from 1887 to 1900. Hannah Cohen thus grew up in an opulent Anglo-Jewish milieu in which it was accepted that members of the dominant families would assume the burdens of communal leadership. In 'Changing Faces', a memoir of her mother which she published in 1937, she offered a sympathetic insight into this world in which affluence and leisure existed naturally alongside persistent philanthropy and public service. 
Hannah Cohen was educated at Roedean School and Newnham College, Cambridge (1894-7), where she read for the classical tripos. Though of independent means, during the First World War she accepted employment in the factory department of the Home Office (1916-17), from where she moved to the Treasury (1917-20), becoming one of the first women to be entrusted with senior employment in the civil service; her work at the Treasury earned her an OBE. At that time the presidency of the Jewish Board of Guardians was held by her cousin, Sir Lionel Cohen, who had succeeded her father in that office. Established in 1859, the board of guardians had been regarded as a model of good practice in relation to voluntary poor relief, which in time extended also to financing schemes of apprenticeship and to providing loans and grants to enable impoverished Jewish immigrants to learn suitable trades. But the large-scale influx of Russian-Jewish refugees in the 1880s and 1890s had led it to adopt, under the influence of Sir Benjamin Cohen and other members of the Anglo-Jewish establishment, a series of highly unpopular panic-induced policies, including repatriation; Sir Benjamin himself had incurred considerable communal opprobrium by offering parliamentary support for the 1905 'Aliens Act'. 
In 1900 Hannah Cohen had become the first woman to be elected a member of the board of guardians; over the next twenty years she familiarized herself with every aspect of its work. In 1921 she became the guardians' honorary secretary, succeeding to the vice-presidency in 1926; she held the presidency itself from 1930 to 1940. In the case of each of these offices, she was the first female incumbent. The revival of the reputation of the guardians was due in no small measure to Hannah Cohen's exertions. A brilliant administrator, she brought the guardians back to an appreciation of their original philosophy, arguing that the prevention of poverty was better than its cure, and emphasizing the importance of health and the value of convalescence. In the nineteenth century the Anglo-Jewish leadership had vigorously opposed any reliance on financial assistance from the state to help cope with the problems of the Jewish poor. Hannah Cohen had no such inhibitions: in 1929 she made, on behalf of the guardians, its first radio broadcast appeal for funds. Under her leadership the guardians took full advantage of the financial benefits of the rudimentary welfare state then in existence, covering sickness, unemployment, and old-age benefits. These were supplemented as necessary, but the major focus of the guardians was readjusted to concentrate on housing schemes, the provision of health services, and the expansion of convalescent facilities, especially for women and children. 
Hannah Cohen served on the governing bodies of Roedean and Newnham, the Working Women's College, London, Swanley Horticultural College, and the Jewish Orphanage, Norwood. She never married. She died of gangrene in Stoneycrest Nursing Home in Hindhead, Surrey, on 21 November 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 56666


Vere, Thomas (d. 1682), jury foreman, was the son of Ralph Vere of Wrotham, Kent. He was apprenticed in 1635/6 to John Wright, a member of the Stationers' Company. He obtained his freedom in 1644, and between 1646 and 1680 he operated as a bookseller in the Old Bailey area. 
Vere served as the foreman of the jury which tried the Quakers William Penn and William Mead at the Old Bailey before the mayor and recorder of London in September 1670. Penn and Meade had been arrested for conspiracy to commit a riot in Gracechurch Street on 14 August 1670. After an initial deliberation lasting one and a half hours, the jury split 8:4 for a guilty verdict. After being sent back again the jury found the defendants guilty of 'speaking in Gracechurch Street'. After being sent out again, they found Penn guilty of speaking or 'preaching' to an 'assembly', but found Meade not guilty. The judge then ordered the jury detained overnight, without food or drink. When they returned the same verdict twice more, the court threatened the jury with being carted about the city. The jury sent word of a new verdict, but the court adjourned until the following day, whereupon the jury found a unanimous verdict of not guilty. This enraged the bench, who imposed a fine of 40 marks upon each juror and ordered them detained until the fine was paid. Vere evidently paid his fine and was released, as he was not one of the four jurors, led by Edward Bushell, who sued out a writ of habeas corpus in the court of common pleas, and won the ruling that the fine had no basis in law and that the jury had been held without lawful cause. 
Vere was elected a common councilman for the Farringdon Without ward in 1672 and 1675-7. He served as warden of the Stationers' Company in 1677 and as master in 1681. His will, dated 13 February 1682, referred to himself as 'citizen and stationer', and to his belief in his personal salvation 'with the elect children of God' (will). He asked to be buried in his local church of St Sepulchre, near to his 'late wife'. His will was proved later in 1682. 


@@@@@


doc= 56668


Bodie, Walford (1869-1939), music-hall entertainer, was born on 11 June 1869 at 33 George Street, Aberdeen, the son of William Bodie, journeyman baker, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Murphy. Educated at Robert Gordon College, Aberdeen, he joined the National Telephone Company as an electrician in the mid-1880s. He reputedly made his stage debut demonstrating electricity in an amateur show at Stonehaven in 1886, but his subsequent early career is hard to document, not least because of the variously embroidered accounts he later offered. In 1897 he began work as assistant manager of a Norwich music-hall run by his brother-in-law, H. Werner Walford, before briefly managing a hall at Macclesfield. As Dr Walford Bodie (he may have obtained an American qualification of dubious provenance) he then founded the Royal Magnets Variety Company, quickly establishing a reputation in Scotland and the English provinces. He probably made his London debut at the Britannia, Hoxton, in 1903 and for the next few years was one of the biggest attractions ever seen on the British variety stage. 
Tall, with piercing eyes and a large, dramatically pointed moustache, Bodie had tremendous stage presence. His act contained a number of elements of greater or lesser importance at different stages of his career. A renowned ventriloquist, he was also a highly gifted hypnotist, specializing in the physical and mental manipulation of his assistants and popularizing the hypnosis and subsequent embarrassment of audience members. Yet another element involved the carrying out of electrical exhibitions and experiments, often involving the passage of supposedly lethal doses of electricity through his body and that of volunteers. An endlessly inventive self-publicist, happy to refer to himself in his posters as the Most Remarkable Man on the Earth, his stunts included hypnotizing animals in Dundee Zoo in 1904 and exhibiting the original electric chair in the 1920s. 
Walford Bodie's box-office success, however, was ultimately built upon his reputation as a healer through the deployment of what he termed 'bloodless surgery'. More than 76,000 people were reputed to have seen his shows during a three-week run at the Bristol People's Palace music-hall in 1904, at which he claimed to have cured some fifty patients 'discharged as hopeless and incurable cases from the Royal Infirmary and the general Hospital' ('Era', 7 July 1904). Bloodless surgery involved an amalgam of hypnotism, muscular manipulation, faith-healing, and what he termed 'Bodie-force', the intuitive direction of electrical currents via his hands and feet to the relevant parts of the patient's body. Whatever its validity and for whatever reason, his treatment clearly benefited some individuals. Unsurprisingly, Bodie was a constant target for the medical profession. Medical students heckled his performances while senior practitioners attacked him in the press: even a visit to his home town in 1904 was thus marked. Bodie deliberately courted the publicity that ensued, teasingly dedicating his 'textbook' 'The Bodie Book' (1905) to British doctors 'in the hope that it may lead them to a fuller understanding of the finer forces of which it treats'. However, in November 1909, during the course of a successful court action brought against Bodie by a former assistant, many of his stage secrets, including selective choice of patients and the exaggeration of their symptoms, were exposed. His next engagement at the Glasgow Coliseum was disrupted for several nights by medical students and finally closed by a virtual riot on 12 November. Further demonstrations and an attack on his business premises followed the next week in London. Although Bodie remained an attraction -- his company's dramatic escape from the torpedoed SS 'Arabia' on return from an Indian tour in 1916 gave valuable publicity -- he concentrated far less on healing and found it increasingly difficult to obtain bookings in leading halls. 
Bodie invested his not inconsiderable earnings in a number of business ventures, owning a hotel, shops, and houses in Macduff, Banffshire, by 1903. He also ran the Bodie Electric Drug Company in London, which produced 'electric liniment' and 'electric life pills'. He wrote a body of literature to support his act and created the fictional detective Harley the hypnotist, with a book-length treatment published in 1910 enjoying some commercial success. In 1890 he married the eldest daughter of David Henry, a road surveyor from Macduff. As Princess Rubie, illusionist and thought-reader, she worked with him until her retirement in 1930. Four of her sisters also had spells with his company, as did his sister Marie Walford, who appeared as Mystic Marie, the Electric-Magnetic Floating Lady. In 1903, the Bodies built the Manor House, Macduff, with Bodie happily playing the role of local laird and enjoying golf and masonic activity. They were badly affected by the early deaths of their daughter, Jeannie, who worked in the family show, and son Albert who had managed his father for a period. A third child, Samuel, survived both parents. 
On 15 February 1932, a year after the death of his first wife, Bodie married Florence Joan (Florrie) Robertshaw ('b'. 1909/10), a 22-year-old, Leeds-born dancer who worked in his show as La Tesla. He was taken ill while performing at the Blackpool Olympia in October 1939 and died in Blackpool Victoria Hospital on 19 October, six days after an unsuccessful operation on a perforated ulcer. He was buried in Macduff five days later. His obituarist declared: 'Whatever he was, he was an exquisite showman' ('Aberdeen Evening Express', 20 Oct 1939); Bodie personified the diversity of twentieth-century variety and skilfully exploited the tensions between popular belief and scientific-medical knowledge. 


@@@@@


doc= 56669


Bosanquet, Bernard James Tindal (1877-1936), cricketer, born at home at Bulls Cross, Enfield, Middlesex, on 13 October 1877, was the eldest son in the family of two sons and three daughters of Bernard Tindal Bosanquet (1843-1910) and his wife, Eva Maude Cotton (died 1912), and was grandson of James Whatman Bosanquet. His father, who was of Huguenot descent, belonged to the banking firm Bosanquet & Co., which was sold to Lloyds Bank in 1884, and then became a partner in Culverwell, Brooks & Co., hide, leather, and fur brokers in the City of London; he was high sheriff of Middlesex (1897-8), honorary lieutenant-colonel in the rifle brigade, and captain of Enfield cricket club. Bernard, the son, attended Sunnymede School, Slough, before going on to Eton College (1891-6), where he scored a century against Harrow at Lord's, and then Oriel College, Oxford (1897-1900), which he left without taking a degree. He had a distinguished sporting career at the university, winning blues for cricket (1898, 1899, and 1900), and half-blues for hammer-throwing (1899, 1900) and billiards (1898, 1900), as well as being an accomplished ice hockey player. 
Bosanquet is remembered as the bowler who invented the 'googly', an off-break delivered with a leg-break action from the back of the hand. He had begun, when at Oxford, to pitch a tennis ball on a table so that, with the same action or delivery, he could make it break in one direction, then another. By 1899 he had progressed to a cricket ball. 'I had become a 'star turn' for the luncheon interval during our matches at Oxford. The most famous batsman from the opposing side was enticed into a net' ('Wisden', 1925, 226), Bosanquet bowled two or three leg-breaks to him, and then, with the same action but altering the axis of the spin, deceived him with an off-break. He recorded his first success when, playing for Middlesex at Lord's in 1900, he had the Leicestershire batsman S. Coe stumped on 98, albeit with a delivery which bounced four times before reaching the wicket-keeper. It was at first regarded as something of a joke, and 'Wisden' (1901, 129) chose to give him credit instead for his two centuries in the match. The development in this technique, however, marked a revolution in bowling, and transformed Bosanquet from a fairly ordinary medium-pacer into a spinner capable of baffling the most assured batsman with his flight and break. 
Between 1898 and 1919 Bosanquet, who had a business career, played 123 matches as an amateur for Middlesex and represented England on six occasions. He took a total of 629 wickets at an average of 23.8 runs per wicket. In his best season, 1904, he captured 132 wickets. He went on six overseas tours but played representative matches only on MCC's 1903-4 tour to Australia, when, in the fourth test at Sydney, his six for 51 in the second innings enabled England to win back the 'Ashes'. His best performance was eight for 107 against Australia at Nottingham in 1905. After 1905, when he was one of the 'Wisden' cricketers of the year, his bowling declined, though his batting improved remarkably. Standing 6 feet tall, he was a fine hard-hitting batsman who in 1908 topped the first-class averages with 1018 runs (average 54.05). 
As a bowler, Bosanquet remained something of an enigma. A friend once reflected, 'I know old Bose invented the Googly and that sort of thing, but did he ever get any wickets?' ('Wisden', 1925, 228). His length was notoriously wayward and even his mentor, Sir Pelham Warner, said he bowled more bad balls than any bowler he knew. Yet on his day he was a match-winner, and the long line of googly bowlers who succeeded him (notably the 1907 South African side) was testimony to his achievement. Abdul Qadir of Pakistan was the most notable exponent of the technique in the 1980s, and Shane Warne of Australia in the 1990s. 
During the First World War Bosanquet was a temporary lieutenant in the Royal Flying Corps. A convivial and good-natured man, he married, on 5 April 1924, Mary Janet ('b'. 1897/8), daughter of (William) Kennedy Jones, MP for Hornsey and joint founder of the 'Daily Mail'. After his father's death in 1910 Bosanquet sold the family seat, Claysmore, Enfield, Middlesex, and settled at Wykehurst Farm, Coneyhurst Lane, Ewhurst, Surrey, where he died on 12 October 1936. He was buried three days later in the Lavender Hill cemetery, Enfield. His wife survived him along with their only child, Reginald Tindal Kennedy Bosanquet (1932-1984), who became a well-known television newsreader and was rector of the University of Glasgow from 1980 to 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 56670


Russell, Edward Southwell, twenty-sixth Baron de Clifford (1907-1982), racing driver, dog-food salesman, and the last peer to be tried by the House of Lords, was born on 31 January 1907, the only son of Jack Southwell Russell, twenty-fifth Baron de Clifford (1884-1909), an Irish landowner, and his wife, Evelyn Victoria Anne ('b'. 1886/7), a Gibson girl whose stage name was Eva Carrington; she was the daughter of Walter Robert Chandler of Dalgan Park, Shrule, Tuam, sometime orderly room clerk to Colonel Fred Burnaby. In infancy Russell succeeded to the title and an impoverished Irish estate (12,000 acres in co. Mayo and co. Galway, worth $5691 a year in 1883 but valued at $100,000 in 1909) when his father was killed in a motor accident at Bramber, Sussex, on 1 September 1909. He was educated at Eton College and Imperial College, London, where he studied engineering. His early years were associated with fast cars and fast women. On 11 March 1926, aged nineteen, he married Dorothy (Dolly) Evelyn Meyrick (1902-1987), dance hostess daughter of the shady nightclub manageress Kate Meyrick, and was promptly fined $50 for making a false oath to obtain the marriage certificate, claiming that he was aged twenty-two and the son of Jack Russell, engineer; he feared that his mother, who was his legal guardian and by then on her third husband, George Vernon Tate, might have withheld her consent. He was lucky, the lord mayor stated, in imposing the fine, to have escaped a prison sentence. 
Nine years later de Clifford was luckier still to escape prison. On 21 August 1935 he was charged with 'feloniously killing and slaying Douglas George Hopkins by driving a motor recklessly at the Kingston Bypass road'; he stated that the other car, driven by Hopkins, another racing driver, returning at 3.30 a.m. from a dance in Datchet with his sister and girlfriend, had been out of control, on the wrong side of the road, and going at a tremendous speed, so that he, de Clifford, had swerved to avoid it and thus also ended up on the wrong side of the road. This was not considered a convincing defence. A peer -- and indeed any peeress, whether noble by birth or by marriage -- accused of felony had to be tried by his peers -- a privilege, or procedure, that could not be waived. These trials had become exceedingly rare so that the first action of the House of Lords was to set up a select committee to scrutinize the precedents and establish the proper form for turning itself into a court, which it drew from the last trial, that of the second Earl Russell for bigamy, in 1901. 
The Russell trial had been a big social occasion, with much demand for ringside seats; again, in 1935 admission to de Clifford's trial was by ticket only, issued to privileged categories of peers electing not to take a full part in the trial, peeresses, eldest sons of peers, Scottish and Irish peers, and a limited number of MPs. While there was a full house on 12 December 1935 it was not, however, treated as a second Ascot, unlike the 1901 event, which had chanced to fall in July. There was some preliminary debate on whether it was obligatory for peers to wear cocked hats, and on the definition of a cocked hat; it was decided that all peers wishing to be full members of the trial had to be properly dressed and hatted, but ordinary spectators could be less formally dressed. After this considerable build-up the trial itself, while quite spectacular as pageant, was very brief. Sir Henry Curtis Bennett KC advanced the extraordinary argument that de Clifford had no case to answer, since the mere fact that a motorist was on the wrong side of the road, as he admitted he had been, was no evidence of negligence, let alone of criminal negligence. The trial peers listened to this in the royal gallery (fitted out as a court), trooped out to their chamber to debate it, and returned to the court to pronounce in turn, starting with the most junior baron, that de Clifford was not guilty. The charge against him of dangerous driving still stood, in theory to be heard in the ordinary courts; but it was quietly dropped and no further charges were pursued. 
These occasional trials by peers tended to produce theatrical performances of a carefully choreographed and half-remembered costume drama -- Dorothy Sayers, no doubt inspired by accounts of the Russell trial, gave a graphic description of a fictitious trial by peers in her 'Clouds of Witness' (1926) -- and bizarre verdicts. The de Clifford acquittal was in the tradition of the perverse conviction of Earl Russell for bigamy (he spent three months in Holloway prison) on the grounds that his divorce from his outrageously impossible first wife, perfectly validly performed at Reno, Nevada, was not recognized under English law, and of the even more outrageous acquittal of Lord Cardigan in 1841, because the evidence that he shot Harvey Tuckett in a duel did not prove that he had shot the Harvey Garnet Phipps Tuckett named in the indictment. The lord chancellor in 1935, Hailsham, praised the trial as a fine example of maintaining a glorious tradition, while at the same time acknowledging that the whole archaic ritual was an anachronistic and inherently unfair procedure. Nothing was done about it, however, until after 1945, when a section of the law reforms in the 1948 'Criminal Justice Act' abolished trial by peers. 
For de Clifford the publicity of his trial and the curious basis of his acquittal meant his withdrawal from public life. He perhaps appreciated the irony that he had begun to build a reputation as a road safety expert in the Lords from his maiden speech, at the age of twenty-one, proposing driving tests for all applicants for driving licences and -- years before its time -- suggesting that road deaths and injuries of children could be curbed by having policemen outside schools to help them in crossing roads. In the early 1930s, between visits to Brooklands racetrack, he maintained a steady stream of short speeches on road safety, pressing for the introduction of driving tests because it was 'unfair that the majority of motorists should be penalised for the minority of careless drivers' ('The Times', 3 June 1932) and welcoming speed limits in built-up areas, urging that 'there were places in larger towns where even 30 miles an hour would be too great' (ibid., 11 July 1934). He gave this up after 1935 and never spoke in the Lords again. He also gave up racing, using his engineering training with armoured cars in the Territorial Army and then with the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (REME) during the Second World War; he transferred to the regular army in 1942, was appointed OBE (military) in 1955, and retired as lieutenant-colonel. 
De Clifford's marriage survived his appearance as co-respondent in a divorce case in 1936 but he and his wife separated after the war and were finally divorced in 1973; on 4 December 1974 he married Mina Margaret, only daughter of George Edward Sands. For a while he lived in Wrantage, near Taunton, Somerset, running a quarantine kennel and selling dog food door-to-door, and then moved to The Birches, Silvington, Cleobury Mortimer, Shropshire, where he died on 3 January 1982, leaving $437. He was survived by his second wife, and was succeeded in the title by his elder son, John Edward Southwell Russell, who was born in 1928. 


@@@@@


doc= 56671


Roberts, Arthur Brinley (1897-1964), trade unionist, was born on 7 April 1897 at 4 Penybont, Aberystruth, Monmouthshire, the fifth of eight children born to William Roberts ('c'.1863-1906), a mining engineer, and his wife, Mary Ann Blacker. After the death of William Roberts the family endured considerable hardship. Angry at the harsh treatment meted out by the Bedwellte board of guardians, the Roberts family became staunch supporters of the Independent Labour Party. Though Bryn Roberts left Abertillery elementary school at the age of thirteen to work in the Penybont pit, he continued his education by attending night classes. 
Roberts was a conscientious objector during the First World War. He was incarcerated, escaped from a prison in Northumberland, and was eventually recaptured. Upon his release in 1918 he worked in the Cwmtillery colliery before winning scholarships to Ruskin College, Oxford, and the Central Labour College in London. He returned to south Wales in 1921, and in the following year he was elected as a checkweigher for the Mardy pit. He married Violet Mary Sheenan in October 1922. Four years later he was elected as the miners' agent for the Rhymni valley district in Monmouthshire and also to Rhymni council, where he led a campaign against the means test. In 1929 he finished second behind Aneurin Bevan in the contest to find a Labour candidate for the Ebbw Vale constituency. He was industrious both as a councillor and a miners' union leader: in 1932 he chaired the council and, in addition, dealt with the cases of over 400 injured miners. 
In 1934 Roberts became general secretary of the National Union of Public Employees (NUPE), which at that time had 13,000 members. The union was in debt and could only afford to employ a back-room staff of four. His response was to launch an ambitious expansion plan. The timing was propitious: after years of decline, union membership had begun to rise. He prosecuted the plan with shrewd determination. NUPE concentrated its recruitment policy in rural areas, which the general unions had mostly ignored. Within two years the membership of NUPE had risen by 80 per cent and the union's income had doubled. The membership drive did not escape controversy, however, as NUPE organizers were not averse to recruiting members of other unions. 
In 1938 Roberts returned from a visit to the Soviet Union, convinced that there was genuine popular support for the regime. Three years later, his campaign to replace the system of local bargaining for county council workers bore fruit, and national bargaining structures for other NUPE workers followed soon afterwards. In the same year, 1941, the National Union of General and Municipal Workers, alarmed at NUPE's expansion, offered Roberts a lucrative position, which he declined. In 1943 his advocacy helped persuade the TUC to begin to prepare detailed plans for nationalization of the transport and fuel industries. 
Though the war had interrupted the NUPE expansion plan, the union made progress in other areas. Roberts and his colleagues, for instance, had succeeded in doubling the pre-war wages of roadmen by 1945. In 1952 he urged the TUC to draw up a plan for further nationalization. His belief that private enterprise was discredited and should be replaced by a planned economy was unwavering. His views on the labour movement were iconoclastic and equally uncompromising: nationalization and industrial democracy were both hindered by unnecessary competition between unions. The union movement should be fundamentally restructured along industrial lines with one union representing each group of workers. His opinions won him few friends among his fellow union leaders and, despite numerous attempts, he never succeeded in being elected to the TUC general council. Furthermore, his antagonism towards the general unions contributed towards the comparative isolation of NUPE within both the TUC and the Labour Party. 
By 1959 NUPE comprised nearly 200,000 members and employed over fifty staff at its headquarters. Two years later Roberts published 'The Price of TUC Leadership', in which he claimed that TUC conservatism had cost the Labour Party victory in the 1959 election. Shortly afterwards, he suffered a severe stroke. He returned to work briefly in the autumn of 1961 but retired in July 1962. An outstanding organizer, a powerful orator, and a skilled polemicist, whose ability was attested to by the phenomenal growth of the union he led and dominated, he was not a man of false modesty. His outspoken radicalism denied him the influence within the union movement that his talents deserved. He died after a long illness at his home, White Cottage, 10 Scotts Lane, Shortlands, Kent, on 26 August 1964, and was survived by his wife, a son, and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 56672


Sabini, (Charles) Darby (1888-1950), gang leader, was a prominent figure on racecourses during the 1920s and 1930s. In his lifetime he was variously known as Octavius (or Ottavio) Sabini, but more widely as Charles Darby Sabini or Darby Sabini, and, among other aliases, Frank Handley (TNA:PRO HO 45/23691). He was probably the boy named 'Otavia' (b. cert.) whose birth was registered as having taken place at 4 Little Bath Street, Holborn, London, on 11 July 1888, the son of Charles Handley, builder's labourer, and his wife, Elizabeth Eliza, 'nee' Fryer (1864-1919). He grew up in London's Little Italy, Saffron Hill, and his mother married at St Paul's, Clerkenwell, on 14 December 1898, Otavio Sabini (1853-1902), a carman of Italian descent, whom he later described as his father (m. cert.). As Ottavio Sabini he attended Drury Lane industrial school (an institution for neglected children considered in danger of delinquency) until 1900 when he became a pupil at Laystall Street elementary school in Holborn. He left school in July 1902, at thirteen, and became involved with Dan Sullivan, a boxing promoter. Sabini was a promising fighter but he disliked the arduous training and became a bouncer at Sullivan's promotions in Hoxton Baths. He married at St Paul's, Clerkenwell, on 21 December 1913, Annie Emma Potter (1892-1978), daughter of William John Potter, warehouseman. They had at least three daughters and one son. His reputation as a hard man was established in 1920 in a bar brawl at the Griffin public house in Saffron Hill. A notorious enforcer for a gang from south London insulted an Italian barmaid: Sabini knocked him out and gained status as the protector both of Italians and women. 
At this time the racecourses of southern England were preyed on by gangs extorting money from bookmakers. The main group was the Brummagem Boys. Their leader, 
The Birmingham gang was not a firm grouping under the tight control of Kimber. From about 1916 'three low blackguards, always more or less full of liquor' began to terrify and blackmail a number of small-scale London East End Jewish bookies (Divall, 183). After one of them was assaulted badly they turned for help to 
Emmanuel 'was pally with the Italian push', Darby Sabini's gang, and he recruited them to protect the Jewish bookies (Chinn, interviews with Prince, 1). This action led to protracted violence on many racecourses in southern England, and as one Jewish bookie recalled, 'it was us against them, the North against the South' (ibid., interview with S. Lewis, 1). On 25 March 1921 Sabini was attacked by a mob of Brummies at Greenford Trotting Park, and a few days later Kimber was shot when he went to the Italian's flat to try to calm matters. The trouble escalated and there were serious fights, but Kimber's position was weakened in June 1921 when the Brummagem Boys attacked a coachload of bookies from Leeds, believing that the vehicle was actually used by the Sabini gang. The Birmingham men were arrested in a pub nearby, and the next month twenty-three of them were imprisoned. It was believed widely that Sabini was bribing certain police officers and by the summer of 1921 he had the upper hand over Kimber. 
Fearful of further trouble, on 23 August leading southern bookmakers formed the Bookmakers' and Backers' Racecourse Protection Association (BBRPA; subsequently a respected organization). The vice-president was Emmanuel, whose connection was explained by his interests in credit betting away from the racecourses. At the inaugural dinner of the association in December 1921 it was explained that he was giving 'very valuable assistance' ('Bookmakers' and Backers' Racecourse Protection Association', 6). This help consisted of finding eight stewards who were each paid the large sum of $6 a week to protect bookies who were members of the BBRPA. It seems that Edward Emmanuel saw an opportunity to wrest control of the protection rackets on the southern racecourses from the Brummagem Boys, and he became involved in providing the lists of runners for various races. They were brought out for as little as a farthing each but 'to the bookies they were half a crown a set' (Greeno, 166). 
In 1922 Kimber acknowledged Sabini's power on the racecourses of southern England, but continued to operate his 'services' to bookies in the midlands and the north, where he helped to minimize the bullying of lesser gangs. Although Kimber's income was gained from violence, he was called 'one of the best' by a former chief inspector at Scotland Yard who was employed by the racecourses to keep order at various meetings and who was saved from a beating by Kimber (Divall, 201). He was remembered by some Brummie bookies as 'a game un', a fearless fighter who fought fairly with his hands and did not use knives (Chinn, interview with Green, 1). Following the death of his first wife, and now describing himself as a china and glass dealer, Kimber married secondly, on 19 July 1926, Elizabeth ('b'. 1896), daughter of Thomas Garnham, china dealer. He went to America in 1927 following a shooting incident at a club connected with the Sabini gang, but returned in 1929. Subsequently the ageing Kimber was no longer associated with bullying and coercion, and had come to be 'greatly respected' by some well-known London bookmakers who had not been involved in the preceding gang wars (ibid., interview with Dell, 5-6; Maskey, 9). He became a prosperous bookmaker, settling in Torquay at Park Hill Road. He died at the Mount Stuart Nursing Home on 27 June 1945. 
Sabini not only defeated Kimber but he also outmanoeuvred Emmanuel, forcing him to withdraw from the racecourses -- although the Jewish gangster later set up a profitable company which printed the tickets used by bookmakers as a receipt for their punters (customers). With no opposition, Sabini took over the protection rackets in the south of England which led the BBRPA to dispense with his services. However, he went on to become the leading gangster in southern England. Sabini's men provided a variety of 'services' to bookies, which they did not in fact need. These included payment for 'dots and dashes', whereby a racecard was marked to alert the bookmaker to the form of the horses and which told the bookie nothing more than he knew already; and the calling-out of the numbers allotted to the runners in a race. Bookmakers were also 'encouraged' to pay for the tools of their trade like lists of runners, stools to stand on, pieces of chalk with which to mark up the odds of the horses on a blackboard, and water with which to rub them out. Bookies were charged 2's'. 6died for each of these 'facilities', and at major meetings there could be as many as sixty bookmakers taking bets on up to eight races. In addition Sabini controlled the five or six best pitches (positions from which a bookie did business) at each meeting and put his own men on them on a 'ten bob in the pound basis' (Chinn, interview with Dell, 5). These protection rackets were highly profitable. He brought a libel action against D. C. Thomson, publishers of the 'Topical Times', which had named him as notorious in turf gangs (12 April 1924). He failed to appear when the case came before the high court in December 1925; costs were awarded against him, which the publishers pursued. Declared bankrupt in 1926, he denied during the proceedings that he earned at least $20,000 each year (Morton, 30). 
From 1929 stringent controls by the Jockey Club and the Bookmakers' Protection Association stopped Sabini controlling the best pitches, while his other racecourse activities were combated by the police. Making less money, Sabini moved into protection rackets at greyhound tracks and at drinking and gambling clubs in the West End of London. Sabini successfully thwarted challenges by other gangs, including the Cortesi brothers from within Saffron Hill and by the English Hoxton mob, but he lost his position of authority in the Second World War when he was interned in April 1940 as an alien on the Isle of Man. By then he had a penthouse flat in the Grand Hotel, Brighton, Sussex. 
After the war Sabini settled in Hove, Sussex, and became a small bookie. Despite his wealth, in his heyday he was unostentatious. He wore a flat cap, collarless shirt, high-buttoned waistcoat, and dark suit. A later gangland boss stated that Sabini 'stood for no liberties', while a bookie remembered that 'he was the gentleman of the mob but he feared no one' (Hill, 5; Chinn, interview with Prince, 2). He was regarded by many as 'Uncle Bob', someone who was courteous to women and who was generous to children, the needy, and the local Catholic church. To others he was a ruthless gangster and extortioner. One policeman recalled that he 'and his thugs used to stand sideways on to let the bookmakers see the hammers in their pockets' (Greeno, 12). Sabini was said always to carry a loaded pistol, and he did not hesitate to order the vicious beating and razor-slashing of opponents. It is likely that he was the model for the gang leader Colleoni in Graham Greene's novel 'Brighton Rock' (1938). When Sabini died at his home in Old Shoreham Road, Hove, on 4 October 1950, he left little money, although his clerk was later found to have $36,000 and it was believed that this was Sabini's cash. 


@@@@@


doc= 56676


Alexander Simpson (1902/3-1937), who took over the running of the firm. Known as Mr Alex to his employees, he was an enthusiast for style and quality who had saved pocket money for good, smart clothes while a child. Alexander entered the trade at fifteen, straight from Westminster City School, learned the business thoroughly at home and abroad, and at the age of twenty-one became his father's right hand in the planning of the new factory and partner in charge of sales. He shared with his father the credit for introducing the adjustable self-supporting trouser, obviating the need for belts or braces, patented in 1932. As Daks slacks they were the first fashion sports trouser and so convinced were Simeon and Alex Simpson of the quality of the design that they made 10,000 pairs in advance of the first sale. The trade mark Daks, registered in 1934, is, according to family legend, a combination of Dad and slacks, a late night inspiration of Alex and his brother Samuel Leonard, approved by William Crawford, their advertising agent and friend. Demand was great and by 1936 when S. Simpson Ltd changed from being a private to a public company, it had an issued capital of $350,000, all held by the family, and employed 2500 people. In April 1936 Simpson married Ceridwen Catherine Rees Roberts, the daughter of a neighbour. 
Alexander Simpson had a particular flair for promotion. In 1934 he and William Crawford organized a very successful Simpson stand at the British Industries Fair. This was the first to use live male models and sports demonstrations. In the same year he began to plan a permanent showplace for Simpson clothes, a prestige London shop. After acquiring the Piccadilly site, he commissioned a design team for what he intended as the most modern shop in London, with a unique feature, the largest curving plate glass windows in the world. Correspondence shows him to have worked closely and amiably with the architect Joseph Emberton. Interiors were designed by Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, design and lettering concept by Ashley Havinden. The shop became a listed building, acknowledged as a modernist classic. It had been financed by the parent company, with a supplementary loan arranged by the Yorkshire wool magnate Lord Barnby, later a director. In just over two years the shop was complete, opening on 24 April 1936, and by 1939 edging into profit. Only thirteen months after the store opened, Alexander Simpson's life was cut short by leukaemia; he died at Rookery Wood, Highwood Hill, Mill Hill, Hendon, on 15 May 1937. 
The shock to the trade was great, for Mr Alex was popular and admired. Dark haired like his father, he was similarly active in Jewish and local affairs, especially those relating to young people. Of large build, he was lively, a good communicator, and 'never made a boring speech in his life' according to 'Mens Wear' (1937). Fond of amateur football, boxing, and fast cars, he had the family ability to get on with staff of any age and level. Knowledgeable about all aspects of the men's wear, he was a perfectionist with a sense of style and quality which included but went far beyond clothes. 
The direction of the family business then passed to Alexander's brother 


@@@@@


doc= 56677


Simpson family (per. 1894-1990), clothing manufacturers, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 56678


Stout, William (1665-1752), grocer and ironmonger, was born in March 1665 at Bolton Holmes, Lancashire, the second son and third of seven children born to William Stout (died 1681), yeoman of Bolton Holmes, and his second wife, Elizabeth Dickinson ('c'.1632-1716). William was baptized at Bolton-le-Sands, Lancashire, on 26 March 1665. He attended the free school at Bolton until he was fourteen, then from 1679 a school in Heversham, Westmorland, and finally, in 1681, Lancaster grammar school. His skill at arithmetic caused his father to apprentice him to Henry Coward, a grocer and ironmonger. 
Coward was a prominent member of the local Society of Friends, and during his apprenticeship Stout attended the illegal meetings which were held at Coward's house. At one in 1685 he was so convinced by a 'plaine country farmer of Craven in Yorkshire' ('Autobiography', 83) that he joined the Quakers, regardless of the possible adverse effect upon his career. For the rest of his life his moral conduct and motivation were shaped by this religious group. 
At the end of his seven-year apprenticeship in 1687 Stout rented premises in Lancaster. Travelling with other local shopkeepers for mutual protection against highway robbery, he went to London, Northampton, Leicester, Sheffield, and Birmingham to purchase goods for setting up shop. From an outlay of $300 he made $50 profit in his first year. Stout took on an apprentice in 1690, and expanded his trade by buying up the goods of several retiring or insolvent shopkeepers. He increased his rented accommodation, and his sister Ellen, despite ill health, became his housekeeper and occasional shop assistant. 
Stout's reputation for being honest and conscientious led to his frequent appointment as an executor of wills, an office to which he devoted considerable care and attention over many years. From 1698 to 1734 he was clerk and treasurer to the Lancaster Friends' monthly meeting, and local representative at the quarterly meetings. While these activities involved much clerical work, as well as accountancy and travel on behalf of the Friends, especially those who were imprisoned because of their beliefs, they also kept him informed about trade and industry throughout the country and particularly in the north-west. Furthermore his Quaker contacts assured him of reliability and integrity, an enviable strength for a tradesman. 
Having averaged a profit of about $100 a year in nine years' trading, Stout sold the shop to his finishing apprentice in 1697. From that time he occasionally speculated in overseas ventures, generally in the Virginian and West Indian trade, with one Norwegian voyage, but his investments were never very profitable. Several times he returned to retailing, once to help an old friend and twice to save two of his former apprentices from bankruptcy; and he increased his property ownership both by purchase and building. Stout never married, having failed in the one courtship he attempted, but was generous and long suffering -- if critical -- in support of his siblings and their families. 
Stout's autobiography was probably written in later life from contemporary notes. It was first published in book form in 1851, having been serialized in the 'Manchester Guardian'; it was republished in 1967. It provides a unique account of the life of an early modern shopkeeper. The manuscript reveals his preferred manner of trading: not taking his former master's customers, plain dealing with his purchasers, set prices with no bargaining. It also illuminates a host of other topics -- the relationship between industrial growth and dissent, the financial and ethical practices of retailers as well as their routines, the financial implications of the French war, the development of local industries, and the problems of the depreciation and recoinage. In it Stout shows the pragmatic measures adopted by community and family for physical and social survival, and notes price fluctuations in the same detached way that he comments on his neighbours; 'negligent and careless', 'indolent and sottish' are his terms of condemnation, while 'improving' is his greatest approbation. 
Stout attributed his lifelong excellent health to a good plain diet, and at the age of seventy-eight made a remarkable recovery from injuries caused by a bolting horse. He died on 15 January 1752 at Lancaster and was buried in the Lancaster Friends' burial-ground on 19 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 56679


Sumner, Sir John (1856-1934), tea merchant, was born on 25 February 1856 at 97 High Street, Birmingham, the elder son of John Sumner (1824-1907), grocer and druggist of Birmingham and Coleshill, and his first wife, Ann (1825-1869), 'nee' Lees. 
The family grocery and druggist business was founded in 1820 by William Sumner ('b'. 'c'.1796) and passed in 1852 to his sons John (senior) and William. In 1863 John, author of 'A Popular Treatise on Tea' (1863), took specific responsibility for the grocery trade, while his brother ran the adjacent chemist's and druggist's. Sumner was educated at a private school in Moseley before entering his father's business. In 1894 the business was transferred to Hutton House, 25/26 High Street, Birmingham, to premises built by the noted local antiquary and historian William Hutton. From there Sumner 'rescued' the Priory Stone, which he presented to Birmingham Museum. This episode aside, there was little to distinguish Sumner from the majority of successful provincial grocers of his day until in 1903 he began to packet and market the tips of tea leaves or 'fannings'. 
Until then the market had been dominated by whole leaf tea, and these siftings had been thought to be of little or no commercial value, but Sumner successfully promoted them as a cure for indigestion and nervous disorders and sold them through chemists and grocers under the brand name 'Typhoo Tipps'. In 1905 he sold his retail business to finance the creation of Sumner's 'Typhoo' Tea Ltd, a private company which relied on financial backing from family members and from J. H. Brindley, founder and director of the Priory Tea and Coffee Company in Dale End, Birmingham. 
Rapid expansion followed through the adoption of aggressive marketing of the brand and in 1909 Sumner visited Ceylon to secure supplies, establishing an agency to buy, blend, and ship tea ready for packaging in Birmingham. Until the early 1920s these tea imports were stored in bonded warehouses in London, Liverpool, Manchester, and Avonmouth, but between 1923 and 1925 new canal-side packaging and storage facilities were developed in Birmingham enabling the firm to operate completely independently from the London tea market. By the early 1930s Typhoo was retailed from over 40,000 outlets, making it one of the most popular packet teas in Britain. When asked on one occasion to describe his business methods Sumner emphasized 'close personal supervision' in the early stages of his career, and 'absolute freedom from routine' with the confidence to delegate to 'the right type of man and woman' as the firm grew ('Worcester Daily Times', 12 May 1934). 
In 1926 Sumner passed control of the firm to his son and began to channel his energies into a wide range of charitable and public activities in Birmingham and the west midlands. In 1927 he founded the John Sumner Trust to promote works and objects of humanity, public utility, education, and research and to provide financial support for deserving persons not adequately provided for against infirmity and old age. This was followed in 1930 by the Colehaven Trust to finance the building in Coleshill of the Colehaven endowed homes for gentlewomen in reduced circumstances and failing health. He also took an active interest in the management of local hospitals, including the Birmingham nerve, children's, and general hospitals, Bromsgrove Cottage Hospital, and Worcester Royal Infirmary. He was a member of the Anti-Vivisection Society and, after retiring to Ham Court, Powick, near Worcester, joined Worcester Archaeological Society and became president of the Worcester branch of the National Citizens' Union. 
Sumner married Martha Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Potter, farmer of Coleshill, on 22 August 1885; they had one son. Sumner retained an interest in country life throughout his life. In his younger days he hunted with South Staffordshire hounds; in retirement he pursued farming, topiary, landscape gardening, and forestry as hobbies. As a staunch Conservative, Sumner did much to support the party's cause in the west midlands and was rewarded with a knighthood in June 1932 in recognition of his philanthropic and political services. 
Sumner died on 11 May 1934 at Ham Court, of prostate cancer. His funeral service at Powick parish church on 15 May was attended by representatives of the firm and all the organizations with which he had been associated. Cremation followed at Perry Barr, Birmingham, and his ashes were placed in the family vault in Coleshill cemetery. He was survived by his wife. His son, J. R. Hugh Sumner, succeeded him as chairman of the company; his nephew, Roland Sumner Kneale, became general manager. 


@@@@@


doc= 56681


Thaarup, Aage Gjerfing (1906-1987), milliner, was born on 29 April 1906 in Copenhagen, Denmark, in a lower-middle-class family of moderate means. He was the second of four brothers. After a conventional high- and commercial-school education he was employed as a trainee salesman in the millinery department of Fornesbeck, the largest Copenhagen department store. He then received an educational grant, which he supplemented by extracurricular fashion drawing and English teaching, and worked for a brief period in Berlin and at a Paris couture milliner, Maison Lewis. He returned to Copenhagen but, unable to settle, left for London in 1928. 
A period as a traveller with a wholesale hat firm having proved disappointing, Thaarup borrowed $200 and went to India in 1929, accumulating during the voyage the basis of a smart society clientele associated with the viceregal court. On his return to London in 1932, with $300 further borrowed capital, he opened a small salon at 4 Berkeley Street. By 1935 he was established as the most fashionable and innovative milliner in London with a royal and international society clientele. He also made hats for film and stage productions. 
Thaarup's creativity lay in his sense of form and the suitability of the hat for the personality of the wearer, the outfit, and the occasion for which it was intended. His sewing skills were minimal and he consistently stressed his reliance on the craft of his assistants. Nevertheless, with an enterprise then unusual in the London fashion accessory trade, after becoming a limited company and moving to larger premises in Grosvenor Street, he began to export hats to Lord and Taylor in New York and, less successfully, to Paris. Publicity was sustained by fashion shows, such as a surrealist-inspired display in New York in 1936, as well as others in collaboration with the newly formed Fashion Group of London. The wit and originality of these shows inspired his nickname, the 'Mad Hatter'. His house in Bywater Street, Chelsea, became a centre for the artistic intelligentsia, several of whom were to contribute to his artistically innovative magazine 'Pinpoints', of which four numbers were issued (1938-9). 
Being both lame and a Danish national, Thaarup was not directly involved in the war. However, the abnormal trading conditions forced his business into administration in 1940-42. Hats were nevertheless unrationed and were popular accessories, and as trade revived Thaarup organized touring fashion exhibitions as well as beginning a small wholesale trade. Popular innovations were '6 o'clock hats' for semi-formal wartime entertaining and miniature hats as gift tokens. His post-war popularity was confirmed by hats made for Queen and Princess Elizabeth for prestige royal occasions such as the victory parade in 1946 and for the trooping of the colour in 1950, but Thaarup appears never to have become a royal warrant holder. 
In 1947, participating in the post-war export drive, Thaarup launched Aage Thaarup (Export and Wholesale) Ltd. In 1948 he became president of the Associated Millinery Designers of London. Despite a series of worldwide promotional tours and the innovative introduction of a 'Teen and Twenty' range of hats, the firm which had merged with Aage Thaarup Ltd was bankrupt by 1955 with debts of $16,500 and assets of $6500, which 'The Times' ascribed to overtrading, the long credit customary in the fashion industry, and inadequate financial supervision; Thaarup's generosity to friends and family also probably played a part in the collapse. It is perhaps characteristic of his ebullient and optimistic personality that after the bankruptcy hearing, with help from friends, he spent the weekend at the Ritz. 
Sponsored by friends, Thaarup continued to work for the next ten years. He was based first at 132 King's Road, Chelsea, where he was assisted by students, several of whom became successful milliners in their own right, and from 1960 in Hanover Square, where he remained until retirement in 1965. He then lived for some years at Flat 2, 104 Elm Park Gardens, Chelsea. 
Small, spare, and sprightly, witty and articulate with a slight Danish accent, conventional in dress but with an enduring affection for flowing bow-ties, Thaarup remained on the fringes of the fashion world until he died of heart disease, on 11 December 1987 at St Stephen's Hospital, Chelsea. He never married. His autobiography, 'Heads and Tales' (1956), outlined his career. Examples of his work have survived in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and the Museum of Fashion, Bath, as well as other collections. 


@@@@@


doc= 56685


Thomason, Ann Arabella (1874-1959), bookmaker, was born at 15 Walkin Lane, Nether Hallam, Yorkshire, the daughter of John Clark, steel smelter, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Foster. On 6 July 1896 she married, at the register office, Bolton, Lancashire, Stephen (Steve) Thomason (1874-1951), an ironworks labourer, son of Stephen Thomason, forgeman. They had a son and a daughter. Her husband 'used to hawk kippers, and take sixpenny bets, and when they got enough money, to start big, they took that shop' (interview with Dean, 10). This was a fruit shop at 9 Great Moor Street in the centre of Bolton. The 'Betting Houses Act' of 1853 made it unlawful for people to bet for cash on horse-races in premises away from racecourses. Despite this the Thomassons (as their name was widely spelt) used their shop as a betting house. 
When they were raided by the police in 1905 and prosecuted, Stephen Thomasson faced seven charges and his wife one. At the police court hearings the defence 'asked the Justices to dismiss the woman even if she had been assisting her husband, arguing that she was under his coercion' ('Bolton Journal and Guardian', 23 June 1905). The bench fined Stephen Thomasson $25 with costs but made no additional penalty on his wife. At the hearing her husband promised that there would be no more betting at any house of his. This promise was unfulfilled and the Thomassons became the best-known betting house proprietors in Bolton, despite a heavy fine of $100 imposed in November 1924 for their fourth offence. 
In the early 1920s the Thomassons installed a ticker tape machine in their back yard. This was a telegraphic device run by the Extel company and it conveyed information from racecourses to subscribers. The facility placed them ahead of all the other local bookies, who relied on the local newspapers for their knowledge. By this time their shop was ostensibly a tobacconist's. In 1938 it was noted as 'a large cigarette shop that doesn't sell any cigarettes; there are dummies in the window, and the counter inside is used only for passing bets over; everybody knows about this, including the police, since anybody can walk in' (Mass-Observation, 265). 
During the Second World War racing was suspended but afterwards Bella Thomasson started up in business again. Her husband was ill and although she had a son (called Steve) she took another bookie, Albert Hampson, as a partner. He put the ticker tape in the shop and hired a miner who worked on shifts to read out over a microphone the details given. These included the results and the changes in the betting on each race, and so allowed Thomasson to take race-by-race bets throughout the afternoon. This was an innovation. In much of Britain illegal bookies took their bets on the streets for a couple of hours around midday, with the majority of punters (betters) choosing a number of horses and having multiple bets. Race-by-race facilities encouraged single betting, leading to a higher turnover and bigger profits. In effect, Thomasson and Hampson had a modern betting shop, one punter recalling that it 'was full of men backing horses' (Carl Chinn bookmaking letters, Bootham to Chinn, letter 1, 1-2). 
As with other illegal bookies it is likely that Thomasson paid certain police officers to turn a blind eye to her activities. Yet she adhered to a strong code of conduct, believing that the shop was no place for women, and only allowed them to bet before racing started. Thomasson was also well known for her honesty. One punter was in the merchant navy and was called away to sea before he could collect his winnings. Two years later he returned and she paid him his money. He described her as 'always immaculate, always in black' with 'nice bit of jewels on, not too flashy, she was a plump lady, well-built, good mannered. Always spoke like a lady' (interview with Dean, 10). Despite her partner's involvement and her old age, the business was seen as 'Bella's' although 'some also called it Steve Thomasson's' (Carl Chinn bookmaking letters, Green to Chinn, letter 4, 1). She died at 1153 Chorley Old Road, Bolton, Lancashire, on 11 November 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 56686


Ventners, Lawrence (c.1880-1947), bookmaker, was a well-known figure in the Garscube Road area of Glasgow, but nothing is known about his birth or parents. In common with a significant number of other bookies locally, Ventners was a Roman Catholic. He was popularly known as Lawrie. 
Since the passing of the 'Betting Houses Act' in 1853 it had been unlawful to accept bets for cash in premises away from a racecourse. Bookmakers evaded the law by taking bets on the street, a practice which was outlawed by the 'Street Betting Act' of 1906. To avoid capture by the police, bookies then moved their operations into more secluded spots, and Ventners, like other Glasgow bookmakers, worked in closes, the entrances to tenement buildings. These were well used and easily approached by 'punters' (betters) but they could be well guarded by 'watchers' (look-outs). 
In a city rent by sectarianism and discrimination bookmakers, like public house owners, 'came disproportionately from among the first or second generation Irish Catholic immigrants' (McGlennan to Chinn, letter 1, 2). Condemned by establishment leaders in church and local government (but not by the Roman Catholic church) as immoral and unchristian, bookies were also depicted as parasites who leached off the working class and who encouraged unwise expenditure. Yet the life of Lawrie Ventners is in stark contrast to that bleak and unflattering portrayal. Ordinary Glaswegians, according to later oral testimony, looked on him as 'the 'patron saint' of the neighbourhood' (Ditty to Chinn, letter 2, 2). He was recalled as being a man 'who was always helping someone with their financial troubles'; and when he died 'the streets were black with mourners' (Moir to Chinn, letter 2, 5; 'Daily Record' cutting). This positive view of Ventners was emphasized by a reporter who witnessed his funeral: the crowd was so great that mourners were six to eight deep on both sides of the street for its whole length. Every window was crammed with spectators and special police were on duty. The reporter learned that this was not just a gathering of Ventners' clients, it was 'the massed tribute of his friends, the humble folk of Garscube Road and the congested area around'. People spoke of how Ventners had sent food to families in difficulties, of how he had saved others from eviction, and of how 'every week without fail a cripple received an envelope with enough in it to keep a roof over his head' ('Sunday Sun', 15 June 1947). 
A latter-day Robin Hood and working-class 'folk hero', Lawrie Ventners died in June 1947 and was buried in Glasgow on 15 June 1947. 


@@@@@


doc= 56687


Vernet, Helen Monica Mabel (1875/6-1956), bookmaker, was born in 1875 or 1876, but little else is known about her early life. She had a brief career as an actress, playing small parts, but this ended on her marriage, at the age of seventeen, to Spencer Thornton, a stockbroker. Influenced perhaps by her husband's occupation, Helen Thornton became a prolific gambler and quickly exhausted most of the $8000 left her by her father, who had died when she was still a child. The dissipation of her inheritance was accelerated when, following a serious illness which affected her lungs, she was advised by her doctor to spend more time in the open air: she opted to go racing several times a week. Her marriage to Thornton was annulled, possibly because his income proved insufficient for her needs, and she subsequently married another stockbroker, Robert Vernet. 
In her early racing days Helen Thornton became aware that many women wished to bet in small amounts which bookmakers on Tattersall's rails were reluctant to accept. Entry to Tattersall's ring was more expensive than to normal enclosures and the bookmakers expected their customers to wager accordingly and not in denominations as low as 5 or 10's'. During the 1918 racing season Mrs Vernet, as she had by then become, let it be known among her friends that she would accept bets of this order handed to her in writing. This was illegal, and as her clientele increased the professional bookmakers objected and had her warned off by racecourse officials. 
However, Arthur Bendir, who had essentially established the bookmaking firm of Ladbrokes in 1902, saw the economic potential and publicity value of employing Helen Vernet as the first female licensed bookmaker on British racecourses. He was proved right and during her career with Ladbrokes, which began in 1919, she never earned less than $20,000 a year from her commission on gambling receipts. In 1928 she purchased a partnership in the firm. This was the year that the totalizator first came to British racing. It catered for the small-scale better but many gamblers still preferred the interaction with bookmakers, who offered character as well as negotiable odds. Mrs Vernet contrasted with the brash personalities of many of her male counterparts, being charming and extremely chic. 
Helen Vernet's second marriage, coupled with her commission from bookmaking, allowed her to live in style in a succession of elegant, furnished London houses in Gray's Inn, Albany, and finally at 49 Eaton Place, Westminster. She also owned Cunningham Lodge at Hove where she installed her mother. She was fond of dancing and allegedly insisted that her clerks, who accompanied her to provincial meetings requiring overnight stays, should be both handsome and expert dancers. For holidays she favoured the Riviera where she could gamble in the casinos. She admitted to one weakness: a fondness for gigolos. 
Helen Vernet continued with Ladbrokes until 1955, often in later years, as Parkinson's disease and arthritis took hold, being pushed to her position in a wheelchair by her 'bookmaker's runner' (or assistant), Alf Simmons. Her death, on 30 March 1956, at 49 Eaton Place, was from a combination of bronchial pneumonia and Parkinson's disease. Her estate was valued at $7573, $500 of which went to Alf Simmons. Five years after Helen Vernet died, betting shops were introduced to Britain: although they brought money to her old firm, she would not have appreciated their lack of glamour. 


@@@@@


doc= 56688


Yule, Annie Henrietta, Lady Yule (1874/5-1950), film industry financier, was the only daughter in a family of two children of Andrew Yule (1834-1902) ['see under 'Yule family], merchant of Calcutta, and his wife, Emma Porter. In 1900 she married her first cousin David Yule (1858-1928) ['see under 'Yule family], who until his marriage had lived a solitary bachelor existence over his business premises in Calcutta. They lived briefly together in Calcutta until she contracted malaria. She refused thereafter to spend prolonged periods in India, and he bought for her Hanstead House at Bricket Wood near St Albans, where their only child, Gladys Meryl, was born in 1903. In 1922 her husband returned to England, latterly working from a frugally furnished office in Finsbury Circus in his shirt sleeves. 
By her husband's death on 3 July 1928 Annie Yule came to command between $8 and $15 million. She was then probably the richest British widow, surpassing even Dame Fanny Houston. Aged only about fifty-three when Yule died, she was restless and easily bored. As a diversion she joined J. Arthur Rank in forming a film-making company called British National (1934). Her strong if unsystematic patriotism was indicated by the title of the company. She was an original shareholder in Pinewood Studios (1936), but exchanged her stake with Rank's interest in British National (1937). Under the management of John Corfield British National produced a series of thrillers. The eerie 'Dead Men Tell No Tales' (1938), about the murder of a school matron who won a lottery, was among the most successful. Though Lady Yule's commitment to filming was spasmodic, her financing of 'Contraband' (1940) by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger early in the Second World War was a fillip to British film production at a moment when it might have perished. British National's low-budget melodrama 'Love on the Dole' and its propagandist 'One of our Aircraft is Missing' were notable successes of 1941. The chairmanship of British National and of the National Studios at Elstree was delegated by Lady Yule to Sir Henry Richardson, a director of her husband's old firm Yule, Catto. The company closed in 1948 at a time when the British film industry was stricken by a crisis of confidence and finance as a result of ill-judged meddling by the Labour government headed by Clement Attlee. 
Lady Yule owned a stud farm at Bricket Wood, where she also kept prize-winning Jersey and Aberdeen Angus herds. Her horses enjoyed every equine luxury, including mechanical drinking-troughs. After buying a Newmarket racing stable called Balaton Lodge she ordered that her jockeys must never use their whips. She subsidized the Olympia International Horse Show, for which on one occasion she ordered forty horses to be taught to dance a quadrille to prove that English horses could be trained to do almost anything. She kept penguins and wallabies in her grounds, and formed an institution in the south of France to care for weary or ill-treated animals. Lady Yule had little obvious affection for humans other than her daughter, who having received a thousand proposals of marriage from fortune-hunters became increasingly reclusive. Although in 1946 she gave Balaton Lodge to the Veterinary Educational Trust as an equine research station, her daughter maintained the thoroughbred stud at Bricket Wood and was the leading horsewoman in Britain at her death in 1957. 
Lady Yule had strong religious opinions, a sharp tongue, and imperious habits. She tried to enforce her teetotalism on the fifty-one crew of her yacht 'Nahlin', which she sold to Carol II of Romania shortly before the Second World War. A heavy cigarette smoker, she died of a coronary thrombosis on 14 July 1950 at Hanstead House, Bricket Wood, St Albans, Hertfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 56689


Joanna Margaret Hill (1836/7-1901), who was born in Hampstead. All three were involved in prison reform and the reform of the treatment of juvenile delinquents and the children of the poor. Rosamond, the best known of the three, was also involved in educational reform. Their parents had moved from Birmingham to London after their marriage in 1819, and the family, which also included two sons, Alfred (1821-1907) and Matthew Berkeley (1834-1892), lived in Hampstead from 1831 to 1851. They were acquainted with a wide circle of reformers and writers including Charles Knight, Leigh Hunt, and William Thackeray. Contact with such individuals, as well as with their own extended family, provided Rosamond, Florence, and Joanna with a political education and fuelled in all of them a sense of social responsibility. While their parents espoused conventional Victorian notions about appropriate roles for women, the daughters were encouraged to develop independence of mind and to value their own capacities for serious work. For example, their father had a great respect for the noted Irish writer and reformer Maria Edgeworth. When she visited London in 1840 he arranged that Rosamond and Florence should pay a call on her: Rosamond's biographer, E. E. Metcalfe, relates that this visit made a deep impression on Rosamond and on Florence. 


@@@@@


doc= 56690


Brown, Mary (1847-1935), social reformer, was born at Sea Point, Cape Town, Cape Colony, on 20 July 1847, one of the eleven children of Henry Solomon ('b'. 1816), a Jewish convert to Christianity, and his wife, Julia Middleton, the daughter of a Yorkshire doctor. Henry Solomon's British-born parents had moved to the Cape, where their family became prominent and influential. Mary Brown's childhood was happy, with more freedom than was usual for girls of her time. In adult life she had striking features, with deep-set eyes and dark curly hair. She went to a small dame-school in Cape Town, and, showing great intellectual promise, joined the first classes for women at Cape Town University when she was seventeen. 
At the age of nineteen Mary Solomon met Dr John Brown (1842-1929), the son of a London Missionary Society missionary, the Revd J. C. Brown. He had been educated in Scotland, returning to South Africa in 1864 as a newly qualified doctor. His advanced views on freedom and the education of women attracted Mary. When they were engaged he sent her to Scotland on a six-month visit to his parents and to see London and Paris. They were married in Cape Town on 22 June 1869. Her husband was practising in Fraserburg, and after a short honeymoon at the Cape they travelled there by Cape-cart, a journey taking nearly a week. 
It was an isolated life. John Brown had books sent out from England, including John Stuart Mill's 'Liberty' and 'The Subjection of Women', and read aloud to his wife most evenings. A son was born in 1870, followed by a daughter, Rachel, in 1872, and another son, John, in 1874, who died in infancy. In 1876 John Brown gave up his practice and returned to Edinburgh with his family to study. Three years later they moved to Burnley in Lancashire, where Mary Brown began the social work for which she became well known. She was the first woman to be elected a poor-law guardian, and it was due to her that the cruel practice of separating elderly married couples when they entered the workhouse was ended. Seeing the trouble caused by alcohol she 'took the pledge' and founded the Burnley branch of the Women's Temperance Movement. 
A close friend in South Africa was Olive Schreiner; Mary Brown persuaded Chapman and Hall to publish 'The Story of an African Farm' (1883), and the two women remained close until Schreiner's death in 1920. Mary Brown joined the Burnley Co-operative Society and became a leader of the Women's Co-operative Movement. She supported the Labour Party from its foundation, and she and her husband were staunch friends of Keir Hardie. An excellent public speaker, she was also a competent chair of meetings and committees. 
Confirmed in the Anglican church in 1880, Mary Brown was deeply religious but never sectarian. Although she was in sympathy with the socialism of her day she could not always agree with its methods, putting her Christian faith first and politics second. During the great Burnley coal strike she organized soup kitchens for the men and their families. 'Moral and social hygiene' engrossed her: she helped found a rescue home for girls, becoming its secretary and treasurer, and sometimes took desperate pregnant girls into her own home. When General Booth visited Burnley she added the Salvationists to the causes she supported. She joined in the fight for women's suffrage, though was never a militant. 
When John Brown retired in 1898 he and his wife spent a year travelling in South Africa. She met President Kruger in Pretoria and President Steyn in Bloemfontein. The stupidity of the Jameson raid of 1895 had angered her and she was certain war was near. It broke out after their return to England: regarding it as an unnecessary war, she supported self-government for South Africa. 
The Browns returned to South Africa in 1905 and spent the rest of their lives there. Although nearly sixty Mary entered the battle to bring social reform to her country. Elected a member of the Women's Christian Temperance Union of Cape Colony, in 1907 she became the superintendent of its department for social purity and moral education. After the Union of South Africa was created in 1910 this post led to her dealing with social welfare throughout South Africa, being particularly involved with work for the 'feeble minded'. She also founded the first Mothers' Union in the Cape and worked for women's suffrage. She went to Johannesburg to help start a moral welfare campaign there and about 1908-9 was involved in a parliamentary commission of inquiry into 'the Colour Question', which meant the prevention of venereal disease. In 1912 she led a deputation to the minister of justice demanding that the age of consent be raised to a uniform sixteen throughout the country. It was strongly opposed, but she was ultimately successful. With the help of a Jesuit priest she organized special meetings for men, and together they opened a 'home for rescuing girl children from evil surroundings'. 
Brown died on 8 May 1929. Mary Brown, in her last years, suffered badly from arthritis and was nearly blind. She died in her sleep on 16 January 1935 at her home, Avondrust, Rosebank, Cape Town. 


@@@@@


doc= 56691


Townsend, Mary Elizabeth (1841-1918), philanthropist, was born on 23 July 1841 at St John's vicarage, Kilkenny, the only child of the Revd Robert Butler (died 1847) and his wife, Grace (died 1843), daughter of the Revd James Hamilton of Trim, co. Meath. At the time of her birth, her father was vicar of St John's and domestic chaplain to the earl of Ormond. Left an orphan at an early age, Mary Butler was brought up in England by her father's sisters. On 21 July 1863 she married Frederick Townsend (1823-1905), a serious-minded amateur artist and botanist eighteen years her senior. The marriage was a happy one: Mary Townsend later recalled 'I was free indeed with one who was all in all to me. Then life began to open out in fair colours and every gift I had began to grow and develop under his care' (M. E. Townsend, 'Memories', 7). 
In 1875 Frederick Townsend inherited his uncle's estate of Honington Hall, but the couple's early married life was spent at Shedfield Lodge, near Wickham, in Hampshire. Taking a keen interest in the people living on the estate, Frederick organized support for the local cottage hospital, the building of a recreation and reading-room, and a library for working men, and ran village penny-savings banks, while Mary started working classes for girls whose education had finished at elementary school, looked after the ill and the aged, and became involved in the work of the local orphanage for girls. Through these activities she became aware of the problems faced by girls going into domestic service, including loss of communications with their families and unwanted pregnancies resulting in dismissal. 
A friend and frequent visitor at Shedfield was the Revd T. V. Fosbery, chaplain to Bishop Samuel Wilberforce; in 1873 the bishop invited Mary Townsend to assist in some diocesan 'rescue work' among 'fallen women'. She soon perceived that prevention was better than cure: realizing that servant girls were often friendless and had no respectable place to go on their half-days off, she argued that they needed 'a little love, a few kind words, a look, a smile of interest to show that they are cared for; that they are expected to do well and that their career is watched with hope' (Money, 7). Fosbery encouraged Mary Townsend to take on this work herself, and through his interest drew in Catharine Tait (1819-1878), Elizabeth Browne (wife of the bishop of Winchester), and Jane Nassau Senior (1828-1877). They all met at Lambeth Palace in May 1874 and resolved to establish the Girls' Friendly Society (GFS), which officially began its work on 1 January 1875. 
Although avowedly non-sectarian, the GFS was organized in parish, deanery, and diocesan groups (with a central office in London), reflecting its Anglican origins. It aimed to maintain a high standard of morals among its members (aged from fourteen upwards and unmarried), supplying 'for every working girl of unblemished character a friend in a class above her own' (Money, 36). Both classes of membership -- known as members and associates -- paid an annual subscription, half of which went to the branch and half to central funds. Recreation rooms, supervised by associates, provided opportunities for working-class girls to meet, read, sew, sing, and enjoy simple refreshments. Mary Townsend worked tirelessly in the early days of the movement. She served as president from 1876 to 1883 and again from 1891 to 1894, and also acted as head of various departments; she was directing the candidates department in 1879 when, by popular demand, it was decided to admit girls as young as eight years old. She wrote copiously for the various GFS journals -- such as 'Friendly Leaves', 'Friendly Work', and the 'Associates Journal' -- and compiled best-selling collections of prayers and hymns. She succeeded in persuading popular writers to contribute to GFS publications, most notably recruiting Charlotte M. Yonge (1832-1901), who opened and ran a branch of the GFS at her home in Elderfield and featured the GFS in such novels as 'The Two Sides of the Shield' (1885). Mary Townsend developed lifelong friendships with many of the early associates and paid workers of the GFS, and she was consulted by the general committee even when she held no office. 
The GFS encountered some difficulties -- the mistresses of households were sometimes suspicious of what they saw as interference between themselves and their servants -- but it grew with a speed that astonished the founder. By 1878, when the first report was published, the GFS was active in nineteen dioceses and Gibraltar, with 10,678 members and 4442 associates. A wide range of departments had been established, including those supervising shop and factory workers, publications, houses of rest, and affiliated societies, and services included a circulating library and an employment exchange. Thirty years later, other new departments -- including those overseeing the welfare of sick and blind members and the safety of emigrating girls and women -- had been established, and the GFS was offering training of various descriptions to members. From 1880 the society enjoyed royal patronage, and Queen Victoria herself acted as an associate and admitted servant girls at Balmoral to membership. In 1911 Mary Townsend celebrated the success of the GFS in expanding its original remit and transcending class boundaries: 'We are no longer an Association of Ladies working for girls chiefly of one class, but a band of women of all ranks, ages and occupations, invited to share in the same work, to uphold the same principles, each according to her power. (Money, 200)' By 1913 the society had 197,493 members and 39,926 associates in England and Wales alone, with 80,274 candidates. When war broke out in 1914 the government sought the assistance of the GFS in recruiting and caring for women war workers, running canteens, and providing comforts for the troops. Mary Townsend herself organized a guild of church needlework to provide linen and paintings for army chaplains in France. She died suddenly on 14 June 1918 at Homewood, Hindhead, Surrey, shortly before the society received commendation for its war efforts in a government white paper, with honours for the president and secretary. She was buried beside her husband in Honington churchyard. Childless herself, Mary Townsend had influenced the lives of many girls and women of all classes, and her ability to motivate, delegate, and promote essential change ensured that the GFS survived her own death. At the close of the twentieth century it was still active in twenty-five countries worldwide, mainly those in the Anglican communion. 


@@@@@


doc= 56692


Hirsch, Clara de, Baroness de Hirsch (1833-1899), philanthropist, was born in Brussels on 18 June 1833, the daughter of the Jewish banker Raphael Jonathan Bischoffsheim (1808-1883) and his wife, Henrietta Goldschmidt. In 1855 Clara married Baron Maurice de Hirsch (otherwise Moritz von Hirsch) (1831-1896), a distant relative whose family were bankers to the Bavarian royal court, and who in 1850 had entered the Brussels office of her father's business, Bischoffsheim and Goldschmidt, where she acted as secretary and adviser. Her father was deeply immersed in Jewish affairs, becoming in time a member of the central committee of the Alliance Israelite Universelle, formed in Paris in 1860 as an international agency to protect Jewish interests worldwide. Clara de Hirsch was thus able to engage her husband in Jewish philanthropic work while he proceeded to amass a vast fortune as a banker on his own account. In time this wealth secured for him an entree into the circle of Edward, prince of Wales, of whom he became a very close friend and racing companion. 
Maurice de Hirsch was antipathetic to territorial Zionism, regarding the notion of the re-establishment of a Jewish state as fantastic. But he was prepared to believe that the Jews had a future as an agricultural people, and, under Clara's influence, became increasingly drawn to the financing of schemes of agricultural resettlement. He made regular large donations to the Alliance in support of its work in the Middle East, and invested heavily in Jewish educational and welfare schemes in Austria. His donations to London hospitals were prodigious. In 1888 the Baron de Hirsch Foundation was established to further educational reforms among Jews living in Galicia and the Bukovina, and in 1891 the Baron de Hirsch Fund was established in New York to facilitate the settlement of immigrants in the USA and later Canada. But these benefactions were dwarfed by his establishment, in 1891, through a donation of $2.4 million, of the Jewish Colonization Association; based in London, the mission of the association was to relieve the plight of oppressed Russian Jewry by promoting the movement of Jews from Russia first to Argentina, but later to Canada, Brazil, Cyprus, Turkey, and -- ultimately -- Palestine. 
Contemporary observers all agreed that it was Clara who provided the stimulus for these charitable works, many of which were her brainchildren, though executed in the name of her husband. But the couple had a tragic domestic life. Their only daughter died in infancy and their only son, Lucien, born in 1856, died of pneumonia in 1887. Clara and Maurice de Hirsch seemed to have turned instinctively to ever greater acts of philanthropy as a way of filling the void thus created in their lives. Clara de Hirsch made many charitable donations in her own right, notably to the Pasteur Institute and Paris University. On Maurice's death in 1896 she became the sole administrator of his estate, making charitable disbursements totalling $3 million; by the terms of her will a further $2 million were donated for the endowment of a variety of philanthropic causes, including the Jewish Board of Guardians in London. 
In 1898, by order of the Emperor Franz Joseph of Austria, Clara de Hirsch was appointed to the order of Elizabeth. As her death approached, she adopted Maurice's two illegitimate male offspring as her own children, successfully petitioning the emperor to confer Maurice's barony upon the elder of the bastard sons, the Oxford-educated Maurice; on his death in 1912 the title passed to his younger brother, Raymond (died 1968), a close friend of Winston Churchill and Liberal MP for West Ham North from 1911 to 1918. 
Clara died of cancer at her Paris home on 1 April 1899 and was buried, two days later, beside her husband in the family vault in the Montmartre cemetery. The presence of the British, Austrian, Belgian, and Italian ambassadors to France at her funeral reflected the esteem in which she was held in these countries. In London the chief rabbi, Hermann Adler, conducted (at the Jewish convalescent home she had endowed in Hampstead) a special memorial service, a remarkable act of homage to a lady who was never, in fact, a British citizen. 


@@@@@


doc= 56693


Reaney, Isabella Emily Thomasa (1847-1929), preacher and social activist, was born on 15 July 1847 in Huntingdon, the sixth of seven children of Robert Edis and his wife, Emma Ekin. Her father was a literary bookseller and a well-known man in the town. One of her brothers, Dr Arthur Wellesley Edis (1840-1893), was to become a noted specialist in the treatment of women's illnesses. She was to work closely with him in campaigns for reducing the hours and improving the working conditions of shop-girls. Another brother, Robert William Edis (1839-1927), was an architect especially concerned with interior decoration, 'healthy furniture', and sanitary improvements in houses. Isabel Edis was educated at a boarding-school. In her teens she began to work among the poor of Huntingdon, reading and teaching from the 'Bible'. She instituted a cottage service, which soon became so crowded that it was transferred to a large classroom belonging to the local Congregationalists. Eventually attendances were so large that the services were moved to the Institution Hall of Huntingdon, where they attracted the attention of the bishop of the diocese. He criticized Isabel Edis for disturbing the regular order of the church. However, on hearing her reply -- that her authority was higher than that of bishops and archbishops, and so she must speak, but that if her work was likely to injure the church she would withdraw from it -- the bishop seems to have allowed her to carry on, with his blessing. She continued to hold services there until her marriage on 4 March 1873 to the Revd George Sale Reaney (1838-1901), a prominent Congregational minister in Warrington. She moved her activities there, and conducted Sunday afternoon services in the public hall. Her husband's health having broken down from overwork, in 1876 they moved to a smaller church in Reading, Berkshire, for six years, and then (in 1882) to the East End of London, where he took charge of Stepney meeting-house. 
In the East End, Isabel Reaney continued to work among the poor, and also, in emergencies, took her husband's place at meeting, although remaining herself a staunch member of the Church of England. On one occasion she conducted a special service in the City Temple for Dr Joseph Parker. While living at Stepney she worked with Henrietta Barnett to set up a Children's Country Holiday Fund, and she herself established a home for convalescents at Folkestone. When her husband left London to take charge of Dr Parker's former church, Cavendish Street Chapel, in Manchester, she founded a similar home at Blackpool (by 1894 capable of accommodating 130 people), and was a significant figure in the promotion of Blackpool as a winter health resort. In 1890 George Sale Reaney left Congregationalism for the Church of England, disillusioned with what he felt to be the excessive individualism of the Congregational ideal and attracted by the national idea, as propounded by F. D. Maurice (1805-1872) and Samuel Barnett (1844-1913). His wife's example was scarcely less important. He was always totally supportive of her public work, having written in 1886 a memorable riposte to an attack on women preachers, in which he began by observing that: 'It is always a rather difficult task for men to discuss the true sphere of women.... The truest conception of womanhood can only be possessed by women' (G. S. Reaney, 'Preaching women', 844-5). He served as a curate at Riverhead, Kent (1890-91), and at Bickley, in the same county (1891-3), and in 1893 was appointed vicar of Greenwich, where Isabel Reaney was able to return to the sort of work which she had done in Stepney. She supported the Women's Convalescent Home Association to establish homes providing a fortnight's rest for women employed in factories, warehouses, workshops, and offices, and for the wives and daughters of London workmen. In 1894 she played an important part in getting the baths at the London People's Palace opened in the evenings (on Tuesdays they were opened from 6 a.m. to 10 p.m.) for the use of ladies in business. She and her husband held Sunday afternoon services for the people at Good Duke Humphrey's Hall (a temperance restaurant of which Isabel Reaney was the honorary director): G. S. Reaney held the service on the first Sunday of the month for men only, Isabel Reaney conducting all the rest, for men and women. On Thursday nights she organized magic lantern lectures and, on Saturday nights, popular concerts and entertainments. 
From the time when they moved to Stepney, Isabel Reaney became a great campaigner on behalf of tramcar drivers. Feeling the poverty of 'mittens and tracts' as a means of expressing sympathy with their terrible working conditions, she qualified as a shareholder in several metropolitan companies so that she could press their cause more effectively. In 1885 she got Samuel Smith MP to put a question to the home secretary in the Commons about the long hours worked. She also attended a shareholders' meeting of the North Metropolitan Tramways Company, where 70 shareholders out of about 4000 were present. To the sound of shuffling feet and hissing she urged the injustices of the drivers' working conditions. Gaining only six supporters, she proceeded to launch a campaign, canvassing shareholders by pamphlet and mobilizing the press. By the next half-yearly meeting (February 1886) she had a considerable body of support, and, even though her motion was defeated, the chairman reluctantly promised to do something. The press meanwhile drew public attention to conditions in Liverpool, Glasgow, Bristol, and Leicester -- even in Melbourne and Sydney; and under the Revd F. Barclay and others a new union was established in south London. In a powerful article in the 'Contemporary Review' (56, 1889, 649-58), 'Slave-driving by public companies', which culminated in a quotation from Mazzini, Isabel Reaney underlined the status of tramway and railway companies as public companies. Since they were under parliamentary sanction, state intervention was justified to ensure that they were run properly. She even urged the advantages of the municipalization of tramways and of the nationalization of railways. 
Isabel Reaney was a prominent temperance activist throughout her life, and wrote innumerable temperance stories. Her three-decker novel, 'Dr Grey's Patient', published in 1893 as part of the 'Story Book Series', was much more than a temperance tract: it was well paced and compelling, and provoked much discussion. She also published advice manuals for girls and boys (between 1879 and 1882) and a book of devotional texts for the use of girls' schools and colleges, relating religion to everyday life. In 'English Girls: their Place and Power' (1879) she cited John Ruskin (1819-1900) on the need for girls at home to develop a sense of will and drive, including reading for a purpose. She supported higher education for women, but felt that it needed to embrace every aspect of womanhood, training heart and hand as well as head. In February 1892 she founded a popular monthly magazine, 'Our Mothers and Daughters', which she edited until July 1896 (the magazine continued, becoming a weekly in mid-1897, until October 1898). It cost 1died and 20,000 copies of the first issue were printed. It was offered to secretaries of YWCAs, mothers' meetings, and Girls' Guilds at a reduced price (and back numbers were subsequently offered free to boost circulation). It was aimed at 'tired mothers and busy daughters', and contained a mixture of reports on women's activities, home remedies, recipes, serialized stories, Sunday talks for the use of mothers and Sunday school teachers, and articles by famous guest writers. The tone was very firmly set by Isabel Reaney's strong editorials, and many of the series -- for example, 'The duty of girls in regard to self-education' -- were written by her. In issue 4 she poured scorn on well-off women who denied the need for women's rights, and she continually urged women to exercise their influence and not to be afraid to campaign publicly against wrongdoing. In her editorial for the eighth issue she commented: 'Mothers are to be commended for impressing upon their daughters the fact that marriage is not the end of a girl's life.... No girl with a fair amount of ability, courage and enterprise, need ever marry 'for the sake of a home'. She may establish a home for herself. ('Our Mothers and Daughters', 1/8, 1892, 133)' She publicized the achievements of professional women and commended new career opportunities, citing one woman who had set herself up as 'accountant and auditor' for a large household, charging a sum equivalent to a lawyer's fee for an hour's work. She noted with approval that in America women commercial travellers were being employed in trades concerning exclusively women and children. She urged the need for more women factory inspectors, feeling that women were likely to be tougher on employers of female workforces. She urged women to refuse to buy cheap underclothes, undoubtedly produced by sweated labour, and called for an early shopping pledge (not to shop after 8 p.m.). She publicized the demonstration in a northern town of domestic servants demanding shorter hours and a weekly half-holiday. She commended vegetarianism, supported dress reform, opposed the use of birds in millinery, advertised the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, and offered up a paean of praise to the bicycle as part of her promotion of physical exercise for women. She wrote for women whose principal role was to be in the home (and for whom she offered advice in reducing the time spent on domestic duties) as well as for those who were to be doing paid work. She saw no fundamental distinction in that each was to exercise usefulness beyond the minimum requirements of her job. She herself carved out a career which transcended the conventions of her position, and gained widespread respect for so doing. 
In 1894 Isabel Reaney achieved the distinction of having her profile published in the magazine 'Men and Women of the Day' (7/74, 1894). The photograph which accompanied it showed a handsome, slim woman with dark, wavy hair and a face, with the crinkles of one who smiled a lot, at once clear-eyed, intelligent, and energetic. Isabel Reaney outlived her husband, whose 'Occasional Papers, Serious and Otherwise' (1902) she edited. She continued to publish on her established themes: 'Temperance Sketches from Life' appeared in 1911, and 'Daisy Snowflake's Secret' in 1913, for example. She died at her home, 26 The College, Bromley, Kent, on 19 June 1929. 


@@@@@


doc= 56694


D'Eichthal, Gustave (1804-1886), visionary and social observer, was born in Nancy, the son of Louis D'Eichthal (1780-1840), a Jewish banker, and his wife, Fleurette, 'nee' Levy (died 1837). Raised as a Catholic from 1817, when he was baptized at Deuil, near Versailles, he was educated in Paris, first at a Catholic boarding-school and then at the Lycee Henri IV. Late in 1822 he became the young Auguste Comte's first disciple, and was responsible for introducing Comte's work to Hegel and other German philosophers in 1824. During the next few years, while working in commerce, he began to drift away from Comte and was drawn instead to the Saint-Simonians; he was fully converted in 1829, and for the next three years was a leading member and benefactor of the Saint-Simonian sect. Comte regarded this as a betrayal. 
D'Eichthal made an extended visit to Britain in 1828, and recorded his observations in the form of extensive notes, which were first published by his son some three-quarters of a century later. These notes have been unduly neglected, perhaps, by historians of nineteenth-century Britain. D'Eichthal stayed for eight months, mostly in London, but he also made a two-month trip to the industrial north and to Scotland. The title under which his notes were published in 1902 implied that he was primarily interested in working-class life, but that bias is not apparent in the full text of his notes; neither is there much justification for the assertion that he was shocked by what he saw of working-class living standards in industrial Britain. He recorded his observations in a matter-of-fact tone. D'Eichthal's main interest, then and for the rest of his life, was religion, and his notes are peppered with observations on religious practice. He was not greatly impressed by 'the apparent respect the English show for religious matters', which he thought a matter of habit rather than conviction (Ratcliffe and Chaloner, 31). 
It is sometimes said that D'Eichthal was interested in Britain because, as a Saint-Simonian, he regarded the birthplace of the industrial revolution as being in the vanguard of history. This interpretation is open to dispute. He saw Britain in 1828 as an 'ancien regime' in its last years. 'Privilege and monopoly', he thought, 'are the basis of the entire constitution', and he was thinking not just of the privileges of the aristocracy and the gentry, of the clergy and the municipalities, rather, 'the keystone of this whole edifice of privilege, which in my opinion has made its survival possible for so long, is the privilege enjoyed by the poor who 'have a right' to relief from the rich, according to the level of their wages and the number of children in their families' (Ratcliffe and Chaloner, 40-41). He drew an explicit comparison between the situation in England in 1828 and the state of France on the eve of the revolution of 1789. D'Eichthal did not think of England as the epitome of modernity in all respects; he did see it as a society ripe for conversion to Saint-Simonism, and that belief was to account for his next visit in 1832. 
Conversations with bankers and economists in England influenced the monograph on government finance which D'Eichthal completed on his return to France in 1829. Influenced by the work of the House of Commons finance committee, he argued for the desirability of government loans and stressed the absurdity of a sinking fund. He was also impressed by the savings bank movement, and proposed the creation of similar institutions in France as a means of improving the working-class standard of living. 
During the visit to Britain D'Eichthal had met J. S. Mill, who became perhaps his closest English friend. He introduced Mill to Comte's work, and Mill and D'Eichthal began a lengthy correspondence. Another of his notable English contacts was Francis Place, with whom he had lengthy conversations about the machinery question. On his return to France D'Eichthal had planned to write a book on Britain, and he wrote to Place and Mill about it. The project never came to fruition. It was during this period that he also began to correspond with Thomas Carlyle, who had come to his attention as the author of 'Signs of the times' in the 'Edinburgh Review'. He viewed Carlyle as a likely convert: somewhat optimistically, since Carlyle, though sympathetic to Saint-Simonian social and historical philosophy, was unable to see it as a religion. 
D'Eichthal visited England again in January 1832, when with Duveyrier he undertook a Saint-Simonian 'mission'. On the eve of the visit he wrote that Britain -- in the midst of reform agitation -- was ripe for conversion: the last bastions of feudalism were on the point of collapse, and circumstances were propitious for the new Saint-Simonian doctrine to take hold. In the event the apostles were spectacularly unsuccessful in winning converts, though they attracted press attention and reinforced the celebrity, or notoriety, of the Saint-Simonian sect. Carlyle, who finally met his correspondent, thought the two missionaries 'the greatest Babblers I have ever heard' ('Collected Letters', 6.127). The sect was denounced in 'The Times', and in organs as different as the 'Quarterly Review' and the 'Westminster Review'. In the same year the new religion collapsed as several of its leaders were successfully prosecuted in Paris. D'Eichthal was one of the last of the leaders to abandon the sect, in November 1832, and the Saint-Simonian conception of history exercised a lifelong influence on his thinking. 
Thereafter, D'Eichthal's active interest in Britain subsided, although he continued to correspond with Mill. D'Eichthal also pinned his hopes on Greece for a while, and in 1834-5 served in the new state's political economy office, which had been set up at his suggestion to look into the land question. He was an enthusiast for the promotion of Greek as an international language, and thought that its adoption as the official language could be a solution to the nationality question in the Habsburg monarchy. But his chief interest was religion: he published a number of penetrating works of biblical criticism, both on the gospels and on the 'Pentateuch'. He also devoted himself to promoting the unity of the human race through a new synthesis of the three great 'Mediterranean' religions. This project was not successful. He married a Jewess, Felicite Rodrigues-Henriques, who came from a Sephardic family of stockbrokers who had converted to Catholicism. Their eldest son, Eugene, became director of the Ecole Libre des Sciences Politiques in Paris. D'Eichthal died in Paris on 9 April 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 56696


Eric Harald Macbeth Robertson (1887-1941) was one of the most brilliant art students of his period and often scandalized Edinburgh society with his drawings of the female nude. But he was a fine landscape and portrait painter and was well aware of developments in English art, particularly vorticism which he tentatively adopted in a modified form, calling it expressionism. He was also influenced by Gustave Moreau, the Pre-Raphaelite painters, and their followers, and not least John Duncan. But Duncan saw a clearly defined element of decadence in Robertson's work and kept his distance from him, much to Robertson's dismay. During the years leading up to the First World War, Robertson carried out designs and decorative work for Professor Patrick Geddes, and at the same time he painted landscape, portraits, and Celtic myth and legend in a symbolist style. 


@@@@@


doc= 56699


Mitchell, Gladys Maude Winifred (1901-1983), novelist, was born on 19 April 1901 in Crescent Road, Cowley, Oxford, the eldest daughter of James Mitchell, of Scottish ancestry, and Annie Julia Maude, 'nee' Simmonds. She moved with her family in 1909 to the Brentford and Isleworth area of Middlesex, where she received her early education at the Rothschild School in Brentford, and the Green School in Isleworth. She studied at Goldsmiths' College, London (1919-21), and later attended University College, London, where she gained an external diploma in European history in 1926 and qualified as a teacher. 
Gladys Mitchell became a distinguished writer of detective novels, a survivor of the 'golden age' of detective fiction of the 1920s and 1930s which included such writers as Dorothy Sayers, Agatha Christie, and G. K. Chesterton. Like them, she was a member of the Detection Club. In 1976 she won the Crime Writers' Association silver dagger award. During much of her writing career she was also a dedicated teacher of history, athletics, English, and Spanish at several girls' schools in Middlesex. She taught at St Paul's School, Brentford (1921-5), and at St Ann's Senior Girls' School, Ealing (1925-39). After a period of ill health she took up a post at Brentford Senior Girls' School in 1941 and resigned in 1950 with the intention of retiring. Three years later, having devoted herself to writing, she returned to teaching, this time at the Matthew Arnold School, Staines, where she remained until 1961 when she finally retired. 
Mitchell, who also wrote under the pseudonyms Stephen Hockaby and Malcolm Torrie, began writing early. Undeterred by the rejection of her first four novels, she launched her long and prolific literary career with 'Speedy Death' (1929) and continued to produce at least one book a year for the rest of her life. This first book introduced her famous character Mrs Beatrice Adela Lestrange Bradley (later Dame Beatrice), a sleuth and 'psychiatric consultant to the Home Office'. The formidable Mrs Bradley, with her unattractive physical features, claw-like hands, yellow skin, and cackling laugh, was sometimes nicknamed Mrs Croc. She appears in all the crime novels written under Gladys Mitchell's name. Like her creator, Bradley possessed a strong sense of justice, socially progressive views, and a warm understanding of humanity. Characteristic features of Mitchell's novels include sustained tension, improbable plots, black humour, and eccentric themes with frequent use of folklore and the supernatural. In 'Speedy Death', a double murder story, Bradley commits the second murder herself but is acquitted with the assistance of her defence counsel, who is also her son; the victim of the first murder, known as a male explorer, turns out to be a woman. 
Mitchell's settings varied enormously but she frequently used the enclosed atmosphere of schools, as in 'Death at the Opera' (1934), 'St Peter's Finger' (1938), 'Laurels are Poison' (1942), and 'Faintley Speaking' (1954), while 'Spotted Hemlock' (1958) is set in two adjacent agricultural colleges, one male and one female. 'The Rising of the Moon' (1945) recalls Mitchell's childhood in Brentford. As the novels progress, various members of Bradley's family and associates begin to appear, and reappear, such as her son Ferdinand Lestrange, a barrister, and Carey Lestrange, her pig farmer nephew. Sally Lestrange, Bradley's granddaughter, is the key figure in 'Winking at the Brim' (1974), a comic work in which the Loch Ness monster eliminates the culprit. A grandniece, Hermione Lestrange, appears in 'The Death-Cap Dancers' (1981), where the suspect is killed by a boar on her father's pig farm. George, the faithful chauffeur, is in frequent attendance, as is Laura, Bradley's secretary, whose investigative skills are put to good use in the Holmesian satire 'Watson's Choice' (1955). While Mitchell's novels are firmly rooted in the golden age tradition of detective fiction, she was equally capable of turning the genre on its head. Such was the confidence of her narrative style, it is often impossible to distinguish serious crime from parody, or tragedy from comedy. While some readers found her implausible plots taxing, her numerous loyal followers, not least Philip Larkin, enjoyed her inimitable mixture of horror and jollity. Other notable Bradley novels include 'Lament for Leto' (1971), which centres on an archaeological expedition, 'The Saltmarsh Murders' (1932), and 'Here Lies Gloria Mundy' (1982). 
In the Stephen Hockaby novels, written during the 1930s, Mitchell moved from crime detection to historical fiction with works such as 'Marsh Hay' (1933), set in Edwardian rural England, and 'Grand Master' (1939), a Mediterranean adventure story about the knights of Malta. 
Mitchell had a lifelong fascination with the legends and folklore of the British Isles and a serious interest in archaeology and ancient buildings. These interests are reflected throughout her work, but are particularly evident in the six crime novels she published as Malcolm Torrie. They all feature the male detective Timothy Herring, who is also the secretary of the Society for the Preservation of Historic Buildings, a role which frequently leads him to corpses in bizarre situations, as in 'Heavy as Lead' (1966). In 'Your Secret Friend' (1968), Timothy becomes engaged to Alison Marchmont Pallis, an embittered schoolteacher whose knowledge of history makes her a useful sidekick in subsequent Torrie novels. 
Gladys Mitchell also wrote several mystery stories for children. She never married and spent the latter part of her life at 1 Cecil Close, Corfe Mullen, Dorset, where she died of cancer on 27 July 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 56700


Kem, Joseph (bap. 1700, d. 1780), miser and farmer-weaver, was baptized on 14 May 1700 at Wolvey, Warwickshire, the younger son of Joseph Kem ('c'.1680- 'c'.1730), butcher, and his wife, Frances ('c'.1680-1731). He was the great-great-grandson of Samuel Keme, the puritan divine and spy. Joseph's elder brother, Daniel, became a yeoman farmer at Smockington, Leicestershire, a few miles distant from Wolvey. Joseph remained in the Wolvey-Monks Kirby area of Warwickshire until he married Mary Butler on 10 April 1722 at St Mary de Castro Church in Leicester. Within a year mother and child had died during childbirth, and were interred at the parish church of St Margaret, Leicester. 
Kem's early career was that of both a 'customer-weaver', with independent status in the village and making up customers' orders, and a 'smallholder weaver', working part-time at the loom. In his later life the erratic nature of the local weaving industry may have given him the status of a superior artisan, self-employed and working by the 'piece' for a choice of masters. By 1763 Kem was proprietor and farmer at Sinney Fields (valued at $3 17's'. 7died), Burton Hastings, near Attleborough. He had probably moved by 1767 and was then associated with Daniel Leigh (who managed Lord Pagett's Attleborough lands). 
In 1772 and 1773 Kem was brought before the local court for failing to clean ditches and cut hedges, which was part of his tenancy agreement. This was a serious offence because the local rivers rose seasonally and the ditches were essential to flood relief. The punishments varied from public humiliation to fining. Kem was threatened twice with fines of $1 10's'. 0died, a sum which no tenant farmer could have paid unless he earned extra income. The fine was not paid but Kem relented and thereafter undertook his specified duties. It was believed that he made a great deal of money, but that he hid the coins in the walls or chimney of his house while continuing to maintain a frugal lifestyle. 
In 1774 Kem voted in the Warwickshire elections, giving his place of abode as Nuneaton. His voting status implied he was a 'forty-shilling freeholder', or yeoman, farming his own land and enjoying parliamentary franchise. He voted for Skipwith the whig and Mordaunt the tory. He died in February 1780 and on Tuesday 29 February was buried at St Nicolas parish church, Nuneaton, in an unmarked grave, leaving no will or descendants. 
Kem's life history became well known in the nineteenth century and historians made references to this miserly character. Such austere behaviour was influenced by the 'Whole Duty of Man' (1658). By 1861 George Eliot had developed the story into 'Silas Marner', with the help of her father, Robert Evans. Alfred Scrivener, a local historian and journalist, drew on literary and historical sources for his article in the 'Nuneaton Observer', on 27 December 1878. The story was reprinted in 1909 emphasizing the gold hoarding of the hermit. The local public reaction was unexpected; many people then scoured the site, looking for gold coins. Kem's farm was cited on Ordnance Survey maps from 1887 to 1966 as Teddy Kem's Heaven. The name Teddy was a local corruption of 'tedder', a person who cut grass and laid it out to dry. The farm was demolished about 1970, and the site was later developed for housing. In 2002 the local authority agreed to place a commemorative tablet there, marking the site. 


@@@@@


doc= 56703


Jarvis, Edward Kem (bap. 1805, d. 1853), judge and philanthropist, was baptized on 15 March 1805 at Ratcliffe Culey parish church, Hinckley, Leicestershire, the only child of Joseph Jarviss ('fl'. 1785-1830), Atherstone postmaster and innkeeper, and his wife, Mary ('fl'. 1785-1810), daughter of John Sands, publican, of Congerstone, and his wife, Melinda. Jarvis's parents were midlanders. The Jarvis ancestry included the parliamentarian Purefoy (later Jervis) family of Caldecote (Warwickshire) and Fenny Drayton (Leicestershire) and Swynfen Jervis, the ancestor of the earls of St Vincent. His first two names acknowledge the benefaction and bequest left to his father, Joseph, by Edward Kem (died 1800), yeoman of Attleborough and Armitage, who could trace his origins back to the Northumbrian D'Umfrevilles and Talboys as well as Baron De Kyme of Lincolnshire ['see 'Kem, Joseph]. 
Jarvis's early life is unknown: he may have been educated at the locally endowed Queen Elizabeth Grammar School before moving to Hinckley in 1819. In 1826 he joined the legal practice of Charles Jervis (a distant relative whose business was established before 1800). On 16 September 1828 he married Rebecca Brown, 'nee' Tomlinson ('b'. 1791), a blind widow. From 1829 Jarvis's name appeared annually in the 'Law List' as a solicitor. By 1838 he was listed as clerk to the Hinckley magistrates' court and parish auditor. His chief claim to fame derives from his meticulous and thought-provoking evidence to the royal commission into the conditions of the frame-work knitters in 1844. In hosiery's 'golden age' (1781-1811), Hinckley had contributed 2400 pairs of stockings for British troops on the continent in 1793. But the industry was very vulnerable to market changes, and by 1829, 66 per cent of the town's people were on poor relief. By the time the commission's report was published Leicestershire's hosiery goods were uncompetitive in their traditional foreign markets because of the progressive American and German manufacturers. 
Jarvis's evidence stated that he had been one of two or three local manufacturers who did not practise the pernicious truck system of payment of workers in kind, often in goods of inferior quality. He had set up his own knitting company where no frame rents or standing charges were levied, and even offered his workers stone breaking in the slack times, but their hands were too soft from the intricate loomwork. The project failed because local frame-work knitters disliked the regular routine of his factory. Jarvis also told of how he had called various meetings to set up local funds to help suppress the 'truck'. His evidence also provided details of the profiteering devices adopted by other local manufacturers. As a lawyer, Jarvis was litigious and resourceful and by 1846 his outstanding ability saw him promoted to judge of Hinckley and Market Bosworth. As a judge, he disliked imprisoning first-time offenders, preferring to fine the truck operator $5 for a first offence, and $10 for the second before invoking his powers of incarceration. By 1851 he had been made a perpetual commissioner for the poor. 
On 1 January 1853 Jarvis died of a heart attack at his home, 4 The Borough, Hinckley; he was buried in a vault beneath the floor of St Mary's Church, Hinckley, on 7 January. A shield-shaped brass plaque with the initials EKJ was affixed to the wall near the bell-tower entrance. His will records investments, cattle, real estate, and property in Hinckley, Barwell, and Burbage, which he left to his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 56704


Barber, John (1734-1793), coalmaster and inventor, was born at Greasley Castle Farm, Nottinghamshire, and baptized at Greasley on 22 October 1734, the eldest son of Francis Barber (died 1782), Nottinghamshire coalmaster, and his wife, Elizabeth Fletcher (died 1787). His mother's father, John Fletcher (died 1735), since 1712 of Stainsby House, Smalley, Horsley, Derbyshire, had made his fortune in the nearby collieries of Heanor, Smalley, and Denby and was sheriff of Derbyshire in 1731-2. The arms then granted him unusually show an array of mining equipment. On 13 October 1731 Francis Barber married Elizabeth Fletcher and the coalmining partnership of Barber and Fletcher was born. Francis and his brother-in-law, John Fletcher junior, soon proved aggressive coalmining entrepreneurs. Accused of monopolizing local coal sales by stopping up soughs and drowning competitors' workings, they in 'January 1740, offered to supply any persons with coals for 40 years to come at 2's'. 6died to 3's'. a ton and to give security for the performance of the same' (Glover, 2.612). 
From an early age John Barber was trained by his childless uncle, John Fletcher junior, as a coalmaster. When Fletcher died in January 1766 Barber inherited all his estates and took over his colliery business, including coalmines at Camp Hill, Nuneaton, where Barber lived from 1762. In April 1766 he married Martha ('bap'. 1735, died 1814), daughter of George Goodwin (died 1782), of Monyash, Derbyshire. Barber proved as entrepreneurial as Fletcher and in 1766 took out his first patent, for raising water, for instance from mines or ships. This showed a desire to break away from the ponderous beam of the steam engine to achieve more uniform motion via a water turbine. Another clause in this patent specified the application of the crank to the steam engine, an issue which became significant when the patent lapsed in 1780. James Pickard of Birmingham immediately took out a new patent, famously blocking James Watt's ability to use any such device. 
In 1769 the Swede Johann Jacob Ferber (1743-1790) visited Derbyshire, reporting that one of the Newcomen steam engines at Stainsby coalmine 'was improved by the owner Mr Barber's specifications... in that the operation of steam from the... boiler, and the introduction of cold water, were sideways or horizontal, not... vertical' (Ferber, 40). Barber seems to have been one of the first to try to relieve the boiler and engine-house from vibrations caused when a large cylinder was slung from a beam above the boiler. That same year Barber and his father-in-law leased land to erect water-wheels to de-water lead mines at Matlock. Between 1771 and 1776 Barber worked fifteen mines here 'in some of which he expended very considerable sums... without having the good fortune to re-imburse himself' because of 'ill luck and ruinous expenses occasioned... by his own visionary schemes' (BL, Add. MS 6676, fols. 235-244). 
In 1773 Barber's second patent was for a 'machine... to purify fossil-coal and extract metals from their ores and collect their particles when volatilised'. This, beautifully illustrated, also involved the recovery of that valuable by-product coal gas. In the 1770s Barber was a commissioner of the act enabling construction of the Erewash Canal, built to transport Nottinghamshire coal. In 1776 came his third patent, for machinery for draining mines, propelling vessels, and so on, via a reaction turbine mounted on top of a haystack boiler geared to a beam for pumping. 
But on 9 December 1780 a commission of bankruptcy was issued against Barber. From March 1782 notices of the sales of his estates and mines filled the regional newspapers. The death of his aged father in 1782 was noticed in the same issue that announced the start of these sales. His assignees sold Stainsby House in 1783, and Barber now became an itinerant. The effect of his bankruptcy on his family can be gauged by the shilling he received from his mother's estate in 1788. Some of the collieries held in trust to him from her father had been quickly reassigned to her by December 1780, when Barber was living at Weddington Hall, Nuneaton. Here he planned a branch line from the Coventry Canal to his Nuneaton collieries. 
By March 1789 Barber had moved to Drayton Hall, Leicestershire. In July 1790 he announced that he could now repay his debts. His inventive activities soon resumed. His most remarkable patent, filed from Attleborough House, Nuneaton, to which he had moved by October 1791, was to obtain and apply motive power. This, his finest achievement, was based on much careful experimentation and his earlier work on coal gas. No mere paper exercise, it gave the first suggestion of any motor driven by explosion from inflammable gas (from coal, wood, or other materials) in air. It used the same methods later used by almost all who experimented with the internal combustion turbine. Barber here also predicted the pure jet engine which was to follow 140 years later. It has rightly been called 'world historic' (Bruce, 506). 
Barber's final patent of 1792 concerned the smelting and purification of metallic ores. His will dated 18 February 1793 left all his patent rights, but less than $600, to his widow. He died on 17 June 1793 at Attleborough and was buried at Monyash church. The 'Gentleman's Magazine', hinting at the depths of the papyrophobic tragedy which had overtaken Barber's inventiveness, called him 'a man of universal knowledge', since 'by his death the world lost a sound philosopher, an eminent mineralogist, and a good mechanic who expended an ample fortune in benefiting mankind' ('GM', 1st ser., 63/2, 1793, 960). His probate account showed that his debts still amounted in 1796 to nearly $5000 (Lichfield RO, B/C/5/1796: 8). 
John's younger brothers, Robert (1737-1820) and Thomas (1738-1818), were by 1779 operating a worsted spinning mill in Derby then employing twenty hands. Their material was sent to Yorkshire for carpet manufacture. They took out seven textile-weaving patents, Robert between 1774 and 1805 and Thomas between 1774 and 1783, with many of which John must have been involved. Robert is described as another 'prolific inventor, far ahead of his time' (Reisfeld, 57). A Nottingham historian later reported that, like his elder brother, he had 'spent a fortune of $50,000 in mechanism, and in permitting knaves to impose on his credulity' (Blackner, 229). This was because his last 1805 patent had been much infringed, as soon as it was adopted, to supply Admiralty trousers and jackets. In September 1809 Robert was declared bankrupt, in a major bankruptcy enlarged in October. His problems apparently stemmed from lawsuits over his last patent. All his frames and patent rights were sold to a rival weaver, John Passman, in May 1810. Thomas became, in 1787, a founding partner of the later important Nottinghamshire and Yorkshire colliery company, Barber, Walker & Co., which survived until nationalization of the coal industry in 1947, having earlier provided much crucial inspiration for D. H. Lawrence's novels. 


@@@@@


doc= 56705


Adderley, Humphrey (1512-1598), courtier, was born at Blake Hall, the family home, near Cheadle, Staffordshire, the fourth of seven children of Thomas Adderley ('c'.1480-1538), gentleman and landowner, and his wife, Joan, daughter of John and Elizabeth Thirkill of Smallwood, Cheshire. The Adderley family was of considerable importance and antiquity in Staffordshire; it is through this connection that he probably became a groom of the wardrobe of the robes, and later a yeoman of the wardrobe of the robes from about 1530 to about 1570. The royal court had no permanent base and periodically moved on a circuit encompassing Whitehall, Nonsuch, Woodstock, St James's, Somerset Place, Oatlands, Richmond, Greenwich, Hampton Court, and Windsor. This was a journey of some 220 miles (excluding various progresses), and involved dedicated and meticulous planning, for which only a few people were intellectually suited. Adderley's service through the reigns of four monarchs illustrates his exceptional personal qualities which engendered long-lasting trust and discretion. 
On 4 April 1562 Queen Elizabeth presented Henry, earl of Huntingdon, John Cholmeley, and Humphrey Adderley with Weddington Manor, Warwickshire, valued at $30 19's'. 4died (previously owned by Henry, duke of Suffolk), and the advowson of the rectory at Weddington. This was supplemented with Packington Heath Manor, Leicestershire, valued at $20 6's'. 4died and its capital messuage. By 1566 Adderley had become the sole owner of Weddington and its rectory and no longer held any rights at Packington. About 1566 he had Weddington Hall constructed in brick and local Attleborough sandstone. It was situated on a low ridge overlooking the River Anker flood plain and had uninterrupted views of the geologically unique and beautiful Oldbury-Hartshill Ridge until the hall's demolition in 1928. This ridge featured numerous halls and granges, notably Dugdale's Merevale Hall; the views from the ridge were immortalized in Drayton's 'Poly-Olbion'. Adderley's lands, which extended over 800 acres, were farmed by a mixture of arable and pasture. In addition he leased a parcel of land at nearby Higham on the Hill, Leicestershire, from the queen, who also gave him a black gown. 
In 1571 Adderley married Anne North of Northampton. This union produced a daughter, Anne ('bap'. 20 May 1578), who married William Wightman of Wykin, Leicestershire. It is possible that his first wife died during or shortly after the birth of Anne. On 7 May 1581 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Capel of Rudgwick, Sussex. They had three children, including a son, Humphrey ('b'. 1583), who married Jane, daughter of Thomas Ward of Nunthorpe, Yorkshire; Jane ('b'. 2 Feb 1589) married the local antiquarian William Burton of Lindley; the youngest child was Katherine ('b'. 10 Jan 1594), who married Harvey Bagot of Blithefield, Staffordshire. 
On 29 July 1598 Adderley died at Weddington Hall; he was buried in the churchyard of St James's Church, Weddington. His estate was perhaps $2000 or $3000 in value as deduced from the numerous bequests in his will. His legatees included Sir John Harington, a confidant of Elizabeth. The fourteenth-century vicar's vestry at St James's contains an alabaster plaque on the north wall summarizing his status in the royal household. His descendants are the barons Norton of Norton in the Moors, Staffordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 56706


Liggins, Joseph (c.1806-1872), literary impostor, was born at Attleborough, a village near Nuneaton, Warwickshire, the only son of a baker, William Liggins, and his wife, Sarah. He matriculated at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, in 1824, but was rusticated and left without taking his degree. He travelled in Europe, and in 1830-33 was a tutor on the Isle of Man, subsequently returning to Warwickshire to a life of quiet poverty, until he was catapulted to fame by the assumption in and around Nuneaton that he was the new, unknown, author 'George Eliot'. 
The real author of 'Scenes of Clerical Life', three stories of midland life published first in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' between January and November 1857, then in two volumes in January 1858, was Marian Evans, a free-thinking 'strong-minded woman' (Thomas Carlyle's phrase). She and the writer and journalist G. H. Lewes lived together as man and wife from 1854 until Lewes's death in 1878, as he was unable to divorce his wife. 
Marian Evans -- or Mary Anne, as she was baptized in 1819 in Chilvers Coton church, near Attleborough -- was brought up in and around Nuneaton, the setting of the three stories of 'Scenes of Clerical Life' -- 'The Sad Fortunes of the Revd Amos Barton', 'Mr Gilfil's Love Story', and 'Janet's Repentance'. In them the author drew on personal memories and on hearsay about local clergymen and their families which she had picked up during her childhood and youth. So detailed and credible is her representation of the town and village life of the area that local people -- including her own family, from whom she was estranged and who knew nothing of her literary life in London -- began to speculate about the authorship. Liggins was first declared to be the author by the reviewer of 'Janet's Repentance' in the 'Manx Sun' of 4 July 1857, who remembered this 'gentleman of our own acquaintance, an old Cantab, and well known in this island some five-and-twenty years or more ago'. The 'Manx Sun' of 21 May 1859 added, in an article on 'Adam Bede', that Liggins had lived on the Isle of Man between 1830 and 1833. In the 1841 census he is recorded as being aged thirty-five and living in Church Street, Attleborough, with his parents. No profession or trade is entered against his name. 
Marian Evans was at first amused at the rumour, welcoming it as a smokescreen behind which she could hide, but when her first full-length novel, 'Adam Bede', was published to immediate acclaim in February 1859, the universal curiosity about the identity of the author became burdensome, especially as Liggins neglected to disclaim authorship. It became known that he was living in straitened circumstances, and various midlands clergymen and magistrates accused George Eliot's publisher, Blackwood & Sons, of cheating Liggins of his due financial reward. Letters appeared in 'The Times' claiming Liggins's authorship. Elizabeth Gaskell, Harriet Martineau, and other well-known authors took up the claim, until in June 1859 Marian Evans and G. H. Lewes were obliged to reveal the true identity of George Eliot in order to put a stop to the wild Liggins stories. Dickens, who had been convinced on reading 'Scenes of Clerical Life' and 'Adam Bede' that the author was a woman, exulted to Lewes in August 1859, when the secret was at last out: 'I have a horrible and unnatural desire upon me to see Liggins, whom, I am proud to remember I contemptuously rejected' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 9.104). 
After the Liggins myth had thus finally been scotched, the enigmatic supposed author settled back into obscurity in Nuneaton, dying destitute in the workhouse at Chilvers Coton in late May 1872. He was buried on 1 June at Attleborough. Joseph Liggins is perhaps the only person commemorated in the 'Oxford Dictionary of National Biography' for having achieved nothing of importance or influence, except to have been a thorn in the side of a sensitive author. 


@@@@@


doc= 56707


Hewins, (Margaret) Nancy (1902-1978), theatre director and actress, was born on 14 February 1902 at The Rowans, Putney Common, London, the daughter of Professor William Albert Samuel Hewins (1865-1931), economist, and his wife, Margaret Slater. She had a sister and a brother. Nancy founded and led what seems to have been Britain's first all-women professional theatre company. She introduced Shakespeare to many audiences, often of schoolchildren, in industrial towns and remote villages. 
Nancy Hewins was educated in London at Queen's Gate School, and then at St Hugh's College, Oxford (1921-4). Here she became fascinated by the theatre, and by lighting and sets in particular. On graduating in 1924, she started an amateur company called the Isis Players which played Shakespeare in tough east London schools, using floodlights made from old biscuit tins. A switch to professionalism brought a change of name. The Osiris Players' first production was 'The Merchant of Venice' in December 1927. Until it ceased touring in 1963, the company performed against all the odds throughout Great Britain and Ireland. 
Nancy Hewins devoted her life to Osiris. It was always all-women, and never had more than seven players at a time. Everybody did everything: acting, props, cooking; Nancy also played the flute. Shakespeare was the heart of the repertory. Scenes were cut and minor speeches transposed to make the doubling work. Lady Macbeth was one of Nancy's parts and, applying a fresh makeup at speed, she could change from this to the Porter within a few lines. Osiris travelled in black and white Rolls-Royces, usually two at a time. Nancy Hewins said they were the only cars that could take the strain when they were piled high with bedding and scenery, on which players lay flat, learning their parts. They also accommodated her Belgian griffons, which she always took with her, one playing Moon's dog in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream'. 
Nancy Hewins's family came from the Black Country. She was proud of her midland origins and liked to think she was a relative of the John Hewins who married Shakespeare's aunt Agnes. She built on her family connections, starting her out-of-London tours in Wolverhampton, where her father had attended the grammar school; from the late 1930s she based herself and the company in the Cotswolds near Broadway. Her father was the first director of the London School of Economics and briefly a Conservative MP. He knew Lord Rothermere who gave Nancy $40 which helped her to launch Osiris. Her godmother was the pioneer socialist Beatrice Webb, whose christening present of a silver teapot she kept all her life. Through her Nancy gained helpful introductions to local co-operative society education departments. 
Nancy Hewins's finest hour, perhaps, came during the Second World War. She put on 1534 performances of thirty-three plays (sixteen of them by Shakespeare) in wartime, with the company travelling for a time by horse and dray because of petrol restrictions. She celebrated Osiris's twenty-first birthday at a women's institute in Kent with 'Twelfth Night' in the morning, 'Everyman' at lunchtime, 'Macbeth' in the afternoon, Shaw's 'Captain Brassbound's Conversion' after tea, and 'Badger's Green', R. C. Sherriff's comedy about village cricket, in the evening. 
Nancy Hewins reckoned she had eventually played 128 Osiris parts herself. She was not a subtle actress; sets and lighting remained her first love. But her productions left an indelible impression on her young audiences, many of whom had never seen any professional theatre outside the music hall or the Christmas pantomime. Her principle was that no one could understand Shakespeare unless they enjoyed it. 'The play had to come alive to the children', she wrote in her unpublished autobiography. Osiris also played to other local audiences, including unemployed miners in the Rhondda and munitions workers. If there was no proper stage, the company would play in the round. Few players, outside the steady core of three or four, survived more than a few years. On tour they slept in barns, on school floors, even a park cafe. 'Digs' were too expensive. If emotional complications arose, Nancy Hewins's remedies were sal volatile or a teaspoon of brandy. 
Theatre was a mission to Nancy Hewins. Everything was subordinated to the task of keeping Osiris on the road. To begin with, she augmented the funds by working as lighting director on other productions, especially pageants. The company was never publicly subsidized. Nancy Hewins was ahead of her time in acting in improvised venues to regional audiences, though she was also in the great tradition of strolling players. 'I dare say if the company had had a Russian name', she wrote, 'it would have been regarded as a remarkable experiment.' The costumes had a bright, Renaissance glamour: hessian or canvas, painted in vivid reds or golds. They were uncomfortable to wear, but they folded flat. Everything had to be tough and durable. When she played Claudius in 'Hamlet', she wore the Ghost's armour underneath, for quick changing. In her later years, she made a modest living by renting the costumes out. 
Nancy Hewins was stubborn, even dogmatic, and said what she thought, but she evoked great loyalty among her actresses. She never married and had no personal vanity. She loved practical things. Interviewing one would-be actress, she made it clear that the important thing was to be able to change a car wheel. To many young people, for more than thirty years, the arrival of her Osiris company brought the first experience of theatrical magic into their lives. 
Nancy Hewins died of heart failure at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 17 January 1978. She was buried at St Peter's Church, Willersey, Gloucestershire. 


@@@@@


doc= 56709


Praed, Rosa Caroline (1851-1935), novelist, was born on 27 March 1851 on her father's cattle property, Bromelton, near Brisbane, New South Wales, Australia, the third of eleven children of Thomas Lodge Murray-Prior (1819-1892), pastoralist and MP, and his first wife, Matilda (1828-1868), daughter of Thomas Harpur and his wife, Rosa Adams. Educated mostly by her mother and by governesses, Rosa Murray-Prior lived on a succession of pastoral and farm properties and in Brisbane, where her father became postmaster-general and a member of the legislative council of the newly declared state of Queensland. Experience of both pioneering bush conditions and Brisbane's elite social and political circles was stored for later use in fiction. In 1872 she married Arthur Campbell Bulkley Praed (1846-1901), known as Campbell Praed, a younger son of an English brewing and banking family, and went with him to live on his cattle run, Monte Christo, on Curtis Island off the Queensland coast. Lonely and unhappy there, Praed was delighted when in 1875 Campbell Praed decided to sell up and return to England. 
Encouraged by her mother to write, Praed as a teenager had produced a number of romance novelettes for the family's handwritten, monthly 'Maroon Magazine'. On arrival in England she resumed writing and submitted Australian sketches to various publishers. Encouragement from George Meredith and Frank Chapman led to the publication of her first novel, 'An Australian Heroine', in 1880. Over the next thirty-five years Praed published almost fifty books, including four in collaboration with the Irish politician and author Justin McCarthy. Their attempt to produce a novel, ''The Right Honourable'' (1886), which combined the insights of male and female, led to a close friendship terminated by McCarthy's death in 1912. Praed edited his letters to her as 'Our Book of Memories' (1912). 
Praed had a lifelong interest in the supernatural. She was involved with the Theosophical Society in London in the early 1880s and hosted meetings of the society in her house. Occult themes appear in her novels of this period such as 'The Brother of the Shadow' (1887) and 'The Soul of Countess Adrian' (1892), and continue throughout her later books. In 1899 she left her husband to live with another writer, Anne (Nancy) Harward (1864-1927). Praed believed Nancy to be the reincarnation of a Roman slave girl whom Praed herself, in an earlier life, had oppressed. The Roman past revealed by Nancy in a series of seances was fictionalized as 'Nyria' (1904) and recounted in more documentary form as 'Soul of Nyria' (1931). Although not as committed to astrology as Nancy, Praed was convinced of the reality and importance of the spiritual plane. An unpublished book consists of the teachings of nature spirits with whom Praed communicated. 
Praed's literary reputation peaked about 1890 on the basis of her Australian stories such as 'Policy and Passion' (1881), which describes the tensions between a self-made Australian politician and his Anglophile daughter, 'The Head Station' (1885), and 'Outlaw and Lawmaker' (1893). She also achieved a reputation for sensational psychological studies of victimized or tragic women, as in 'Nadine' (1882), 'Moloch' (1883), 'The Bond of Wedlock' (1887; dramatized in London as 'Ariane'), and 'Christina Chard' (1893). 'Affinities' (1885), with its protagonist based on Oscar Wilde, reflects the prominent social and artistic circles in which she moved at this time. After revisiting Australia in the mid-1890s she published an autobiographical account of her Australian days in 'My Australian Girlhood' (1902), in which she bids farewell to the pioneer era, her own youth, and the Australian Aborigines, then believed to be dying out. Praed thought the lasting value of her work was in its investigations of the supernatural. Fitfully reprinted since the 1980s, she is now valued for her energetic Anglo-Australian literary sensibility, as a critic of female oppression, and as a complex example of late Victorian sexual ambiguity. 
An unenthusiastic mother, Praed bore four children before separating from her husband in 1899. Three sons predeceased her, one dying in a car crash in California, one in a hunting accident in South Africa, and one, racked by terminal cancer, shooting himself. Her daughter was placed in a mental asylum. All died childless. Praed herself died on 10 April 1935 at her home, 12 Lower Erith Road, Torquay, Devon, and was buried with Nancy in Kensal Green cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 56710


Ramabai, Pandita Mary Saraswati (1858-1922), social reformer and writer, was born on 23 April 1858 in Gangamul, near Mangalore, India, the youngest of the six children (of whom three survived infancy) of Anant Shastri Dongre, Sanskrit scholar, and his second wife, Lakshmibai, daughter of Madhavrao Abhyankar. Her father, who was a Marathi Brahman, had an unusual belief in the education of women. He taught his wife Sanskrit, in which Ramabai was instructed in the sacred books by both her parents. The family lived on a pilgrim route in a remote part of the Western Ghats, where her father spent so much in entertaining pilgrims and students that he had to sell off his rice fields and coconut plantations. He and his family then became travelling pilgrims, earning their living by reciting the Sanskrit 'Puranas' in the villages. In the famine of 1876-7 all the family died except for Ramabai and her brother Shrinivas, who eventually arrived in Calcutta in 1878, where Ramabai studied the Hindu scriptures further. She was so disgusted with their treatment of women and of low castes that she became associated with the reforming Brahmo Samaj. Her lectures on the rise and fall of the Aryan race and on the position of women, as well as her knowledge of the sacred books, caused Calcutta University to confer on her the title Saraswati, after the goddess of learning; a gathering of scholars also awarded her the title of Pandita (learned woman). Her brother died in 1880. On 13 June in the same year she married, in a civil ceremony, a Bengali schoolteacher, Bipin Behari Das Medhavi, who was a member of the Brahmo Samaj. He died of cholera in 1881, leaving her with a daughter, Monorama, with whom she returned to Maharashtra, the home of her ancestors, where she earned a living by lecturing on social questions. 
In 1883, hoping to study medicine, Ramabai went to England, where she and her daughter stayed with the community of St Mary the Virgin in Wantage while she improved her English. Impressed by the sisters' work, particularly among prostitutes, she was baptized with the name Mary and confirmed in the Church of England in 1883. When her defective hearing made a medical career impossible the sisters arranged for her to study at Cheltenham Ladies' College and to teach Sanskrit in return. Ramabai now came to question the Anglo-Catholic position of the community and was irritated by what she regarded as its patronizing attitude; it was a relief to all when in 1887 she accepted an invitation to visit the Women's Medical College in Philadelphia. There she decided to devote her life to the protection and the education for employment of Hindu widows, particularly those who were children. She prepared herself by taking a teaching course and by studying the school systems of America. At the same time she wrote 'The Hindu High Caste Woman' (1887), the first book by an Indian woman to appear in English. Its vivid description of the cruelties suffered by Hindu widows and her lectures throughout America led to the formation of a Ramabai Association, which raised sufficient funds to enable her to return to India in 1889 and open a school for high-caste Hindu widows and orphans, first in Bombay, then in Poona, and finally in her Mukti Sadan (House of Salvation) near Poona. Rapidly becoming a public figure, in 1889 Ramabai was the first woman to address the Indian National Congress, recommending that Hindi should be used as the common language of India. At the Indian National Social Conference in the same year she urged that it should be made a legal offence to shave the heads of widows. 
In 1896-7 and 1899 severe famines occurred in central India. With the memory of her parents' fate, Ramabai rescued hundreds of women and girls from starvation and prostitution and settled them at Mukti, where they were educated and set to work in fruit farming and small industries. A church was built with space for 5000 worshippers; services were usually conducted by American Methodist ministers. In 1905 a phenomenon occurred which has been variously treated with admiration, puzzlement, or reserve by Ramabai's biographers. As she was reading from the eighth chapter of St John, the whole congregation began to weep and speak in tongues, and waves of prayer swept through the church. Evangelical activity outside the settlement was now intensified. Though Ramabai dampened the manifestation of the revival when it verged on hysteria, it brought her a personal message to translate the 'Bible' into a language which, unlike the current Marathi versions, could be understood by the people. For the remaining fifteen years of her life this translation from the original Hebrew and Greek became her main occupation, in addition to running her institution. She gave up travelling and public speaking. 
Some 2000 people lived at Mukti, which was largely self-supporting, and where Ramabai had ten American and European helpers. In addition to the girls' school with its industrial and agricultural sides there was a rescue department for former prostitutes, homes for the elderly and sick, and a boys' orphanage which eventually provided Christian husbands for many of the girls. Despite occasional tussles with the British authorities, notably over insensitive plague control measures, Ramabai was awarded the kaisar-i-Hind medal in 1919. In 1921 she suffered a severe blow on the death of her only child, Monorama, who had been trained to succeed her. Shortly after completing her translation of the 'Bible' she died in her sleep on 5 April 1922 at Mukti, where she was buried the following day. Her work was successfully continued by her foreign and Indian colleagues. 
Ramabai was described by Sarojini Naidu as the first Christian to be enrolled in the calendar of Indian saints. In her twenties Max Muller found her 'truly heroic in appearance, small, delicate and timid, but in reality bold as a tigress' (Muller, 42). The timidity disappeared; later a visitor to Mukti described her as 'very charming and humble but imperious' (Dongre and Patterson, 123). She lived very simply, owning nothing but her books and clothes and wearing the white sari and cropped hair of a Hindu widow. 
Ramabai's achievements were of many kinds. As an educationist she was a pioneer of methods which combined academic and practical work. Her girls operated and maintained the printing press, and as masons and carpenters did much of the construction of the Mukti buildings, organizing themselves and electing their own leaders. She also introduced kindergarten methods and braille into India. In modern India she was the first woman to become prominent in public life. She was a brilliant lecturer, earnest but witty. As a social reformer she aroused a strong sentiment against the cruel traditional treatment of widows. As a religious leader and evangelist she was closer to nonconformists than to Anglicans in later life, though she never formally renounced her membership of the Church of England. She was prophetic in calling for closer co-operation between Christian churches and for the acceptance by Christians of what was good in Hindu tradition and custom. She attributed all successes to God, in whose providence she was completely confident throughout the frequent financial crises at Mukti. 
In addition to her 'Hindu High Caste Woman' and her 'Bible' translation, Ramabai was a prolific writer of books and articles on social and religious subjects in English and Marathi. Her many biographers draw largely on her own 'Testimony' (1917), her recollections included in S. M. Adhav's 'Pandita Ramabai' (1969), and her 'Letters and Correspondence' (1977). The two latter contain bibliographies of her writings. 


@@@@@


doc= 56711


Couvreur, Jessie Catherine (1848-1897), author, was born on 28 October 1848 at Southwood Lodge, Highgate, Middlesex, the second child and eldest daughter in a family of five sons and three daughters. Her mother, Charlotte Sophia, 'nee' Ogleby (1817-1908), who had run a small boarding-school in England, placed great store on genealogy, emphasizing throughout her life the status derived from having a French mother, and connections with a titled family through her English father. Jessie's father, (James) Alfred Huybers (1811-1893), came from Flemish merchant stock, and it was his decision to set up as a wine trader in the Australian colonies that took the family in 1852 to Hobart in Van Diemen's Land -- soon to be renamed Tasmania. When she embarked on her career as an author, Jessie's choice of Tasma as pen-name declared her pride in the formative influence of the place. She helped educate her younger brothers and sisters and, in addition to the love of languages and intellectual debate derived from her increasingly eccentric mother, developed also a passion for outdoor pursuits, notably sea-bathing and horse-riding. 
However, following her early marriage to Charles Forbes Fraser (1841-1913), in Hobart on 6 June 1867, Jessie spent only short periods in Tasmania. Charles Fraser was employed on rural properties owned by his well-connected family in the Australian mainland state of Victoria, among which the couple moved until incompatibilities between Charles's sporting interests and Jessie's cultural ones, compounded by financial problems, brought about their separation in December 1872. In March 1873 Jessie set sail with her mother and siblings for London via Cape Horn, to spend over two years in Brussels and Paris. On her return to Melbourne in 1875 she was reunited with Charles, and in 1877 she began to publish articles and stories, mainly in the Melbourne newspaper 'The Australasian', where her work appeared regularly to the late 1880s. 
The Fraser marriage broke down finally in 1878. In 1879 Jessie was back in Europe, where she joined her mother and four siblings in Paris. Here, as Madame Jessie Tasma, she embarked on a career as lecturer on Australian subjects, praised for the quality of her French as well as her beauty and animation, and recognized in the mid-1880s by the award of the French honour 'Officier d'Academie' (rarely accorded to foreigners and even more rarely to women), for services to cultural education. 
It was while Jessie was in Venice to lecture in 1881 that she met the distinguished Belgian liberal politician and journalist Auguste Pierre Louis Couvreur (1827-1894), recently widowed. They married in London on 7 August 1885 and took up residence in Brussels, Jessie having secured a divorce during her last visit to Australia in 1883-4. She now began to write longer fictional works which both reworked her life experiences, especially in the Fraser marriage, and also celebrated the energy and opportunities of Australia while respecting the cultural values of the Old World. She had significant success with 'Uncle Piper of Piper's Hill', serialized in 'The Australasian' in 1888 and published in book form in London in 1889. This mellow comedy, set in the booming city of Melbourne in the 1860s, dwells on the egalitarian possibilities of life in Australia by its depiction of the family of Tom Piper, who has migrated from England in the gold rushes and made money as a butcher and in real estate. This novel was rapidly followed by a volume of stories, 'A Sydney Sovereign' (1890), and five more novels, none of them acclaimed as 'Uncle Piper' had been. Writing for her living, Jessie produced also a translation into French, and journalism in both French and English, publishing frequently in Edmund Yates's London newspaper, 'The World'. 
In 1892 Auguste Couvreur was appointed Brussels correspondent for 'The Times'. When he died on 23 April 1894, Jessie indefatigably took over the role until her own death from coronary heart disease at her home, 161 chaussee de Vleurgat, Brussels, on 23 October 1897. In accordance with her long-held principles she was cremated, though this required that her body travel by rail to Paris (where she was cremated at Pere Lachaise) as cremation was illegal in Belgium. Her mother and five siblings -- for whom she had had significant financial responsibility -- survived her. Obituaries identified her prominence in the London literary scene, and her distinctive role as a cultural ambassador for Australia. 


@@@@@


doc= 56712


Harpur, Charles (1813-1868), poet, was born on 23 January 1813 at Windsor, New South Wales, the third of seven children of Joseph Harpur (died 1842) of Kinsale, co. Cork, and Sarah Chidley (died 1866) of Somerset. Both parents were former convicts, Joseph having arrived on the 'Royal Admiral' on 22 November 1800, and Sarah on the 'Alexander' in August 1806. Joseph Harpur made good in the colony, becoming parish clerk and schoolmaster at Windsor, and retiring on a government pension of $50. Charles Harpur gave his date of birth as 1817, possibly because his parents were not married until 16 June 1814, and possibly from a wish to emulate the youthfulness of Chatterton, the subject of the long poem 'Genius Lost'. As he explained in a note to 'To the Lyre of Australia', Harpur decided in his teens to be a poet, making a choice that brought him 'hunger and rags'. He allied himself with the native-born in the colony, the 'native youth' or the 'currency lads' as they called themselves, and styled himself 'Charles Harpur, an Australian'. He was sympathetic to the plight of the Aborigines, and used Aboriginal terms in his writing. 
Poems by Harpur appeared in the Sydney newspapers from 1833 onward, and 'The Tragedy of Donohoe', a blank verse play on the bushranger of that name, was published in selections in 'The Monitor' in 1835. Harpur found employment in Sydney as a post office clerk in 1836, but resigned to avoid dismissal on 10 October 1839. Although he continued to spend time in Sydney, where his mother had remained in Parramatta after his father's death in 1842, Harpur for the next twenty years lived a life of hardship on the Hunter River, where his elder brother Joseph had established a farm. He was located at Patrick's Plains and then at Jerry's Plains, where he deputized for his brother in the post office store, and acted as pound-keeper and as agent for the Sydney papers. At Jerry's Plains in 1843 Harpur met Mary Ann Doyle (1820-1899), who was in part the inspiration of the sonnet series to 'Rosa' (later 'Nora'). She was the daughter of a more prosperous family in the district, who frowned on the match, but the pair eventually married on 2 July 1850. After unsuccessful ventures as a schoolmaster at Black Creek and at Muswellbrook, Harpur returned to sheep farming at Doyle's Creek, probably with the assistance of his wife's family. 
In the 1840s and 1850s Harpur had increasing contact with the nascent literary circles in Sydney, especially with Henry Halloran, D. H. Deniehy, and N. D. Stenhouse. He was praised by Henry Parkes, who in 1843 made him a gift of the six-volume edition of Shelley. These years on the Hunter were Harpur's most productive, not only for some of his identifiably 'Australian' poems, but also for polemical pieces in verse and prose on such issues as convict transportation, land reform, and self-government. 
Harpur's feeling that the world owed him a living was answered in August 1859, when he was appointed gold commissioner for the Goulburn and Araluen districts. He proved effective in this office, and selected land and built a house (the 'Euroma' of the later poems) for his family at Eurobodalla. This property was hardly adequate to support him when the goldfields appointment lapsed in July 1866, and ruinous floods came the year after. Harpur died on 10 June 1868 of 'induration (hardening) of the lungs'. He was buried at Euroma, beside his second son Charlie, killed in a shooting accident in 1867. 
Apart from the occasional pamphlet offprinted from a poem appearing in the press such as 'The Tower of the Dream' (1865), Harpur's published volumes were two: 'Thoughts: a Series of Sonnets' (1845) with a dedication to Wordsworth, and 'The Bushrangers' (1853), a reworking of 'The Tragedy of Donohoe', with 'other poems'. As the posthumous 'Poems' (1883) were substantially abridged and 'improved' by H. M. Martin, there was no comprehensive text of Harpur until the 1984 edition by Elizabeth Perkins, who is preparing a definitive text. Harpur's manuscripts occupy some twenty-five volumes in the Mitchell Library, Sydney, offering multiple versions of the poems, annotations sometimes as extensive as the text, and much writing in prose. 
Harpur has been seen as the poet who brought Australian landscape into Australian verse. It was already there, in W. C. Wentworth's 'Australasia' (1823) and Charles Tompson's 'Wild Notes, from the Lyre of a Native Minstrel' (1826), but these were in the cultivated eighteenth-century manner, which seemed to later readers to mask the features of the Australian scene. Harpur was more recognizably a Romantic, and 'A Mid-Summer Noon in the Australian Forest' was gratefully seized on by the anthologists. This misrepresented his work. Although particular observations were not lacking (the 'rush of startled kangaroo', 'the upland growths of wattles'), Harpur more often saw the Australian bush as vast and overwhelming and unknown -- to some extent recording an Australia which has passed. He typically responds to the natural world in its larger, sometimes more threatening movements, as in a bushfire, a storm in the mountains, or in the darkness enveloping those who are lost in the bush. This is the quality of 'The Creek of the Four Graves', 'The Kangaroo Hunt', and 'Lost in the Bush'. Harpur is also sensitive to the distinctive effects of light, especially in glare and haze, and he made an antipodean analysis of the 'dancing' of the sun. 
Like Wentworth and Tompson before him, and his admirer Henry Kendall after, Harpur saw himself as laying claim to the English poetic tradition, and as giving it individual expression. The projected edition of his poems in 1867 was dedicated 'to the People of England'. From the autobiographical 'The Dream by the Fountain' to the more ambitious 'The World and the Soul' and 'The Witch of Hebron', his work is informed by his conviction of the peculiar sensibility and mission of the poet. He becomes his own hero, meeting adversity with a melancholy satisfaction. Harpur's achievement otherwise is to have conveyed the immensity and the menace of the Australian bush more effectively in larger poetic structures, where the local faults may be overtaken in the general impression. 


@@@@@


doc= 56714


Gruffudd, Elis (b. c.1490, d. in or after 1556), copyist and chronicler, was born at Gronant Uchaf, Gwesbyr, Llanasa, Flintshire. He himself is the source for almost all that is known of his life and career, though a few details are supplied or confirmed by external references. His genealogy has not been recorded, but he appears to have inherited a small estate which became the subject of legal wrangling, and he probably had wide family and social connections as one of the minor gentry in Flintshire, which would have facilitated his entry into service with English nobility, as one of the many Welshmen who joined the retinues of English noblemen in the period. He served in several campaigns, probably from about the age of twenty: Venlo (1511), Cadiz (1511), Fuenterrabia (1512), and Tournai (1514 onwards). 
Gruffudd entered the service of Sir Robert Wingfield in 1518 and accompanied him to Calais, where Wingfield was deputy in 1520. He was an avid observer of the meeting at the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1521, and he fought in the army of the duke of Suffolk in the campaign in France in the last months of 1523. He spent the next years, 1524-9, as a member of the Wingfield household in London, describing himself as overseer of the mansion. Whatever his duties may have been, he found enough time to enjoy and to describe vividly many aspects of the life of London, and he also had leisure to compile, about 1527, a large compendium (Cardiff Central Library, MS 3.4) of fourteenth- and fifteenth-century gentry poetry, popular religious, historical, and astronomical treatises and lists, and a version of 'The Seven Sages of Rome', all typical of the native gentry culture of the time. 
Gruffudd is best known, however, by his preferred self-description as 'a soldier of Calais'. He enlisted in the garrison in January 1530 and spent the rest of his active life there. He married Elizabeth Manfield in Calais, acquired land, set up house, and had two children. He describes many of his duties as a soldier, and he clearly enjoyed the ceremonial aspect of military life, especially the opportunities afforded him to observe the comings and goings of leading figures. He was tipstaff about 1546. 
Gruffudd continued his literary activities in Calais. During a period of ill health about 1548 he put together a collection of his translations of English medical books (NL Wales, Cwrtmawr MS 1). His most important work was an extensive chronicle of the six ages of the world from the creation to his own time, a two-volume manuscript (NL Wales, MS 5276 and Mostyn MS 158), which he arranged should be sent to a friend, probably a kinsman, at Pant-y-llondy, Gwesbyr, for safe keeping soon after its completion about 1552-3 (the last date in the chronicle is 1552). Gruffudd was probably inspired to write his world chronicle by his knowledge of similar works in English and French. He was able to bring together in Calais a number of familiar histories. He names Ranulf Higden's 'Polychronicon' and John Trevisa's translation, Edmund Hall, John Rastell, and Jean Froissart, but for the most part he refers merely to 'French books', 'English books', 'English chronicle', 'my copy' as sources. He rarely quotes directly from his sources but paraphrases and gives the gist of what he reads. 
More remarkably Gruffudd had access to 'Welsh writings', unfortunately unnamed, and he also relied on oral sources ('a credible person', 'old folk', 'some... others', 'the opinion of the people') from his own cultural inheritance, acquired from what must have been a rich oral and literary culture in the north-east Wales of his early years. His chronicle is well structured, and as it progresses it becomes increasingly focused on Wales, regarded here as part of English history. He has a sound grasp of Welsh legendary history so that he is able to include at the appropriate points some folk tales, the first full version of the Taliesin prose-verse tale, and an extended Arthurian section together with other material. 
Throughout his chronicle Gruffudd comments critically on the value of his sources, literary and oral. He appears to have received little training as a scribe and he has a personal idiosyncratic literary style underlying which is a strong aural sense. He is, nevertheless, an intelligent and able writer with consciously developed literary skills. He has a fine eye for dramatic situations, both contemporary and historical, and he can write effective dialogue. His extended anecdotes are narratives carefully constructed to achieve his desired literary effects or to make an implicit comment. Though Gwenogvryn Evans may have claimed too much for him as the author of some of 'the most readable prose in the Welsh language after the 'Mabinogion'' ('Welsh Language MSS', viii), he is now recognized as a master of narrative and a serious and effective writer. 
Always interested in life around him, Gruffudd is a keen observer of people and commentator on events so that, drawing on personal experience, recollections, and possibly notes taken during his long career, he can describe graphically what he sees and hears. His account of numerous closely observed contemporary events and his own well-judged comments on situations and conditions make him a valuable 'unofficial' contemporary witness, but in Welsh historiography he represents the last stages of the declining traditional Welsh gentry culture recorded by one who represents the sociological changes which were transforming that class in the sixteenth century. 
Both Gruffudd and his wife were alive in 1556, but nothing more is heard of him after that. It is not known where or when he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 56715


Bakewell, Thomas (1761-1835), mad-doctor and poet, was born on 1 June 1761 at Kingstone, near Uttoxeter, in Staffordshire. He was raised by his maternal grandfather, John Chadwick, who kept a private mad-house at Grindon in the Peak District. Chadwick moved to Ashbourne in Derbyshire, where Bakewell received a limited education at the school of a Mr Richards. He was profoundly influenced by his experiences in his grandfather's mad-house. He received no formal medical training. After Chadwick's death, the management of the mad-house passed to his son John Chadwick, Thomas Bakewell's uncle. After assisting Chadwick for three years, Bakewell was apprenticed in 1774 as a tape weaver. He progressed eventually to become foreman over 300 men. 
Bakewell resumed work with the insane about 1793, taking over the house from his dying uncle. Business difficulties led him to emigrate to North America two or three years later. He returned about 1802 and set up practice as a mad-doctor in the Staffordshire town of Cheadle. In 1805, Bakewell published 'The Domestic Guide in Cases of Insanity'. This provided practical advice to people managing insane relatives at home. He considered mental illness to emanate from a diseased state of the brain. Social factors, like alcohol abuse, religious excess, or relationship difficulties might be precipitants which acted on the physical predisposition. Bakewell's approach to the management of patients emphasized humanity along with the imposition of firm authority. Treatment comprised methods in general usage, including warm and cold bathing and emetic and purgative medicines. The book achieved some critical approval and enhanced Bakewell's local reputation. 
Bakewell opened his own private mad-house in 1808 at Spring Vale, near Stone, in Staffordshire. His intention was to put into practice the system of management and treatment learned from his relatives. In its early years Spring Vale was not commercially successful. Bakewell attributed this to his ability to cure patients; admissions were not frequent enough to replace discharges. His financial difficulties were partly alleviated by his third marriage, to Sarah Glover, who both invested money and took on the role of matron. By 1820 Spring Vale was flourishing, and within a few years was catering for up to forty patients. The treatment methods there embodied what Bakewell liked to call his 'system of cure'. This comprised a regime of fresh air, vigorous exercise, and a nourishing diet, supplemented by active medical intervention which centred around achieving efficient digestive and bowel action. 'Moral treatment' was also employed, concentrating on the promotion of rational and sensible behaviour. Bakewell sought to foster a supportive milieu that resembled a large family, with recreational activities, occupation, and religious observance, intended to divert thoughts away from the irrational. He claimed a cure rate of nine out of ten patients referred at an early stage of their disorder. 
Bakewell became an active campaigner for his principles of treatment. He was galvanized by the passage of the 'County Asylums Act' 1808, which encouraged county justices to provide asylums for pauper lunatics. His conviction was that large public asylums would become 'mighty prisons', in which confinement would take precedence over curative treatment. He lobbied leading politicians and was called as a witness before the select committee on mad-houses in 1815. After his appearance in 1815, Bakewell published 'A Letter to the Select Committee on Madhouses', in which he developed his argument against public asylums and detailed his alternative treatment methods. There were two other publications: in 1807 he had published 'The Moorland Bard', a book of poetry; in 1820 he issued 'Remarks on a Publication by James Loch', a strident polemic against the highland clearances, and in particular the part played in them by the marquess of Stafford, against whom Bakewell had a personal grievance resulting from a land dispute. Between 1815 and 1830, while building up his business at Spring Vale, Bakewell continued to campaign for a better public understanding of the needs of the insane. He delivered lectures in towns around the midlands and north. He became a frequent contributor to literary journals, first the 'Monthly Magazine' and then the 'Imperial Magazine'. In his articles he outlined the origins and causes of mental disorder and expanded his ideas on treatment. Many columns were devoted to his critique of public asylums, and his perception of their inevitable therapeutic failure. He called for a nationally regulated system in which the lunatic would be regarded as the 'child of the state' and a series of small curative asylums would be built around the country. Through his writings Bakewell attained some celebrity as a prototype popular psychiatrist. 
Bakewell led a fairly colourful life. He married three times and produced twenty-four children, nine with his first wife, four with his second, and eleven with his third, Sarah. He became a well-known local character in Staffordshire, contributing on a range of issues, political, social, agricultural, and industrial, to the county press. He died on 6 September 1835 at Spring Vale, and was buried in St Michael's Church, Stone. After his death, the asylum at Spring Vale was taken over by his wife together with his son, Samuel Bakewell; it was subsequently relocated a few miles away at Oulton, and later moved to Church Stretton, Shropshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 56716


Ellis, Ruth (1926-1955), nightclub hostess and convicted murderer, was born on 9 October 1926 at 74 West Parade, Rhyl, north Wales, the fourth of six children of Arthur Neilson (formerly Hornby), musician, and his wife, Elisaberta Goodall, a seamstress. 
Born into poverty, Ruth determined very early that she would not live a life like her parents. 'She wasn't like my other children' her mother recalled, 'she was so very ambitious for herself. She used to say 'Mum, I'm going to make something of my life'' (Hancock, 16). When her father's work as a jobbing musician on the ocean liners and in the cinemas evaporated with the advent of the 'talkies', the family moved to Basingstoke, and Ruth attended the local Fairfields Senior Girls' School. It was soon obvious that she intended her passport to a better life to be not education but rather her charm, prettiness, and opportunistic energy. Marriage seemed the first and most obvious means of escape, but the Canadian serviceman on whom she pinned her hopes, and with whom she had become pregnant, proved to have a wife and two children back home. It was 1944 and Ruth Neilson was just eighteen. This common betrayal destroyed what little confidence Ruth had in human relations. 'I did not feel that anything could hurt me any more and I had become emotionally rather cold and rather spent... somehow in my association with men nothing touched me' (ibid., 19) was how she described herself then. Her son, Clare Andrea Neilson, was born on 15 September 1944 and given his father's forenames. 
From being a factory hand, waitress, and shop worker, Ruth turned to more lucrative and risky pursuits: photographer's model at an amateur camera club, and then hostess for a notorious vice boss with a string of clubs and brothels in Mayfair. The Court Club in Duke Street and the Hollywood in Welbeck Street were the first two clubs where Ruth worked in 1946, taking home $20 a week, almost ten times what she had been earning in Woolworths in Brixton. 
Ruth Neilson became Ruth Ellis when she married, on 8 November 1950, George Johnston Ellis (1909-1958), a divorced and alcoholic dentist for whom she felt vaguely sorry and with whom she hoped to gain some financial security. But the drinking, continual arguments over money, and Ruth's suspicions and violent jealousy meant the marriage was bitterly over by the time their daughter, Georgina, was born on 2 October 1951. 
Short of money again and now with two children to support, Ruth returned to the vice boss: she continued her work as a hostess and call-girl. She then met in 1953 David Moffatt Drummond Blakely (1926-1955), a racing car enthusiast and the youngest child of a Sheffield doctor. Blakely was a reckless and feckless young man who frequented the Little Club, a disreputable drinking club in Knightsbridge where Ellis had become manager. Although he was engaged to another woman, and Ellis was still seeing her clients, the two became lovers. Quite soon, however, his drinking and possessiveness caused trouble in the club and Ellis found herself a second man friend, sharing her favours between them. 
Desmond Edward Cussen had been a bomber pilot during the war and then became a director of the family firm of tobacconists. Well-off and bored, he belonged to the same circle of motor racing enthusiasts as Blakely. Alcohol was the most important currency between them and Ruth Ellis, Blakely, and Cussen all drank excessively. Resentments, jealousies, and violent drunken fights between Blakely and Ellis were commonplace. Cussen wanted to extract Ellis from the explosive relationship with his younger rival and had offered to marry her himself. But Ellis was infatuated with Blakely, and became obsessively and morbidly so when he decided to end the relationship at the beginning of the 1955 Easter holiday. 
By Easter Sunday, 10 April, Ruth Ellis had endured three days of sleeplessness, panic, and pathological jealousy, fuelled by quantities of Pernod and a reckless consumption of tranquillizers. It appears that in this state she was given a 38 Smith & Wesson revolver by Cussen, who had oiled and loaded it and shown her how to use it. He then drove her to the Magdala public house in Hampstead where they expected David Blakely to be. Cussen waited in the car while Ellis set off to find her former lover. She caught Blakely as he left the pub with a friend: oblivious to everything else she pumped four bullets into his fleeing body. Hysteria broke out around her: 'Arrest me -- I have just shot this man -- and fetch an ambulance' (Hancock, 10) she said with icy calm to the first available policeman. 
It seemed to the witnesses to be a cold-blooded murder, and nothing Ruth Ellis said in court in her defence altered the opinion that it was premeditated. She refused to plead insanity and the jury would not accept her defence of provocation. For her own reasons, Ellis had shielded Cussen's crucial involvement in the tragedy. Only the day before her execution did she admit his complicity to her lawyer, Victor Mishcon, afterwards Lord Mishcon. However, Desmond Cussen could not be found in time to corroborate her story and the home secretary, Gwilym Lloyd George, later Viscount Tenby, refused to reprieve her. 
Ruth Ellis was hanged on the morning of 13 July 1955 at Holloway prison, north London. She was twenty-eight years old. She impressed everyone with her control and courage; the prospect of being executed for a crime she never denied was marginally less unpleasant to her than that of growing old in prison, as unprivileged and deprived of hope and opportunity as she had been as a child. She was buried first in Holloway prison, and later reburied in Amersham, Buckinghamshire. 
The circumstances of her death assured Ruth Ellis the fame and significance she had failed to find in life. The natural public interest in her case was intensified by her startling platinum-blonde looks, glacial manner, and life in the seedier reaches of Mayfair's clubland. The guilty verdict and the death sentence ensured the trial became a 'cause celebre', the verdict still debated today. As it turned out, Ruth Ellis was the last woman to be judicially hanged in Britain: the widespread and international revulsion against her punishment expedited the establishment of a law of 'diminished responsibility' in the 'Homicide Act' of 1957. 
Following her death some campaigned for Ruth Ellis's verdict of murder to be commuted to one of manslaughter, on the grounds of provocation and diminished responsibility; judgment was reserved after a hearing at the Court of Appeal in September 2003. But she will remain memorialized as the last woman to be hanged, the glamorous blonde, guilty of a classic 'crime passionnel', whose execution hastened the abolition of the death penalty in Great Britain. Circumstances, timing, and the fact that she was so young, good-looking, and a woman had combined to award Ruth Ellis her small, brave place in history. It seems likely she would have been happy enough with that. Miranda Richardson played the part of Ruth Ellis in Mike Newell's film of her life, 'Dance with a Stranger' (1985). 


@@@@@


doc= 56720


Myersbach, Theodor (c.1730-1798), uroscopist, was probably born in Bavaria. Virtually all the particulars of his life were discovered initially by Dr John Coakley Lettsom, who pertinaciously investigated Myersbach's background and exposed his dubious practices. As Lettsom was a Quaker of the highest personal and professional integrity, who used as evidence Myersbach's letters and prescriptions that he had openly acquired, his account can be taken as essentially reliable. 
Myersbach is said to have begun his working life in Germany as a postboy, delivering letters; he then rose to a clerkship in a Post Office. He married a sister of Joseph Brenner of Schweinfurt, near Wurzburg, possibly in 1755; they were to have two sons, Alexander and Polycarp. However, owing to 'misdemeanours' -- not specified by Lettsom -- Myersbach had to leave Germany. After residing for a while in Amsterdam he moved to England, about 1772, but was very poor as he was unable to find work. 
Myersbach first tried for a post with a starch manufacturer in Essex. Then, while lodging over a chandler's shop in Soho, London, he and his son Alexander developed 'the itch'. Not knowing how to treat this affliction he consulted a Dr Griffenberg, who lived nearby. Griffenberg directed him towards a job in a local riding school, but Myersbach failed as his figure was not imposing enough. Once cured of his affliction, however, he moved in with the doctor and soon acquired some expertise and much jargon. Griffenberg died not long afterwards, and in gratitude Myersbach undertook to pay a pension of 6's'. a week to his widow. 
In December 1773 Myersbach produced an advertisement which proclaimed, with some stretching of the truth, that 'Dr von Mayersbach' was newly arrived from Prague; he set himself up in Berwick Street, Soho. The practice of diagnosing ills from the scrutiny of a sufferer's urine went back fifteen centuries, the title of 'piss prophet' perhaps reflecting some lay contempt for this vocation. However, as Myersbach had such a slender grasp of medicine he chose this profession cannily, as no bodily examination was needed. He disguised his insignificant figure with very expensive apparel; that, and his elegant coach and horses, put people in awe of him. So did his pronouncements in very broken English. He would wave his hands some inches above the recumbent victim to discover the seat of the problem, and over some spot exclaim, 'It is here, it is here', moving on if the patient disagreed. Sometimes he knew precisely, because his employees had initiated or overheard conversations in the waiting room. 
Lettsom asserted that Myersbach often made two hundred consultations daily, which would have meant treating one patient every three or four minutes during a twelve-hour day. More realistically he was supposed to earn 1000 guineas a month, equivalent to the income of a small German principality. He charged half a guinea per consultation and also received one-third of the income from the medicines he prescribed, each of which cost 7's'.-10's'. Lettsom bought and analysed some hundreds of Myersbach's prescriptions: a red powder contained saltpetre; green drops were a tincture of tansy; sweet drops consisted mostly of sugar; and black pills were made from a hallucinogenic mixture of brandy and opium. 
Early in 1776 Myersbach moved from Soho to Hatton Garden in the City of London. That April, David Garrick, the actor, consulted him for the gout and the stone that had plagued him for many years, and found relief. Among other patients were Charles Lennox, the third duke of Richmond, and his wife, the first Baron Hawke, the second Baron Archer, and a Lady Harrington. However, at the beginning of 1777 Myersbach left Britain; perhaps the Royal College of Physicians had been asking awkward questions over his improperly describing himself as a doctor. At about this time Myersbach purchased a doctorate of medicine from the University of Erfurt in Thuringia, and within twelve months he was back in London, building up as extensive a following as before. 
Lettsom for his part had learnt that unfortunately his relentless pillorying of Myersbach had entirely failed to break him. He in his turn had to face not only anonymous counter-attacks in the press and through pamphlets, but also some hostility from eminent colleagues, aware that Myersbach did cure cases that had baffled orthodox medicine. Myersbach continued his practice until he died in London early in February 1798, after only a few hours' illness; he was described as a 'water-doctor'. Although clearly a wealthy man, no will under his name was sworn at the prerogative court of Canterbury. However, on 19 February of that year, the will of Alexander von Myersbach (no occupation being given), of Savile Row, London, was proved there. This rare substantive information gave the wife's name as Sarah. She may possibly have been Myersbach's second wife, as the two older sons were mentioned separately from two daughters Penelope and Caroline and a son Henry Ferdinand, then minors. Regrettably, Lettsom's sleuthing instincts were never brought to bear on the riddle of this final identification. 


@@@@@


doc= 56721


Marten, John (fl. 1692-1737), surgeon, is probably one of the John Martens enrolled in the Company of Barber-Surgeons in 1692. He may have been the brother of Benjamin Marten. John Marten's first extant work is a translation of and supplement to the 'Treatise of the Safe, Internal Use of Cantharides' (1706), originally published in Latin by Joannes Groenevelt in 1698. Dedicated to William, earl of Portland, it made the internal use of cantharides (or Spanish fly) developed by Groenevelt (or Greenfield, as he is called in Marten's translation) much better known in England, and it obtained the imprimatur of the president and censors of the Royal College of Physicians of London. As the title page explains, Marten also added 'Several further and very remarkable Observations and Histories of the said Doctor, also of the Translator and others' to Groenevelt's work, which are clearly marked but almost doubling the original size of the work. While Marten claims to have received the blessings of Groenevelt for translating and supplementing his book, he was later accused by J. Spinke of having imposed himself. 
According to Marten's preface, signed 'From my House in Bridg-water-Square, near Aldersgate-Street, London, a Golden Head over the Door', he had been particularly 'conversant' with the cure of 'several in the most deplorable Conditions, especially from 'Venereal Causes'' and found that 'the use of Cantharides, when all other means failed' had great benefits. He therefore had approached Groenevelt, who agreed to let Marten translate and correct his book. He also thanked 'that great and learned Physitian and favourer of Learning, Dr. Edward Tyson', for suggesting some of the additions. Marten's own commentary grows in size as the original text begins to end. By pages 189-95, Marten re-emphasizes the usefulness of cantharides in treating the clap, and within another fifty pages or so degenerates into telling stories of a lascivious nature. The book ends with an advertisement for the fourth edition of Marten's own book on gonorrhoea. 
This latter work, no longer extant in earlier editions, appeared in a sixth edition in 1709 ('Treatise of All the Degrees and Symptoms of the Venereal Disease, in both Sexes'), which went through additional editions thereafter. By way of an appendix it contained a 'letter' on sexual relations that veered into pornography, intended to be bound with the book but printed on a separate signature so that it could be separated if appearances warranted. The book and its appendix quickly aroused enemies. One of the chief of them, J. Spinke, published an attack on Marten titled 'Quackery Unmask'd', in which he accused Marten of the basest dishonesty; among other charges, he printed an affidavit of one 'J.C.' stating that a lawyer, Mr. Joshua Stephens, claimed to have been the real translator of the Latin work on cantharides, although Marten came into possession of his sheets. Marten or a friend rose to the defence with an anonymous 'An apology for a Latin verse in commendation of Mr. Marten's Gonosologium novum proving that the same liberty of describing the diseases of the secret parts of both sexes, and their cure, (which is said by some to be obscene) has been us'd both by ancient and modern authors' (1709). But in the same year Marten was indicted in the queen's bench for 'being evil disposed and wickedly intending to corrupt the subjects of the Lady the Queene'. The indictment was eventually dismissed. But Spinke made further attacks on Marten's seventh edition in 'A Short Discourse, Preliminary to the Second Edition of Quackery Unmask'd' (1711) and 'Venus's Botcher, or, The Seventh Edition of Mr. Marten's (Comical) 'Treatise of the Venereal Disease'' (1711). 
After these incidents Marten continued to publish, but on a safer -- if also common -- chronic disease related in cause, he and other practitioners thought, to venereal disease: the gout. 'Attila of the Gout' was published in 1713, promising to show the reader that all previous works on the subject had been vanities, while he had developed 'an infallible Method to Cure it' in the form of a new specific. The text describes the symptoms, causes, and cures for the gout, and recommends his own specific liquor (the receipt for which is not given), concluding with letters testimonial for his remedy and an account of how previous practitioners accused of quackery had found new and effective cures. He tried to keep his remedies in the public eye with 'Dishonour of the Gout' in 1721 and 'Treatise of the Gout', 4th edition, in 1738. He seems to have died at about the time he completed his last book. 


@@@@@


doc= 56725


Brodum, William (fl. 1767-1824), quack, claimed to have been born in Mecklenburg-Strelitz, Germany, the son of Abraham and Caroline Brodum. This was thrown into doubt in 1805 by an article in the 'Medical and Physical Journal' which stated that his real name was, in fact, Issachar Cohen, that he had been born in Copenhagen, and that he had made his living by selling ribbons on the street before arriving in London at the age of twenty. After working for a time as a street seller on Tower Hill, in 1787 he began an association with a Dr Lamert, a purveyor of patent medicines, who employed him to do odd jobs. It was alleged that Cohen then adopted the name of Williams, and he was credited by Lamert as 'a smart active youth, very loquacious, and of sonorous lungs' (Ietros, 67), and sent by him to Kent to sell his 'Switzer's balsam' and other remedies. John Corry's 'Detection of Quackery' (1802) gives an entirely different account of the start of Brodum's career and states that he attended Dr Bossy, another huckster of medicines, 'in the quality of a footman' when he toured England. Corry also quotes a statement by Brodum in his 'Guide to Old Age' that 'There is no other person of the name of Brodum in England'. He probably made the name up, possibly as a Latinized version of the Polish Jewish surname Broda. On 15 January 1791 he was awarded an MD degree by Marischal College, Aberdeen, on the recommendation of doctors Saunders and Leo. Marischal College required no examination, and, providing the college's fees were paid, the recommendation of two doctors of medicine was deemed sufficient. 
In 1795 Brodum published his 'Guide to Old Age, or, A Cure for the Indiscretions of Youth', in two volumes, dedicated to George III. This booklet was a puff for his two preparations: the nervous cordial, which he recommended for consumption, debility, and menstrual problems; and the botanical syrup, which he claimed would cure scurvy, scrofula, leprosy, cancer, and venereal disease. It could also be mixed with white lead and olive oil and painted on scrofulous skin. Both preparations were sold in bottles of various sizes for 5's'. 5died, 11's'. 6died, or $1 2's'. 0died and could be bought from agents in Philadelphia and the English provinces or from Brodum's house at 9 Albany Street, Blackfriars Road, London. His claims were supported by many testimonials from named persons and by a copy of his doctoral diploma from Marischal College. The book went into four editions, each with a freshly engraved portrait of its author. It also claimed to have been translated into Italian, French, and Spanish. 
Brodum was then summoned before the president and censors of the Royal College of Physicians for practising medicine without their licence. He claimed that he was merely selling medicines for which he held a royal patent. The president said that the college had no objection to that, but he should not accept consultation fees and must remove the brass plate from his house which described him as Dr Brodum. He refused to do so, pointing out that he held a doctorate in medicine from Marischal College, which he had purchased with a recommendation from a member of their college. The college of physicians took no further action. The medical faculty of Marischal College sought counsel's opinion as to whether they could cancel his doctoral degree, because of his notorious and impudent quackery and the immoral tendency of many passages in his various publications. Solicitor-General Blair advised them that they had no power to do so and pointedly suggested that they should make 'the case of Dr Brodum a lesson of caution and circumspection to themselves for the future in the bestowing of Academical honours' (Anderson, 2.133-4). 
Because Brodum was rich and a doctor of medicine, in 1798 he was elected a steward for a fund-raising banquet organized by Abraham Goldsmid to establish a free school for the education of the children of the Jewish poor. Then Goldsmid discovered that on 28 June 1798 Brodum had been naturalized, for which he had professed his adherence to the protestant religion. Since he had thus publicly renounced Judaism, he was dismissed from office in this Jewish charity. Brodum then sold his pharmaceutical business to one Anthony Daffy Swinton, with whom he was caricatured in 1811. 
When Brodum made his will in 1824, he styled himself De Brodum and was living at 21 Great Coram Street, London. He left money to four charities in Copenhagen, where he owned property, as well as to the Westminster Hospital and to the Foundling Hospital, London. He and his wife, Cecilia, had no surviving children and his heirs were nephews and great-nephews in Copenhagen and Hamburg. In his will he complains that a promise made by the prime minister of Denmark, Count Moltke, to confer certain honours on him had not been confirmed by the king of Denmark. He therefore revoked an undertaking he had made to leave his estate in Denmark to six Danish charities, three to be nominated by the king and three by himself. However, the 'De' suggests that he had acquired noble status there. 
Brodum's 'Guide to Old Age' is a shameless marketing exercise. It shows that Brodum was aware of the discovery that orange or lemon juice cured scurvy, and it is probable that his botanical syrup contained some fruit juice. It 'was chiefly the old formula of the decoction of woods, consisting of sassafras, guaiacum, and a few other articles, which he procured from Mr Chamberlin, an eminent chemist in Fleet Street. The decoction [was] well edulcorated with sugar of molasses. (Ietros, 71)' Nothing else in the book suggests any knowledge of medicine. His other publications were 'By his Majesty's Royal Letters Patent: Dr Brodum's Nervous Cordial, and Botanical Syrup' (1808) and 'A Medical Essay on the Nature, Cause, and Cure of Coughs' (1814). 


@@@@@


doc= 56726


Beresford, Henry de la Poer, third marquess of Waterford (1811-1859), reprobate and landowner, was born on 26 April 1811 at 5 Mansfield Street, Marylebone, Middlesex, the second son of Henry de la Poer Beresford, second marquess of Waterford (1772-1826), and his wife, Lady Susanna Hussey Carpenter (1784-1827), daughter of the second earl of Tyrconnel. His elder brother and both his parents died before he was seventeen, and the young marquess, who was educated at Eton College (1824-9), became notorious for his wildness. (He returned to Eton in 1838 to steal the headmaster's whipping block, an exploit Waterford celebrated with an annual dinner.) He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1829, but was invited to leave, and for the next decade he was to be found most frequently at the racetrack, on the hunting-field, or in the police courts. His favoured companions were young 'sporting men', prize-fighters, and prostitutes; powerfully built, rich, and with an uncontrolled sense of humour, it amused him to challenge passers-by to fight him, to break windows, to upset (literally) applecarts. He painted the Melton Mowbray toll-bar red; he fought a duel; he painted the heels of a parson's horse with aniseed and hunted him with bloodhounds. When, as frequently occurred, his activities landed him in court, he laughed at (and paid) the derisory fines which were designed to control the excesses of the working class, not those of the apparently limitlessly wealthy aristocracy. Waterford's reputation as a rowdy and boisterous ruffian led to his name being associated with Spring-Heeled Jack, the unknown figure who terrorized women in London in 1838. 
The turning point in Waterford's life was the Eglinton tournament of 1839. He took an enthusiastic part as one of the thirteen knights in Lord Eglinton's attempt to revive ideas of chivalry among the tory aristocracy. The Knight of the Dragon (the sobriquet taken by Waterford) excelled his host's hopes by not only being so carried away in the melee that he had to be separated from his opponent, Lord Alford, by the knight marshal but also by falling in love at first sight with Louisa Stuart ['see 'Beresford, Louisa Anne (1818-1891)], younger daughter of Charles Stuart, Lord Stuart de Rothesay. The beautiful Louisa Stuart, like her sister Charlotte, Lady Canning, was celebrated as a model of pious, gentle, artistic womanhood; on the surface, she was the most unlikely match for Waterford. At the same time, the wooing of the pure, virtuous woman by the worldly, rough -- if good-natured and kind-hearted -- reprobate, and the reshaping of his character by the love of a good woman, represented an archetype of the chivalric ideal. After a courtship of three years, Waterford secured his lady's affections and the consent of her family, not least by the reform of his habits. The wedding took place on 8 June 1842 and the couple went immediately to his estate, Curraghmore, in co. Waterford, where they were to pass most of their happily married but childless life together. 
Marriage ended Waterford's career in the police courts. Instead, he busied himself with the management of his estates, becoming in the process something of a model landlord. Resident on their estate in Ireland, the Waterfords worked long hours to attempt to relieve the worst effects of the famine on their tenants and neighbours. Despite generally good relations with his tenants, unrest in the region in 1848 led Waterford to fortify Curraghmore. He remained devoted to horses, of which he kept hundreds, and, if he no longer steeplechased, he continued to hunt with passion (six days a week during the season). His death came suddenly, on 29 March 1859, on the hunting-field, at Corbally, near Carrick-on-Suir: thrown from his horse, he broke his neck and died almost instantly. He was buried in the family mausoleum at Clonegam, close to Curraghmore. His title and estates passed to his brother. 


@@@@@


doc= 56727


Washbourn, John (1792-1847), bookseller and antiquary, son of 
Soon after his father's death on 25 April 1829, the younger John Washbourn, who had joined his father's business as a young man, seems to have left Gloucester. He died on 12 April 1847 at 5 Stonefield Street, Islington, in his fifty-fourth year, leaving a widow and eight children. 


@@@@@


doc= 56730


Blackie, Margery Grace (1898-1981), homoeopathic physician, was born on 4 February 1898 at Redbourn, Hertfordshire. She was the youngest of ten children of Robert Blackie ('c'.1852-1936), a man of independent means, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1941), daughter of Rowland Rees, civil engineer and architect. Her mother's family were ardent supporters of homoeopathy and Elizabeth's sister Katherine married James Compton Burnett, an eminent homoeopathic physician and father of the novelist Ivy Compton Burnett. 
In 1911 the Blackie family moved to London where Margery attended the Haberdashers' Aske's School for Girls in Acton. At an early age she determined upon a medical career and in 1917 entered the London School of Medicine for Women. She was by no means a brilliant student. Her path to qualification included several failed examinations. In 1923 she eventually qualified as a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians and a member of the Royal College of Surgeons. Three years later she passed, at the second attempt, the examination for the London University degree of MB BS. However within two years she proceeded MD at the early age of thirty. 
Immediately after qualification Blackie became resident medical officer at the London Homoeopathic Hospital, where she added to the knowledge of the homoeopathy she had gained from her family. She came under the particular influence of Douglas Borland and John Weir, who were two of the first British doctors to study under James Tyler Kent in the United States. She never deviated from her devotion to his principles, and his advocacy of the use of high potency remedies. After the completion of her residency in 1926 Blackie had opened a practice at 10 Drayton Gardens, Fulham, but also resurrected a defunct homoeopathic dispensary at 68B Fulham Road. Although she always regarded herself as a general practitioner she continued to work at the hospital, becoming assistant physician to the children's department in 1929 and, years later, physician in charge of out-patients. At the end of the decade she moved to 18 Thurloe Street, Kensington, where she remained for the rest of her working life in partnership with Helen Banks (died 1971). 
Blackie kept up to date with developments in medicine, and was respected by her medically more conventional colleagues, consulting them whenever she thought it necessary. She was a remarkable homoeopath, who attracted patients from all over the country and, indeed, the world. Her ability was recognized in 1969 when she was appointed physician to the queen in succession to Sir John Weir. Although her prime concern was always the welfare of the patient she came to recognize the need for research that would demonstrate the effectiveness of homoeopathy. In 1971 she founded the Blackie Foundation Trust to encourage education and research. 
In 1965, having already served as president, Blackie was appointed dean of the Faculty of Homoeopathy. She reorganized teaching and ran three week-long courses per year. These grew from small beginnings to serve up to one hundred students per course. She did not hesitate to write personally to doctors who she thought would become good homoeopaths, to encourage them to attend. She was persistent in her pressure upon those she wanted as lecturers so that few ultimately refused her. At her own expense she entertained students to a fork supper at Thurloe Street and to a dinner at a Bloomsbury hotel. A number of these students on each course would be selected to attend her surgery at Thurloe Street, where she would demonstrate her methods leading to the selection of a remedy. She always emphasized the advantage of bringing the patient from the waiting room herself, because so much knowledge could be gained from the patient's attitude and from a handshake. She also unwittingly demonstrated her instinctive ability to select the appropriate remedy. 
Blackie was a lifelong devout evangelical Christian, greatly influenced in adult life by the Congregational ministers at the Westminster Chapel. She always regarded herself as on call but her long friendship with Musette Majendie, whose home was Hedingham Castle in Essex, enabled her to spend her limited leisure time watching birds, playing croquet and bridge, and solving jigsaw puzzles. Her summer holidays were spent with her friends at Aviemore. While she gave many lectures (a selection of which was published posthumously under the title 'Classical Homoeopathy', 1986) she wrote very little and published only one book. 'The Patient, not the Cure' was published in 1975 and was an anecdotal summary of her ideas on homoeopathy. In later life Blackie contracted and recovered from rheumatoid arthritis, but a broken hip eventually led to her retirement in 1980. She resigned from her appointment as physician to the queen in June 1979. She received the honour of CVO in recognition of her devoted service to the royal family. Blackie spent her final year at Hedingham, becoming increasingly frail, although her bedside reading remained what it had always been, the 'Bible' and Kent's 'Homeopathic materia medica', which sum up her main interests in life. 
Blackie had an excellent memory for names. She was polite and meticulous about punctuality, although delays such as traffic jams were accepted with patience. Always well dressed she evolved and kept to her own smart bright style with the assistance of Peter Crown of La Chasse, a London fashion house. Margery Blackie died peacefully of a stroke on 24 August 1981 and was buried on 29 August at Castle Hedingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 56735


Baxter, Sir (Arthur) Beverley (1891-1964), journalist, was born in Toronto, Canada, on 8 January 1891, the younger son and third of five children (plus an adopted son) of James Bennett Baxter, who worked in a wallpaper factory and served as a church organist and choir director, and his wife, Meribah Elizabeth Lawson, a pianist and vocal soloist. A boy alto in a fashionable church, he absorbed the family's Methodism, musicality, and strong British identity. 
After leaving Harbord Collegiate Institute at fifteen Baxter rose quickly in the Nordheimer Piano and Music Company at a time when pianos were home entertainment centres and symbols of social status. By the beginning of the First World War he was sales manager, at the impressive salary of $3500 a year. After enlisting in 1915 as a lieutenant (signals) in the 122nd Canadian battalion he realized his boyhood dream when he arrived in England in April 1917. Sent to the front in March 1918, he contracted influenza (presumably 'Spanish') and was invalided back to England. By the time he recovered the war was over. 
He yearned to be a writer, at which he had had some modest success, and the turning point in his life was meeting Lord Beaverbrook in 1919. At first Baxter declined the offer of a newspaper job but changed his mind and after a week as a reporter on the 'Daily Express' he was promoted to the editorial staff. In 1922 he became managing editor of the 'Sunday Express', moving in 1924 to the same position at the 'Daily Express'. In December 1924 he married Edith Christina Letson (1898-1988) of Vancouver, with whom he had a son and daughter. He became editor-in-chief of the 'Daily Express' in 1929. What impressed Beaverbrook about Baxter, in addition to talent and energy, was a passion equal to his own for integration of the British empire based on the programme of preferential tariffs earlier promoted by Joseph Chamberlain. Baxter was Beaverbrook's valued assistant in the empire free trade campaign from 1929 to 1931 and in the decade-long newspaper circulation war for readers and advertising revenue that was fought principally against Lord Rothermere's 'Daily Mail'. 
Following Britain's abandonment of free trade, the Ottawa imperial trade agreements in 1932, and victory in the newspaper contest (the 'Daily Express' emerged with sales of over two million per day by 1933), Baxter sought a less demanding career than the exhilaration but relentless strain of working for Beaverbrook. In 1933 he became director of public relations for the Gaumont-British Picture Corporation and a board member of the film companies of Max Schach. In 1935 he returned to journalism as editorial adviser and writer for Allied Newspapers, owned by Lord Camrose and his brother Gomer Berry (Lord Kemsley from 1936); when the company was divided in 1937, Baxter went with the Kemsley papers. Working for the Berrys, who staunchly supported the Conservative leader and prime minister again from 1935, Stanley Baldwin, whom Beaverbrook despised, helped Baxter to secure election in 1935 as MP for the solidly Conservative constituency of Wood Green; after redistribution he represented the Southgate division from 1950 to his death. 
Between 1936 and 1960 Baxter also wrote a regular 'London Letter' in the fortnightly 'Maclean's Magazine', English Canada's only national publication. His theme was the mutual benefit of close relations between the two countries and of commonwealth unity for the British empire to remain a great world power. In peacetime he went on annual speaking tours of Canada (often including the United States) and occasionally gave radio talks on the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. 
Having concluded that the First World War was a tragedy and near disaster for Britain and the empire, Baxter was a vocal supporter of appeasement of Germany in the late 1930s. At the same time he was sceptical of Nazism and advocated rearmament and peacetime conscription for the defence of Britain. In May 1940, when Beaverbrook became minister for aircraft production on the formation of Winston Churchill's ministry, he overlooked their differences of recent years to appoint Baxter to stimulate morale in aeroplane factories. Soon Baxter was again writing for Beaverbrook's newspapers, including ten years from 1943 as drama critic. Until 1956 the voice of Baxter was practically that of Beaverbrook, including the latter's call after resigning from government at the beginning of 1942 for 'A Second Front Now' and insinuations of the inadequacy of Churchill's leadership. 
After 1945 Baxter criticized the Labour government's nationalization and welfare legislation, the acquiescence of the Conservative leaders in most of it, and the 1946 North American loan which he regarded as an American attempt to destroy the British empire. He also deplored the 1951 Churchill ministry's continuation of Labour's policies and its seeming indifference to imperial unity. In 1956 he was surprised and heartened by the military attempt of the prime minister, Sir Anthony Eden, to retake the Suez canal from Egypt. But on the eve of the invasion Baxter had decided that it was too late for a united British empire. He now believed that the colonies should become independent as soon as possible and that Britain, with some accommodation for the commonwealth, should find a new destiny as leader of the European Economic Union. This put him at odds with Beaverbrook, the 1957 Canadian Conservative government, and others who clung to Baxter's previous vision of the commonwealth and Britain as an overseas power. This difference from his natural friends largely accounts for his silence on controversial issues after 1957, though in his last years he suffered mental decline and at the end dementia. He died of a heart attack on 27 April 1964 in a nursing home, Whitehanger, in Fernhurst, Sussex. 
Throughout his life Baxter had the great knack of knowing important and interesting people, which was greatly helped by being a protege of Beaverbrook. A fluent and urbane chronicler and commentator on politics and the arts, he wrote perceptive profiles of such leading figures as Churchill (whom he knew for forty years), Beaverbrook, Baldwin, Neville Chamberlain, Eden, and Harold Macmillan (his invalid roommate in the First World War), and vivid descriptions of such dramatic parliamentary occasions as the Munich debate, the declaration of the Second World War, the fall of Chamberlain's government, and the end of the war in Europe. His intimacy with Beaverbrook gave him much inside information, particularly during the Second World War. His articles, while not in the league of Harold Nicolson's diaries, are at least as informative and fascinating as those of his similar-minded fellow Conservative MP, Henry 'Chips' Channon. As gratifying to Baxter as the knighthood which he received in 1954 must have been acknowledgement of his professional skill by election as a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1949. 


@@@@@


doc= 56737


Bolam, Silvester (1905-1953), newspaper editor, was born on 23 October 1905 at 84 George Street, Willington Quay, Tynemouth, Northumberland, the son of Thomas Bolam, a foreman blacksmith, and his wife, Amelia English. He was educated at Tynemouth Municipal High School and Armstrong College, Newcastle (then part of Durham University), graduating in economics in 1926. On 21 April 1934 Bolam married Annabel Cecilia ('b'. 1906), daughter of John Scorer, coal fitter; they were to have two children. 
Initially destined for a business career, on graduating Bolam instead took a job on the 'Newcastle Journal'. After making his mark amid the ferocious newspaper competition of the late 1920s, he moved to Manchester to work for the 'News Chronicle', then in 1936 joined the 'Daily Mirror' as a sub-editor. Leaving in 1938 to rejoin the 'News Chronicle', he was told by H. G. Bartholomew, editorial director of the 'Mirror', 'you'll be back' (Griffiths, 118). Within ten months he was, as joint night editor beginning a rise through the 'Mirror's' executive ranks. His success was built on 'disciplined habits of work and an imperturbability rare among newspaper executives' ('Manchester Guardian', 28 April 1953). A gifted newspaper technician, he was noted for skill in making heavy subjects accessible and had a close working relationship with the cantankerous, wayward Bartholomew, whom he praised for 'the sense of purpose he created in the young men around him' (Griffiths, 118). 
In July 1948 Bolam succeeded Cecil Thomas as editor. His four and a half years in charge were to see the 'Mirror' displace the 'Daily Express' as Britain's best-selling daily paper. Soon after he became editor Bolam memorably expressed his credo: 'Sensationalism does not mean distorting the truth. It means the vivid and dramatic presentation of events so as to give them a forceful impact in the mind of the reader. It means big headlines, vigorous writing, simplification into everyday language and the wide use of illustration by cartoons and photographs. (Cudlipp, 'Walking on the Water', 174)' Bolam is mainly remembered for his imprisonment in March 1949, for contempt of court. He admitted an error of judgement in printing a story in the 'Daily Mirror' which might prejudice the trial of John Haigh, who was subsequently executed for murder. However, Lord Goddard, the lord chief justice (clearly aware of Bolam's editorial stance), chose to interpret it as 'a matter of policy, pandering to sensationalism for the purpose of increasing the circulation of this paper' ('World's Press News', 31 March 1949). Bolam was sent to Brixton gaol for three months, the first national newspaper editor gaoled for reasons relating to his paper since 1901. 
Bolam was philosophical about his imprisonment: 'Most executive journalists never get the chance to think. If you have 18 hours a day by yourself for three months you have a valuable opportunity for reaching objectivity, for clearing your mind, for setting your sights' (Griffiths, 118). Nevertheless, his 'Mirror' colleague W. N. Connor (better known as Cassandra) believed it 'may well have been solid claustrophobic hell for a man whose hobby happened to be mountaineering' ('Daily Mirror', 1 May 1953). 
In July 1949 Bolam returned to the paper, edited in his absence by Alex Little, a former classmate at Tynemouth Municipal High School. He remained editor for a further three and a half years. However, the period was not entirely happy. In 1951, recognizing that the behaviour of his mentor, Bartholomew, had become impossibly erratic, he cast the decisive vote in a board-room coup against him. His relations with Bartholomew's successor Cecil King, who found him far too earnest, were poor, and in January 1953 he left the post, resigning ostensibly because of a disagreement with the management ('World's Press News', 30 Jan 1953), although the history of the 'Daily Mirror' describes him as 'a deferential editor sacked for disagreeing with his superiors' (Edelman, 156). 
Bolam was a serious-minded man, a slight figure with a goatee beard and 'the mild manner of a professor of languages' ('Newcastle Journal', 28 April 1953), whose dedicated Christianity earned him the nickname Bish. His 'Mirror' colleague Hugh Cudlipp recalled him as a 'friendly, wiry bird with a dozen interests -- books, art, music, the countryside' (Cudlipp, 'Publish and be Damned!', 251-2). 
He died suddenly on 27 April 1953 at his home, Lincoln House, West Road, Guildford, his wife surviving him. He was cremated on 30 April at St John's crematorium, Woking, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 56741


Campbell, John Ross (1894-1969), political organizer and newspaper editor, was born on 15 October 1894 at 39 Lady Lane, Paisley, Renfrewshire, to Scottish working-class parents, John Campbell and Mary, 'nee' Stevenson. His father was a journeyman slater. Educated at an elementary school in Paisley, he started work at fourteen as an apprentice grocer's assistant. He joined the British Socialist Party in 1912 and soon became known as 'the Boy', publicly propagating Marxist ideas. In 1914, as a reservist, he was posted to the Clydeside section of the Royal Naval division and served throughout the war. Wounded at Gallipoli, he was permanently disabled at the battle of the Somme, where he was awarded the Military Medal for conspicuous bravery. 
On his return to Scotland in 1918, Campbell played a leading part in the Clyde Workers' Committee movement, editing its weekly paper, 'The Worker', from 1921 to 1924. He joined the Communist Party of Great Britain on its foundation in 1920 and in 1923 was elected to its central executive committee, on which he served until his retirement in 1965. He also sat on the party's political committee for most of those years. Among the party posts which he held were head of its industrial department in the 1920s, and 'Daily Worker' foreign editor (1932-4), assistant editor (1937-8, 1939, and 1942-9), and editor (1939 and 1949-59). He was elected to the executive committee of the Communist International at its sixth (1928) and seventh (1935) congresses. 
Campbell moved to London in 1924, becoming acting editor of the Communist Party's 'Workers' Weekly'. He rose to national prominence in the Campbell case of that year, when on 5 August he was charged with incitement to mutiny for having published on 25 July an appeal to soldiers not to fire on striking workers. The article was actually written by Harry Pollitt. Under widespread labour movement pressure the Labour attorney-general, Sir Patrick Hastings, dropped the case, pointing in particular to Campbell's 'exceptional gallantry' in the war. This led on 8 October to the defeat of the minority MacDonald government by a combined Liberal and Conservative Commons confidence vote against it. 
The next year, on 25 November, Campbell was sentenced to six months' imprisonment after being tried under the same act with eleven other Communist leaders. He conducted his own closely reasoned political and legal defence. He was released on 10 April 1926 in time to play an active part in Scotland in the general strike of 1926. 
Campbell clashed with the Communist International on two major issues. In February 1928 at the Comintern's ninth executive plenum, he argued cogently against Moscow's demand for all-out opposition to the Labour Party. When this sectarian 'new line' was implemented he formally accepted it, but worked with Harry Pollitt to check its worst effects on communist influence in the trade unions. Their flexible approach here would pay increasing dividends in coming years. When war came in 1939, Campbell -- alongside Pollitt and William Gallacher -- argued with great force and logic against the Comintern's instruction to oppose it (King and Matthews). Outvoted and under great pressure, he subsequently rationalized the Comintern's position and publicly confessed to error in having opposed it. Later he believed his stand against the Moscow line had been correct. 
Campbell liked to stress that his socialist convictions were rooted in the Scottish revolutionary Marxist movement, which he had joined before Russia's October revolution. Nevertheless, although standing out among Communist leaders for his independent-mindedness, he was strongly influenced and constrained by Stalinism during much of his political life. This is strikingly shown in his book 'Soviet Policy and its Critics' (1939), which devoted two long chapters to a defence of the Moscow trials of 1936-8, which he recognized after 1956 to be unsustainable. It was also reflected in the 'divided nature' he revealed in confronting demands for fuller and more critical debate from many members of his 'Daily Worker' staff in 1956-7 following Khrushchov's revelations about Stalin (Macleod, 191). Opinions differ on how far his stay in Moscow in 1938-9 had made him aware of Stalin's mass repression of innocent people. 
While he remained a communist, Campbell's outlook evolved considerably in his last years. Whereas, for instance, in 1956 he had defended Soviet military intervention in Hungary, in 1968 he condemned the invasion of Czechoslovakia. As a Marxist economic specialist chairing his executive's economic subcommittee, he became increasingly cautious in his analyses, insisting on the basis of bitter experience that 'our Committee now makes no predictions'. 
Campbell was a friendly but tough-minded Scot. His rather mournful face belied his ready wit and pawky humour. He and his wife, Sarah Marie Carlin, 'nee' O'Donnell, were married from 1920 until her death in 1965. He acted as father to five stepchildren and two daughters. He lived on a London council estate and ate with staff and printworkers in the 'Daily Worker' canteen. A widely read and cultured worker-intellectual, he wrote over two dozen books and pamphlets and innumerable articles in his distinctive, sprawling handwriting. He was a recognized authority on Robert Burns, whose poems he recited in his strong Scottish accent. His humanity, selflessness, and down-to-earth intelligence led to his enjoying widespread popularity and affection, even among many who disagreed with him politically. He died on 18 September 1969 at the Middlesex Hospital, London, and was cremated on 23 September at Golders Green crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 56742


Carr, Sir William Emsley (1912-1977), newspaper proprietor, was born on 30 May 1912 at 9 Pembridge Square, Kensington, London, the sixth son of Sir (William) Emsley Carr (1867-1941), editor and chairman and managing director of the 'News of the World', and his wife and cousin, Jenny Lascelles (1879-1942), the daughter of (Henry) Lascelles Carr (1841-1902), co-founder and first editor-in-chief of the 'Western Mail'. Educated at Clifton College (1926-31) and Trinity College, Cambridge (1932-4), where he won a golfing blue, Carr joined the 'News of the World' in 1937. His father was still at the editorial helm, with William's twin elder brothers Walter Copley Carr (1908-1944) and Henry Lascelles Carr (1908-1943) as his trusty lieutenants and obvious heirs. They had inherited Sir Emsley's business acumen and eye for a good headline. They also shared their father's sporting prowess, his standing in polite society, and above all his remarkable capacity to remain a model of rectitude while at the same time enlivening Sunday mornings across the nation: news of lurid court cases and exposes of sexual nonconformity, reluctantly conveyed to open-mouthed readers by shocked but dutiful reporters, provided the 'News of the World' with a sensationalist recipe for success, its sales peaking around 8 million in the early 1950s. On 22 September 1938 William Carr married Jean Mary ('b'. 1911), daughter of Neil Forsyth, general manager of the Royal Opera Syndicate. They had a son and a daughter. He volunteered for military service in 1939, serving until 1946 in the Royal Artillery, where he held the temporary rank of major and was mentioned in dispatches. 
In July 1941 Sir Emsley Carr died, shortly followed by Henry and Walter Carr, both of whom died of illness while serving as pilots in the RAF. William Carr, familiarly known as Bill, was now entrusted with protecting the family stakehold in a business focused on a single purpose: publication every Sunday of a newspaper purchased by half the households in Britain. The formula was simple and successful, the overheads low, and the staff loyal. With a board reluctant to risk change, the price was complacency. Nevertheless, the late 1950s did see the 'News of the World' pioneer a fresh mix of sexual revelation and criminal investigation, culminating in its coverage of the 1963 Profumo scandal. 
Carr did not actually become chairman of News of the World Ltd until 1952. He had already assumed several of his father's honorary appointments in both golf and athletics, not least club chairman at Walton Heath. In 1953 he established in his father's memory the Emsley Carr mile, a one-mile annual invitation race originally run during the British games at the White City. However, despite his membership of the general council of the press, Carr refused to adopt a similar high profile within the newspaper industry. He eschewed any wider responsibility for the well-being of Fleet Street, or of the provincial press, despite acquiring Berrow's Ltd, a group of newspapers concentrated on Hereford and Worcester. Carr was only interested in the 'News of the World' and its workforce. Knighted in 1957, Sir William entertained lavishly. His largess was legendary, and he indulged his editorial staff, who were always invited to Lady Carr's annual garden party at Bentley Wood, the family's country home in Sussex. The chairman would also foot the bill, including the green fees and the bar tab, at Walton Heath, where staff had the freedom of the course every Monday. 
Not surprisingly, by 1960 Carr and his board were poorly regarded in the City. The 'News of the World' failed to acquire the Newnes publishing group. There were rumours in 1961 of a bid for the ailing Odhams conglomerate; but Carr could see that reversing the fortunes of the 'Daily Herald' would prove a hopeless task. Nevertheless, Carr was a director of Reuters from 1960 to 1967, and he was able to identify investment opportunities outside publishing: a new holding company invested substantially in TWW, the Welsh commercial television station, and acquired a 38 per cent stake in the French production company Tele-Europe Societe Anonyme. Neither of these initiatives was likely to prove a major revenue earner, at a time when sales of the 'News of the World' were beginning to slip. The company was ripe for a take-over, being highly profitable but poorly led, and heavily dependent upon a single product. 
In 1968 Robert Maxwell seized on City rumours that Carr might lose his controlling interest: a cousin's substantial shareholding was for sale, and Carr could not afford to buy him out. Maxwell launched a hostile bid, and Carr looked to the then little-known Australian media magnate Rupert Murdoch as his company's saviour. A complicated share deal gave News International its first British title. Carr served as chairman of the new company for three months, with Murdoch as chief executive. But then Murdoch assumed full control. Sir William was left with the honorary titles of life president and consultant to the board. 
A generous and convivial man, Sir William Carr lacked the business skills to survive the ruthless approach a new generation brought to boardroom politics in the late 1960s. During his final years, although never short of loyal golfing and drinking partners such as Sir Douglas Bader, he had to cope with serious illness. Carr died on 14 November 1977 at his home, Bentley Wood, Halland, Sussex. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 56747


Burn, Andrew (1742-1814), marine officer and religious writer, was born in Dundee on 8 September 1742, the son of George John Burn and Christian Donie. When business failure induced his father to become a naval purser the sixteen-year-old Andrew accompanied him as an assistant clerk on active service in the North Sea and West Indies. Through the good offices of a family friend he obtained a commission in the marines at Chatham in 1761. With the coming of peace in 1763 Burn went on half pay and spent the next six years in France as tutor to a young man. He returned home bankrupt from gambling and with the piety of his upbringing undermined by deistic philosophy. He was brought to face the emptiness of his life by the death of his brother, and in 1772 he experienced an evangelical conversion. He became a keen student of the 'Bible', a man of disciplined prayer, and, through the medium of a detailed journal, a sharply introspective critic of his own shortcomings. 
During the American War of Independence, Burn experienced active service off North America and a posting to the East Indies, but with his health permanently damaged by tropical disease he was allowed to return to home waters. On 11 February 1771 Burn had married Mary Southerden (died 1785) at Rochester. After her death he married Sarah Grigg (1763x6-1828) also at Rochester on 2 February 1786. Both unions produced several children. 
In the French Revolutionary War, Burn took part in the capture of the Cape of Good Hope from the Dutch in 1796, served under Admiral Sir John Jervis in the Mediterranean in the 'Goliath' (74 guns), and was senior marine officer at the battle of Cape St Vincent in 1797. After his promotion to lieutenant-colonel in the army and major in his own corps, Burn's military service was in administration, training, and garrison duties, most notably as colonel commandant of the Woolwich division (1808-14). His final promotion was to major-general on the army list in July 1810 before his retirement in 1814 after 53 years in the marines. With ten sons and daughters to support on his military pay he was never a wealthy man. Contemporaries recalled his integrity and kindness, but his lasting reputation rests upon his religious writings. 
In 1789 Burn published 'The Christian Officer's Panoply', retitled 'Complete Armour' for the second edition in 1806. Burn's thesis is that reason alone cannot lead to knowledge of God which must come by divine revelation. His next work, 'Who Fares Best, the Christian or the Man of the World?' (also 1789) used dialogue to compare (in the words of the subtitle) 'the advantages of a life of real piety to one of fashionable dissipation'. Burn sought to demonstrate that the Christian believer enjoyed all the rational joys of life enriched by daily fellowship with God in prayer, and fortified in the face of death with the assurance of eternal glory in the presence of his Saviour. These are substantial little works, reflecting a well educated mind and a secure grasp of basic Calvinist theology. In addition he wrote an evangelistic tract for a military readership and a pamphlet in support of the Bible Society. 
Burn died at Gillingham, Kent, on 18 September 1814 and was buried on 22 September at St Margaret's, Rochester. Published in 1815, his posthumous memoirs are edited extracts from his publications and personal journals, richer in spiritual introspection than factual detail, and unlikely to appeal far beyond his own day. 
For one at the top of his profession Burn made surprisingly little impact upon the history of his famous corps, with but passing notice in officer lists and routine papers and little contact with the wider evangelical world. Such straitened recognition would scarcely have troubled the Burn who emerges from his writings: an unassuming character uncomfortable with rank and eminence, a soldier of proven courage who had no love for war, and a writer indifferent to fashionable opinion so long as he could commend the Christian gospel to his readers. 


@@@@@


doc= 56750


Eade, Charles Stanley (1903-1964), journalist, was born on 10 June 1903, at 100 Grove Green Road, Leytonstone, London, the son of Arthur Eade, an auctioneer, and his wife, Alice Steadman. He left school at the age of fourteen to join the editorial staff of the 'Daily Chronicle', and also worked on 'Lloyd's Weekly News', until he moved to the 'Daily Herald' in 1919. He first worked for the Rothermere press in 1922, when he began writing for the 'Daily Mirror', founded by Alfred Harmsworth in 1903, remaining there until 1930, while also working for the 'Sunday Pictorial', another Rothermere title, between 1922 and 1924, and 'The Observer' from 1926 to 1930. He became the proprietor of the 'East Ham Echo and South Essex Mail' in 1928. After travelling abroad for two years, he was briefly sports editor and later deputy editor of the 'Sunday Express', belonging to Rothermere's rival, Lord Beaverbrook, and then worked for Allied Newspapers as deputy editor of the 'Sunday Graphic' (1933-6), and deputy editor of the 'Daily Sketch' (1936-8). He also did sports commentaries on the radio (1932-8). In 1941 Eade married Vera Manwaring: they had one son and two daughters. 
Eade was appointed editor of the 'Sunday Dispatch', another Rothermere paper, in 1938, and remained there until 1957, except for the later years of the Second World War, when he was public relations adviser to Admiral Lord Mountbatten, supreme allied commander in south-east Asia, and from 1943 to 1944 he organized newspaper and radio services for allied troops in India, Burma, and Ceylon. In 1953, in an effort to improve the circulation of the 'Sunday Dispatch' in the face of competition from Beaverbrook's 'Sunday Express', Eade selected the American best-selling historical novel 'Forever Amber' (1944), by Kathleen Winsor, for serialization in the paper. Despite Randolph Churchill's attack on the 'Sunday Dispatch' for publishing what Churchill regarded as pornography, Eade succeeded in adding 400,000 to the circulation figures, and continued to publish more of the same kind of material. However, later in the 1950s the 'Sunday Dispatch' began to lose money, and in 1961 Rothermere closed it down and sold the title to Beaverbrook Newspapers. 
During the war Eade edited five volumes of the war speeches of Winston Churchill to the House of Commons, publishing one a year beginning with 'The Widening Struggle' (1942) and ending with 'Victory' (1946). After the war he compiled Churchill's 'Secret Session Speeches' (1946), speeches made to the House of Commons in secret session between 1940 and 1942. There were five major speeches that had not been recorded, even for official purposes, and after the House of Commons agreed in December 1945 that they need no longer be kept secret, Churchill passed his notes to Eade, giving him authority to publish them. The first of these speeches was made on 20 June 1940, when Churchill told parliament that if Hitler failed to invade Britain, he had lost the war. On 17 September 1940 he gave details of how parliament would carry on sitting despite the air raids; on 25 June 1941 he reported on the grave shipping losses in the Atlantic; he spoke to the Commons on 23 April 1942 after the fall of Singapore, and on 10 December 1942 explained the reasons for recognizing Admiral Darlan as the French leader in north Africa. This was followed by 'Churchill by his Contemporaries' (1953), edited by Eade, a series of short articles by people who had known and worked with Churchill, including Eisenhower. 
Eade was a director of Associated Newspapers from 1947, a member of the Press Council from 1956 to 1957, and from 1961, and he sat on the council of the Commonwealth Press Union. He died on 27 August 1964 at his home, Bleak House, Broadstairs, Kent, and was buried on 1 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 56755


Fish, Margery (1892-1969), gardener and author, was born at 16 Eastbank, Stamford Hill, London, on 5 August 1892, the second of the four daughters of Ernest Townshend (died 1926), City of London commercial traveller in tea, and his wife, Florence Harriet, 'nee' Buttfield (died 1920). Her time at the Friends' School in Saffron Walden, where she was head girl, instilled the virtues of patience and hard work which were to prove useful during her twenty-year career in Fleet Street. She passed out of secretarial college with flying colours and started work on 'Land and Water' and 'The Country Gentleman' (which was later incorporated with 'The Field', a magazine to which she also contributed). After working for the advertisement director of Associated Newspapers, she accompanied Lord Northcliffe as his personal assistant on the Northcliffe British war mission to the United States in 1916, for which she was appointed MBE. She then worked as secretary for six 'Daily Mail' editors, including Thomas Marlowe and finally Walter Fish ['see below'], a widower, whom she married on 2 March 1933, three years after he retired from the newspaper. Despite the long hours required in newspaper offices she found time to write freelance articles for the women's pages of the 'Daily Mail', 'Evening News', and some provincial newspapers, as well as reviewing books. 
Marriage to Walter Fish brought a home in London, travel to Europe, and leisurely days playing golf. But after a holiday to Germany in 1937 Walter decided that war was imminent and that they should move to the country. Early on in their search for the right house they briefly saw East Lambrook Manor, South Petherton, Somerset, but it was dismissed by Walter as needing too much work. For three months they carried on looking for the right place until they returned to East Lambrook in November 1937 and decided it was the house for them. The house, built of Somerset hamstone in the fifteenth or sixteenth century, was in a poor state of repair but the Fishes decided to buy it along with the 2 acre garden for $1000, and for the next two years they commuted between London and Somerset. 
During their early years at East Lambrook the pair developed the garden together but often warred over differences of style. Margery Fish admitted that she was a gardening novice but soon knew the informal look she wanted: an abundance of cottage-garden flowers allowing for self-sown seedlings. Walter, on the other hand, insisted on rolled gravel paths and neatly edged lawns, and was keen on giant delphiniums, dahlias, and hybrid tea roses. 
After Walter's death in 1947 Margery Fish was able to give full rein to her ideas. He had had little interest in what she called the 'small, unshowy plants... [liking] a good show for his money' (Fish, 63). She was also particularly keen to have flowers blooming all the year round, which Walter -- and many other gardeners of this period -- felt would only take space away from the flamboyant, labour-intensive summer display. Her first gardening book, 'We Made a Garden' (1956), gently describes the battle of wills between the couple over their differing tastes. 
In the 1950s East Lambrook Manor became the cottage garden Margery Fish had dreamed of, full of unfashionable 'green' flowers, and shady corners packed with hellebores, snowdrops, primroses, and epimediums. Throughout the year there was always some small delight to be found nestling near the stream or falling over the stone paths and walls. Gardening friends gave her choice cuttings, knowing that she would care for and propagate them. In doing this she saved many rare plants from extinction. In return she was renowned for sharing and swapping plants with other plant-lovers. Among her correspondents were Lawrence Johnston, of Hidcote Manor, Gloucestershire; the society garden designer Nancy Lindsay, who was the daughter of Norah Lindsay; and her near Somerset neighbour Violet Olive of Brympton d'Evercy. In the late 1950s she opened a small nursery as an adjunct to the garden (which she opened for charities, in particular the British Red Cross, with which she was actively involved). 
Margery Fish's garden at East Lambrook, while not small, was still of a size with which many gardeners could identify. Its importance was recognized in 1963 when she was awarded a silver Veitch memorial medal by the Royal Horticultural Society for its creation and her writing. For many years she had little help in the garden and worked an eighteen-hour day, squeezing her writing in early and late just as she had done during her time at Associated Newspapers. Although photographs of her (she hated having them taken) show her as a somewhat elderly lady always gardening in a dress and sensible shoes, her energy was legendary and she was remembered as 'fast-talking and quick-moving' (private information). She laid her own dry-stone walls and winding narrow paths, creating several areas such as the silver garden which caught the heat of the day, and a damp, shady garden utilizing the stream that ran behind the old malthouse. 'Artemisia absinthium' 'Lambrook Silver' remains a popular variety of one of her best-loved silver-leaved plants. She made a special selection of another favourite, 'Euphorbia characias ssp. wulfenii', which was named 'Lambrook Gold'. 'Santolina chamaecyparissus' 'Lambrook Silver' and 'Primula' 'Lambrook Mauve' were also introduced by her. In addition she and Lambrook are remembered through many other plants introduced after her death. As well as promoting such unfashionable plants as hostas and bergenias, she delighted in variegation in leaves. Her greatest love was for primroses. She hunted out rare old double forms and single, named coloured forms. 
Marrying her dual talents for writing and gardening wisdom, Margery Fish wrote seven more books including 'An All the Year Garden' (1958) and 'Cottage Garden Flowers' (1961). They remain essential reading for anyone seeking to achieve the informal cottage garden look she made so popular. She also contributed to the 'Oxford Book of Garden Flowers' and 'The Shell Book of Gardens'. In the late 1950s and 1960s she had a regular column in 'Amateur Gardening' and then in 'Popular Gardening'. In addition she appeared regularly on the BBC Home Service programme 'Home This Afternoon' as well as 'In Your Garden' and 'Gardening Club', and also lectured across the country. When a database of every plant she mentioned was compiled by the nursery at Lambrook in the 1990s, it ran to 6500 names and included more than 200 single snowdrop varieties. 
Margery Fish died at South Petherton Hospital, Somerset, on 24 March 1969, and was cremated at Taunton crematorium. East Lambrook Manor was bequeathed to her nephew, Henry Boyd-Carpenter, who with her sister-in-law and her sister-in-law's husband maintained the garden and extended the nursery. For many years the nursery was associated with hardy geraniums, another of Margery Fish's great loves and a species she brought to the public's attention as one of the best, trouble-free perennials. 
Her husband, Walter George Fish (1874-1947), journalist, was born at 69 Whalley Road, Accrington, Lancashire, on 3 June 1874, the son of George Fish, a newspaper reporter, and his wife, Margaret Anne, 'nee' Pierce. He was educated at Westminster City School. Following in his father's footsteps, he entered journalism, given as his occupation at the time of his marriage, on 13 April 1898, to Nellie ('b'. 1875/6, died in or before 1933), daughter of David Thomas Oakley, bootmaker. Their marriage, which ended with his wife's death, produced two daughters. He was discovered by Lord Northcliffe, and joined the 'Daily Mail' in 1904, rising to become its news editor between 1906 and 1919. He was an intuitive newshound: his contacts during Dr Crippen's attempted escape to Canada enabled 'Daily Mail' readers to be the first to read of his capture. During the First World War he was honorary director of publicity for the coal mines department of the Board of Trade, for which he was appointed CBE in 1919. That year he became editor of the 'Daily Mail' and a director of Associated Newspapers. His relationship with Lord Northcliffe was stormy. In 1922 he and Sir Andrew Caird, vice-chairman of Associated Newspapers, started proceedings to sue Northcliffe for libel but tempers were soothed and Fish did not retire until January 1930, while still retaining his directorship. During the Second World War he was an honorary adviser to the Press and Censorship Bureau and the Ministry of Information. He died at East Lambrook Manor on 21 December 1947. 


@@@@@


doc= 56757


Glynn, Prudence Loveday (1935-1986), fashion writer, was born on 22 January 1935 at 34 Evelyn Gardens, Kensington, London, the youngest child in the family of two sons and two daughters of Lieutenant-Colonel Rupert Trevor Wallace Glynn, a retired Royal Artillery officer, of Poplar Farm House, Cold Ash, Newbury, Berkshire, and his wife, Evelyn Margaret Vernet. She grew up in Tetsworth, and was educated at Downe House, Berkshire, leaving school for a job in advertising. After working for Frank Usher, the dress company, she turned to writing for women's magazines, and became fashion editor of 'Women's Mirror'. On 22 May 1965 she married David James George Hennessy, third Baron Windlesham (1932-2010), Conservative politician and later managing director of the ATV television network: they had one son and one daughter. 
In 1966 Prudence Glynn was appointed the first fashion editor of 'The Times', a post she held until 1980. The editor, Sir William Haley, wanted to change the image of the paper, and appointed a women's editor, Susanne Puddefoot, to introduce a daily women's page. She recruited Prudence Glynn, whose first article launched the new women's page on 3 May 1966, the first time in the history of 'The Times' that news appeared on the front page. After the new editor William Rees-Mogg introduced personal bylines in 1967, she became very well known. Her articles were stylish and witty, though some felt they were too witty, and made fun of the serious world of fashion. She championed British designers, including Jean Muir, and after attending his first fashion show in 1966 was instrumental in the rise to fame of the pop designer Ossie Clark (1942-1996), whom she regarded as one of the most talented fashion designers ever produced in Britain: she chose his chiffon and satin trouser suit as the 1968 dress of the year for the Museum of Costume in Bath. Glynn was passionate about British fashion, and she crusaded through her articles to raise it to the level of French fashion; this led to government initiatives to promote the manufacture and export of British designs. She enjoyed the glamour of the fashion scene, and the power that she wielded at the height of her influence as a 'grande dame' of fashion. Highly respected as a fashion journalist, she was regarded as authoritative because she wrote for 'The Times', and to be mentioned by her was of enormous importance to designers. She was an excellent journalist, writing beautifully and at length, and it was a standing joke that her sentences were even longer than those of her fellow journalist Bernard Levin. Many people read her articles not because they were interested in fashion, but because they were fun to read. But she found it hard to get on with her female colleagues at 'The Times', and after several difficult years from the mid-1970s onwards she was removed from the post of fashion editor, and given a weekly column. Her first piece, on 16 October 1980, was 'Fourteen years and positively no regrets'. 
Glynn published two books, both lavishly illustrated. 'In Fashion: Dress in the Twentieth Century' (1978), a social history of fashion, puts the work of designers into the context of their times, and traces the ways in which fashion reflects society. It is full of witty observations, such as her comment on the contradiction involved in buying a pair of blue jeans by Yves St Laurent: 'that is one problem of wearing pioneer dress in the richest country in the world' (p. 59). The book covers sporting fashion, royal fashion, theatrical fashion, and utility clothes, as well as 'haute couture'. 'Skin to Skin: Eroticism in Dress' (1982) begins by asking why people wear clothes at all, and agrees with Robert Burton that 'The greatest provocations of our lust are from our apparel'. Recalling that Hardy Amies once told her that the most erotic sight he ever saw was nuns playing tennis, making the point that sexual excitement can be caused as much by concealment as by revelation, she concludes that 'Eros, god of love, depends from every coathanger' (p. 16). 
During the 1970s Prudence Glynn was very influential in the design world as a member of the council of the Royal College of Art from 1969 to 1977, and the Design Council from 1973 to 1979. She was also on the Council for National Academic Awards committee for art and design from 1972, and a member of the Crafts Council from 1977 to 1980. She was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts in 1974. 
Glynn was very tall, slim, and elegant, and described herself as having a face like a currant bun. In her later years she began to suffer psychiatric problems; she separated from her husband, and the quality of her journalism became uneven. She died on 24 September 1986 in the St Charles Hospital, Kensington, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 56758


Green, (James) Maurice Spurgeon (1906-1987), journalist, was born at Padiham in Lancashire on 8 December 1906, one of the two sons of Lieutenant-Colonel James Edward Green, and his wife, Constance Ingraham-Johnson. He was educated at Rugby School where he was a scholar and at University College, Oxford, where he won a double first-class degree in Greats and was counted among the most brilliant of his generation. 
Brendan Bracken, who had a sharp eye for able young men, gave him his first job on the 'Financial News'. Green quickly made his mark, first on market reports and then as a leader writer. He was among the small group of young men in the 1930s who helped to lay the foundations of modern financial journalism. At the age of only twenty-eight he became editor and stayed in that post for five years. Together with Otto Clarke, his chief leader writer and head of the 'Lex' column, he devised the Financial News 30-share index which eventually became the Financial Times ordinary share index. He married first, on 15 January 1930, Pearl Oko of Cincinnati, Ohio, who died in 1934. On 14 October 1936 he married Janet Grace Norie, daughter of Major-General C. E. M. Norie. They had two sons. Green moved to 'The Times' in 1938 and had a year there as financial and industrial editor before the Second World War broke out. Green had joined the Territorial Army and for the next five years served with the Royal Artillery, finishing his military career as a major on the staff of the 3rd anti-aircraft group at Bristol. He was made an MBE (military) for his wartime service. 
Reckoned to be too old to serve overseas, Green was released from the army in 1944 and rejoined 'The Times', where his value was seen to lie in judgement rather than drive. There he became assistant editor in 1953. After eighteen years with 'The Times', he moved to the 'Daily Telegraph' as deputy editor in 1961, and in 1964 was appointed editor there in succession to Sir Colin Coote. The period of his editorship, 1964-74, was politically divided between six years of Harold Wilson and four years of Edward Heath. Both prime ministers were made to feel the weight of Green's economic philosophy and influence. Always more interested in economics than politics, he held firmly to the doctrine of the free market before it became more fashionable a decade later. Thus throughout Green's tenure as editor the 'Daily Telegraph''s leader writers were given the clearest economic guide posts. Many of the editorials were written by Green himself. His writing was exact rather than exciting. There was no embroidery. He applied the somewhat austere disciplines he imposed on the work of colleagues to all his own writing. 
From 1971 onwards Green's relations with Edward Heath became increasingly strained, mainly because he profoundly disagreed with the prime minister's economic policy. Green's economic beliefs led him to see virtue in the line being taken by Margaret Thatcher and her friends, and he was among her early supporters. He encouraged her to stand for the Tory leadership when her chances of gaining it looked slim. 
As an editor Green was admired and respected for his intellect, but he also exercised a gentle, persuasive art of his own. With his slightly donnish stoop, he would approach his specialists for guidance with endearing modesty. Rooted in clear principles, particularly in the economic sphere, he did not have to raise his voice to make his point. At the 'Daily Telegraph' 135 Fleet Street specialists and leader writers worked in separate rooms. Green rarely summoned anyone to his room; he preferred to visit them in theirs. Economics apart, Green's editorial policies were generously described by 'The Times' as 'marked by civilised, humane ideals' ('The Times', 21 July 1987). It was an apt comment. His apparent air of detachment concealed a firm hold on the principles by which he felt the affairs of the 'Daily Telegraph' should be conducted. He often thought for what seemed an unnervingly long interval before giving his answer to some question or request. But when it arrived, the answer was usually hard to gainsay. 
For some years after he retired as editor, Green remained a contributor to the 'Daily Telegraph' on economic subjects. He attended the annual budget statement and would turn out a long leader on the subject within ninety minutes of returning to the office. In 1976-7 he was president of the Institute of Journalists. It was a time when trade unions exercised considerable power in Fleet Street, as they had done throughout his tenure as editor. Strenuously opposed to the single-union closed shop, Green used his position to utter repeated warnings to his profession against its dangers. His interests and his recreations lay in many fields. Foremost among them was fly fishing which he practised principally on the River Itchen. He was a keen shot. When the 'Sunday Telegraph' was founded in 1961, Green, then deputy editor of the 'Daily Telegraph', asked not to be considered because it would deprive him of Saturday shooting. He played the piano, collected porcelain and watercolours, won a half-blue at Oxford for chess, and was an authority on wine. Early in his life he was an enthusiastic collector of wild fungus. In the early post-war years he went on bicycling tours of Europe with his wife. Green died on 19 July 1987 at Winchester, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 56761


Hardcastle, William (1918-1975), journalist and radio broadcaster, was born on 26 March 1918 at 5 Sydenham Terrace, Newcastle upon Tyne, last of the four children of William Hardcastle (1873-1924), medical officer at Newcastle prison, and his wife, Mary Constance Wardroper (1883-1967). William (Bill) Hardcastle's education at Durham School was cut short when, aged sixteen, he contracted osteomyelitis, and was in and out of hospital for the next four years. Nevertheless he read voraciously in the intervals between repeated painful operations which left his arms and legs deeply scarred. Though he had to abandon long-standing plans to become the fourth successive Hardcastle in the medical profession, he was able, in 1938, to start work with a Newcastle house agent. He hated the job and soon left to become a cub reporter on the 'South Shields Gazette' and later the 'North Shields Evening News'. His three years on Tyneside during the depression of the late thirties were to leave a lasting mark. 
Unfit for military service in the Second World War, Hardcastle moved to Yorkshire to become a sub-editor on the 'Sheffield Telegraph' and then on to London to work briefly for Kemsley Newspapers. In 1943 he joined Reuters news agency on the editorial desk and early in 1945, after a brief spell at SHAEF (Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force), was sent to New York and later to Washington as Reuters junior correspondent. His first big break was a casually distributed White House handout on what had seemed a slow day for news, with President Truman on the way home from the Potsdam conference. Dull the handout was not: in a state of shock he rushed to the phone to dictate his copy to London: 'The first atomic bomb, most powerful bomb in the world, was dropped sixteen hours ago on Hiroshima' (Hardcastle, 'Time of my life'). 
Long afterwards, Hardcastle remembered those early post-war years in the USA as 'a newspaperman's dream', and indeed it was the ideal place for an ambitious young journalist to learn his trade. He was in his element, making many friends and greatly enjoying the whole lively Washington scene with his wife and young family. He had in 1945 married the widow of a Royal Air Force pilot, Constance May Turton, 'nee' Ashmore (1923-1987); they had four children. The marriage was dissolved in 1960. 
Hardcastle's eight years in America were briefly interrupted when, in May 1949, Reuters made him their chief of bureau in Rome -- a promotion; yet after only three months in the job he resigned. Early in 1950 he was again in Washington, this time correspondent for the 'Daily Mail'. In December 1952 he returned to London to become news editor and later deputy editor on the 'Daily Mail'. By then Hardcastle had become every inch the tough, American-style newsman -- shirt-sleeved, cigarette-smoking, hard-drinking, insatiable in the pursuit of news. So successful did he prove that in October 1959 the proprietor of Associated Newspapers, the second Lord Rothermere, appointed him as editor of the 'Sunday Dispatch', and his revitalization of that ailing journal prompted Rothermere after only two months to sack Arthur Wareham, the 'quiet man' who had edited the 'Daily Mail' for eight years, and install Hardcastle in his place. 
Circulation had been falling, the paper needed a face-lift, and this tough newsman seemed the man for the job. Yet, although he tried to widen the appeal of a dyed-in-the-wool Conservative journal by bringing in writers with a wider, more radical outlook and recruiting lively columnists and gossip writers, readers gradually fell away despite over a million inherited from the 'News Chronicle' when it was taken over by the 'Mail' in October 1960. 
In fact, Hardcastle was not entirely at home in the editorial chair: for one of his temperament it provided too little action and too much administration, which he did not enjoy and for which he proved unsuited. One of his columnists, Alan Brien, recalled how his in-tray piled up with urgent decisions he seemed unable to face, and how he gradually sank into a deep depression when 'nothing seemed of any importance'. After three years Rothermere too had had enough: Hardcastle was dispatched on a fact-finding trip to the USA early in 1963, only to find himself out of a job on his return. 
Without salaried employment for the first time in his working life, Hardcastle launched into freelancing for radio and television; and when, in 1965, the BBC planned an innovatory lunchtime radio news programme, 'The World at One', its editor, Andrew Boyle, chose Hardcastle as presenter. So began a second career which was not only to make his a household name in radio journalism but to give the 'wireless', as he liked to call it, a much-needed shot in the arm at a time when television seemed to be taking over. 
Boyle and Hardcastle between them injected a new immediacy into the BBC's carefully correct current affairs output. Not only was the latter's urgent, breathless presentation -- so alien to the hitherto customary staid and measured delivery -- a somewhat startling innovation, but 'The World at One' itself set out to be provocative. Stimulating new commentators were brought in; hot news was relentlessly pursued wherever it might be happening; and, basically serious though the programme remained, it took a not always reverent look at the passing scene. 
Hardcastle quickly adapted to the new medium, bringing with him as presenter and interviewer an encyclopaedic knowledge of home and foreign affairs from his years in print journalism, as well as an instinctive ability to know what questions to ask, whether interviewing some quaking newcomer to the microphone or an evasive politician. With the latter his questioning was relentlessly persistent; but seldom rude and abrasive. 
For Hardcastle the great attraction of radio was the speed, immediacy, and flexibility with which it could tackle the news: planned items or even a whole programme could be abandoned if some important story broke at the last moment. No wonder, then, that for him 'The World at One' marked 'a real adventure in journalism', and its later Sunday edition, 'The World this Weekend', 'a further stride down the same exciting road'. 
'It was journalism of the highest order,' wrote Asa Briggs, author of the official history of British broadcasting, but he continued: 'none the less, the programme did not escape criticism from politicians, including the Prime Minister' (Briggs, 578). The prime minister in question, Harold Wilson, had complained to the BBC's governors, who, while agreeing that 'occasional lapses of judgment' were unacceptable, added that they were 'loath to sacrifice the real achievements of these programmes in the field of popular news presentation' (ibid.). Yet Wilson and his Conservative successor, Edward Heath, were always ready to face yet another of Hardcastle's tough, searching grillings: according to Heath, 'an interview with him was always an important matter' ('Daily Mail', 11 Nov 1975). 
As Hardcastle wrote in 'The Listener' shortly before his death, 'it would be wrong to assume that we were greatly loved. We were brash and cheeky and unappreciative of the many excellences of the BBC' (Hardcastle, 'Ten years'). For their part too, top people in the BBC hierarchy were themselves sometimes unappreciative of these often provocative programmes: indeed, when in 1974 Hardcastle's appearances as presenter were cut from four to three days a week, there were those who believed that the BBC management had yielded to political pressure on the grounds of his alleged left-wing bias, though he was always careful not to let his personal opinions obtrude. 
Yet audiences for 'The World at One', 'The World this Weekend', and the afternoon edition, 'P.M. Reports', multiplied, and within a decade similar programmes had become a commonplace in both radio and television. 
Hardcastle was a large, untidy person, never happier than when working under pressure in shirt-sleeves in a kind of creative chaos. He was stimulating though not always easy to work with: his professionalism made him impatient with those who did not match his high standards, though his often searing strictures were tempered by an unfailing sense of humour and ready support for inexperienced young journalists. 
Always a workaholic, he drove himself too hard, with weekly columns in 'Punch' and 'The Listener' and other journalism, as well as the relentless pressure of twice-daily radio programmes. He paid the price: on a Friday evening after a heavy day at the BBC and on the eve of a fortnight's holiday, he had a massive stroke and died three days later, on 10 November 1975, in Epsom Hospital. He was buried at St Mary's churchyard at Headley in Surrey, across the fields from Webb's Farm Cottage, which had been his home for the past fifteen years. 


@@@@@


doc= 56763


Hoskins, Percy Kellick (1904-1989), journalist, was born on 28 December 1904 at Bothenhampton, Burton Bradstock, Bridport, Dorset, the son of John Hoskins, chief officer of coastguards, and his wife, Sarah Rose Trevett. After a career of sixty years reporting crime, Hoskins rejoiced in his boast that a life so devoted to crime and punishment should have begun on Holy Innocents' day in Bridport, where once they made the hangman's rope. He was educated locally at Bridport. Hoskins was nineteen when he went to London to join the 'Evening Standard' as a reporter. Nine years later he was crime reporter on the 'Standard''s sister paper, the 'Daily Express'. His catalogue of successes was formidable. He wrote the first account of the disappearance of Guy Burgess and Donald Maclean, the Foreign Office diplomats who defected to Moscow. But his most memorable case was his campaign in support of Dr John Bodkin Adams, a fashionable Eastbourne doctor. In the years up to 1956 a number of wealthy widows living in the district had died. There was much local gossip; then an inquest on one widow brought about a police inquiry and Scotland Yard was called in. The national newspapers printed sensational accounts of the affair. There was talk of the exhumation of ten women, of the wills of 400 people being examined, even of the possibility of a local 'Bluebeard'. 
Hoskins was suspicious of the briefings that the police were giving to newspapers and decided that the rumour and vilification of Dr Adams had reached a point where a fair trial might be impossible. With the backing of his editor, Edward Pickering, he launched a one-man campaign attacking trial by newspaper. The 'Daily Express' stood alone. Even the proprietor, Lord Beaverbrook, had doubts. On his morning walks with the editor, he would repeatedly say, 'I hope and pray you are right' (private information). 
On 19 December 1956 Dr Adams was charged with the murder of an eighty-year-old woman patient. In March 1957 his trial opened at the Old Bailey. It proved to be a chapter in legal history. Lord Devlin was the judge; the attorney-general, Sir Reginald Manningham-Buller, prosecuted, with Melford Stevenson QC as his junior. Geoffrey Lawrence QC defended. The weight of evidence seemed to be going against the doctor when Lawrence dramatically produced the diaries kept by the nurses going back several years which contradicted claims of improper administration of drugs. On 9 April 1957 Dr Adams was found not guilty. On that day Hoskins received a telephone call from Lord Beaverbrook: 'Two men have been acquitted today: Adams and Hoskins' -- a phrase that Hoskins adapted for his own sparkling book on the trial. 
The importance of the Bodkin Adams case, and Hoskins's part in it, was demonstrated by the fact that it brought about a fundamental change in criminal law. The Tucker committee was set up and its findings resulted in the 'Criminal Justice Act' of 1967 laying down a change to the restrictions on the reporting of proceedings in magistrates' courts, leaving the choice of publicity or no publicity to the defence. It also highlighted the medical and ethical problems a doctor faces in treating aged and sick patients -- a dilemma brilliantly expounded by Lord Devlin in his book 'Easing the Passing' (1986). 
For some years Hoskins was chairman of the Crime Reporters' Association and was largely responsible for improving relations between police and the press. He was a regular lecturer at police colleges and training schools. He married while still a young man, but the relationship was not long-lasting. The couple nevertheless had a daughter. One of Hoskins's great strengths as a newspaperman was the wide circle of contacts and friends that he maintained in many fields, and in this he was greatly helped by his subsequent partner, Jeannie Fettes Smith (1909-1986). Although the couple never married, this was not publicly known; and she took his name by deed poll. Jeannie Hoskins was the founder of Celebrity Services, which looked after the London schedules for visiting politicians, film stars, and actors. Consequently, on any night in their flat at 55 Park Lane, one was liable to encounter high-ranking police officers, ministers of the crown, publishers, Hollywood beauties, and editors. 
Hoskins was president of the Saints and Sinners Club, which he had founded with Jack Hylton, the bandleader, in 1947, an organization which raised many hundreds of thousands of pounds for charity, and endowed the Percy Hoskins scholarship at Sheffield University's School of Journalism. The club also raised more than $40,000 to endow the Jeannie Hoskins memorial suite in King's College Hospital, London, and later, in 1991, sponsored two suites with full intensive care facilities in memory of Hoskins. For his work in journalism and for charity he was made CBE in 1976. 
All this daily activity and Hoskins's frequent visits to health farms had little effect on his Alfred Hitchcock-like figure. His rich Dorset burr stayed with him, as did a magnificent bass voice that came from years of church-choir training. He was capable on occasions of bursting into song -- a Stanford or a Mendelssohn anthem or an operatic aria. He wrote several books dealing with crime, including 'No Hiding Place' (1951), a title made famous in a television series. 
Hoskins died at his home, 65 Kingsway Court, Queens Gardens, Hove, on 5 February 1989 from cerebral thrombosis. He was cremated in Hove. Jeannie Hoskins had died three years earlier in 1986. 


@@@@@


doc= 56774


McLachlan, Donald Harvey (1908-1971), journalist and intelligence officer, was born in London at Flat 6, 23 Cathcart Hill, Islington, on 25 September 1908, the only child of David James McLachlan, a hotel manager, and his wife, Elizabeth Hine. From the City of London School he won a scholarship in French at Magdalen College, Oxford, where he took a first in modern Greats in 1930. He held a Laming fellowship at Queen's College, Oxford, in 1932-3. 
Two sisters called Harman, daughters of Nathaniel Bishop Harman, a surgeon, who were at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, resolved to marry their two brightest contemporaries. Elizabeth married the future seventh earl of Longford; Katherine (1909/10-1997), known as Kitty, married McLachlan on 12 May 1934. It was a close and happy marriage, to which three sons and a daughter were born. 
By the time it began McLachlan was on the staff of 'The Times' as its correspondent in Warsaw. He was standing in for the Berlin correspondent, who was on holiday, on the night of the Reichstag fire, 27 February 1933. His dispatch on this was so telling that he was brought back to London to write leading articles. He happened to be in charge of the paper the night that news came in, at 8.45 p.m., that Albert I of Belgium had died; he went to press at 9.22 with a news article, a leading article, and a complete obituary, the last ten years of which he had also just written. Yet he found the work less interesting than being a foreign correspondent, and in 1936 he left for two years as an assistant master at Winchester College, where he taught German, Russian, and current affairs -- the last two hitherto untaught subjects. As an agnostic he was in a difficulty in compulsory divinity classes: instead of instilling Christianity, he taught ethics out of lives of Socrates and Voltaire. He was a stimulating teacher, encouraging his pupils to think for themselves, and sharing with them his knowledge of European personalities as well as his gift for languages. 'The Times' lured him back with the offer of the editorship of the 'Times Educational Supplement', which he ran in 1938-40. 
In spite of his defective eyesight -- he wore heavily horn-rimmed spectacles -- McLachlan was accepted by the army, with an emergency commission as a second lieutenant, general list, on 8 July 1940. After a brief intelligence course at Swanage he was posted to the intelligence branch of southern command, where he served until late October, while German invasion was thought imminent. He was then attached to the Duke of Cornwall's light infantry for training. 
From this McLachlan was rescued by the director of naval intelligence, J. H. Godfrey, who had him posted probationary lieutenant in the special branch of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve on 31 December 1940. He served no sea time; he worked in the naval intelligence department, at first on U-boat tracking. Later in 1941 he moved to naval intelligence division (NID) 17 Z. NID was now only cover for him: in fact, though in naval uniform, he joined the political warfare executive, running black broadcasts under the aegis of Sefton Delmer of the 'Daily Express', who had known him before the war. His rank, from 1942 to 1945, was acting temporary lieutenant-commander. 
McLachlan's task was to run Kriegswellensender Atlantik, an ostensibly German short-wave station that aimed at rotting the morale of U-boat crews, partly by scabrous accounts of what their wives and girlfriends were doing while they were at sea. No one has ever been able to establish what impact it had. In March 1944 he again moved, to the psychological warfare branch of Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force, where he worked, still under Delmer, against the morale of the German army; again without precisely assessable results. Authority was satisfied with him, and he was appointed OBE in 1945. 
After the war McLachlan returned to journalism and served from 1947 to 1954 as joint foreign editor of 'The Economist' with Barbara Ward, under Geoffrey Crowther's editorship. He took, as always, a sternly rationalist line about foreign policy, attacking the sentimentality of the left as sharply as he opposed any tendencies towards tyranny of the right. In 1954 he moved to the 'Daily Telegraph' as deputy editor. It was he who wrote the article headed 'The smack of firm government' early in 1956 that so much annoyed Sir Anthony Eden. He alternately exhilarated and alarmed his colleagues, because of the many bright ideas he put before them. He was a tall, thin, clean-shaven man, thin-lipped, decisive in manner, and noticeably helpful to anyone he thought promising. He was a visiting fellow of Nuffield College, Oxford, in 1960-68, and sat on the BBC's General Advisory Council from 1961 to 1965. 
For its first five years, from 5 February 1961, McLachlan edited the 'Sunday Telegraph', intended to 'fill the gap' -- as he put it on its first page -- between the two quality Sunday papers, 'The Observer' and the 'Sunday Times', and the more popular ones. He meant to make it readily readable in a single day, and yet to include plenty of hard news and commentary as well as many cultural features, but never escaped from the quip that the gap it filled was between Saturday's 'Telegraph' and Monday's 'Telegraph'. 
In 1966 McLachlan resigned, because he wanted to write books instead of articles. First he produced 'Room 39' (1968), a long and original account of wartime naval intelligence, studded with asterisks (inserted whenever he wanted to refer to most secret sources, still then unavowable, to which he had himself been privy in NID). It remains one of the leading texts on practical intelligence work. 
McLachlan then wrote 'In the Chair', a life of R. W. Barrington-Ward, the wartime editor of 'The Times', a sympathetic biography which appeared after its author's death. He also wrote a novel, 'No Case for the Crown' (1972), about the secret world, in which a principal character is removed by the counter-espionage service by being forced to drive into a tree. He next began a life (never finished) of Kurt Hahn, the headmaster of Gordonstoun, the Scottish public school on the Moray Firth. He went there early in 1971 to pursue research. On long journeys, he and Kitty normally shared the driving; she happened to have a broken wrist, and he went alone. On 10 January, early on the way back, he drove into a tree and died at once. His ashes were scattered, close to his country home, on the Hanger near Selborne, Hampshire; friends put up trees there to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 56782


Roberts, Brian Richard (1906-1988), newspaper editor, was born on 16 September 1906 at 28 Queen Elizabeth's Walk, Stoke Newington, London, the eldest of the four sons of Robert Lewis Roberts (1875-1956), sometime president of the London Master Builders' Association, and his wife, Muriel Grace, second daughter of J. T. Henderson of Highbury. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, and at St John's College, Oxford, where he read Greats. On 25 July 1935 Roberts married Elisabeth Franziska Dora ('b'. 1904/5), elder daughter of Dr Leo Zuntz, of Berlin, and they had one adopted son. 
One brother, Colin Henderson Roberts (1909-1990), was a classical scholar and, from 1954 to 1974, secretary to the delegates of Oxford University Press; another, Roger Lewis (1911-1990), became chaplain at the Queen's Chapel of the Savoy and chaplain to the queen from 1969 to 1981. Brian Roberts, after graduating, chose to enter journalism with a lowly job at the 'Oxford Mail'. In 1933 he moved to Fleet Street to join the 'Daily Mail' as a sub-editor, and in 1939 he moved again, to the 'Daily Telegraph', with which company he remained. When the 'Sunday Telegraph' was founded in 1961 he became its managing editor, and in 1966 he succeeded Donald McLachlan (1908-1971), who had been the paper's first editor. 
Roberts was a thoroughly professional journalist, combining deep experience with mental quickness and flair. His organizing abilities played a vital part in the creation of the new Sunday newspaper. Although small in stature and physically somewhat frail, he possessed a natural authority which was reinforced by an often wintry wit. His rages were legendary but they were swiftly forgotten (by him at least) and he was also capable of great kindness. He was not primarily a 'writing editor', nor did he spend much time cultivating cabinet ministers and suchlike persons: essentially he was a 'backroom' newspaperman, devoting his talent and energy to the production of a newspaper which came up to his standards of honesty and accuracy. 
By a bizarre turn of events this least publicity-seeking of editors found himself the object of national attention in 1971, when he became the central figure in a celebrated 'Official Secrets Act' trial at the Old Bailey. He did not relish the experience: it had not been funny, he wrote after his acquittal, to sit for nearly a month in the dock on a kitchen chair once occupied by one of the Kray brothers. But he endured it with fortitude. 
The case arose from the 'Sunday Telegraph''s reporting of the Nigerian civil war. Roberts, whose editorial line had been in support of the minority Biafran cause, published the text of a report marked 'confidential' from the United Kingdom high commission in Lagos, a document which was severely critical of the federal Nigerian army. The news value of this scoop, at first considerable, was diminished by the speedy collapse of Biafran resistance; nevertheless special branch officers arrived at the newspaper's offices to investigate the 'leak', and prosecutions under section 2 of the 1911 'Official Secrets Act' duly followed. 
In addition to Roberts and the 'Sunday Telegraph', the defendants were Colonel Douglas Cairns, former military attache at Lagos, who had sent a copy of the report to his former chief, General Henry Alexander; and Jonathan Aitken (at that time a freelance journalist, later a Conservative MP) who, after being shown the report by General Alexander, had communicated it to the 'Sunday Telegraph'. 
From the outset it was accepted that no question of national security was involved. The important point, therefore, was the extent to which this 'catch-all' section of the act could be used to restrict the publication of matter which, while possibly embarrassing to the government of the day, in no way affected national security (covered by section 1). In a historic summing-up Mr Justice Caulfield (1914-1994) declared that section 2 had 'reached retirement age and should be pensioned off' ('Daily Telegraph', 4 Feb 1971). The jury swiftly acquitted all defendants and the judge awarded them their costs out of public funds. 
During the summing-up Lord Goodman, representing Aitken, passed a note to the 'Telegraph''s then proprietor, Lord Hartwell, saying: 'I think your man is going to be given a medal. A. G.' (Hartwell). The note stood on Roberts's desk thereafter: and indeed the Institute of Journalists, to mark a notable victory, later awarded Roberts its gold medal. 
After the trial Roberts wrote: 'I believe I am the first editor to be prosecuted under a stupid, obscure and malignant Act. God willing, I shall prove to have been the last' ('Sunday Telegraph', 7 Feb 1971). He campaigned against the oppressive section 2, and there followed the appointment of a committee under Lord Franks, provost of Worcester College, Oxford, to examine the question. In its report in 1972 this committee recommended the repeal and replacement of section 2, to Roberts's great satisfaction. 
Roberts retired in 1976. He had interests apart from journalism. At Old Foxhunt Manor, Waldron, Heathfield, Sussex, he was his own active farm manager. Following family tradition, he was for many years a member of the governing body of the Northern Polytechnic, London, which his grandfather had helped to found, and in 1956 he succeeded his father as its chairman. His term of office coincided with a turbulent period of student unrest. In 1975 he was made an honorary fellow of his old college, St John's, of which his brother Colin had been a fellow since 1934. In 1981 he became an honorary fellow of the Northern Polytechnic. He died on 2 June 1988 at his home, Old Foxhunt Manor, and was survived by his wife and son. 


@@@@@


doc= 56783


Peel, Constance Dorothy Evelyn (1868-1934), journalist and writer on household management, was born on 27 April 1868 at Ganarew, Herefordshire, the seventh of nine children (four of whom died in infancy) of Richard Lane Bayliff, captain in the 100th regiment and adjutant of the Monmouthshire Volunteers, and his wife, Henrietta, daughter of Robert Peel. Constance Bayliff's early childhood was spent in Wyesham, Monmouthshire, in straitened circumstances due to her father's poor health. Following a move to Bristol, she was mainly educated at home by her parents. Her education was constantly interrupted by asthmatic illness and she spent a considerable time convalescing with much wealthier relatives. She moved to Folkestone aged seventeen and came out at a military ball. She recalled that she and her sister 'lived what sensible people call an aimless life', visiting and party-going, which they could ill afford, struggling to 'freshen up' their few party dresses (Peel, 58). Her frugal upbringing, together with her parents' preoccupation with the poor and the extravagance she saw in the homes of her relatives, left a considerable impression on her. 
Constance's journalistic career started after her family moved to Twickenham. Inspired by her sister, who was illustrating articles for 'The Queen', she won a competition for a dress article in 'Woman'. Despite her poor education, she went on to write for most of the popular magazines and newspapers of her time, her earnings giving her an unusual amount of financial independence. Arnold Bennett, editor of 'Woman', told her that she did not know how to write and arranged for her to have grammar lessons from a board schoolteacher. She learned more, however, from Bennett's skilful editing. 
On 6 December 1894 Constance married her second cousin Charles Steers Peel, the son of Francis William Peel, rector of Burghwallis, Yorkshire. Her husband was an electrical engineer and they moved to Dewsbury. Constance continued to work as a journalist in London, publishing as Mrs C. S. Peel. She inhabited three very different worlds: the artistic London world, the manufacturing town world, and the country house world (she was presented at court the year after she married), all of which influenced her writings. She drew on her experience of setting up home in her first book, 'The new home: treating of the arrangement, decoration and furnishing of a house of medium size to be maintained by moderate income' (1898). Forced to run her own house when her maid left, she 'soon discovered how easily money could be wasted by bad kitchen management' (Peel, 111). She concentrated on work that she could do from home so that she could spend time with her young daughter. She was editor and managing director of 'Hearth and Home', 'Woman', and 'Myra's Journal' from 1903 until 1906 and published a series of popular cookery books. She was also managing director of Beeton & Co. from 1903 to 1906. 
Constance Peel took a break from work after the birth of her second child, Denise. A year and a half later she lost her third and last baby. She decided on a change of career and, fashionably, started a hat shop with her friend Ethel Kentish. The business met with some success, with famous clients such as Ellen Terry. However, she had doubts about the morality of fashion and eventually decided to close down the business owing to ill health. When she recovered in 1914 she wrote a novel, 'The Hat Shop', which met with critical acclaim, encouraging her to write three more. 
By 1913 both children were at school and Constance Peel began to miss her former life as a journalist. She took up the post of editor of the household department of 'The Queen', a position she held for seventeen years, as well as working for 'Hearth and Home' and 'The Lady'. Her books such as 'Marriage on Small Means' (1914) and 'The Labour Saving House' (1917) instructed women in modern methods and technologies of household management. In 1918 Lord Northcliffe appointed her editor of the 'Daily Mail' women's page. This was brought to an abrupt end when she was diagnosed with diabetes in 1920; her life was saved by the discovery of insulin later in the year. 
During the First World War, Constance Peel organized a Soldiers' and Sailors' Wives Club in Lambeth, and was a speaker for the United Workers' Association and the National War Savings Association. In partnership with Maud Pember Reeves she worked as co-director of women's service for the Ministry of Food during the period of voluntary food rationing, March 1917-March 1918. She travelled round the country and delivered 176 addresses promoting the economical use of food. She was appointed OBE in 1919. After the war she worked for improvements in women's domestic lives. She served on two committees, under the Ministry of Reconstruction, on working-class housing and domestic service. She also was involved in committees of the Ministry of Health, the Town Planning and Garden Cities associations, Women's Pioneer Housing, and the Peckham Pioneer Health Centre. She was vice-president of the British Women Housewives' Association. 
Constance Peel wrote five volumes of memoirs with vivid descriptions of interiors and a keen eye for social detail on the great social changes in her lifetime. In 'Life's Enchanted Cup: an Autobiography, 1872-1933' (1933) she made it clear that she worked out of necessity as well as pleasure: to provide for her two children, to support an aunt, and to save for her old age. She died at 7 Knaresborough Place, Kensington, London, on 7 August 1934 from complications induced by her long-standing myocarditis and diabetes. Her husband survived her. 


@@@@@


doc= 56784


Lascelles, Frank William Thomas Charles Christian Culpeper (1875-1934), pageant master, was born in Sibford Gower, Oxfordshire, on 30 July 1875, the youngest of the three children of Edward Thomas Stevens (1832-1898), vicar of Holy Trinity, Sibford Gower, from 1874 until his death, and his wife, Isabella Hannah, 'nee' Cooper (1833/4-1907). His name at birth was Frank William Thomas Charles Stevens. The home atmosphere was cultivated and literary: his father, who had run a school in Islington, London, and written school textbooks before studying at Oxford in his late thirties in preparation for the church, was an admirer of Ruskin and Emerson; his mother, a 'Botticelli-like' beauty (Darnley, 239), had taught at the Islington school. The sculptor Alfred Stevens was a relative. Frank was brought up with stories of medieval artists and saints, with recitations, drawing, and 'dressing-up'. His early enthusiasms were for Burne-Jones, Morris, Rossetti, Shelley, and Swinburne. 
Stevens was educated at the village school in Sibford Gower and then privately. Admitted to Keble College, Oxford, in 1895 to study English literature, and tutored by Ernest de Selincourt, he left without a degree. A heart affliction and a serious eye complaint interrupted his studies; when he took his finals in 1899, he 'knew enough for a third class but broke down during the examinations' (Keble College archives). Meanwhile the undergraduate journalists of 'Isis' (19 Feb 1898) declared him an 'Idol' as a leading light of the Oxford University Dramatic Society, who took a prominent role in his first term, and proceeded to a 'tremendous success' as Romeo. 
Stevens moved to London where he became an actor. During the years 1904 to 1906 he performed in the famous company of Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree, playing Laertes, Nero, and Octavius Caesar, although he was said to have been unhappy on stage. At about this time he took the surname Lascelles, and subsequently assumed additional forenames, though no deed poll has been located for the changes. 
Tree introduced into his Shakespearean productions pageant-like scenes of historical events and staged imperial celebrations. Lascelles was soon to become famous for his work as a specialist producer, a 'pageant master'; between 1907 and 1932 he produced twenty-two pageants. With the Oxford historian Charles Oman, Lascelles had attended the ambitious pageant at Warwick of 1906 staged by Louis Napoleon Parker. The new vogue for pageants was claimed as a revival of a didactic pictorial and theatrical art as old in England as the book; historical events were now impressed on the mind by drama and spectacle, and used to foster a civic and national sense. Directed by Lascelles, who became known as 'the man who staged the Empire', they were also to become compelling imperial celebrations and propaganda. 
The Oxford Historical Pageant of summer 1907, Lascelles's first project, engaged his romantic, picturesque idealism, his 'magnetic persuasiveness' (Darnley, 5), and his celebrated patience and tact. The story of the city and university, from the coming of St Frideswide, was presented in three-hour performances of fifteen scenes (with a 'masque of mediaeval learning' as interlude) and was performed on Christ Church Meadow. Lascelles was told that university people would not dress up in costume and that the town and gown would not work together, but with the support of Oman and Francis Madan an impressive number of academics joined the committee, and it was a great success. Among the 'dramatic authors' were Oman himself, Robert Bridges, Laurence Housman, Laurence Binyon, Stanley Weyman, and Professor Walter Raleigh. Charles Ricketts was a designer, and Hubert Parry and Beerbohm Tree advised on the music and spectacle. Several hundred horses took part, in addition to the 3000 performers, and there was a colourful antiquarian flourish of armour, heraldry, ecclesiastical vestments, and academic robes. 
In Canada the following year Lascelles excited patriotism and imperial loyalty with the Quebec Tercentenary Pageant of July 1908, held on the Plains of Abraham, attended by the prince of Wales. The celebrations had been planned by Lord Grey, governor-general of Canada, as an occasion to reinforce Anglo-French amity, and Lascelles staged a pageant which brought together British and French Canadians. The historical scenes, planned by the dominion archivist, Arthur Doughty, carefully balanced the different periods of French and British rule, and military victories and defeats. They were directed by Lascelles, who organized some 4000 performers, and secured the co-operation of French-speaking Catholics of Quebec. He also recruited Iroquois, and they afterwards made him a chieftain with the title Tehonikonraka ('man of infinite resources'). In July 1909 he returned to English themes, when he was master of the Bath Historical Pageant. 
Lascelles's success in orchestrating the Quebec pageant led to his appointment by the Cape Town city council as master of the historical pageant planned as part of the celebrations to mark the opening of the first parliament of the newly created Union of South Africa in 1910. The pageant, which depicted scenes from South African history, took place over several days in late October and early November 1910, and was attended by the duke of Connaught as representative of the British crown. As in Quebec, two settler traditions, British and Afrikaner, had to be reconciled. Nearly 5000 performers were drawn from Cape Town's residents. Other groups participating included bushmen, Hottentots, and Portuguese grandees; the Basuto made Lascelles a chieftain, with the name Rakalelo ('the father of wonderful thoughts'). At the conclusion, civic tributes were paid to Lascelles's work. 
Since late 1907 Lascelles had been planning a pageant of London, though it was repeatedly postponed (in 1910 on account of the death of Edward VII). Instead it formed part of the Festival of Empire, Imperial Exhibition, and Pageant of London, held at the Crystal Palace, Sydenham, in 1911 as part of the ceremonies accompanying the coronation of George V. The events were organized by a council chaired by Lord Plymouth, with Lascelles being appointed master of the Festival of Empire and of the Pageant of London. The festival opened on 12 May, and the first performance of the pageant was on 8 June 1911. The latter, which was in four parts, performed on separate days, celebrated the 'magnificence, glory and honour of the Empire and the Mother Country' ('Festival of Empire: Imperial Exhibition and Pageant of London', 1911), and was said to be Lascelles's own 'crowning triumph'. He persuaded over thirty London boroughs as well as corporate bodies to become involved and to sponsor individual scenes, whose performers were drawn from those boroughs. They rehearsed twice a week for six months beforehand. Forty 'striking scenes of the Empire City' were performed in the English Landscape Garden of the Crystal Palace, by 15,000 costumed volunteers, including titled folk and 'artisans'; Penge supplied 'hundreds of picturesquely-clad early Britons' to present Roman London, with the Emperor Carausius in a chariot ('Pageant of London Programme', 2), while Wimbledon and Merton supplied uniformed warriors for the scene depicting the battle of Bosworth Field. The speeches were hardly audible during the performances, but Lascelles, praised by his friend Frank Brangwyn for his sense of colour, was admired for his painterly 'colour massing' and 'fluid and evanescent' movements (Darnley, 83). Fifteen state coaches were used. In a climactic 'Masque of Empire' Britannia proved her right to her vast empire, whose representatives appeared 'in vast procession to lay their riches at her feet' ('Pageant of London Programme', 2). Performances of a selection of the scenes continued until the end of August 1911. 
Immediately afterwards Lascelles accepted an invitation to stage a pageant in Calcutta to mark the royal visit to India, and sailed for India in September 1911. Famous for its colossal scale and colourful spectacle, the pageant was held on the Maidan, Calcutta, on 5 January 1912. Originally planned as a succession of scenes from Indian history, the pageant instead took the form of two traditional processions, Muslim and Hindu, and was organized by Lascelles and the orientalist Denison Ross. It involved a cast of 300,000, with massed troops, horsemen in chain armour, a war dance, elephant processions, caparisoned horses, oxen-drawn carts, and palanquins. 
Lascelles's successes as a pageant master enabled him to establish himself at Sibford Gower, where he declared himself lord of the manor. He designed a second new 'manor house' in the village in 1915, adding a tower, a great hall, thatched roofs, and gardens to an existing barn and cottages. Here he entertained his many celebrated and interesting friends at house parties and directed alfresco Shakespeare productions with the local community; Ivor Novello reputedly composed 'Keep the Home Fires Burning' while on a visit. He did much to beautify the village, paying for a hall and embellishing Holy Trinity with First World War memorial doors, a memorial with a marble bust of his mother, and a bronze angel on the family tomb. His activities during the war years are unclear, though he visited Toronto in 1916 to stage for the Empire Club an abbreviated production of Hardy's 'The Dynasts'. 
Lascelles returned to pageant direction in 1923, when he was responsible for the Harrow historical pageant. He was master of the Bristol Pageant, entitled 'The Cradle of the Empire', which opened in May 1924. In that month he was called in at short notice by William Lunn, a junior minister in Ramsay MacDonald's Labour administration, as pageant master-in-chief to replace ineffectual producers at the government-sponsored British Empire Exhibition. Within weeks he had enrolled 15,000 performers for the opening in Wembley stadium on 25 July 1924. Although less ambitious than at Sydenham, the empire pageant at Wembley colourfully presented the 'noble episodes' of the history of the empire and the dominions, to 'light the torches of the future at the glowing heart of the past' ('The Pageant of Empire, Souvenir Volume', 1924). There were historical texts by Charles Oman, an Indian episode designed by Denison Ross, scenery and decorative souvenir programmes by Brangwyn, lyrics written by Alfred Noyes, and music composed by Edward Elgar. Elizabethans were said to 'scamper in a dazzle of blue and yellow and red', and 'turbaned orientals stippled the dusk with countless specks of white' (ibid.). When the pageant concluded its season in August 1924, Lascelles was carried shoulder-high by Maori warriors and acclaimed with laurel wreaths. 
Lascelles next mastered a series of provincial historical pageants, among them Carlisle (1928); Stoke-on-Trent (1930) for the Wedgwood bicentenary celebrations; Rochester (1931), with Canterbury pilgrims, Charles Dickens, and an assault on the castle; Bradford (1931); the charter celebrations of Barking (1931); and the counties of Leicester (1932), Essex (1932), and Kent (1932). 
Lascelles was also a sculptor, whose portrait busts included Edward, prince of Wales, the duke of Connaught, Earl Grey, and the Aga Khan III. 
An effusive commemorative volume of 1932, edited by the eighth earl of Darnley, praised Lascelles's contribution to 'the civic, patriotic, and imperial sense of the many peoples who have been inspired by his art and personality', saying that to hundreds of thousands throughout the British empire he brought joy, uplifting the race 'artistically, mentally, and spiritually' (Darnley, ix). It contained a collection of tributes from British and colonial politicians, civic dignitaries in places where he had organized pageants, collaborators, friends, and, lastly, his manservant, Ewart Bodfish. 
Lascelles was unmarried. His end was pitiful, dying on 23 May 1934 at 10 Clifton Place, Brighton, in poverty and sickness, after ten weeks at the boarding-house. His family told the press that his ill health had involved him in considerable losses, in spite of the properties he owned in Sibford Gower; he had been unable to attend to his financial affairs, and had given away more than he could afford. He had asked Frank Brangwyn to administer his estate to fund a 'school of nations' for children from all over the world to promote world peace and understanding, but his net estate proved small, and his intended benefaction was not feasible. 


@@@@@


doc= 56785


Beecroft, Elizabeth (1748-1812), iron manufacturer and butter seller, was born Elizabeth Skirrow, and had at least one brother. She married George Beecroft (1739-1820), a respected tenant farmer, and together they lived at Bramley in Yorkshire, close to Leeds, with Betty producing butter for sale at local markets. They had a son and a daughter. 
A woman of remarkable business enterprise and spiritual strength, Betty recorded in her diary how one evening in October 1778 she first discussed with her husband the possibility of leasing Kirkstall forge. On the banks of the River Aire, 41/2 miles to the west of Leeds, the forge had manufactured iron since the early thirteenth century. However, in 1778 the business and its attached farm, owned by the earl of Cardigan, were once again to let. 
Betty relentlessly overcame her husband's reluctance to proceed. George Beecroft protested that 'It would take too much money!', but she replied, 'Never mind 'that'. We shall do for that, I warrant thee' (Butler, 23). Nevertheless, after discussions with the earl of Cardigan's agent it became clear that the forge was in a ruinous condition and that new tenants would have to spend at least $1000 on it. Despite her husband's 'Dither & Shak' and at least one attempt by him to withdraw from the venture, Betty persuaded George and his family to proceed. A passionate follower of John Wesley, she recalled that 'I began by talking about God's kind providence in so clearly opening our way in this matter and if we gave it up we should never have another chance again' (ibid., 24-6). 
A number of possible partners in the venture were considered -- and rejected -- by Betty Beecroft. The Dixon family were 'very sharp people and if they see a good pennyworth come their way may be they will not be generous enough with my husband, and may try to throw him out and take the whole to themselves' (Butler, 24). In the event Betty found better partners in two members of the Butler family, long established in the wool trade: John Butler (1738-1826), who was also married to her husband's sister Jane; and Thomas Butler, a man of substance in Lichfield and sheriff there in 1770. The Butlers each invested $500, and with some difficulty George and Betty managed to raise $800. 
'And, now with much diligence, and I believe uprightness', Betty wrote, 'we proceeded on our way with our new business' (Butler, 27). The articles of agreement were signed, and the Beecrofts took possession of the dwelling house at the forge on 3 May 1779. While her husband looked after the farm, Betty was in sole charge of the forge. 'I undertook the care of the trade and the books: also the buying and selling and all the engagements of the men up to March 31st 1780' (ibid., 27). However, it became clear that John Butler, who came over once a week and paid the wages, was to be the key figure once he had wound up his other business; and from 1780 everything was 'generally ordered and decided' by him (ibid., 28). 
Kirkstall forge was transformed by its new management. The existing water-wheels were replaced, and the old races leading to them from the abbey mill were enlarged. The screw mill was rebuilt, a plate mill was added, and in 1797 a puddling furnace was commissioned to exploit Henry Cort's new process. Iron was imported from the Netherlands, Russia, and Sweden; and from the mid-1790s, in addition to rods, bars, screws, and plates of iron, the forge was manufacturing more lucrative finished products. Initially these were spades, shovels, and patten rings, but in 1798 the first cart-arms were produced, and these and other axles later became the firm's speciality. Betty Beecroft's son George and John Butler's son Thomas both became partners at about this time, ensuring a future for 'Butlers and Beecrofts'. 
After 1785, when John Butler built himself a house at the forge, Betty's role steadily declined, but she continued to help in the counting-house until 1805. A curious advertisement that she placed in the 'Leeds Mercury' on 4 May 1793 indicates that Betty continued selling farm produce: this condemned the 'vile and malicious' reports that she had exported butter and bacon to revolutionary France and offered a reward of 10 guineas for the discovery of the propagator of the rumour (Butler, 22). 
Local tradition records that John Wesley was attacked by a mob in the area, and took refuge in a chamber in Kirkstall forge. Whether Betty met Wesley then is not recorded, but she certainly did so in London shortly before he died in 1791. As she wrote to her mother, 'I hope I shall be ever thankful that he gave his blessing upon one so unworthy of his notice' (Butler, 29). 
A much-loved figure in both the Butler and Beecroft families, Betty died in 1812. A tribute from a Wesleyan minister accurately noted that, though 'neither free from defects nor destitute of eccentricities', Betty was legendary for her 'industry, economy, integrity, firmness of mind and inviolable attachment to the Scriptures' (Butler, 110). Guided by a sure sense of providence, Betty Beecroft was also a remarkably astute businesswoman. 


@@@@@


doc= 56791


Sayers, John Edward (1911-1969), newspaper editor and social commentator, was born on 13 July 1911 in King Street, Birkenhead, the eldest of three children of John Sayers (1880-1939), journalist, of 16 Cyprus Avenue, Belfast, and his wife, Elizabeth Lemon (1886-1957). 
Educated at Miss Corry's and Miss Brown's school, Cyprus Road, and then Methodist College, Belfast (1920-30), Sayers became an apprentice reporter at the 'Belfast Telegraph' in 1930, there joining his father and his uncle. All three would in time become editor, so ensuring a continuous familial succession from 1937 until 1969. Jack, as he was known, had risen to parliamentary reporter when the Second World War broke out and barely a month later he was serving on HMS 'Courageous' when she was torpedoed in mid-Atlantic with the loss of 700 on 17 September 1939. As with many of his generation, the experience of war cast in stone the ideals that were to dominate his later career: patriotism and the values of empire, duty in the service of the community, and the moral responsibility of those in authority to pursue the cause of justice. At the same time his secondment (on 24 October 1939) to Churchill's private map room exposed him to the exotic world of the 'high ups'. Here he observed his mercurial leader and met the great and good, from Churchillian cronies such as Lord Beaverbrook and Brendan Bracken to world leaders such as Roosevelt, Eisenhower (whom he once tried to lock out of the map room on grounds of security), de Gaulle, and even Chiang Kai-shek. 
With the war over Sayers married, on 4 October 1945, a war widow, Daphne Mary Godby (1916-1998), daughter of Roger Hardy Parnell, chartered accountant, and his wife Amy Sarah, at Holy Trinity, Brompton, rejoining the 'Belfast Telegraph' a month later as political correspondent (with John Cole as his deputy). At the same time (January 1946) he began a radio career for the BBC on such programmes as 'Ulster's Half Hour', 'Your Questions', and the influential, often controversial 'Ulster Commentary'. This, together with his freelance articles for the 'Daily Telegraph', the 'Observer', and the 'Round Table' (1948-69), ensured that by the time he became editor-in-chief in 1961 Sayers had emerged as the foremost political commentator of his day. 
Slightly swarthy and owlish as he peered through his glasses, he looked distinctly archaic for the 1960s in his neat, dark suits with a tight knot to his tie in a stiff white collar. Yet Jack Sayers was to prove one of the most remarkable editors Ulster had ever produced. Under him the 'Belfast Telegraph' commanded a daily readership that approached two out of three households in the province, straddling the sectarian divide and offering for many, both protestant and Catholic, a common ground for debate amid the political turmoil of the 1960s. Convinced of the need for change in Ulster he determined through his paper to transform Ulster unionism into an inclusive, supra-class political movement. These ideas, emanating as they did from a traditional Unionist organ, won considerable support in the late 1950s and 1960s. And, with traditional unionism floundering in the wake of this articulate assault, Sayers quickly found himself the confidant of prime ministers, especially Terence O'Neill. Indeed, with O'Neill's conversion to liberalism always a little ambiguous, it was Jack Sayers who proved the most coherent exponent of 'O'Neillism'. With his 'Viewpoint' leaders in the 'Telegraph' and most famously the 'I back O'Neill' coupons in December 1968, he led the fight against the sectarian and unbending in the Unionist movement in what he saw as a 'classic struggle between forces of progress and reaction' (Gailey, 110). 
None of this made Sayers any the less Unionist. Indeed he held that it was the failure after 1945 to incorporate the identities and aspirations of the minority that imperilled the union and led to the humiliation of direct rule. Such attitudes bred many enemies and the onset of the troubles and O'Neill's fall in 1969 saw Sayers overwhelmed by events and by his failure to recognize that Paisleyism also represented a genuine constituency and not just an antediluvian creed. Journalistically too, as one of the last of the great writing editors, he was finding himself outflanked in the end by the media of television and soundbites. With his health failing, he retired on 31 March 1969, and died in Belfast on 30 August at the Royal Victoria Hospital, after suffering a major heart attack; he was survived by his wife and two daughters, Diana and Sarah. As befitted an Ulster romantic, he was buried, four days later, at Carnlough in co. Antrim, where his planter ancestors had first settled in the seventeenth century. 
Under his editorship he gathered together an unusually talented group of young journalists, including John Cole, W. D. Flackes, Martin Wallace, Eric Waugh, and Dennis Kennedy -- many of whom later made their names on television. And through them the 'Belfast Telegraph' sustained and moulded a popular moderate consensus which, however fragile, remains a unique achievement in twentieth-century Ulster. With his constant emphasis on British standards and with the wide coverage given to all parties he contributed to the civil rights strategy of seeking justice within the system, which was so to unnerve unionism. It was therefore ironic, given his firm belief in the union, that the lasting consequence of his crusade was the permanent division of unionism in Ulster and the subsequent abolition of Stormont with all that that implied for unionism as a philosophy of government. On the other hand, it said much for his integrity that he did not shrink from embracing such conclusions in public. For he recognized that questions over the purpose of unionism and its relationship to the Catholic minority lay at the very heart of the Unionist dilemma. 


@@@@@


doc= 56792


Scott, Edward Taylor (1883-1932), journalist, was born on 15 November 1883 at The Firs, Whitworth Lane, Rusholme, Manchester, the third and last son of Charles Prestwich Scott (1846-1932), editor and owner of the 'Manchester Guardian', and his wife, Rachel Susan Cook ['see 'Scott, Rachel Susan (1848-1905)]; the name Taylor acknowledged the Scotts' cousins, co-founders of the paper. He was educated at Rugby School and then at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, but left without a degree to study economics at the then new London School of Economics; in London he boarded with the family of the anti-imperialist writer John Atkinson Hobson. Again he left (in 1906) without a degree to become private secretary to Sydney Olivier, the Fabian socialist and newly appointed governor of Jamaica, but almost at once (1907) achieved a London BSc (Econ) degree as an external student. Before going to Jamaica he married on 5 September 1907 Mabel Josephine Hobson (1886-1969), J. A. Hobson's daughter; they had four children. 
After two years (1907-9) in Jamaica, where he and his wife were intimate friends with the Olivier family, Scott became a financial journalist in the City office of the London 'Daily News'; in 1913 he moved to Manchester as commercial editor of his father's newspaper. Early in 1915 he joined the Royal Field Artillery; taken prisoner in the German offensive of March 1918 and held at St Quentin, he was long posted missing, but was home by Christmas. His experiences in the First World War affected him deeply: during the 1919-21 period of labour unrest, when he was in charge of economic and social topics, his leaders 'always show a sympathy with men who might well have been gunners in his battery a year before. His views about cabinet ministers, company directors and trade union bosses often resemble a front line soldier's opinion of the staff' (Ayerst, 432). 
Because foreign affairs in the 1920s so often turned on economics and finance -- as over German inflation and reparations -- Scott's expertise made him in effect the paper's chief foreign as well as home leader writer. He was now also its part proprietor: in 1914 his father had divided the bulk of his shares among his two surviving sons and his son-in-law, C. E. Montague. The elder brother, John Scott, kept to the management side; in 1925 Montague deliberately left the editorial staff to make room for Ted Scott, as he was known. In 1929 C. P. Scott formally retired and Ted became editor. The octogenarian father, however, as 'governing director' still came to the office every day and exerted an influence the son could not withstand. Scott achieved full autonomy only on his father's death on 1 January 1932, and then could exert it only for a few months. His colleague and devoted friend Malcolm Muggeridge later made the harassing father-son relationship the theme of a novel, 'Picture Palace' (1934); the 'Manchester Guardian', however, got the publisher to withdraw it. 
In the 1920s Scott broadened the paper's economic and financial coverage, launching the 'Manchester Guardian Commercial' (later discontinued) and 'Manchester Guardian Weekly'. The policy he followed was shaped both by his own radical, independent temperament and by the stress of the two great crises he lived through, the post-war boom and slump and the world depression that started in 1929. 'One can hardly doubt', he wrote in one leader, 'that [self-government in industry] will come, and resistance to it may be futile' ('Manchester Guardian', 23 June 1921); in another, that to keep productive workers unemployed was 'the economics of the madhouse' (ibid., 23 Nov 1921; Ayerst, 432). He guided the paper in opposition to the 1926 general strike but also to parts of the 'Emergency Powers Act'. In 1931 he led it gradually away from approval of the National Government (which, in his absence on holiday, his deputy W. P. Crozier had welcomed), criticizing its conduct of the election campaign and opposing the uniform cut in unemployment benefit; this led many business firms to cancel advertising -- a severe loss of revenue. By 16 November 1931 he was writing to J. L. Hammond: 'it seems to me broadly that politics are getting into an ugly shape and that we shall be driven more and more to take an anti-property line. And that is fatal to a twopenny paper. I myself feel that I am getting more and more of a socialistic way of thinking (or rather feeling) but the more I look at the Socialist party the less I like it. (Ayerst, 471)' In overseas matters he shared the paper's sympathy with Weimar Germany and its suspicion of colonialism. 
Where Scott might have led his 'twopenny paper' is unknowable: on 22 April 1932 he took his son Richard to Windermere for a boating weekend; while they were on the water, very cold at that season, a freak squall capsized the boat. Richard got on top. Scott tried to swim ashore, but the cold brought a seizure; he sank and drowned. His remains were cremated four days later at Manchester crematorium. 
Scott cared more for ideas and argument than for style. A dark, well-built, handsome man of great charm, he was 'so reserved and so modest that the toughness of his mind and the independence of his character escaped the negligent eye. He was of all men the most sincere and the least prejudiced' (Martin, 186). He had started to innovate and, in newspaper history, remains a great might-have-been. 


@@@@@


doc= 56797


Thomas Phillips (c.1689-1736), son of Matthew Phillips senior and his wife, Joan, was a notable master carpenter in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 56805


Walter, Arthur Fraser (1846-1910), newspaper proprietor, was born on 12 September 1846 at Waterloo House, near Wokingham, Berkshire, the second of the two sons of John Walter (1818-1894), grandson of the founder of 'The Times', and of his first wife, Emily Frances (died 1858), eldest daughter of Henry Court of Castlemans, Berkshire. It was Arthur Walter's misfortune to be head of the family at the moment when circumstances forced the sale of the paper. It was in a different sense a personal misfortune. His elder brother, John, groomed for a dynastic role as John Walter the fourth, was drowned on Christmas eve 1870, while rescuing one of his half-brothers and a cousin from the frozen lake at the family home, Bear Wood in Newland, Berkshire. Arthur thus found himself thrust into a position for which he was prepared neither by upbringing nor by temperament. 
At Eton College, Arthur Walter, though less sociable than his elder brother, was a painstaking scholar and an excellent games player. He completed his education at Christ Church, Oxford, where he took a first in classical moderations and a third in finals. The latter may have been due to the competing appeal of cricket, which he played for the university against Cambridge. He made no great mark in his college, except that he was active in a campaign against poor college food, which became known as 'the bread-and-butter row' and attracted (not surprisingly, the campaign's opponents remarked) the friendly support of 'The Times'. Shortly after graduating Walter started helping his father with the paper. He also entered Lincoln's Inn and was called to the bar in 1875, but he never practised. On 15 October 1872 he married Henrietta Maria ('b'. 1846/7), eldest daughter of the Revd Thomas Anchitel Anson, of Longford rectory, Derbyshire. They had two sons and two daughters. In 1885 his father, by now sixty-seven, made him joint manager of 'The Times', and in 1894, on his father's death, he became chief proprietor. He conducted the paper along its traditional gentlemanly and politically independent lines. He did not seek to impose his views on the editor, G. E. Buckle, with whom he got on well and who was in the chair throughout his proprietorship. The printing side was left entirely to his younger half-brother Godfrey. None of this took him away from Bear Wood for more than three or four days a week. 
This apparently stable regime was deceptive. The structure of 'The Times' had grown cumbersome. Two-thirds of the buildings and printing business now belonged to Arthur Walter, and one-third to Godfrey. The printing business had a longstanding contract with the paper (which had been founded to provide it with work). 'The Times' itself was owned as a co-partnership, in which the shares, divided into sixteenths, were often subdivided. Arthur Walter owned two sixteenths. There were about 100 other partners. These arrangements sufficed, so long as the paper made a profit. If it did not, the partners would be bound to object, since their liabilities at law were unlimited. This was precisely the problem developing at about the time of Arthur Walter's succession. His single most important action in response, and arguably the most important decision of his career, was the appointment in 1890 of C. F. Moberly Bell as his assistant manager. The choice was all the more remarkable because Bell had spent most of his working life in business in Egypt, where latterly he was the 'Times' correspondent, and Walter did not know him well. The appointment had profound consequences. Bell's formidable personality and absorption in the job enabled him to dominate his nominal superior and, eventually, to defeat the Walters' own plans for 'The Times' and to sell it to Alfred Harmsworth. Bell found a paper with steadily declining circulation and advertising, archaic design, and outdated printing services for which it was overcharged. He sought relief in such money-making initiatives as a reprint of the ninth edition of 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' and the Times Book Club. At length legal action by some of the partners led to a dissolution of the partnership, and in July 1907 'The Times' went up for sale. Arthur Walter, on Godfrey's initiative, sought a limited liability company in which the main injection of capital would come from the newspaper entrepreneur C. Arthur Pearson. Neither Bell nor Buckle was privy to this scheme. When it was disclosed precipitately after a mischievous paragraph in Harmsworth's 'Observer', Bell immediately determined to defeat it. Pearson, who founded the 'Daily Express', was known as a 'hustler'. Harmsworth too ran papers that were the antithesis of 'The Times' in looks and content. But his record was stronger and he was prepared to give Bell assurances about maintaining the paper's character and independence. Arthur Walter abandoned Pearson and threw in his lot with Bell. During the negotiations Harmsworth's identity remained secret -- even from Walter and his son John Walter (1873-1968), who joined the business in 1898. Walter's influence helped to bring round the partners and nullify alternative schemes. In March 1908 the court approved the sale, chiefly to Harmsworth nominees, of whom Bell was the principal. Arthur Walter was the second largest single shareholder and became chairman of the new Times Publishing Company Limited. Had he worked with Bell from the beginning, the problems of the old structure might well have been resolved without the Walter proprietorship coming to an end. 
Quite apart from the traditions of 'The Times', which meant that the proprietor, though instantly deferred to, was never obtrusive, Arthur Walter was by nature reserved and aloof, and he lacked imagination. A portrait by H. Riviere shows him in middle age, balding and with flowing moustaches typical of his generation. His education completely failed to equip him for business in a rapidly changing newspaper world. The Bear Wood estate, amounting to 7000 acres, always engaged his interest -- for instance in landscape gardening. Locally he was known as a country gentleman whom private affairs frequently called to London. He served as a county councillor, a railway company director, and a Territorial Army colonel. Arthur Walter died at Bear Wood on 22 February 1910 after an attack of influenza. 


@@@@@


doc= 56808


Wilson, Sir Frederick William (1844-1924), journalist and politician, was born on 20 March 1844 at the Manor House, Scarning, Norfolk, the second of the three sons of William Wilson (1810-1885), Liberal tenant farmer and newspaper founder-director, and his wife, Eliza (1809-1893). He was educated at East Dereham and Wymondham, and served his indenture as journalist on the 'Norfolk News' -- his father's newspaper -- under J. H. Tillet MP, about 1863, when he became acquainted with J. E. Taylor. Desiring experience on a daily newspaper, he became a reporter on the 'Liverpool Daily Post' under M. J. Whitty, describing battles of the American Civil War and winning the esteem of Edward Russell. As editor of the 'Chester & Birkenhead Observer' he reported Fenian activities, and, having joined the volunteer force, was called to defend Chester Castle against a projected Fenian attack. In 1870 he married Mary Elizabeth (1847-1925), daughter of Edward Capps; they had no children. 
In 1874, for J. J. Colman and T. R. Elkington, at Ipswich, Wilson became founding editor of the 'East Anglian Daily Times', with which he was associated for the rest of his life. Here he played a key role in the popular scientific movement, publishing J. E. Taylor's lectures and giving public demonstrations of stereotype, linotype, and autotype processes before introducing them as plant. Early under his editorship James Sykes and Spencer Leigh Hughes spent formative years, as did R. C. Annand, later inventor of the Simplex rotary machines. Freddie Wilson, as he was known, encouraged initiative, enterprise, and sporting instincts at every level of his staff, holding frequent events days at his Felixstowe home. An exceptionally keen all-round sportsman, taking part in golf, lawn tennis, rowing, and cricket, he was closely connected with many early sporting clubs in East Anglia. He encouraged rifle shooting and the creation of ranges, and followed hounds enthusiastically. He stood unsuccessfully as Liberal candidate for Mid Norfolk in 1893, but was elected in 1895 and returned again in 1900, often taking an independent, even radical, stand over matters that interested him, especially in relation to agriculture and rural economy. As a founder of the Norfolk Smallholdings Association he also conducted practical experiments in the sale and lease of land for smallholdings. 
Wilson was president of the Newspaper Society of the United Kingdom in 1895, and his contacts with leading Liberals drew him into various projects for cheap newspapers, including 'The Star' and the 'Morning Leader'. Elected president of the Institute of Journalists in 1907, he led a large party of journalists on an excursion to Germany, where his interview with the Kaiser appeared to cement Anglo-German relations. He was knighted later in the same year. He became deputy lieutenant of the Norfolk Territorial Association and chairman of the recruiting committee for that organization in Suffolk. For Suffolk he was commissioner of Boy Scouts until 1914 and organizer of the corps of Guides in 1913. A justice of the peace for Suffolk, he was a member of the appeal tribunal for east Suffolk during the First World War. After 1920 he lived in retirement at The Dale, Scarning, Norfolk, where he died on 26 May 1924; he was buried in the churchyard of St Peter and St Paul in Scarning. 


@@@@@


doc= 56814


Bartlett, Ellis Ashmead- (1881-1931), war correspondent, was born at 57 Grosvenor Street, London, on 11 February 1881, the eldest son of Sir Ellis Ashmead Bartlett (1849-1902), a Conservative MP, and his wife, Frances Christina, 'nee' Walsh (1851/2-1929). The family mixed in and scandalized high society. His uncle William Ashmead Bartlett ['see 'William Lehmann Ashmead Bartlett Burdett-Coutts] caused a sensation when he married his benefactor, the wealthy Baroness Burdett-Coutts, some thirty years his senior; Ellis senior had a highly publicized affair with Blanche Hozier, mother of Clementine Churchill, in 1889. 
Ashmead-Bartlett (who generally hyphenated his name) was educated at home before he was sent to Marlborough College, where he quickly tired of the routine of school life. In 1897 he managed to escape it for a term when his father accepted an invitation from the sultan of Turkey to observe the Graeco-Turkish War and decided to bring the young Ellis with him. While following the war's progress, the sixteen-year-old was injured, lost, and taken prisoner. Remarkably, these experiences managed to fire an enthusiasm for military life. On leaving school, he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in a militia battalion of the Bedford regiment in 1898, promoted to the rank of lieutenant in 1899, and in 1900 served in the South African War, of which his father and uncle were observers. However, he was invalided home as a result of complications to a head wound he had suffered as part of his earlier experience in Greece. He resigned his commission, with the rank of captain, in 1904. 
Forced out of the action, Ashmead-Bartlett confronted a problem that would plague him throughout his life: how to maintain his extravagant lifestyle on a limited budget. Socially well-connected, but impecunious, he became increasingly reliant on his wealthy uncle, living with him after his father died insolvent in 1902. To make a living, Bartlett dabbled with diplomatic options, tried journalism, and even studied law. He acquired a lifelong gambling habit, and in the years to come was involved in a series of bizarre moneymaking schemes, including attempts at gunrunning in Morocco in 1907 and working as an agent provocateur in post-First World War Austria. For the flamboyant and adventurous Bartlett, a career as Conservative MP -- he stood unsuccessfully as candidate for the constituencies of Normanton, Yorkshire, and Poplar, London, in the general elections of 1910 -- could only seem pale by comparison. 
When, in 1904, war broke out between Russia and Japan, Ashmead-Bartlett tried his hand as a war correspondent. He borrowed $300 and went to the front where 'The Standard' hired him as a stringer. In 1907 he was correspondent with the French army in Morocco; in 1911 Reuters hired him to cover the Italian invasion of north Africa, where his uncensored account of Italian troops massacring local villagers was published worldwide. His reputation was growing, although his real break came in 1912, when Harry Lawson (Lord Burnham) hired him to cover the first and second Balkan wars for the 'Daily Telegraph'. Ashmead-Bartlett repaid him with more scoops, including the first report of the Turkish defeat at the battle of Lule Burgas. 
The outbreak of the First World War offered strangely few opportunities for war correspondents. At the outset Ashmead-Bartlett tried to report on the early stages of the war in central Europe with little success. The 'Daily Telegraph' hired him as a roving correspondent in France, but army restrictions made it impossible to undertake the kind of reporting he had done in other conflicts. By January 1915 he was back in London, where mounting debts he incurred keeping up his champagne lifestyle on a correspondent's salary had pushed him into bankruptcy. 
The opening of a new campaign in the Dardanelles offered a lifeline. On Lawson's recommendation, Ashmead-Bartlett became one of three official press correspondents allowed to accompany the forces. By 5 April 1915 Bartlett was at Mudros Bay, the staging point for the Dardanelles invasion, where he wrote breathlessly of the 'greatest Armada of warships and transports ever assembled together in history' (Brenchley and Brenchley, 56). But he soon began to harbour doubts about the campaign. 
At a meeting with Sir Ian Hamilton, commander of the allied Mediterranean Expeditionary Force, Ashmead-Bartlett asked if the reporters might accompany the troops on their landing. Hamilton, at this point a great believer in press freedom, agreed. Then Ashmead-Bartlett had another stroke of luck. Hamilton's plan required two attacks: the main landing by the British at Cape Helles, and a lesser flanking attack by the Australian and New Zealand forces, at Gaba Tepe. A lucky toss of the coin decided the inveterate gambler's future. Reuters correspondent Lester Lawrence won the British, while Ashmead-Bartlett would cover the 'colonials' from Australasia. 
Ashmead-Bartlett's account of the landings on the morning of 25 April 1915 became his most famous piece of writing. His vivid description of the courage, spirit, and fighting qualities of the soldiers became the foundation of the 'Anzac legend', a key part of popular nationalism in Australia and New Zealand. That his account was the first to be published (in both Britain and Australia on 7 May 1915, and a day later in New Zealand) was one factor in forging its mythic status: Ashmead-Bartlett himself was another. For the still-fervently imperial Australasian public, it was important that their boys had been judged and not found wanting by a famous British war correspondent. As one soldier later wrote, 'It is fairly certain that future historians will teach that Australia was discovered not by Captain Cook, explorer, but by Mr Ashmead Bartlett, war correspondent' (Fewster, 20). 
As the campaign quickly turned into a bloody stalemate, Ashmead-Bartlett began to criticize the army's leadership. Restive under Hamilton's increasing censorship, and having survived the torpedo attack on the 'Majestic' off Gallipoli at the end of May, he made his way to London in June 1915 on the pretext of requiring new kit. His social standing, and his reputation, meant he met with war leaders including Lord Kitchener. He was asked to provide a memorandum on the Dardanelles situation for Asquith, the prime minister. On 14 June 1915 he returned to the Dardanelles, taking with him a motion picture camera with which he filmed scenes from Anzac cove, the only moving pictures of the campaign. 
After a disastrous offensive in August 1915, Ashmead-Bartlett tried to sound the alarm again. To avoid the censors, he persuaded another visiting press correspondent, Keith Murdoch, to smuggle a letter to Asquith on his way to London. Hamilton was tipped off: military police confiscated the letter from Murdoch on 19 September in Marseilles, and on the pretext that he had broken censorship laws, Ashmead-Bartlett was forced to leave Gallipoli on 2 October 1915. Yet in the end, Hamilton could not stop the news getting through. On 23 September Murdoch dictated a version of the letter, which reached Asquith and within a few days was circulated to the Dardanelles committee. Meanwhile, Ashmead-Bartlett returned to London in October to publicize his views, notably in a lecture at the end of the month, critical of mistakes made in the campaign ('The Times', 28 Oct 1915). 
Although Ashmead-Bartlett and Murdoch's letter caused a storm, its wider effects should not be exaggerated. The government already held concerns about the campaign. A few days before Murdoch arrived, one of Hamilton's own staff, Major Guy Dawnay, had arrived in England with the same story to tell. As a fellow correspondent, Compton Mackenzie, noted, Ashmead-Bartlett's views were just 'one extra sack of coal unloaded on a Newcastle of ill will' (Hiley, 259). In January 1916 his film of the Dardanelles was screened for the first time in London, and was later distributed as a popular movie, 'With the Dardanelles Expedition', which was played as part of his lecture tour of Australia and New Zealand in that year. Both helped cement his role in the creation of the Anzac legend. 
Ashmead-Bartlett continued to work as a correspondent, covering the French army for a short period in 1916. But his relations with the War Office meant he would never again report on British forces, and although he gave evidence in May 1917 to the commission on the Dardanelles campaign, he spent some time away from the war, pursuing business opportunities in America. Immediately after the war though, he regained his enthusiasm, covering the collapse of the Austrian empire from Vienna, again for the 'Daily Telegraph'. There he became involved in a counter-revolution against communist forces in Hungary, eventually representing the short-lived Karoly government of Hungary at the Paris peace conference. In Paris he met Marie Alejandrina (Nina) Elizade, from a wealthy Argentinian family. After forty-eight hours they were engaged, although their wedding was delayed by Ashmead-Bartlett's campaigning work. They married in Paris in 1919 and had two sons and a daughter. 
Ashmead-Bartlett returned to Britain where, after an unsuccessful attempt in 1923, he was elected Conservative MP for Hammersmith North at the general election of 1924, defeating the sitting Labour member on an anti-socialist platform. After another bankruptcy, precipitated by a court case over a political pamphlet which he issued while campaigning, he resigned his seat in May 1926. To stave off further financial disaster, he returned to reporting, and published 'The Uncensored Dardanelles' (1928). While in Lisbon to cover the visit of the prince of Wales, he became unwell, and died there of 'congestion of the lungs' on 4 May 1931. 


@@@@@


doc= 56823


Still, Dame Alicia Frances Jane Lloyd- (1869-1944), nurse, was born on 4 November 1869 in Colombo, Ceylon, the eldest child of Henry Lloyd Still ('fl'. 1869-1893) of the Ceylon civil service and his wife, Isabel Clements ('fl'. 1869-1893); two sons and another daughter were born after their return to England. Alicia grew up in Walton, near Clevedon in Somerset, and was educated at home, mainly by her father. Later in life she regretted her want of formal education, complaining that she was 'never really educated', but though she lacked literary and linguistic skills she had read widely. 
In 1893 Lloyd-Still persuaded her parents to let her go to the Warminster Cottage Hospital in Wiltshire for a year's nursing experience; she was then eligible to apply for training in a London teaching hospital at the age of twenty-five. At Warminster she showed considerable aptitude, and the matron thought highly of her potential capabilities. In 1894 she was accepted as a paying probationer at St Thomas's Hospital under the matronship of Louise Gordon, who had been appointed in 1889. After she completed her training and received her certificate, Lloyd-Still was appointed sister of Charity ward; she was the last Nightingale nurse to be sent to South Street to receive her commission 'from the hands of the Foundress herself', as she described it. In later years she made much of this encounter, seeing herself in the direct line of succession, which impressed would-be candidates and their parents. 
Although weak on theory and written work, Lloyd-Still showed considerable aptitude for administration and teaching, and she was remembered by her nurses for her attention to detail and for her 'single-minded purpose of benefiting her patients'. Some twenty years earlier St Thomas's had opened St Thomas's Home for paying patients, and in 1903 Lloyd-Still was made sister-in-charge of the home. This brought her into contact with a wide range of physicians and surgeons who were impressed by her organizing ability and championed her promotion. In 1904 Lloyd-Still became the matron of the Brompton Hospital, which was employing a new regime for the treatment of tuberculosis. This involved fresh air, rest, and special diets, which required of the nurses different training, which Lloyd-Still organized, giving the lectures herself and helping to establish a sanatorium at Frimley. 
After five happy years at Brompton, Lloyd-Still left for the greater prize of lady superintendent of the Middlesex Hospital, which already had a well-established system for training nurses, with particular emphasis on the ward sisters as instructors of the probationers. With her conviction that nurses needed a better foundation in theory Lloyd-Still persuaded the governors to appoint a specially designated sister tutor, who would have no ward duties but devote herself entirely to the teaching of nurses, and it was agreed to appoint Marion Gullan from University College Hospital, with which the Middlesex had close ties. 
Lucy Seymer, in her memoir of Dame Alicia, which was virtually a eulogy published privately a few years after Lloyd-Still's death, states that she 'made remarkable improvements in the nursing at the Middlesex'. However, researching the nursing records for the first years of the century one cannot but be struck by the clarity and apparent perspicacity of the comments on probationers made by her predecessor, and the rather perfunctory and almost indecipherable notes left by Lloyd-Still; she may have had a 'forceful personality' but it does not come over on paper. She was 5 feet 10 inches tall, slender, and always erect, even in old age; nurses described her as 'gliding down the ward'. Her most conspicuous feature, one often remarked upon, was her mass of unruly red-gold hair turning to grey as she grew older, which she confessed she never mastered -- it mastered her. Since she placed much emphasis on the importance of neatness in the Nightingale young ladies and particularly in a demure coiffure, her own unmanageable hair was the subject of ironic comment. Later probationers likened her to Queen Mary, with whom she was on friendly terms and who was an occasional visitor, with Lambeth Palace and the archbishop conveniently next door. 
In 1913, after an absence of nine years, Lloyd-Still returned to St Thomas's as its matron. By now the Nightingale School was no longer unique: almost all teaching hospitals had a school of nursing and in some ways the Nightingale School was behind the times. The so-called Nightingale tradition was a two-edged sword. Florence Nightingale herself had been ambivalent about the amount of medical and theoretical knowledge nurses needed, not because she thought them incapable of acquiring such knowledge, but because she did not see nurses as doctors' assistants, but rather as promoters of 'Sanitary Science' and preventive medicine -- a skill in which she thought, with some justification, that doctors were deficient. With missionary zeal she saw sanitary science as the key to the abolition of ill health, with hospitals as an intermediary stage of civilization. As far as the 'handicraft of Nursing' was concerned, this, she maintained, could only be taught on the wards. For this reason she had opposed the idea of a preliminary training school where probationers were given a course of theoretical lectures before going on the wards, saying that it was like trying to teach Greek before English. However, in the intervening years the new-style nurses, for better or for worse, were indeed becoming doctors' assistants, and nursing schools were adopting the system of giving preliminary instruction to nurses before they set foot in the wards. This arrangement had an attraction for administrators: it weeded out the unsuitable and reduced the high drop-out rate and it was a privilege for which the candidate herself paid. St Thomas's had to wait until after Nightingale's death in 1910 before such a system was introduced. At the same time, in the competition for candidates, other teaching hospitals were offering better living conditions and amenities, while the Nightingale School rested on its laurels. 
In spite of her veneration of the Nightingale tradition Lloyd-Still set in train a number of changes that would have been anathema to 'the foundress'. First, she appointed a sister to be in charge of the preliminary school and extended the course, then she brought Gullan from the Middlesex to be a sister tutor with no ward responsibilities. Given the problems involved in teaching in the apprenticeship system, this was probably Lloyd-Still's most important contribution. In 1916 she inaugurated the award of medals to the most successful candidates, and in 1925 she introduced the Nightingale badge, to be worn by nurses who had received their certificate. The Nightingale School was becoming like a public school in more ways than one. Florence Nightingale had been against medals and badges; apart from the fact that they were pretentious, when worn on uniform she considered them unhygienic. 
On the other hand, Lloyd-Still did little to mitigate Florence Nightingale's main complaint that probationers were doing half the hospital's work. Comparing the tasks performed by the probationers in the 1880s and in the 1920s, they were latterly spending more time on what Nightingale described as menial tasks. In the fifty or so years since the founding of the school nursing had been caught in the web of its own success. In the absence of many opportunities for women elsewhere, nursing had become fashionable. To debt-ridden hospitals there was an unending stream of suitable candidates who were biddable and cheap, and if young and attractive they added prestige; hospitals now had a vested interest in large numbers of probationers doing the longest possible course. At the same time nurse leaders saw a long and arduous training as a way of raising the status of the profession. 
Lloyd-Still's plans were soon interrupted by the outbreak of war, when St Thomas's Hospital became the 5th London General, with huts erected between the blocks to accommodate 400 officers and men; she herself became a territorial matron. Finding nursing staff was a formidable administrative task, former nurses were recalled and volunteers recruited, and there was an influx of young women of whom many would not have thought of nursing as a career before the war. However, the new candidates in the post-war world of women's emancipation had a different attitude to the strict discipline and rules. Addressing a conference in Manchester in 1919, reported in the 'Nursing Times', Lloyd-Still noted regretfully 'The sense of service is already weakened. It goes hand in hand with personal responsibility and that, alas! is seldom brought home to the modern girl. She is naturally pleasure-loving and heedless and therefore difficult material to train.' 
The withdrawal of government subsidy after the war, and rising costs and demands put the survival of the voluntary hospitals in doubt. The prospect of state control hung like the sword of Damocles throughout the inter-war years and encouraged the rationalization of low pay and long hours of work. Lloyd-Still declared that the matrons had striven for better pay for trained staff, but hospital funds had other claims: as for the probationers, they should be grateful for the valuable training they received, which formed good habits of mind and body. Apparently untroubled by the high sickness and wastage rate in the mid-1930s, Dame Alicia -- the title of DBE was conferred on her in 1934 -- continued to impress on probationers that the 'discipline of St Thomas's was the discipline of the Guards', and that Nightingale gentlewomen were known throughout the British empire. When off duty their dress must be subdued and they must never be without hat and gloves; only shop girls wore coloured jackets. When Dame Alicia retired in 1937 at the age of sixty-eight she appeared to probationers, who were still exhorted to 'polish their brasses to the glory of God', as one for whom time had stood still. A probationer who trained in the 1920s wrote: 'She was a good matron, she inspired awe. She had no sense of humour but she was just, she looked the part -- large and imperial. No one who worked under her would ever forget her.' 
By virtue of her position as head of the Nightingale School, Lloyd-Still was consulted on the wider issues concerning nursing. In spite of her lack of oratorial skill her contribution was considerable, though sometimes at odds with her policy for her own hospital. During the war she had come into contact with Arthur Stanley and Dame Sarah Swift, who had the task of sorting out the disputes between the various nursing factions arguing about state registration for nurses. Stanley conceived the idea of a college of nursing analogous with the medical royal colleges, which would act as a forum and whose members would be elected by nurses themselves. The College of Nursing was founded in 1916 and the first meeting was held at St Thomas's by invitation of Lloyd-Still, who became a founder member and then a member of council (1920-38); she was a vice-president from 1938 until her death. 
The acrimonious dispute about state registration was resolved by the new minister of health in 1919, when a separate statutory body -- the General Nursing Council -- was set up. Lloyd-Still was elected to the first council and became chairman of the education and examination committee. She was a prime mover in negotiations for diploma courses for nurses under the aegis of the University of London. Always interested in military nursing, Lloyd-Still was invited to serve on the board of Queen Alexandra's Imperial Military Nursing Service, which she did until 1935; she was retained in an advisory capacity after her retirement. 
In 1919 Lloyd-Still went to Cannes as the nursing delegate at a medical conference, the purpose of which was to help countries devastated by war to solve their health-care problems. The outcome was the foundation of the League of Red Cross Societies, which led to the establishment of post-registration courses for nurses. Some of these were held at London University, and Lloyd-Still gave practical assistance to the project. In 1925 she spent some time in America and attended the International Council of Nurses Congress in Montreal, which discussed the foundation of a Florence Nightingale memorial. A committee was set up with Lloyd-Still as one of its guiding spirits. In 1933 delegates from twelve countries met in London to inaugurate the Florence Nightingale Memorial Foundation, with Lloyd-Still as president. For the rest of her life she took an interest in the international students and watched the growth of the Old Internationals Association. The same year, in Paris, she was elected president of the International Council of Nurses Congress, an honour that she held for the next quadrennial period, which ended as she retired. 
The abiding impression of Lloyd-Still is of a woman of striking appearance and strong personality imbued with a firm religious conviction, to whom the care of the sick was 'a sacred trust'. A child of the late Victorian era, she grew up inculcated with its social values and mores, which served her well when nursing was still striving to be a profession and a worthy occupation for respectable women. After the First World War, as women became more emancipated and society more egalitarian, those values began to look anachronistic, and by the 1930s the emphasis on the right background and breeding, rather than competence, began to look like social snobbery. In 'A Bride for St Thomas', Christine Nolan, describing her years as a lady probationer immediately prior to the Second World War, recalled how, at her interview, Dame Alicia swept into a convenient waste-paper basket the documents she had brought testifying to her nursing experience in America, saying 'Well child, you don't of course expect me to take this American nonsense seriously do you?' Dame Alicia then gave Nolan her advice to candidates without the right background: 'run along dear, and join one of the County Council Hospitals, they will be pleased to have you'. 
Dame Alicia was a woman of paradoxes. A non-intellectual, she became an international campaigner for better education and university courses for nurses. At the same time she was telling applicants that she had no time for certificates of matriculation; she was looking for gentlewomen who were known throughout the British empire for what they were. However, while she was apparently unmoved by the miseries of probationers in tears because of their inability to achieve perfection in the alignment of bed castors, she could be unexpectedly kind to nurses in trouble. She was a council member of the College of Nursing in the late 1930s when it was campaigning for better salaries and a shorter working week for nurses, but when the Nightingale nurses were found to be involved in an association with similar modest aims they were told that such organizations 'were financed by Moscow gold to destroy the British voluntary system'. She was awarded the Royal Red Cross in 1917 and made a commander of the British empire the same year. Her other honours included being made lady of grace of the order of St John of Jerusalem (1922), the Florence Nightingale medal (1933), and the medaille d'honneur de assistance publique (1933). 
Dame Alicia's final years were clouded by the war. She retired to property in Curry Rivel at Sedgemoor in Somerset, and was cut off from friends because of the difficulties in travelling. Then terminal illness forced her to seek refuge with her younger sister in Buckfast, Devon, where she was nursed by two Nightingale nurses. She died at Buckfast on 23 July 1944, and after a funeral service in the chapel at St Thomas's Hospital, she was buried on 26 July in Brookwood cemetery, Woking, Surrey, in ground that she had acquired for Nightingale nurses. A memorial service was held at St Margaret's, Westminster, London, on 28 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 56826


O Dalaigh family (per. c.1100-c.1620), poets, apparently originated as local chieftains of Corcu Roide (roughly the barony of Corkaree, Westmeath). Five eminent 'ollamhain' ('master poets') of the surname are recorded during the twelfth century, the first of whom, Cu Chonnacht Ua Dalaig, described in the annals of Tigernach as 'the best poet in Ireland' died in 1139 as an old man in religious retirement at the ecclesiastical settlement of Clonard. Mael Isa Ua Dalaig (died 1185), whom the annals of Loch Ce call the 'master-poet of Ireland and Scotland, and high chieftain of Corcu Roide', also died in old age at Clonard. Two others, Ragnall (died 1161), and Gilla na Trinoiti (died 1165), are described as master poets for the kingdom of Desmond, or south Munster, indicating that they were court poets to the Mac Carthaig kings there. The family acquired in the course of this century an extraordinarily high reputation, being among the earliest practitioners of the newly regulated art of 'dan direach' ('strict composition'), though no extant texts attributed to its members predate the early thirteenth century. 
A number of fresh and elegant compositions ascribed to Muireadhach O Dalaigh (fl. 1213) of Lissadill, Sligo, date from this period. The two best-known (Bergin, nos. 20, 22) are: first, his address to the young Richard de Burgh (died 1243), 'Cred agaibh aoidhigh a gcein?' ('Whence comes it that ye have guests from afar?') in which he styles himself O Dalaigh Midhe, and petitions the Anglo-Norman lord for refuge from the anger of Domhnall O Domhnaill, king of Tir Conaill ('r'. 1208-41), whose servant he has killed in a quarrel; and, second, his lament for his dead wife, Maol Mheadha -- 'M'anam do sgar riomsa araoir' ('My soul parted from me last night'), mourning her as his first love, who during twenty years of marriage had borne him eleven children. The account of his life in the annals is a semi-legendary composition of a later century. It relates that he went to Scotland after his exile by O Domhnaill, and he has been claimed as the ancestor of the distinguished Scottish poetic family of MacMhuireadhaigh. Fifteenth-century Irish genealogies (Royal Irish Academy, MS 1233, fol. 36'r'- 'v') assert that Muireadhach of Lissadill was brother to the celebrated Donnchadh Mor O Dalaigh (d. 1244), 'a master of poetry who never has been excelled and never will be', according to the annals of Connacht, where it is also stated that he was buried in the Cistercian monastery of Boyle; another version of his obit says that he kept a guest house, or hostel for travellers, a charity commonly offered by Irish scholars at the top of their profession. Such was his reputation as a religious poet that many folk hymns and ballads of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries have been fathered on him, but a group of poems preserved in the fourteenth-century 'Book of Ui Mhaine' (McKenna, 'Dan De') are probably genuine compositions of Donnchadh Mor. They are long and austere, and do not translate well, but the Irish text corruscates with redundance of rhyme, since like all true bardic poetry it was intended for public recitation. In 'Gabham deachmhaidh ar ndana' Donnchadh Mor pledges to address a tithe of all his professional eulogies to God, and ends with a prayer that those learning or reciting his poem may receive heaven as their reward. Very few of his secular poems survive, the most striking being his lament for the death of his son Aonghus, 'Ar iasacht fhuaras Aonghus' ('I obtained Aonghus on loan'; MacCionaith, 'Dioghluim Dana', no. 69). Another possible example is a eulogy for the three sons of Mac Giollamhuire (a chief in north Down): 'Cuaine rioghna rug Eadaoin' ('Eadaoin bore a queen's litter [of whelps]'; Book of the Dean of Lismore, p. 75; NL Ire., MS 992, fol. 37), which ends with an envoi to Aodh, son of Aodh O Neill, who may be the king Aodh Meith O Neill (d. 1230). 
Some poems from late thirteenth- and early fourteenth-century Connacht are ascribed to Mac Cearbhaill Bhuidhe ('Son of Yellow-Haired Cearbhall'), perhaps for a time the title of the head of a particular line in the O Dalaigh family. Cearbhall Buidhe O Dalaigh himself died in 1245. His son Tadhg, court poet to Aodh son of Feidhlim O Conchobhair, king of Connacht, died in 1274, the same year as his patron. Another Mac Cearbhaill Bhuidhe, court poet to Aodh, son of Eoghan O Conchobhair, king of Connacht ('r'. 1296-1309), composed one, perhaps both, of two poems in honour of the king's palace (MacCionaith, no. 119; Quiggin, 333-52), the first variously ascribed to Cuchonnacht son of Cearbhall Buidhe, Aonghus son of Cearbhall Buidhe, or Aonghus son of Tadhg son of Cearbhall Buidhe, and the second attributed to Aonghus Ruadh O Dalaigh, or Aonghus son of Cearbhall Ruadh (Red-Haired Cearbhall) O Dalaigh. The other Mac Cearbhaill Bhuidhe poems are also of a high quality, but most remain unpublished. Genealogies indicate that the line of O Dalaigh Breifneach, who composed poems for the O Raighilligh chieftains in the late medieval and early modern period, descended from this section of the family. 
In the mid-fourteenth century the main line of O Dalaigh Midhe (O Dalaigh of Meath) divided, when its head, Aonghus Ruadh O Dalaigh (d. 1350), son of Donnchadh son of Aonghus son of Donnchadh Mor, quarrelled with a local chief in co. Westmeath, Ruaidhri O Maolmhuaidh (died 1383). In a poem to the latter, 'Ceangal do shioth riom a Ruaidhri' (McKenna, 'Irish bardic poems', 317-25), Aonghus Ruadh threatened that if the quarrel were not resolved, he would reside with the more prominent O Briain chieftains of Thomond, in modern co. Clare. The existence in 1415 of a line of O Dalaigh of Corcumroe, Clare, headed by Fearghal (died 1420), son of Tadhg son of Aonghus Ruadh, suggests that this threat was fulfilled. 
However, from the fourteenth century onwards the poetic gifts of the Meath, Breifne, and Corcumroe lines of the family were outshone by the Munster branches of O Dalaigh Fionn (O Dalaigh the Fair) and O Dalaigh Cairbreach (O Dalaigh of Carbery, barony, in west Cork). This trend began with the career of Gofraidh O Dalaigh Fionn (d. 1387), styled by the annals of Ulster 'Ollam Erenn re dan' ('chief master of Ireland in the art of poetry'). Educated by the Mac Craith poets of Thomond, he soon outdid his teachers, much to their disgust, as the poem 'Mairg chaitheas dlus re dalta' ('Woe to him who favours a pupil'; MacCionaith, no. 104) suggests. Gofraidh's earliest patron was Conchobhar O Briain (died 1328), but he also addressed chiefs of Tir Conaill and Ui Mhaine, besides Mac Carthaigh Mor, Mac Carthaigh Cairbreach, and their sub-chieftains, and was court poet to the first, second, and third earls of Desmond. His association with the third earl, Gerald the Rhymer 
(Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, died 1398)
, began during the latter's childhood and may have influenced the earl's subsequent development as an amateur poet in the Irish language. In some famous verses to the child Gerald and his father Maurice, the first earl, Gofraidh states: 'In the foreigners' poems we promise that the Irish shall be driven from Ireland, in the Irishmen's poems we promise that the foreigners shall be routed across the sea' (MacCionaith, no. 67). Religious poems and verse tracts on the composition of poetry are also attributed to him. 
By the sixteenth century a branch of the O Dalaigh family had settled at Pallis, Wexford. One member was Aonghus son of Doighre O Dalaigh ('fl'. 1598), poet to the Gabhal Raghnallach, or clan Ranelagh O'Byrnes. From this branch also came the semi-legendary lover of the seventeenth century, Cearbhall na mBan (Cearbhall of the Women). However most prominent at this time was the Munsterman Aonghus O Dalaigh Fionn (d. 1601x9), son of Amhlaoibh O Dalaigh Fionn and author of a lament for Domhnall Mac Carthaigh, earl of Clancare (died 1596): 'Soraidh led cheile a Chaisil' ('Farewell to thy Husband, O Cashel!'; 'Book of O'Conor Don', Royal Irish Academy, MS 2, fol. 363a), and one for the latter's son Tadhg, baron of Valencia (died 1587/8): 'A theachtaire thig o'n bhFrainnc' ('Messenger who comes from France'; Royal Irish Academy, MS 490, p. 151). After the earl's death O Dalaigh Fionn appears to have concentrated on religious compositions, becoming nicknamed Aonghus na Diadhachta (Aonghus of the Divinity). He ran a poetic school at his residence in Duhallow, under the patronage of the local chief, Domhnall O Caoimh, who died in the same year as his eminent protege. A contemporary, Aonghus Ruadh, or Aonghus na nAor (Aonghus of the Satires) O Dalaigh (died 1617) lived on the peninsula of Muntervary in West Carbery, and composed a libellous poem, 'The tribes of Ireland'. From the same period, Lochlainn ('fl'. 1596-1620) son of Tadhg Og O Dalaigh, probably of the O Dalaigh Breifneach branch, is a transitional figure, who composed genre poetry as well as eulogies for patrons, including a lament for the collapse of Gaelic society in the wake of the plantations, 'C'ait ar ghabhadar Gaoidhil?' ('Where have the Gaels gone?'), which mentions the new generation's indifference to his family's historic profession. 


@@@@@


doc= 56827


O Dalaigh family (per. c.1100-c.1620), poets, apparently originated as local chieftains of Corcu Roide (roughly the barony of Corkaree, Westmeath). Five eminent 'ollamhain' ('master poets') of the surname are recorded during the twelfth century, the first of whom, Cu Chonnacht Ua Dalaig, described in the annals of Tigernach as 'the best poet in Ireland' died in 1139 as an old man in religious retirement at the ecclesiastical settlement of Clonard. Mael Isa Ua Dalaig (died 1185), whom the annals of Loch Ce call the 'master-poet of Ireland and Scotland, and high chieftain of Corcu Roide', also died in old age at Clonard. Two others, Ragnall (died 1161), and Gilla na Trinoiti (died 1165), are described as master poets for the kingdom of Desmond, or south Munster, indicating that they were court poets to the Mac Carthaig kings there. The family acquired in the course of this century an extraordinarily high reputation, being among the earliest practitioners of the newly regulated art of 'dan direach' ('strict composition'), though no extant texts attributed to its members predate the early thirteenth century. 
A number of fresh and elegant compositions ascribed to Muireadhach O Dalaigh (fl. 1213) of Lissadill, Sligo, date from this period. The two best-known (Bergin, nos. 20, 22) are: first, his address to the young Richard de Burgh (died 1243), 'Cred agaibh aoidhigh a gcein?' ('Whence comes it that ye have guests from afar?') in which he styles himself O Dalaigh Midhe, and petitions the Anglo-Norman lord for refuge from the anger of Domhnall O Domhnaill, king of Tir Conaill ('r'. 1208-41), whose servant he has killed in a quarrel; and, second, his lament for his dead wife, Maol Mheadha -- 'M'anam do sgar riomsa araoir' ('My soul parted from me last night'), mourning her as his first love, who during twenty years of marriage had borne him eleven children. The account of his life in the annals is a semi-legendary composition of a later century. It relates that he went to Scotland after his exile by O Domhnaill, and he has been claimed as the ancestor of the distinguished Scottish poetic family of MacMhuireadhaigh. Fifteenth-century Irish genealogies (Royal Irish Academy, MS 1233, fol. 36'r'- 'v') assert that Muireadhach of Lissadill was brother to the celebrated Donnchadh Mor O Dalaigh (d. 1244), 'a master of poetry who never has been excelled and never will be', according to the annals of Connacht, where it is also stated that he was buried in the Cistercian monastery of Boyle; another version of his obit says that he kept a guest house, or hostel for travellers, a charity commonly offered by Irish scholars at the top of their profession. Such was his reputation as a religious poet that many folk hymns and ballads of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries have been fathered on him, but a group of poems preserved in the fourteenth-century 'Book of Ui Mhaine' (McKenna, 'Dan De') are probably genuine compositions of Donnchadh Mor. They are long and austere, and do not translate well, but the Irish text corruscates with redundance of rhyme, since like all true bardic poetry it was intended for public recitation. In 'Gabham deachmhaidh ar ndana' Donnchadh Mor pledges to address a tithe of all his professional eulogies to God, and ends with a prayer that those learning or reciting his poem may receive heaven as their reward. Very few of his secular poems survive, the most striking being his lament for the death of his son Aonghus, 'Ar iasacht fhuaras Aonghus' ('I obtained Aonghus on loan'; MacCionaith, 'Dioghluim Dana', no. 69). Another possible example is a eulogy for the three sons of Mac Giollamhuire (a chief in north Down): 'Cuaine rioghna rug Eadaoin' ('Eadaoin bore a queen's litter [of whelps]'; Book of the Dean of Lismore, p. 75; NL Ire., MS 992, fol. 37), which ends with an envoi to Aodh, son of Aodh O Neill, who may be the king Aodh Meith O Neill (d. 1230). 
Some poems from late thirteenth- and early fourteenth-century Connacht are ascribed to Mac Cearbhaill Bhuidhe ('Son of Yellow-Haired Cearbhall'), perhaps for a time the title of the head of a particular line in the O Dalaigh family. Cearbhall Buidhe O Dalaigh himself died in 1245. His son Tadhg, court poet to Aodh son of Feidhlim O Conchobhair, king of Connacht, died in 1274, the same year as his patron. Another Mac Cearbhaill Bhuidhe, court poet to Aodh, son of Eoghan O Conchobhair, king of Connacht ('r'. 1296-1309), composed one, perhaps both, of two poems in honour of the king's palace (MacCionaith, no. 119; Quiggin, 333-52), the first variously ascribed to Cuchonnacht son of Cearbhall Buidhe, Aonghus son of Cearbhall Buidhe, or Aonghus son of Tadhg son of Cearbhall Buidhe, and the second attributed to Aonghus Ruadh O Dalaigh, or Aonghus son of Cearbhall Ruadh (Red-Haired Cearbhall) O Dalaigh. The other Mac Cearbhaill Bhuidhe poems are also of a high quality, but most remain unpublished. Genealogies indicate that the line of O Dalaigh Breifneach, who composed poems for the O Raighilligh chieftains in the late medieval and early modern period, descended from this section of the family. 
In the mid-fourteenth century the main line of O Dalaigh Midhe (O Dalaigh of Meath) divided, when its head, Aonghus Ruadh O Dalaigh (d. 1350), son of Donnchadh son of Aonghus son of Donnchadh Mor, quarrelled with a local chief in co. Westmeath, Ruaidhri O Maolmhuaidh (died 1383). In a poem to the latter, 'Ceangal do shioth riom a Ruaidhri' (McKenna, 'Irish bardic poems', 317-25), Aonghus Ruadh threatened that if the quarrel were not resolved, he would reside with the more prominent O Briain chieftains of Thomond, in modern co. Clare. The existence in 1415 of a line of O Dalaigh of Corcumroe, Clare, headed by Fearghal (died 1420), son of Tadhg son of Aonghus Ruadh, suggests that this threat was fulfilled. 
However, from the fourteenth century onwards the poetic gifts of the Meath, Breifne, and Corcumroe lines of the family were outshone by the Munster branches of O Dalaigh Fionn (O Dalaigh the Fair) and O Dalaigh Cairbreach (O Dalaigh of Carbery, barony, in west Cork). This trend began with the career of Gofraidh O Dalaigh Fionn (d. 1387), styled by the annals of Ulster 'Ollam Erenn re dan' ('chief master of Ireland in the art of poetry'). Educated by the Mac Craith poets of Thomond, he soon outdid his teachers, much to their disgust, as the poem 'Mairg chaitheas dlus re dalta' ('Woe to him who favours a pupil'; MacCionaith, no. 104) suggests. Gofraidh's earliest patron was Conchobhar O Briain (died 1328), but he also addressed chiefs of Tir Conaill and Ui Mhaine, besides Mac Carthaigh Mor, Mac Carthaigh Cairbreach, and their sub-chieftains, and was court poet to the first, second, and third earls of Desmond. His association with the third earl, Gerald the Rhymer 
(Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, died 1398)
, began during the latter's childhood and may have influenced the earl's subsequent development as an amateur poet in the Irish language. In some famous verses to the child Gerald and his father Maurice, the first earl, Gofraidh states: 'In the foreigners' poems we promise that the Irish shall be driven from Ireland, in the Irishmen's poems we promise that the foreigners shall be routed across the sea' (MacCionaith, no. 67). Religious poems and verse tracts on the composition of poetry are also attributed to him. 
By the sixteenth century a branch of the O Dalaigh family had settled at Pallis, Wexford. One member was Aonghus son of Doighre O Dalaigh ('fl'. 1598), poet to the Gabhal Raghnallach, or clan Ranelagh O'Byrnes. From this branch also came the semi-legendary lover of the seventeenth century, Cearbhall na mBan (Cearbhall of the Women). However most prominent at this time was the Munsterman Aonghus O Dalaigh Fionn (d. 1601x9), son of Amhlaoibh O Dalaigh Fionn and author of a lament for Domhnall Mac Carthaigh, earl of Clancare (died 1596): 'Soraidh led cheile a Chaisil' ('Farewell to thy Husband, O Cashel!'; 'Book of O'Conor Don', Royal Irish Academy, MS 2, fol. 363a), and one for the latter's son Tadhg, baron of Valencia (died 1587/8): 'A theachtaire thig o'n bhFrainnc' ('Messenger who comes from France'; Royal Irish Academy, MS 490, p. 151). After the earl's death O Dalaigh Fionn appears to have concentrated on religious compositions, becoming nicknamed Aonghus na Diadhachta (Aonghus of the Divinity). He ran a poetic school at his residence in Duhallow, under the patronage of the local chief, Domhnall O Caoimh, who died in the same year as his eminent protege. A contemporary, Aonghus Ruadh, or Aonghus na nAor (Aonghus of the Satires) O Dalaigh (died 1617) lived on the peninsula of Muntervary in West Carbery, and composed a libellous poem, 'The tribes of Ireland'. From the same period, Lochlainn ('fl'. 1596-1620) son of Tadhg Og O Dalaigh, probably of the O Dalaigh Breifneach branch, is a transitional figure, who composed genre poetry as well as eulogies for patrons, including a lament for the collapse of Gaelic society in the wake of the plantations, 'C'ait ar ghabhadar Gaoidhil?' ('Where have the Gaels gone?'), which mentions the new generation's indifference to his family's historic profession. 


@@@@@


doc= 56828


Bevan, William Latham (1821-1908), Church of England clergyman, born on 1 May 1821 at Beaufort, Brecknockshire, was eldest of three sons of William Hibbs Bevan (1788-1846), then of Beaufort, but later of Glannant, Crickhowell, high sheriff for Brecknockshire in 1841, and Margaret, daughter of Joseph Latham, also of Beaufort, but originally from Broughton in Furness. With a stepbrother, Edward Kendall, his father ran the Beaufort ironworks, trading as Kendall and Bevan, until 1833. 
Educated at Rugby School under Thomas Arnold, Bevan matriculated from Balliol College, Oxford, on 14 December 1838; but he immediately moved to Magdalen Hall on being elected Lusby scholar there. He graduated BA in 1842, with a second class in the final classical school, and MA in 1845. In 1844 he was ordained deacon, and in 1845, after a short curacy at Stepney, he was ordained priest and presented to the living of Hay, Brecknockshire, by Sir Joseph Bailey, who was married to his aunt. This living, though a poor one without a parsonage, he held for fifty-six years. He lived in no little style at Hay Castle, leased from Sir Joseph Bailey, later Lord Glanusk, who had bought the property in 1844. Francis Kilvert, the diarist, was a frequent visitor there. His private means enabled him to contribute largely to the restoration of the church, in 1866, and the erection of a town clock and tower, besides building a parish hall at his own expense in 1890. He was also prebendary of Llanddewi Aber-arth in St David's Cathedral (1876-9); canon residentiary of St David's (1879-93); archdeacon of Brecon from 1895 until 1907; proctor for the diocese of St David's (1880-95); examining chaplain to the bishop (1881-97); and chaplain of Hay Union (1850-95). Bevan married on 19 June 1849, at Whitney church, Herefordshire, Louisa (1829-1909), fourth daughter of Tomkyns Dew of Whitney Court; they had three sons and four daughters. 
Bevan was known in his day for a number of pamphlets written in defence of the Church in Wales during the controversy over disestablishment. A contributor to William Smith's 'Dictionary of the Bible', he also wrote some manuals on ancient geography. A competent historian, he is now remembered for his brief history of the diocese of St David's in the SPCK series of diocesan histories (1888). 
In November 1901 Bevan retired from Hay to Ely Tower, Brecon. The house was so named because, built on ground which once was the bailey of Brecon Castle, there is in the garden the ruin of a tower where a bishop of Ely, John Morton, was imprisoned in the fifteenth century. Bevan died there on 24 August 1908, and was buried on 1 September at Hay, where his widow, who died on 23 October 1909, was also buried. He is commemorated in Hay church by carved oak choir stalls and a marble chancel pavement, given by his family in August 1910. The St David's diocesan conference in 1908 resolved on founding a diocesan memorial to him. The Archdeacon Bevan Trust, now administered in the diocese of Swansea and Brecon, is designed to encourage historical research. 

Edward Latham Bevan (1861-1934), Church in Wales clergyman, the youngest son, the Teddy Bevan of Kilvert's diary, was born at Weymouth, where the family had property, on 27 October 1861. Educated privately, he entered Hertford College, Oxford in 1881 and graduated BA in 1884. Ordained to a title to Holy Trinity, Weymouth, 1886-91, he then became chaplain of the Gordon Boys' Home, Worthing (1891-6); then vicar of Brecon from 1897. He succeeded his father as archdeacon of Brecon in 1907 and was appointed suffragan bishop of Swansea in 1915. He became the first bishop of the diocese of Swansea and Brecon, created in 1923. He was then the national chairman of the Church of England Men's Society. His benefactions to the new cathedral, formerly the priory church, were considerable and the family home, Ely Tower, became the residence of his successors. He died unmarried on 2 February 1934 at Ely Tower, Brecon, and was buried on 8 February in Brecon Cathedral grounds. 


@@@@@


doc= 56832


Boraston, Sir John (1851-1920), political organizer, was born at 163 Hockley Hill, Birmingham, on 24 June 1851, son of John Boraston, a tea merchant from a Worcestershire family, and his wife, Elizabeth Palmer. He trained as a solicitor and took an early interest in politics. Aged only twenty-three he acted as Liberal agent for Southampton in the general election of 1874, and subsequently he worked in the same capacity in Liskeard, though continuing to practise as a solicitor. He married on 13 May 1876 Louisa Jane, daughter of William Henry Lewis, an engineer, with whom he had a son and three daughters. 
A strong unionist on Irish issues, Boraston became assistant secretary of the new Liberal Unionist Party organization in 1887. Initially he ran the machine for London, but from 1891 he was Liberal Unionist chief agent for the whole country. His close collaboration with the Conservatives' Captain Middleton brought Unionist electoral machinery to a legendary pitch of effectiveness in the 1890s, when during actual campaigns Boraston took charge of the parties' efforts in Ireland. He collaborated actively with the party's parliamentary figures, but worked most closely with Joseph Chamberlain who, among the Liberal Unionist leaders, was the most fascinated by organizational matters. Boraston helped to ensure that the Liberal Unionist council backed Chamberlain's tariff crusade from 1903. Thereafter, party divisions hampered electoral effectiveness, but when the Unionist organization committee reviewed the situation in 1911, witnesses contrasted Boraston's efficiency for the Liberal Unionists with the slacker approach at Conservative central office. 
When the two parties finally merged in 1912, Boraston became principal agent for the combined party, and seems to have won the trust of the former Conservatives. For he was, wrote the 'Morning Post', 'a very tactful and genial man, and quickly gained the regard of those with whom his duties brought him into contact'. Thereafter, under the party chairman Arthur Steel-Maitland, he spruced up the party machine between 1912 and 1914. All this effort was rewarded with a clutch of by-election victories which steadily eroded the Liberals' parliamentary strength, and with progress in the annual registration courts that promised a more favourable register for a national contest. Boraston wrote in 1914 that fusion of the parties had been 'a sound investment and, although Unionist stock has appreciated greatly since the new issue, nobody has the slightest intention of selling out' (Ramsden, 93). 
This seemed to presage well for the election due in 1915, but because of war no election was held. It was characteristic of the 'business as usual' manner in which Edwardian Britain went to war that its party machines were turned over to the war effort. Boraston became honorary secretary to the parliamentary recruiting committee, which conducted propaganda for voluntary enlistment through his usual repertory of leaflets, posters, and public meetings, and took personal charge of organizing meetings. The success of the campaign was indicated in the large number of volunteers, enabling Britain to avoid conscription until 1916; his work was recognized by the award of a knighthood in that year. When conscription did come about he was redeployed to similar campaigns for war savings and national service. His only son, John Herbert Boraston, was Douglas Haig's secretary at general headquarters during the war. 
With Boraston so involved in war work, he had less time for central office, and his assistant was promoted to joint principal agent. On the return of peacetime politics, old party certainties had vanished and his health was poor, but he soldiered on, holding the post of principal agent until his death; he died of cancer of the colon on 18 April 1920 at the Greta Nursing Home, Blyth Road, Bromley, Kent. He was buried on 22 April at St Paul's, Beckenham. 'The Times' noted the passing of 'a great political organiser', and the 'Daily Telegraph' reported that 'the Unionist Party has suffered a heavy loss', for Boraston had been 'an admirable type of the British party official, dignified, reserved, discreet, and keen, but scrupulously fair in his methods'. 


@@@@@


doc= 56833


Channing, John (c.1703-1775), apothecary and Arabist, was born in London, the first child of John Channing (died 1725), a London apothecary, and his first wife, Elizabeth (died 1705), daughter of Robert Erle of Sturminster Marshall, Dorset. Channing was apprenticed to his father on 5 August 1718, and was made a freeman of the Society of Apothecaries on 6 September 1726. Shortly thereafter he is recorded as proprietor of an apothecary shop beyond Temple Bar. In 1745 he bought property on Essex Street, off the Strand, where he maintained a shop until his death. 
For thirty years Channing actively participated in the Society of Apothecaries, and he became master in 1771. During this time he edited two medieval Arabic medical texts, which were among the earliest Arabic treatises printed in England. 'Rhazes de variolis et morbilis', a treatise on smallpox and measles written in the tenth century by al-Razi (known in Europe as Rhazes), was published by William Bowyer in London in 1766. The second treatise, 'Albucasis de chirurgia', a surgical section of a tenth-century medical encyclopaedia by al-Zahrawi (known in Latin as Albucasis), was published posthumously in 1778. Both publications give the Arabic texts with Latin translations and display a remarkable knowledge of Arabic, Persian, Hebrew, Latin, and Greek. They remain fine monuments of early modern historical scholarship. 
Where Channing acquired his knowledge of oriental languages is unknown, for he was not university trained, nor is it known what motivated his interest in medieval Arabic medicine. It is evident that he was acquainted with Charles Yorke, the future lord chancellor, for he dedicated his edition of Rhazes to Yorke, acknowledging his assistance in obtaining a copy of a manuscript. It is also evident from the preface to that publication that he had been befriended by Thomas Hunt, the Laudian professor of Arabic and regius professor of Hebrew at Oxford. The circumstances in which Hunt, a don at Oxford, came to know Channing, an apothecary in London, are unknown. Hunt proved instrumental in obtaining permission for Channing to use the Bodleian Library and in having the Oxford University Press print his second Arabic text. From the records of the Bodleian Library it is evident that Channing used the library every year from 1759 until 1775, making one or two trips annually to Oxford. 
Among Channing's other acquaintances was Sir William Watson, who assisted him in finding Arabic fonts with which to print the Rhazes text. Through Watson, Channing's translation and commentary on some Arabic correspondence regarding medicinal substances was published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' of 1767. Channing also prepared Arabic translations for the surgeon William Hunter, and he was a friend of Samuel Richardson, reading 'Clarissa' prior to its publication. 
By 1746 Channing had married Elizabeth Channing (1705-1768), daughter of Richard Channing of Cruxton, Dorset. She died on 30 September 1768 in a coach accident outside Oxford and was buried in Christ Church Cathedral. At the time of her death she was apparently visiting their only son (also named John Channing), who was a student at Christ Church. 
Little is known of Channing's personal life. From the fact that his son was baptized in the Fetter Lane Church and the rector of St Clement Danes subsequently refused to sign the birth certificate, it appears that Channing was a nonconformist. It is evident that he had considerable financial resources at his disposal, presumably from the lucrative practice on Essex Street, a fashionable area of London in his day. After his death in London on 19 November 1775 he was buried at Harrow on the Hill. His considerable library, including Arabic manuscripts, was auctioned in two sales. 
Channing led two distinct lives: he was both a prosperous London apothecary and a dedicated scholar of oriental languages. As a prominent apothecary, his death was noted by a number of London newspapers, but none mentioned his pioneering work as an Arabist. 


@@@@@


doc= 56834


Conyers, John (c.1633-1694), apothecary and archaeologist, was the eldest son of Edward Conyers ('b'. 1590) and his wife, Jane Clarke. The parents had married in London in January 1632 at the church of St Faith, the ruins of which lie under St Paul's Cathedral; however, by the time John Conyers was bound apprentice in August 1649 for eight years to Robert Phelps, citizen and apothecary of London, his parents were living at Little Bowden in Leicestershire. In February 1658 Conyers was examined and found proficient in his trade, and he gained his freedom of the London Society of Apothecaries. He never rose to great eminence in the society, but nevertheless paid his $15 livery fine in December 1667. On 13 February 1666 at the church of St Clement Danes he married Mary Glisson, niece of the eminent physician Francis Glisson. They had eight daughters and two sons, but only two daughters survived childhood. 
Conyers was one of the many apothecaries who stayed in London during the plague period of 1665 to 1666. He had his own specific remedies for the infection and he advertised them in his booklet, 'Direction for the Prevention and Cure of the Plague, Fitted for the Poorer Sort' [n.d.]. After the great fire of 1666 Conyers was to be found at the White Lyon, Fleet Street. There he was innovative enough to prepare an artificial mineral water, 'an essence made of the mineral which giveth the virtue to Tunbridge waters' (memoranda book). Conyers's pharmaceutical work was of great interest to him and was often used in his attempts to explain the phenomena of magnetism, electricity, fermentation, and fossilization. He experimented with the recently discovered phosphorus made by the chemist Godfrey Hanckwitz, and he was a frequent guest at the meetings of the Royal Society. He numbered among his friends such eminent people as Robert Hooke and Thomas Tompion, and he was on excellent terms with Jonathan Goddard, lecturer in physic at Gresham College. Goddard was a determined antagonist of apothecaries who practised medicine, which suggests that Conyers confined himself to running his pharmacy, making most of his own medicines and dispensing physicians' prescriptions. 
Conyers participated eagerly in contemporary intellectual activities, offering solutions to mathematical problems, such as how to trisect an angle. He was keenly interested in meteorology and made observations with his thermoscopes, irrespective of the time of day. A practical man, he devised a number of inventions, details of which were published in the 'Transactions' of the Royal Society: a hygroscope, which the royal astronomer John Flamsteed borrowed in order to copy; an ear trumpet; and a pump, which Conyers claimed and Glisson and Goddard confirmed was used with great success on the new channel of the Fleet River. 
However, Conyers is best remembered for his work in archaeology. The rebuilding of London after the great fire gave him the opportunity to gather 'antiquities', but he was a discerning and well-intentioned collector. His treasures were described in detail and compared with those in other collections, such as that of Elias Ashmole. Conyers understood the importance of the association of finds and he was the first person to suggest that the flint hand-axe was a weapon fashioned by humans. Even more importantly he realized the value of stratigraphy. He noted that small fragments of coloured stones were found at the east end of St Paul's Cathedral at a depth of 15 feet, and that there remained some Roman pottery even lower, 'which tells me this laying so low & the Roman pott 6 or 8 or 10 foot deeper that as tyme passed awaye I might see the epochs or beginnings of things & in these various heights of ground poynt & show with my finger the Romans concernes lay deepest, then higher those of more recent or fresher concerne. (memoranda book, fol. 1096)' The 'Athenian Mercury' of 21 November 1691 relates that his 'curiosities' could be viewed by the public, and it praised the range of materials to be seen. 
By 1693 Conyers's health was failing and the Society of Apothecaries noted that he had 'left off trade'. He died survived by his wife, and was buried on 8 April 1694 at St Bride's, Fleet Street. His will was not found but it is known from the 1695 edition of Camden's 'Britannia' that Dr John Woodward was already in possession of most of his collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 56836


Colyer, Sir (James) Frank (1866-1954), dental surgeon and museum curator, was born on 25 September 1866 at 2 Loughborough Villas, Loughborough Road, Lambeth, London, one of the sons of James Colyer, dentist, and his wife, Rebecca Hastings, 'nee' Farrow. There is no information about Colyer's early years, but by the time he became a student at the Royal Dental Hospital, London, it was clear that he had exceptional talents and a natural aptitude for dental surgery. He quickly gained a reputation for his skill and intellect, quick mind, and responsive hands, and at the age of just twenty, in November 1887, he qualified LDS. Following the advice of the then dean of the school, Morton A. Smale, that a dentist should also be a qualified surgeon, Colyer studied at Charing Cross Hospital, London, and became MRCS LRCP in 1889. 
As well as developing his private practice Colyer held a number of hospital and other appointments: he became consultant dental surgeon at Charing Cross Hospital and at the Royal Dental Hospital, and he was honorary consultant dental surgeon to the Croydon War Hospital, the Ministry of Pensions, and the Queen's Hospital, Sidcup, Kent. Dental students who were fortunate enough to come under his wing found Colyer an inspired teacher, who was unceasingly fair and generous in his outlook. His dynamic personality and natural gift for public speaking were enhanced by his brilliant memory, so that he rarely relied upon notes. In his spare time Colyer enjoyed ball games and took pleasure in a round of golf, but his particular passion was cricket, and he seldom missed a match at Lord's. 
Colyer's marriage on 11 March 1896 to Lucy Olivia Margaret Anna Simpson (1871/2-1950), daughter of George Simpson, a wholesale bookbinder, was an enduring and supportive relationship, but was marred by the untimely death of their youngest daughter, Eileen, a talented lawn-tennis player. The couple had one other daughter and a son. 
Colyer was the recipient of many prizes and honours, both in England and North America. Included among these was his admission to the fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1916, and the honour of being created a knight of the British empire in 1920, for services rendered during the war. The Royal Society of Medicine also paid him a great tribute when in 1926 they named a prize after him, a rare accolade to be made during a person's lifetime. 
As well as the practice and teaching of dentistry, Colyer was a prolific journalist and author. He contributed many articles to professional journals and wrote numerous books on dental subjects. His earliest such work, 'Diseases and Injuries of the Teeth' (first published in 1892, co-written with Morton A. Smale, and later revised with the help of Evelyn Sprawson and reissued as 'Dental Surgery and Pathology'), was a textbook which filled a gap in the sphere of teaching. It ran to many editions and became widely accepted as the bible of dental students and practitioners alike. Other important works reflected Colyer's lifelong interest in the history of dentistry. He received wide acclaim for his book 'John Hunter and Odontology' (1913), but was perhaps best-known for his work 'Old Instruments used for Extracting Teeth' (1952), which came about largely as a result of his long-term involvement with the Odontological Society. 
Colyer was already secretary and editor of 'Transactions of the Odontological Society' when, in 1900, he accepted the post of honorary (unpaid) curator of the society's museum, then housed at the Royal Dental Hospital, and subsequently resited at the Royal College of Surgeons. The museum's collection, which was later described by Sir Arthur Keith as the most complete representation of the history and diseases of teeth in the world (Keith, 304-5), was Colyer's personal passion, and he became the presiding genius over it. For fifty years he devoted hours of his time and energy, and much of his own money, to arranging and cataloguing the specimens, and he was distraught when a massive bomb fell on the museum in May 1941, destroying thousands of irreplaceable specimens. 
Colyer remained in London but his latter years, especially after his wife's death in 1950, were fraught with problems: his personal position as curator of the museum became somewhat difficult and he found it hard to accept the changing policy of the council of the Royal College of Surgeons, which seemed to him to value the social aspects and teaching policy of the college over that of the Hunterian Museum, of which he was trustee. Added to this, the collection of the Odontological Museum was dismantled, and only a few cases of specimens were transferred to the general museum. Ever mindful of the needs of students, and displaying extreme spirit, he continued cataloguing new specimens, even though this meant working in very difficult conditions in dingy premises in Lincoln's Inn Fields. 
Colyer died at his home, Queenswood, 39 Palace Road, Streatham, London, on 30 March 1954. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 12 April 1954. 


@@@@@


doc= 56841


Sir Charles Sissmore Tomes (1846-1928), dental surgeon, was born in London on 6 June 1846. Educated at Radley College and Christ Church, Oxford, he gained the only first-class honours in natural sciences in 1866. He then studied at King's College and the Middlesex Hospital, London, and qualified LDS and MRCS in 1869. He then joined his father's practice. On 12 November 1873 he married Elizabeth (Lizzie) Eno Cook (died 1935) of New York, and a daughter was born in 1876. Tomes lectured at the Dental Hospital, Leicester Square, and for fourteen years was an examiner for the LDS. He published many papers on histology and comparative dental anatomy, and his collection of specimens enriched the Odontological Society museum, where he was curator from 1874 to 1880. He also compiled its first catalogue. He was president of the Odontological Society in 1887 and of the British Dental Association in 1894. His 'Manual of Dental Anatomy, Human and Comparative' (1876) achieved eight editions. He edited and enlarged the second and subsequent editions of John Tomes's 'System of Dental Surgery'. In 1878 Charles Tomes became a fellow of the Royal Society. From 1899 to 1920 he was crown nominee to the General Medical Council, and he was also its treasurer and chairman of its dental committee. In 1898 he was elected fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons and in 1909 he received an honorary LLD from the University of Birmingham; in 1919 he received a knighthood. Under the name of Charles Sissmore he painted in oils and watercolours, at least once exhibiting at the Royal Academy. He died on 24 October 1928 at his home, Mannington Hall, Aylsham, Norfolk, bequeathing $2000 to the Royal College of Surgeons, which endowed two annual eponymous lectures. 


@@@@@


doc= 56842


Robinson, James (1813-1862), dentist and anaesthetist, is said to have been born in Hampshire on 22 November 1813, possibly the youngest son of Captain Charles Robinson RN. He had at least one sister, Charlotte. He was reputedly well educated, and at the age of fourteen he was apprenticed to a London surgeon and chemist. He enrolled for the 1829-30 session at Guy's Hospital for courses in anatomy, physiology, and pathology, and for the lectures on the teeth; simultaneously he attended courses at University College, London, in clinical medicine and chemistry. Robinson does not appear to have completed his formal medical education and never acquired a qualification from either the Royal College of Surgeons or the Society of Apothecaries. However, he was said to have devoted himself with unremitting ardour to the study of chemistry and the structure of the teeth, and an almost obsessive intensity and unshakeable determination was to characterize all the ventures of this small, excitable, yet sometimes reserved man with dark, piercing eyes. 
By 1833 Robinson was practising as a dentist with Thomas Hall, a chemist and dentist, at 8 Store Street, London, and in 1834 he was appointed surgeon dentist to the Metropolitan (later the Royal Free) Hospital. About 1841, and by then already married to Ann Elizabeth Webster (1818/19-1872), he moved the short distance to 7 (later 5 and then 14) Gower Street, the location of his dental practice and his principal residence for the rest of his life. 
In 1842 Robinson attempted to form a British society of dental surgeons with the aim of reorganizing the practice of dentistry, then completely unregulated. He founded and edited the 'British Quarterly Journal of Dental Surgery', the first British dental journal. Its two issues appeared in March and June 1843 and promoted the concept of an independent body of dentists which would award its own professional qualification. Robinson was also closely involved financially and editorially with a second, more proactive journal, 'Forceps' (January 1844 to March 1845). 
After the reform campaign proved unsuccessful Robinson turned towards writing, and in June 1846 he published 'The Surgical and Mechanical Treatment of the Teeth'. This was one of the very few dental publications of the period not published exclusively to advertise the author. Perhaps the first British dental textbook, its second part dealt with mechanical dentistry and was addressed primarily to the dental apprentice. Robinson's reforming activities had made his name known in the United States, and on 8 March 1846 he was made an honorary doctor of dental surgery of the Baltimore College of Dental Surgery. He published two short papers in American journals during this period and it was his American connections which led to his next venture. 
On 17 December 1846 the American physician Francis Boott received news from America of the first successful public demonstration (by the dentist William Morton) of ether anaesthesia. He immediately informed his friend and neighbour, James Robinson, and the two set about improvising their own apparatus. It was in Boott's study, on Saturday 19 December 1846, that Robinson administered the first general anaesthetic in Britain. He was soon recognized as the most skilful anaesthetist in the country and his success won over such influential figures as Robert Liston. Robinson withdrew from the forefront of experimentation at the end of April 1847. By now, however, he had published the first book devoted to the subject, 'A Treatise on the Inhalation of the Vapour of Ether'. Perhaps as a result of his experience with anaesthesia, Robinson was appointed dentist to the prince consort in 1849. 
When the idea of a college of dentists came once more to the fore in the mid-1850s, Robinson was asked to be the president. Aware that he was by no means the first choice for the position, he initially refused. A few days later he changed his mind, and with the ominous words, 'Remember, if I draw the sword, I fling away the scabbard' (Hill, 72), he became the college's first president, on 16 December 1856. Thereafter he threw himself into the movement with the ferocious (and sometimes counter-productive) energy for which he was noted. By now the advocates of a college were opposed by a small but influential faction (which included John Tomes) who had formed themselves into the Odontological Society to campaign for the Royal College of Surgeons to institute a dental diploma. Since neither group had made much progress by the end of 1857, amalgamation was suggested. However, the general membership of the College of Dentists rejected the plan in January 1858, whereupon Robinson and others went over to the Odontological Society. By June 1858 he was a member of the committee which was planning Britain's second dental hospital, the Dental Hospital of London (later the Royal Dental Hospital), and by July he was a trustee. Friction arose, however, between Robinson and the management over the handling of subscriptions and he was asked to resign at the end of 1860. He then rejoined the College of Dentists, which had meanwhile (in October 1859) opened its own Metropolitan School of Dental Science (later the University College Hospital Dental School). Robinson's return to the fold regalvanized the college, and, due almost exclusively to his unremitting efforts, it opened its own National Dental Hospital (later the University College Hospital Dental Hospital) in November 1861. 
Robinson died on 4 March 1862 at his country residence at Kenton House, Harrow, after an accident with a pruning knife. He was buried at Highgate cemetery on 11 March 1862. Robinson's crucial role in the early weeks of anaesthesia was later to be eclipsed by the reputation of John Snow; none the less, his obituaries attest the respect in which he was held by the medical profession. 


