@@@@@


doc= 56843


Allen, Charles (fl. 1685-1687), writer on dentistry, published while living in Stonegate, York, the earliest known book in English devoted exclusively to treatment of the teeth: 'The operator for the teeth, shewing how to preserve the teeth and gums from all the accidents they are subject to' (1685). Two copies are known, one in the library of York Minster, the other in the College of Dentistry of New York University. A second edition of the book appeared in 1686 in Dublin, where Allen was currently lodging at Essex Street. This version contains some modification to the original text, with 'Particular Directions for Children's Teeth and Use of the Polican, Never Published before'. A 'polican' or 'pelican' was a contemporary extraction instrument. The book was bound together with a treatise by an 'unknown hand' (continuously paginated with Allen's), entitled 'A physical discourse, wherein the reasons of the beating of the pulse, or pulsation of the arteries, together with those of the circulation of the blood, are mechanically explained; which was never done before'. Only five copies of this 1686 edition have currently been located. 
In 1687 the main text of the Dublin edition of Allen's work was reprinted for sale in London but with a new title page: 'Curious observations in that difficult part of chirurgery, relating to the teeth. Shewing how to preserve the teeth and gums from all accidents they are subject to'. Fourteen copies of this London edition are known. That any copies at all survived is due partly to the fact that they were collected as examples of seventeenth-century printing in Dublin, London, and York. It was not until B. W. Weinberger acquired a copy of the 1687 edition, in 1923, that the significance of Allen's book for the history of dental treatment in Britain was appreciated and that further copies were sought out. Different editions have subsequently been found, variously listed in a number of bibliographies published between 1824 and 1905. 
Little is known about Charles Allen except what can be deduced from his book. He refers to an unidentified 'master', but never calls himself a barber surgeon. In March 1686 Allen presented a copy of his 'Operator for the Teeth' to the Dublin Philosophical Society but no definite connection can be shown between Allen and either that city or York; his presence in either place may have been purely for the purpose of having his book printed. The book reveals a high degree of literacy, if not very wide reading. The text of approximately forty pages is addressed to the general reader and deals, 'inter alia', with the anatomy of the teeth, and with gum diseases, oral hygiene, toothache remedies, decay, and extraction. Allen speaks of filling cavities and replacing missing teeth with artificial or transplanted substitutes, but he is sparing in the detail he gives of techniques and materials. Some of his suggestions are decidedly fanciful and seem unlikely to have been the product of practical experience. Allen claimed to have invented a number of instruments which would be described in the next edition. No such work has yet been found. 


@@@@@


doc= 56845


Belet, Michael (d. in or before 1247), royal servant, was the second son of Michael Belet (d. 1201), the justice of Henry II's reign, and Emma de Chesney. An Oxfordshire man who was in royal service by 1198, Belet was styled 'master' by 1201, indicating a university training, very possibly at Oxford. In 1200 he was described as a clerk of the king's household, and in 1206 he undertook to pay $100 for the office of assistant royal butler, which went with the serjeanty he held in West Sheen, Surrey. He continued in royal service until 1208, when his promising career was cut short, presumably as a result of the interdict. In any event, in 1211 he was charged with 500 marks as a fine for the king's benevolence. Despite his absence from the royal circle for at least three years, he was still able to muster an impressive list of the king's 'curiales' in support of his fine. By this year his nephew of the same name had reached his majority, and Michael lost his serjeanty to him. 
The younger Michael Belet (d. in or before 1219) was a son of Robert Belet (died 'c'.1205), Michael's younger brother. In November 1215 and July 1216 his lands were confiscated, presumably because he had joined the rebel cause, but on 16 April 1217 he regained some of them, which must have included the serjeanty at West Sheen, and on 2 July 1217 he received letters of safe conduct for his reconciliation with the new administration. By 1219 he was dead, and had been succeeded in his lands by his daughter Matilda (the child of his marriage to Alice), who was a ward of Wimund de Raleigh. As well as the serjeanty in West Sheen, Michael Belet held lands in Bagshot, Windlesham, and Hook, Surrey, and Eastwood, Essex. Confusion between Master Michael and his nephew makes it difficult to establish which of them held particular lands. However it seems clear that Master Michael Belet was a considerable landholder. He was rector of Hintlesham, Suffolk, from September 1200, the advowson of which his father had acquired from King Richard; he was rector of Sebergham, Cumberland, from May 1204; and he was rector of Wroxton, Oxfordshire, from about 1215. He inherited from his brother, John Belet (died 'c'.1204), land in Thorpe Belet, Northamptonshire, and a knight's fee in each of the vills of Syston, Aunsby, and Scott Willoughby, Lincolnshire, all held from the Ledet barony, and in September 1216 he received the confiscated lands of the rebel Wischard Ledet in Northamptonshire. He also held land in Norfolk, while with Walter de Verdun, the husband of his sister Annora, he owned land in Balscott, Oxfordshire. In Wroxton he held a knight's fee, inherited from John Belet, and here, between 1215 and 1222 (probably 1216 or 1217) he founded an Augustinian house for a prior and twelve canons, which evidently caused dissension within the family, as Walter de Verdun appears to have hoped to succeed to the property. Belet endowed the priory with his lands in Wroxton, in Syston, Lincolnshire, and in Thorpe Belet, Northamptonshire, and also with the chapel of Balscott, and the advowson of Syston and Aunsby. 
Master Michael Belet appears again in royal service in January 1224, when he was given custody of the temporalities of the bishopric of Coventry, which he held until the appointment of the new bishop in May of that year. In February 1225 he was appointed a justice in Northamptonshire and in the following January he was appointed to audit the accounts for the fifteenth of 1225. After February 1226 little is known of his activities, and it may be supposed that he went into retirement. His final act in royal service was to officiate as assistant butler at the coronation of Eleanor of Provence in 1236, by right of his serjeanty in West Sheen, which he had clearly been able to reunite with the manor. By February 1247 he was dead. He was succeeded in West Sheen by Emma Oliver and Alice de Vautort, daughters and coheirs of John Belet. 


@@@@@


doc= 56846


Goldney, Thomas (1696-1768), ironmaster, was born on 12 July 1696 at Clifton, near Bristol, the sixth of the twelve children of Thomas Goldney (1664-1731) and his wife, Martha, 'nee' Speed ('c'.1667-1722). His father was a grocer who supplemented his income by holding shares in ships and by acting as agent for the collector of customs for the port of Bristol. After being educated in a Quaker household at Painswick, Gloucestershire, and at a school run by the Society of Friends in Bristol, Thomas was apprenticed to his parents in 1711. In 1717 he began work with the Coalbrookdale Company in Shropshire, the leading ironworks in the country, acting on behalf of his father, who had mortgaged half these ironworks a few years earlier. He remained for six years at Coalbrookdale, where he served as clerk and collected money and orders. In 1723 he returned to Bristol and joined his father and his younger brother Gabriel in trade there, though he spent much time dealing with consignments of goods from Coalbrookdale. In 1726 he was admitted to the freedom of Bristol. He became the head of his family after the death of his father in 1731. 
Goldney devoted much of his business career to dealing with the family's interests in ironworks. In 1731 he became the Bristol agent for the Coalbrookdale Company, and took a particular interest in consignments of pig iron, the casting of hollow ware, engine parts, and the manufacture of guns. He installed Richard Reynolds as manager at Coalbrookdale in 1763, but continued working as an adviser to the firm in Bristol until his death. Goldney was a shareholder in the Willey ironworks, across the River Severn from Coalbrookdale, from 1733 to 1758. In the 1730s he was jointly concerned with Richard Ford in Bershay furnace, near Wrexham. Between 1754 and 1757 he became a co-partner with Abraham Darby (1711-1763) in furnaces at Horsehay farm 2 miles north of Coalbrookdale, and held a one-third share in the Ketley furnaces, 2 miles north of Horsehay. 
In the 1740s Goldney diversified his industrial interests. He held shares in the Warmley Brass Company, near Bristol, and the Bristol Lead Company. He was involved with the Champion family in various enterprises in Flintshire, including coal and lead mines, a smeltery, and a calamine works. He bought shares in ships and in mines in Devon, Cornwall, and Ireland. In 1752 he also became a partner in one of Bristol's first banks under the name of Goldney, Smith & Co., and held a one-sixth share ('c'.$2000) of the bank's initial capital. 
Apart from his business career, Goldney had interests in land and property. He inherited Elberton mansion house and farm, some 8 miles north of Bristol, a house and property in Chester, a Bristol town house in Castle Green, and a half share of the Clifton house, grounds, and household goods that had been purchased by his father in 1705. Goldney devoted much attention to the management and development of this property. He purchased land to gain additional income but was concerned mainly with improving his garden as a gentleman's seat. He landscaped the garden with a grotto, terrace, rotunda, tower, octagon, orangery, and paddock, and placed classical figures around the grounds. The grotto was especially admired because it was connected to a subterranean passage adorned with minerals, fossils, fine shells, and Bristol diamonds (or rock crystals). There was also a cascade of water with a seated figure of Neptune at its head. Goldney's estate was broken up in the mid-nineteenth century. The University of Bristol acquired Goldney House, as it is now known, and restored the grotto to some of its former glory. 
Goldney does not seem to have been very active in the Society of Friends. When he became a Bristol burgess he made a solemn declaration instead of taking the oath, as did other Quakers. He voted for the whigs but does not seem to have been politically active. He died unmarried at Clifton on 28 December 1768 and was buried on 2 January 1769 at the Quaker burial-ground, Redcliffe, Bristol. His inventory shows that he owned more than 300 books, and had comfortable furnishings including mahogany and walnut furniture and satin curtains, demonstrating a standard of living more luxurious than in most Quaker households. A balance sheet of his personal estate as it stood on the day of his death, drawn up for his executors, reveals that he had total credits amounting to about $33,000 and debits totalling $12,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 56849


Robert Price (1717-1761), a gentleman artist, and his wife, Sarah (died 1759), the daughter of John Shute Barrington, first Viscount Barrington. 


@@@@@


doc= 56851


Leather, Ella Mary (1874-1928), folklorist, was born on 26 March 1874 at Bidney, in the parish of Dilwyn, Herefordshire, the daughter of James Smith, farmer, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Griffiths. She was educated at Clyde House School in Hereford and at Hereford High School for Girls. In 1893 she married Francis Leather (1864-1929), a solicitor practising in the small Herefordshire town of Weobley, where she spent the rest of her life. They had three sons: John Francis, who died in France in 1918; Geoffrey, who died in infancy; and Godfrey, who became a solicitor and died in 1943. 
In 1905 Leather was persuaded by a friend and local author, the Revd Compton Reade, to contribute a chapter, 'The folk-lore of the shire', to his 'Memorials of Old Herefordshire' (1905). This was followed by the publication of a selection of Herefordshire folk-tales in the first issue of the 'Herefordshire Magazine' (1907). She became an ardent folklorist, conscious that the modern world was catching up with Herefordshire and that many of the old country customs of her childhood were dying out. 
In 1912 Leather's 'The Folk-Lore of Herefordshire' was published by Jakeman and Carver in Hereford, with an introduction by the eminent folklorist Edwin Sydney Hartland. The work was fully referenced, not only to the elderly cottagers and residents of hospitals and workhouses who contributed their recollections but also to the many archive and secondary sources consulted by the author. The book has long been considered one of the seminal texts of English folklore and continued to be regularly reprinted from 1912 until at least the 1990s. 

'The Folk-Lore of Herefordshire' contained the lyrics and music of twenty-three traditional carols, ballads, and songs. Leather's musical skill was fairly rudimentary, but she was encouraged by Cecil Sharp and the young composer Ralph Vaughan Williams, who recognized the potential of Herefordshire as a source for new folk-music, and arranged for a phonograph to be sent to her. Sharp and Vaughan Williams made several expeditions to Weobley and accompanied Leather on her visits to local Gypsy encampments. Vaughan Williams later regarded a visit to Monkland in September 1912 where they collected a version of 'The Unquiet Grave' from the Gypsy tenor Alfred Price Jones as one of his 'most memorable musical impressions' (Jones, 53). In 1920 he collaborated with Leather in the publication of 'Twelve Traditional Carols from Herefordshire'. Vaughan Williams especially admired 'The truth sent from above' and used it in the opening theme of his 'Fantasia on Christmas Carols' dedicated to Sharp. 
In her native county Leather had become a celebrated authority, much sought after as a speaker by visiting antiquarian societies, folklorists, and the Women's Institute, of which she was the Herefordshire president in 1928. She was especially devoted to Weobley and published a paper on its timber-framed houses in the 'Transactions [of the] Woolhope Naturalists Club' for 1926. She was also personally responsible for preserving the town's old grammar school, a seventeenth-century building which she purchased and used as her study. An undated guide to the parish church was published under her name in which, rather characteristically, the loss of much of the ancient fabric of the church during the restoration of 1868 was regretted. She also planned a 'History of Weobley' in 1927, though she did not live to see it completed. 
Leather was equally assiduous in the collection of folk-dances. Among other achievements she copied down the dance of the last group of Herefordshire morris men at Bromfield in 1909 and later, in 1925, established the Herefordshire branch of the Folk Dance Society. A dance called 'Haste to the wedding' collected by her was performed at the first National Festival of Folk Dance at the Albert Hall in 1926. 
Ella Mary Leather died in Weobley of a heart attack on 7 June 1928 and was buried in Weobley churchyard. An obituary in the 'Hereford Times' (16 June 1928, 4) regarded her death as a great loss to the nation because her musical finds had enabled Sharp and Vaughan Williams to achieve their fame. She found culture in the reputedly uncultured, and acted as a medium between the musicians of the caravan and those of the hall. 


@@@@@


doc= 56853


Morgan, Frederick Charles (1878-1978), antiquary and book collector, was born on 29 June 1878 at 11 High Street, Stratford upon Avon, the sixth of nine children of John Morgan (1830-1908), bookseller and printer, and his second wife, Mary Kibler (1846-1929). After attending Stratford grammar school until the age of thirteen, he assisted his father in running a circulating library. In 1902 John Morgan printed 'The Campden Wonder' and 'An Account of the Battle of Stratford-upon-Avon', both edited by his son, but in the following year he closed his business. F. C. Morgan obtained a part-time post at the Shakespeare Memorial Library and subsequently at the Stratford Public Library. During these years his delight in antiquarianism began to develop with cycling expeditions into the Cotswolds. He became an ardent admirer of William Morris, collected illustrations of Morris's craftsmanship, and visited Kelmscott; he later claimed that Morris's 'Earthly Paradise' (1870) exactly fitted his political ideas. 
In 1910 Morgan was appointed librarian at the new public library in Malvern where, in 1911, he organized the first exhibition of children's books, many of which came from his own collection, which eventually contained over a thousand examples dating from the early eighteenth century. In 1954 this was given to the Baillieu Library at Melbourne University. The catalogue for the exhibition was revised and republished in 1976. On 29 August 1914 Morgan married Emma (1877-1967), daughter of Richard Jones, of Radbrook, near Clifford Chambers, Warwickshire; their only daughter, Penelope, was born in 1916. While at Malvern, Morgan made contact with several eminent local botanists and geologists and met the Herefordshire antiquary Alfred Watkins. During the First World War he served with the Royal Garrison Artillery. 
Morgan was appointed librarian and curator of the art gallery and museum at Hereford in 1925 and thus began his connection with the cathedral city with which his reputation is inextricably linked. For the next half-century he dominated antiquarian pursuits in his adopted county and revealed through his many publications the rich vein of documentary sources and archaeological artefacts which lay uncatalogued and unexplored in the institutions of the county town and the countryside which surrounded it. Through his wide contacts he built up an outstanding reference library but he was also proud of his achievements as curator: he established an important collection of English topographical paintings and, with the help of his wife, a famous collection of English costumes. He found an outlet for his researches in the 'Transactions' of the Woolhope Naturalists' Field Club, the Herefordshire archaeological society, and during his life he held all the executive offices of the club, including president in 1937 and 1951. Morgan pioneered an interest in vernacular architecture, and published several articles illustrated with his own photographs; he was especially depressed by the spate of demolitions of timber buildings after the Second World War, fighting hard to convince the authorities of their worth. 
Long before the age of record offices, Morgan was actively seeking archive material, preserving it and making it publicly available at the Hereford Reference Library. Many documents were carefully transcribed and printed in the Woolhope 'Transactions'. While fire-watching on the roof of the library during the Second World War he began the major task of cataloguing and transcribing the muniments of the city of Hereford. The result after thirteen years was a ten-volume calendar of the city records from 'c'.1500 to 1700. 
In 1945 Morgan retired but now embarked upon a catalogue of the printed books of the famous library of Hereford Cathedral, together with the 30,000 items in its archive. He was assisted here by his daughter, Penelope. He remained honorary librarian until his death in Hereford on 16 July 1978. He was buried in Hereford Cathedral on 20 July. F. C. Morgan produced 165 books, pamphlets, and articles which were listed in a catalogue published by his friends to mark his 100th birthday. He received many honours: fellow of the Library Association (1910), FSA (1938), an honorary MA from Birmingham University (1952), and chief steward of the city of Hereford (1975). His important photographic collection was shared by the cathedral and city libraries in Hereford, and the National Monuments Record. In honour of its most famous member the Woolhope Club inaugurated an annual F. C. Morgan lecture. 


@@@@@


doc= 56857


Scudamore, Sir Barnabas (bap. 1609, d. 1651/2), royalist army officer, was baptized on 2 April 1609 at Timsbury, Somerset, the ninth and youngest child of Sir James Scudamore (bap. 1568, d. 1619) ['see under 'Scudamore family], and his second wife, Mary, 'nee' Throckmorton (died 1632), widow of Sir Thomas Baskervile. His parents' marriage had been strained for several years and shortly after his baptism Sir James permanently repudiated his wife, although they were never legally divorced. 
Scudamore slipped into the obscurity and comparative poverty of Stuart younger sons. With an income of only about $50 per annum (his eldest brother Sir John Scudamore, from 1628 first Viscount Scudamore, had inherited the bulk of the family's wealth and position) he was forced to seek his own way in the world, and he was later described as 'a man of noe fortune' (BL, Harleian MS 6868, fol. 100). He may have been in the earl of Cork's service in Ireland in the summer of 1631, and in December that year he sailed to the Netherlands to enlist as a soldier. He was back in England by March 1636 and in the service of Cork, travelling as an attendant with the earl's two sons to France. 
Only as the king's fortunes declined did Scudamore's rise. A captain in the English forces sent against the Scots in 1640, he joined the royalist army promptly on the outbreak of the English civil war and was wounded at Coventry on 20 August 1642, and at Edgehill on 23 October 1642. By the spring of 1643 he was sergeant-major to Colonel Henry Hastings in the midlands, seeing action at Hopton Heath and Lichfield. By May 1644 he had returned to his native Herefordshire where he was major-general to Nicholas Mynne, whom he succeeded as governor of Hereford on 10 September 1644. It was hoped that he would unite soldiers and civilians, and he had the backing of a number of the leading citizens of Hereford where his brother Viscount Scudamore was high steward. Scudamore's zeal in raising men and contributions, and his high-handedness in ignoring due process of law against tax defaulters, however, helped to provoke a club-men rising in March 1645 which was only suppressed with the assistance of Prince Rupert. 
As a commander Scudamore was resourceful and resolute. He developed a siege tower which he unsuccessfully used against Canon Frome in November 1645, and in the summer of 1645 he held Hereford for five weeks against a besieging Scottish army. In gratitude the king knighted him and, if a persistent rumour can be credited, would have raised him to a barony had Scudamore been able to afford the creation fees. However, Scudamore also had a fatal flaw -- a predilection for arguing. He quarrelled with two of his deputy governors in succession, with disastrous consequences: in revenge one killed his cousin and brother-in-law, Sir John Scudamore of Ballingham; the other later denounced Scudamore to the king as a traitor. Disputes with other junior officers and with the inhabitants of the city led directly to the fall of Hereford to a dawn raid on 18 December 1645. 
Scudamore escaped as the city fell and fled to Worcester, but allegations (certainly groundless) that he had betrayed Hereford in return for a large bribe led to his imprisonment on a charge of treachery. He languished in gaol for six months and was only released at the surrender of Worcester in July 1646. Unable to clear his name in a court of war he published his own 'Defence' in 1646 but many remained convinced that he had sold Hereford to the parliament. On the outbreak of the second civil war he may have been active for the king in Kent in May 1648, and he was certainly trying to raise troops in Newmarket where he was captured in June. On 15 November 1648 he married Katharine Saunders, who appears to have predeceased him. He may previously have been married to a woman with the maiden name Brydges. He was arrested on suspicion of royalist plotting in the summer of 1651, and though soon released, he was in desperate financial straits; he died in London some time between 9 December 1651 (when he wrote to a cousin) and 11 March 1652 when Lord Scudamore wrote of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 56860


Hatton, Brian (1887-1916), artist, was born at Carlton Villas, Whitecross Road, Hereford, on 12 August 1887, the only son and eldest child of Alfred Hatton (1856-1933) and his wife Amelia, 'nee' Keay (1864-1909). He had two younger sisters, Ailsa Marr (1893-1949) and Marjorie (1895-1981). His father, Alfred Hatton, like his grandfather Charles Hatton and his grandfather's three brothers, were in the leather trade, where they were known for the manufacture of the 'Wye Boot'. His mother was the eldest of the six daughters of Robert Keay, a Hereford JP. In 1895 the family moved from Whitecross Road to Mount Craig, Broomy Hill, Breinton, pleasant country on the left bank of the Wye west of Hereford. 
Hatton showed remarkable artistic talent from infancy. He sketched from his earliest years, producing a charming and astonishing study of birds in his pram aged two. When at home he roamed the fields along the Wye at Warham, recording the landscape, country people, and horses -- his passion -- which he rode and drew throughout his life. He was asthmatic with a lifelong stammer, and was prone to epilepsy-like fainting fits. The family doctor recommended sea air and, aged ten, he was sent to live with the doctor's relatives, at Winchester House, Swansea. 
Hatton began winning competitions in 1895, aged eight, with the Royal Drawing Society (RDS) bronze medal, awarded by G. F. Watts, and the Art for Schools Association medal. In April 1898 he was awarded the RDS gold star by Princess Louise. She and her equerry, Colonel Arthur Collins, became admirers of Hatton's work, begging drawings from him and inviting him and his mother to call at Kensington Palace. Watts thought he would develop into the greatest artist of his generation and invited him and his mother to stay at his Surrey home, Limnerslease. Mary Watts especially was a constant support. 
From 1899 to 1902 Hatton attended Swansea grammar school where extra time was allowed him for art practice, and from where he sent home a stream of illustrated letters. He spent two terms in residence at Trinity College, Oxford, from 1905 to 1906, making a lasting friend of his tutor R. W. Raper, the college bursar. Raper found him patrons including Queen Victoria's granddaughter Princess Alice (Princess Alexander of Teck), who invited him to Windsor to draw her children. He then spent a year at Hospitalfield Art School, Arbroath, where he was funded by his uncle Charles Marr. He holidayed in St Ives and Newlyn, Cornwall, and went with his uncle to Amsterdam and The Hague, meeting artists. 
On returning to Herefordshire, Hatton set up a studio in the coach house at Mount Craig and worked on his oil portraits, a likely source of income. He painted his family and local dignitaries such as Bishop Percival (1910; Hereford Museum and Art Gallery), including animals if possible, as in the portrait of Sir Reginald Rankin with his hunter Dervish (1910; priv. coll.) and Charles Fitzwilliams with a hound (1910; priv. coll.). His finest painting of this time is the self-portrait of 1908 (Hereford Museum and Art Gallery). This year he joined the Flinders Petrie archaeological expedition to sketch in Egypt. In 1910 he attended the Academie Julien in Paris for life class practice and had a painting hung in the Paris Salon. 
Hatton's ambition took him to London where he shared rooms with his cousin, Geoffrey Vevers, at 33 Nevern Square, South Kensington. He set up a studio with his Oxford friend Gerald Siordet and had 'Night Piece to Julia' (Hereford Museum and Art Gallery) accepted at the Royal Academy summer exhibition of 1914. Work submitted to the Royal Institute of Oil Painters was praised and he was elected a member. He was commissioned to illustrate John Masefield's 'The Everlasting Mercy', while staying with relatives in Ledbury for local colour. He went again to Paris and on the eve of war his uncle Charles took him on holiday to Belgium. 
Despite these contacts with the continent there are few signs in Hatton's practice of current artistic developments. Elderly patrons like Mary Watts and Briton Riviere warned him to avoid post-impressionism. One of his last paintings, 'Sunday Morning in the Park' (1914; Hereford Museum and Art Gallery), shows impressionist traits, but further development in that direction was cut short by the First World War. 
On 4 September 1914 Hatton enlisted with the Worcester yeomanry as a trooper. Shortly afterwards, on 5 November 1914, at Newbury, Berkshire, he married his Hereford sweetheart Lydia May Bidmead ('b'. 1888), a teacher of dancing. She gave birth to their daughter, Mary Amelia, in September 1915 just before Hatton was posted to Egypt. He had some words of Arabic from his previous trip to Egypt and trained as a signaller. He was commissioned, and held the rank of second lieutenant when he was killed in action at Oghratina on Easter Sunday, 23 April 1916, while providing a guard for a well-digging detachment. They were attacked by a superior force of Turks who chanced to be passing, were surrounded, and were cut down. Hatton, the best rider in the troop, volunteered to go for reinforcements, but was shot and later buried where he had fallen. A friend traced his grave and his remains were eventually moved to Kantara war memorial cemetery in Egypt. 
Hatton's widow and baby lived for a while at Mount Craig, Breinton, with Hatton's father and sisters. In 1930 she married another Hereford man, Angus Wilson. Hatton's daughter, Mary, became a notable ballet dancer, dancing with the Ballets Russes de Paris. On a trip to America she married the editor of an Illinois newspaper, Cecil Shaler, and settled there, her mother later joining them. 
In his brief life as an artist Hatton produced over 1000 works: drawings, watercolours, oils, prints, and some sculpture. His paintings of horses and country people especially are of a high standard from a surprisingly early age, and he showed insightful skill as an illustrator. There were posthumous London exhibitions at Walker's Galleries in 1926, and Leighton House in 1955. He sold a few portraits but the bulk of his work was presented to Hereford Museum by his widow, who gave his letters to Hereford Record Office. His sister Marjorie Hatton devoted her life to his memory. She set up the Brian Hatton Trust which funded the creation of the Brian Hatton Gallery, an extension of Churchill House costume museum in Hereford. His work now occupies a bay at Hereford Museum and Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 56861


Tuvill, Daniel (d. 1660), Church of England clergyman and author, was perhaps a son of Michael Tuvell, Frenchman, described as a denizen, and Jone his wife, who were members of the French church in London in 1571. They lived in one of the sixteen hamlets within the precinct of St Katharine by the Tower, which included Grub Street, Shoreditch, and White Chapel. In September 1598 Daniel was admitted sizar, as born in London, to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, from where he graduated BA in 1601 and proceeded MA in 1607. 
His first known published work, 'Essaies, Politicke and Morall', appeared in 1608, dedicated to Anne, Lady Harington, wife of the first Lord Harington of Exton. The dedications of other works at this time suggest that he had or sought the patronage of the Montagu family: James Montagu, who had been master of Sidney Sussex College when Tuvill was resident there, was the dedicatee of 'Essayes Morall and Theologicall' (1609), and his brother Henry Montagu, first earl of Manchester, was the dedicatee of 'The Dove, and the Serpent' (1614) and 'Christian Purposes and Resolutions' (1622). 'Asylum Veneris, or A Sanctuary for Ladies' (1616) was dedicated to Lady Alice Colville, a member of the Spencer family. All of these were conduct-book literature inspired by the works of Francis Bacon, Montaigne, and Stefano Guazzo, among others, and were heavily reliant on secondary reading for their citations of classical and patristic works, rarely acknowledged. All were signed D. T. apart from 'Christian Purposes and Resolutions', which, perhaps because its subject matter was theological, could be signed Dan. Touteville. He may also have contributed three commendatory poems to the later editions of Thomas Overbury's 'A Wife'. Tuvill was vicar of St Bartholomew-the-Less, London, from 1620 to 1631, probably on the presentation of John King, diocesan bishop. He may have been a member of the English naval expedition to La Rochelle in 1627, perhaps as chaplain. He became preacher at Sutton's Hospital, Charterhouse, Clerkenwell, London, in 1630, perhaps through the patronage of John Buckeridge, who as bishop of Ely was a key governor. This post was open only to the unmarried. John Spencer of Sion College knew the Tuvill who preached at Sutton's Hospital to have been the author of the 1609 'Essays'. While there Tuvill published 'St Pauls Threefold Cord' (1635), like 'Christian Purposes and Resolutions' credited to Dan. Touteville; it reveals unqualified support for royal absolutism, which he saw as resisted only by Romanists. On 7 October 1643 he was sequestrated by parliament on charges of drunkenness, preaching favourably of the organs and new pictures in the chapel, neglecting fasts, and inviting royalist ministers to preach there. He was buried on 13 September 1660 at St Bartholomew-the-Less. 


In 1618 Turval was still on official missions to France. The next year he was naturalized as Jean l'Oiseau. By 1623 he was a royal chaplain, a position which continued under Charles I. In 1625 he was presented by his friend John Donne, dean of St Paul's Cathedral, to St Martin Orgar in the City of London, which he resigned in 1628. Three years later, by which time he was sometimes known as Byrde, Philip Herbert, earl of Pembroke, presented him to Meppershall, Bedfordshire. However, within a short time he died, probably in London. He was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 26 May 1631. He was apparently unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 56862


Brodie, Peter Bellinger (1815-1897), Church of England clergyman and geologist, was born on 27 January 1815 at 49 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London, the first child of Peter Bellinger Brodie (1778-1854), barrister, and his first wife, Elizabeth Mary (died 1823), daughter of Sutton Thomas Wood, agriculturist, of Oxford. Early interested in natural history, Brodie regularly attended meetings of the Geological Society of London in Somerset House, enjoying 'the many intellectual combats between the geological giants of those days' (Brodie, 'Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society', 1887, 33). He was a frequent visitor at the Royal College of Surgeons, with which his uncle, Sir Benjamin Collins Brodie, was closely connected. William Clift, curator of its museum, proposed Brodie as fellow of the Geological Society of London; he was elected on 23 January 1834. In the same year he was admitted pensioner at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where his interest in geology continued alongside his degree studies. He attended lectures in geology by Adam Sedgwick (1785-1873), accompanied him on field excursions, and assisted him in his museum. Sedgwick remained his friend and mentor, and encouraged him to continue his research. He was awarded his BA degree in 1838 and MA in 1842. 
Brodie was ordained deacon at Salisbury Cathedral on 23 December 1838 and ordained priest on 22 December the following year. He was elected curate to the Revd Francis Baker (1773-1840), rector of Wylye, Wiltshire, in 1838, and between 1840 and 1853 he worked in Buckinghamshire, Gloucestershire, and Warwickshire. His final move was to Rowington, Warwickshire, in 1853, when he was instituted vicar of St Lawrence's Church. 
Brodie performed his clerical duties conscientiously. He raised funds for a new school in Rowington, for a major restoration of the church, and for the building of a mission chapel in an outlying hamlet. Probably on 1 July 1841 he married Isabella Octavia (1821-1896), daughter of the Revd Francis Baker; they had one daughter and five sons. Isabella died on 17 November 1896, and a stained-glass window in Rowington church was dedicated to her by the Worcestershire Diocesan Girls' Friendly Society, for whom she was a founder worker. 
Wherever he worked and lived Brodie continued his geological researches. His work was acknowledged by many leading geologists, not only in their publications but also by the numerous species which they named for him. He published over a hundred papers, and his book 'The Fossil Insects of the Secondary Rocks of England' (1845) was the first treatise on this subject. In 1887 he was awarded the Murchison medal by the Geological Society of London. In 1853 he became a member of the thriving Warwickshire Natural History and Archaeological Society and a year later he founded its field club. He was active in every aspect of the society's work -- leading field trips, writing papers, serving on committees, and donating hundreds of fossils to the museum. 
Brodie was described as a genial man who infected people with his enthusiasm and energy. His parishioners held him in high regard and affection, and they dedicated two memorial stained-glass windows to him in Rowington church. He died at home on 1 November 1897, and was buried alongside his wife and two of his sons in Rowington churchyard on 5 November. In a letter to the Warwickshire Natural History Society, after Brodie's death, Charles Lapworth (1842-1920) wrote: 'we of the younger generation of geologists look up to Mr Brodie as one of the fathers of our science... not only does palaeontological geology owe a deep debt of gratitude to Mr Brodie, but stratigraphical geologists have cause to be equally grateful. (Lapworth, 'In Memoriam', 13-14)' Specimens from his huge fossil collection -- at one time he had about 25,000 specimens -- are to be found in museums throughout the country. After his death large numbers of specimens were sold to the British Museum, and to the University of Vienna. 


@@@@@


doc= 56863


Small, Ann Hunter (1857-1945), missionary and educationist, was born on 26 December 1857 at Polmont, Redding, Stirlingshire, the eldest of the three daughters, all subsequently missionaries, of the Revd John Small (1833-1899), trained teacher and missionary of the Free Church of Scotland in India, and his wife, Nathina Hunter (1824/5 - 14 April 1913). At six she went to India, where she was educated by her mother and learned the local language; from thirteen to seventeen she attended the School for the Daughters of Missionaries at Walthamstow, Essex, where her talents blossomed in a community which fostered individual development. 
From 1876 to 1892 Annie Small worked in India, mainly as an agent of the Free Church of Scotland Ladies' Society for Female Education in India and South Africa, specializing in the expanding work among women. Her book, 'Light and Shade in Zenana Missionary Life' (1890), graphically described the skills needed -- but seldom found -- in the new recruits sent out. Based mainly in Poona and influenced by her father's enlightened attitude, she gained deep insight into Indian culture and religion. 
Small was invalided back to Britain in 1892, at a time when training for the increasing numbers of women missionaries had become urgent; this was pioneering work as there was then no special training for either male or female missionaries. Appointed in 1894 as the first principal of the Free Church Women's Missionary Training Institute in Edinburgh (later St Colm's Women's Missionary College of the United Free Church of Scotland), she aimed to make the institute a place of training for life, not 'a sort of hothouse for 'forcing' a certain type of missionary character' (house guild letter, May 1909, St Colm's College). Treating her students as responsible individuals she sought personal development founded on the strong spiritual life of the college community, while not neglecting modern educational methods. The college attracted students from all denominations throughout Britain and beyond, especially from Switzerland, Germany, and Scandinavia. 
Small exemplified her own ideal of the true missionary as 'a throughly furnished man or woman' (Small, 'Letters', 154). She was a slight person, of simple tastes, sane, far-sighted, joyous, and deeply spiritual, an accomplished musician, and a graphic writer -- her works ranged from early books on India to biblical and devotional studies, notably 'The Psalter and the Life of Prayer' (1912). Her interests ranged from the arts and crafts movement to the late nineteenth-century liturgical revival, from politics to the Celtic church. She is credited with drawing the attention of the Revd George MacLeod to Iona as a centre for his community. A proud presbyterian she nevertheless rejoiced in being part of the worldwide church in all its diversity, and her studies on Islam and Buddhism written for the Student Christian Movement show her enlightened attitude towards dialogue with other faiths -- a contrast to the empire-building view of missions of many of her contemporaries. 
Annie Small's portrait in the college reveals a serene gentleness, though not the impressive presence radiating goodness remembered by those who knew her. Her ability to get on well with people extended from her students to many of the great figures of the time. Though never associated with the women's movement she was regarded with suspicion in some church circles for her advocacy of women's training. At the Edinburgh World Missionary Conference in 1910 she was secretary of Commission V whose remit was to study the preparation of missionaries; the commission's influential report recognized the excellence of St Colm's College. Honoured in missionary circles she became a sought-after leader of training courses for both sexes. The college became a model for new training institutions in England and abroad. 
Small retired in 1913, exhausted -- her health was never strong. She continued to live in Edinburgh, a valued speaker at conferences and a profound influence on her many visitors. She died of a heart attack, in an Edinburgh nursing home, on 7 February 1945. In accordance with her will she was cremated, at Warriston crematorium, Edinburgh, on 10 February; she had directed that her ashes should be buried in the family grave at Arbroath Abbey. She never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 56866


Gore, Spencer Frederick (1878-1914), painter, was born on 26 May 1878 at Epsom, Surrey, the third of four children of Spencer William Gore (died 1908), a partner in Smiths Gore, agents to the ecclesiastical commissioners, and holder of the first lawn tennis championship at Wimbledon (1877), and his wife, Amy Margaret Smith. The family lived at Holywell in Kent. Freddy -- as he was known -- was sent, like his elder brother, to Harrow School (1892-6). There he displayed some of his inherited sporting prowess, keeping wicket for the second eleven and winning the Harrow mile. He grew very tall (throughout his life his trousers always hung awkwardly). He also developed his interest in art, winning the drawing prize. After leaving Harrow he attended the Slade School of Fine Art, London (1896-9), studying under Frederick Brown, Henry Tonks, and Philip Wilson Steer, and learning much from their brand of English impressionism. His friends included Harold Gilman, Albert Rothenstein (later Rutherston), Augustus John, and Wyndham Lewis. 
With Lewis, Gore visited Madrid in 1902, partly to study the work of Goya. In the summer of 1904, on a painting trip in Normandy, he visited Walter Sickert, who was living in a self-imposed exile at Dieppe. The meeting was propitious. Sickert, then in his mid-forties, was inspired by Gore's account of the rising generation of Slade students and returned to England after an absence of some seven years. And Gore was excited to come into contact with a painter who was so intimately connected with the artistic traditions of French impressionism. 
From Sickert himself Gore learned the practice of painting in the studio from small, well-documented drawings done from life. Although Gore continued to paint landscapes 'en plein air', Sickert's technique (learned from his friend and mentor Degas) was useful for the complex theatrical subjects he was beginning to attempt. Gore shared Sickert's love of the theatre and the music-hall (he was himself an excellent and enthusiastic amateur performer, specializing in comic policemen and irate Victorian fathers). At about this time he also came into contact with Lucien Pissarro, and from him he learned more directly of the techniques of French impressionist painting, as espoused by Camille Pissarro (Lucien's father). Gore began to adopt such techniques, eschewing black and building up his pictures with dry touches of unmediated colour on a white ground. 
In 1906 Gore's father deserted the family after his business failed. Gore was urged by his uncle -- the bishop of Oxford -- to give up painting. He stood firm, however, and henceforth strove to earn his living with his brush. His mother, granted a pension by the firm, moved to Garth House, Hertingfordbury, Hertfordshire. (Gore, alone of his family, continued to keep in contact with his disgraced father, who died two years later.) Although Gore spent his summers painting the country (at Billy in France, in Yorkshire, at Hertingfordbury, and at Applehayes in Somerset), following Sickert's lead he gravitated to the Camden Town area of London. He had rooms at 15 Granby Street, and often shared Sickert's studio at 6 Mornington Crescent. 
Although an occasional exhibitor with the New English Art Club (he was even elected as a member in 1909), Gore -- like many of his generation -- felt out of sympathy with its increasingly conservative stance. As a result he became involved in a series of initiatives to promote the claims of more progressive art. Together with Sickert, Gilman, and a few others he founded the Fitzroy Street Group, renting a first-floor room at 19 Fitzroy Street, where members' pictures were exhibited and tea was served to prospective clients every Saturday. And in 1908 Gore and Gilman assisted the critic Frank Rutter in the setting up of the Allied Artists' Association, a non-jury society, modelled on the Salon des Independents, which held annual exhibitions at the Royal Albert Hall. In 1911 Gore was elected as the first president of the Camden Town Group, the alliance which evolved out of the Fitzroy Street Group. In March of the same year he had his first -- and only -- one-man show at the Chenil Gallery, London. 
Artistically Gore had begun to move beyond impressionism, towards a post-impressionist style founded, in part, on the examples of Gauguin and (subsequently) Derain. The impact of Roger Fry's ground-breaking 'Post-impressionist exhibition' (1910) and of the Gauguin exhibition at the Stafford Gallery (1911) became increasingly marked in Gore's paintings, with their flat colours and strongly marked contours. Gore's position as, perhaps, the leading British exponent of the new style was confirmed when several of his pictures -- including 'The Cinder Path' (Tate collection) and 'Letchworth Station' (National Railway Museum, York) -- were selected for the English section of the 'Second post-impressionist exhibition' (1912). He also organized the group of artists (Gilman, Charles Ginner, Lewis, Jacob Epstein, and Eric Gill) who decorated the Cave of the Golden Calf, the nightclub set up by Madame Strindberg (widow of the playwright). On account of his personality and his talent Gore was recognized as a leader by his contemporaries. He sought -- and very nearly managed -- to bring together all the progressive strains of British art under a single banner, in the exhibition he curated at Brighton, and in the London Group which was established in 1912 (and had its first exhibition in 1913). In the event the difficulty of reconciling Roger Fry with Wyndham Lewis proved too much, though characteristically both men maintained their affection for, and admiration of, Gore. 
On 19 February 1912 Gore married Mary Johanna 
(Molly; 1889-1968)
, daughter of John Kerr. (Sickert was best man.) A daughter, Elizabeth, was born that October, at Letchworth, where Gore had rented Gilman's house. The young family subsequently moved to 6 Cambrian Road, Richmond, where a son, Frederick John Pym Gore (1913-2009) also a painter, was born. Gore's paintings of Richmond show a new stylistic departure, inspired by his study of Cezanne. It was while painting in the park in the early months of 1914 that Gore contracted a cold which developed into pneumonia. He died at home on 25 March 1914 and was buried in Hertingfordbury. His death called forth numerous tributes, from artists as diverse as Sickert and Lewis. All regarded Gore as a rare talent and a rare friend. His quiet good humour, his eager enthusiasms, his unstinting kindness, and his rare common sense endeared him to a whole generation of artists. 


@@@@@


doc= 56868


Beaton, (Donald) Leonard (1929-1971), journalist and strategic analyst, was born on 20 June 1929 in Montreal, the son of John W. Beaton. He was educated in Montreal, at Westmount high school, and at McGill University, where he took an honours degree in economics and in political science. In 1950 he entered St Catharine's College, Cambridge, as an affiliated student where he read part two of the history tripos and then of the English tripos, achieving second class honours in each of these. 
Eschewing the chance of employment in the Canadian diplomatic service, Beaton chose to become a journalist, beginning with the Montreal 'Gazette'. In the spring of 1954 he joined the London-based staff of Reuters to work on the European and central news desks. Early in 1956 he joined 'The Times' as naval correspondent and general reporter. The post of naval correspondent had for long been held by a retired naval officer. It now passed to someone whose maritime experience hitherto consisted of his first transatlantic crossing from Montreal. Beaton soon justified the judgement of the editor, Sir William Haley, that any competent journalist could do the job if intelligent and energetic enough. 
In May 1957 Beaton moved to the 'Manchester Guardian' as defence and air correspondent. He soon developed a widely recognized expertise on aeronautics and nuclear strategy generally. 'The Guardian' also assigned Beaton the task of reporting the 1962 negotiations in Brussels on Britain's application to join the European Common Market. His sceptical attitude regarding the value of these negotiations for Britain and his disinclination to accept the official version of events at face value earned him the displeasure of Britain's chief negotiator, Edward Heath. 
While still defence correspondent of 'The Guardian' Beaton wrote, with John Maddox, the first serious book-length study of nuclear proliferation, entitled 'The Spread of Nuclear Weapons', published under the imprimatur of the Institute of Strategic Studies in 1962. Beaton left 'The Guardian' in 1963 to be the first designated director of studies at the London-based Institute of Strategic Studies (ISS), then in its fifth year since being launched, though he had been closely in touch with the institute from its start. He felt by then that he ought to free himself somewhat from the grind of daily journalism and turn to longer-range analysis and advocacy. Though a generous and encouraging adviser, he was too much of an individualist and too naturally a polemicist to be entirely at ease in this role, and after two years he gave up the post to become a senior research associate at ISS, freer to concentrate on his own work. Throughout the 1960s he continued to be a prolific writer, broadcaster, and lecturer. It was in a television interview with President Eisenhower that he brought out publicly for the first time the extent to which Eisenhower as president had been ready in 1953 to threaten and contemplate the use of nuclear weapons both in Korea and against China. 
Beaton was editor of the 'Round Table' between 1965 and 1970 and was a principal influence in ending that quarterly journal's practice of anonymous contributions in favour of signed articles. More important, Beaton master-minded the reorientation of the journal away from its strongly flavoured imperialist tradition to the realities of the expanding multi-racial Commonwealth of the late 1960s. Even when not formally a staff member he frequently contributed pieces to 'The Times', before returning as a special writer on strategic affairs at the beginning of 1971. He wrote a more popular and updated version of 'The Spread of Nuclear Weapons' under the title 'Must the Bomb Spread?' (1966). Soon afterwards he prepared and wrote the script for a major television series on strategy and disarmament, 'The Struggle for Peace'. He was twice visiting professor at the University of Toronto. He was once described by a leading American strategist, Bernard Brodie, as 'the most lucid and accurate commentator on defence questions in the press of the English-speaking world' (private information). 
Beaton was about 6 feet in height, and had a round face; his eyes often seemed to be twinkling with good humour behind his spectacles. In 1967 he married Katherine Bougarel, daughter of Dr and Mme Francois Bougarel, of Chateauroux, France, and they had a daughter. Beaton was strongly opinionated on many subjects and liked argument and controversy. For about ten years before his death he rented a cottage near Wells in Somerset, where friends liked to visit. After lengthy walks in the Mendips and during long, reasonably bibulous, evenings by his fireplace they shared with him his keen enjoyment of discussion: his wide-ranging affection for English poets; his reading in devotional and controversial Christian literature; and his spirited challenges to then currently fashionable ideas such as the anachronism of the Commonwealth, the reformability of the Roman Catholic church, and the need for some form of pan-European, or at least pan-west European political organization. 
Beaton died from a heart attack on 9 June 1971 while visiting Venice. He had intended to resume a regular commentary on the Common Market, of which he was critical, for 'The Spectator' from July 1971. Instead, that weekly journal printed his last article posthumously on 19 June 1971. Entitled 'Speaking for the nation' it endorsed some aspects of Enoch Powell's views on immigration and English nationality. 
A memorial service was held for Beaton on 28 June at St Bartholomew-the-Great, Smithfield, London. William Rees-Mogg and Alastair Hetherington, the editors of 'The Times' and 'The Guardian', the two newspapers which had most nurtured and displayed his talents, read lessons, and the large, diverse congregation was a testimony to what 'The Times' in its sensitive obituary had characterized as his 'huge capacity for friendship'. 


@@@@@


doc= 56870


Sir (Alexander) Frederick Whyte (1883-1970), who, having attended Edinburgh Academy and read modern languages at Jena University and at Edinburgh University (graduating with a first class), was warden of the Edinburgh University settlement in 1907-8. He was Liberal MP for Perth City in 1910-18, being parliamentary private secretary to Winston Churchill in 1910-15. In 1912 he married Margaret Emily, 'nee' Fairweather; they had one son and two daughters. Whyte edited 'The New Europe' from May 1917. He was president of the legislative assembly in India, 1920-25, and was knighted in 1922. In 1929-32 he was political adviser to the national government of China. He was involved in the Round Table and became director-general of the English Speaking Union in 1938. In 1939-40 he was head of the American division of the Ministry of Information. Whyte published several books on world politics, including 'Asia in the Twentieth Century' (1926) and 'China and Foreign Powers' (1927). He died on 30 July 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 56872


Rejlander, Oscar Gustaf (1813-1875), photographer, was born probably in Sweden; little is known about his parents or his early life. When on 30 September 1862 Rejlander married Mary Bull ('b'. 1837/8), daughter of George Bull, stonemason, the marriage certificate registered his father as Carl Gustaf Rejlander, an officer in the Swedish army. According to O. G. Rejlander's obituaries he studied art informally in Rome in the 1830s and supported himself there by working as a portrait painter and copyist of old masters. The reasons for his move to England remain a subject of speculation: one obituary states that it was 'a romantic love adventure' with an Englishwoman which brought him to Britain ('British Journal of Photography', 22.55) but there is no evidence to substantiate this claim. Rejlander can be placed in Lincoln in 1841; by 1845 he had settled in Wolverhampton, at 42 Darlington Street, where he opened a painter's studio. 
It was in Rome in 1852 that Rejlander had first seen photographic reproductions of art and marvelled at their precision. He took up photography in 1853 after an afternoon's tutelage by Nicholaas Henneman, formerly the assistant of William Henry Fox Talbot. His decision to learn photography for himself was based upon his desire to make studies from life which would assist him in his painting; however, he quickly became absorbed in the expressive potential of photography and, in 1855, began to exhibit his photographic compositions. In the same year, he won a bronze medal at the Paris Universal Exhibition; from then until his death in 1875 his photographs were regularly accepted for exhibition and reviewed in the photographic and periodical press. These images consisted of portraits, landscapes, studies from the nude, anatomical studies, 'tetes d'expression', art studies, and subject pictures. Of the latter, it was his genre photographs which earned him his reputation as one of Britain's leading photographers. In photographs such as 'Oh Lift me the Veil of the Future' (1855) and 'Please Give Us a Copper!' (1860s, both National Museum of Photography, Film and Television, Bradford, Royal Photographic Society collection) he demonstrated his skill for eliciting from his models naturalistic expressions and poses which sustained a narrative and aroused in the viewer the sentiment appropriate to the scene before them. His 'Night in Town' (also known as 'Homeless' and 'Poor Jo'; 'c'.1860, National Museum of Photography, Film and Television, Royal Photographic Society collection), depicting a child in rags huddled on a doorstep, was used by the Shaftesbury Society for over a hundred years to highlight the plight of homeless children. 
The first photograph which Rejlander exhibited was 'Group Printed from Three Negatives'. Unlike most of his contemporaries, he did not view 'combination-printing' as a necessary evil and, in 1857, decided to demonstrate its creative potential by submitting a large-scale composition to the Manchester Art Treasures Exhibition. It took him six weeks, and thirty negatives, to produce 'The Two Ways of Life' (1857, two versions, National Museum of Photography, Film and Television, Royal Photographic Society collection), a large-scale (31 in. x 16 in.), elaborate allegory of the choice between the life of virtue and that of vice. The suggestion that photography could fulfil the didactic, morally elevated role ascribed to high art was one which divided the critics: the photograph quickly became a 'cause celebre'. Rejlander's use of semi-clad models to personify a number of the vices proved particularly controversial. Prince Albert, already a patron of Rejlander's, purchased three versions, but this royal endorsement did not prevent the council of the Photographic Society of Scotland from initially refusing to exhibit the photograph on moral grounds. When they did exhibit it in 1858, a curtain was drawn over the offending portion. 
In the spring of 1862 Rejlander moved to London and settled in Malden Road. This move brought him into close contact with those who were promoting his exhibition photographs as proof that photography was a fine art. Their insistent claims drowned out Rejlander's own opinion that photography was neither a fine art nor a science but a medium 'sui generis'; to his mind, photography and painting were but two of the many media in which the artist could express his inventive faculty. His 'Infant Photography Receiving a Fee from the Painter' ('c'.1860) challenged the hypocrisy of artists who publicly claimed that art owed nothing to photography while privately using photographs as studies. For Rejlander, artists had as much to learn from photography about observation and draughtsmanship as photographers had to learn from painting about composition and expression. 
Contemporary descriptions of Rejlander, 'the father of art photography', seek to stress his geniality, humour, and childlike enthusiasm for his art ('Photographic News', 19.42). He had blue-green eyes, a balding pate fringed by long sandy hair, a red moustache, and full beard. He believed that he resembled the Italian patriot Garibaldi and he appears as his hero in two of his own photographs. In his composite self-portrait 'The Artist Rejlander Introduces the Volunteer Rejlander' ('c'.1871, National Museum of Photography, Film and Television, Royal Photographic Society collection) he appears as both a bohemian painter and a corporal of the 38th (Middlesex) volunteer regiment, Artists' company. He also appears together with his wife as the personification of married love in his photograph 'Happy Days' ('c'.1872-3, National Museum of Photography, Film and Television, Royal Photographic Society collection). Mary Rejlander was a frequent model for her husband and probably worked as his assistant. 
As a portrait photographer Rejlander photographed several illustrious sitters, including Alfred Tennyson ('c'.1863, National Portrait Gallery, London), Charles Dodgson (Lewis Carroll) (1863), Henry Taylor ('c'.1863, National Portrait Gallery, London), Charles Darwin ('c'.1871), Gustave Dore ('c'.1868, National Portrait Gallery, London, and National Museum of Photography, Film and Television, Royal Photographic Society collection), and Prince Albert ('c'.1861, National Portrait Gallery, London, and Victoria and Albert Museum, London). When, in the mid-1860s, the majority of photographers repudiated their claims to be recognized as artists in favour of staking their claim to professional status on their technical expertise, Rejlander continued to eschew the latter in favour of invention and effect. Despite inspiring a generation of photographers to produce pictorial photographs, his own endeavours became subject to the charge of careless manipulation and his reputation suffered accordingly. 
In 1868 Rejlander's fortunes began to revive: he was favourably reviewed in the 'Art Journal' and, a year later, opened a new and richly furnished studio opposite Victoria Station in central London. It was soon after this move that Charles Darwin, frustrated in his quest for adequate illustrations of the primary human emotions, sought him out after having seen his photographs in a shop window. Rejlander supplied Darwin with nine illustrations for his 'The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals' (1872), six of which he posed for himself. The photograph illustrating 'mental distress', that of an infant boy wailing, became known as 'Ginx's Baby' after the popular novel by James E. Jenkins; a contemporary, H. B. Pritchard, claimed that it earned Rejlander $5000 in a year. This period of prosperity was, however, short-lived. 
In endeavouring to be both a painter and a photographer, Rejlander found himself increasingly isolated from the fraternities which he hoped to unite. In 1870 a raid upon a print dealer's shop resulted in his art studies being seized with other 'obscene' material. About this time he contracted the 'wasting and painful disease' which led to his death on 18 January 1875 at his home, 23 East Cottages, Clapham ('British Journal of Photography', 22.54); he was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 23 January. He left his widow, in the words of one commentator, 'little more than the memory of a reputation, a few debts, and a little knot of friends' ('Photogram', 59). 


@@@@@


doc= 56873


Walker, Kenneth MacFarlane (1882-1966), urologist and author, was born on 6 June 1882 in Hampstead, London, the third child of William James Walker (1844-1905), a Ceylon merchant, and his wife, Isabella MacFarlane (1881-1921), 'nee' Currie. Both his parents were Scottish but were permanently settled in the south and Walker spent much of his childhood on a small estate in Essex where he acquired a taste for, and some skill in, country sports. He attended Leys School in Cambridge and, having chosen medicine rather than the family business, entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, to work for the natural sciences tripos. He gained first-class honours in 1904. He went on to St Bartholomew's Hospital medical school in London where, having overcome his initial repugnance for the unsavoury aspects of advanced disease, he developed a lifelong commitment to his profession. His autobiographical writings reveal the conflicting ambitions of these early years, the craving for adventure, for exploration, for a missionary role in bringing relief to the sick and suffering, and more prosaically for attaining fame and fortune as a Harley Street consultant. He took opportunities during his training to explore Iceland, to climb in Switzerland, to tour India, and to trek in east Africa. His successful student career and house surgeoncy gave him hopes of professional advancement. 
Walker qualified in 1906, gained the fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons at the minimum age, and set about research into disorders of the bladder. However, the prospect of many unrewarding years in a junior capacity seemed altogether too unadventurous and in 1910 he took a resident post in Argentina at the British Hospital in Buenos Aires. There he soon built up a private surgical practice, and also kept in touch with the London surgical scene, and at the outbreak of war he returned to serve in the Royal Army Medical Corps. In 1918 he was appointed OBE but refused to accept it, believing that honour to be little better than a music-hall joke and that he deserved something better. 
Walker next contemplated going into research but nothing was on offer and Harley Street beckoned. He was appointed officer in charge of the venereal diseases department at St Bartholomew's, where his work resulted in a particular concern with the social and psychological consequences of sexual disorders. In the previous century such expertise could well have led to a place on the full surgical staff, but in the 1920s it was considered appropriate only for genito-urinary surgeons and the teaching hospital could not yet contemplate such specialization. Walker thus became a urologist with appointments at smaller London voluntary hospitals and at St Paul's Hospital for Urinary Diseases in Covent Garden. One of the first in Britain to attempt the endoscopic operation for the relief of prostatic obstruction, he was quick to take up new ideas and to publish his experience, but he was not himself responsible for any major advance. With an established consulting practice dealing with psycho-sexual as well as surgical problems he was particularly conscious of the mental as well as the physical aspects of disease, a concern which was to lead him on to philosophical speculations. 
A handsome, athletic, and good-humoured man, Walker was popular with his professional colleagues and on the hunting field, but being curiously careless in his clothing he never quite adopted the style of the complete Harley Street consultant. On 24 April 1926 he married Eileen Marjorie (1903-1983), only daughter of Frederick H. Wilson, with whom he had a son and a daughter. This marriage ended in divorce in 1944. His second wife, whom he married on 23 September 1944, was Mary Gabrielle Piggot 
('nee' Ginnett; 'b'. 1908)
, the divorced wife of an artist. In addition to his Harley Street house he had a country home, Woodcutters, at Little London, South Ambersham in Sussex, where he enjoyed the garden and walking beneath the arching trees of what he called the Cathedral Wood. He remained active and in good health until the last years of his life, when he gradually withdrew from medical practice and gave more and more time to authorship. 
Writing came easily to Walker and no fewer than fifty-three books by him are held in the British Library, though there is considerable repetition of the major themes. His prose is straightforward, readily comprehensible, and displays in a multiplicity of quotations a wide acquaintance with the literature of history and philosophy. His first non-medical publication was a children's book, 'The Log of the Ark'. His professional works included 'Enlarged Prostate' (1926) and 'Manual of Male Disorders of Sex' (1939), but he endeavoured to interpret modern medicine to the laity in 'The Circle of Life' (1942) and 'A Doctor Digresses' (1950). At a time when there was little factual information available to the general public on the subject, his 'Physiology of Sex and its Social Implications', published in the 'Pelican' series in 1940, was well received. In 'The Intruder: an Unfinished Self-Portrait' (1936) and 'I Talk of Dreams' (1946), he interweaves the story of his life with an exploration of the nature of the human mind. 
It was Walker's search for a true philosophy of medicine and for an understanding of the relationship between body and mind which became the pre-occupation of his later years. In 1923 Walker had been introduced to a discussion group led by P. D. Ouspensky, a Russian journalist then expounding the esoteric philosophy of G. I. Gurdjieff, and Walker found in his teachings much to resolve his earlier difficulties. He met the philosopher himself in 1948 and subsequently wrote a series of books, starting with 'Venture with Ideas' (1951), in which he endeavours to explain in simple language the amalgam of analysis and mysticism in Gurdjieff's philosophy. Walker's prose is lucid but for most readers the matter remains obscure. The Buddhist element in his beliefs came increasingly to the fore; happily for his family he never attempted to proselytize. Walker died at Pendean, West Lavington, Sussex, on 22 January 1966; his body was cremated and his ashes scattered in the woods near his Sussex home. 


@@@@@


doc= 56874


Davis, Sir Robert Henry (1870-1965), inventor of diving and breathing apparatus, was born in London on 6 June 1870, the eldest son of Robert Davis, a detective in the City of London police force. In 1882, aged eleven, Davis entered the firm of Siebe, Gorman & Co. Ltd at Lambeth, manufacturers of diving equipment. His neat handwriting was noticed by Gorman, who placed him in the main office. He studied hard to complete his education out of office hours, and, still in his twenties, was promoted assistant manager. In 1900, when Davis married Margaret (died 1952), daughter of William Tyrrell of Kildare, Gorman gave his gifted assistant a house and a gold watch as wedding presents. There were four sons and two daughters of this marriage. Davis rose successively to become general manager, managing director, governing director, and, in 1959, life president. 
Siebe Gorman had long specialized in various types of diving and safety apparatus, but Davis vigorously developed and expanded the company's activities. In 1906 he perfected an oxygen breathing apparatus for mining rescue, and when, in April 1915, the German army launched its first gas attack on allied troops he immediately devised an emergency respirator, persuading friends, relations, and local families to manufacture it in great quantities, which were dispatched to France within 48 hours. Later Davis worked largely with the Royal Navy. He was a member, with Professor J. B. S. Haldane, Sir Leonard Hill, and Captain G. C. Damant, of the Admiralty deep sea diving committee which, in 1933, published decompression tables allowing safe ascents from depths down to 300 feet. Davis again co-operated with the Royal Navy on experiments which culminated in a record 'hard hat' dive to 540 feet in 1948. The submariners' escape method after 1929 was based on the Davis submerged escape apparatus, which incorporated a breathing bag with an oxygen supply from a small bottle and a chemical agent for absorbing carbon dioxide before exhaled breath was returned to the bag. The apparatus incorporated the hazard of breathing more or less pure oxygen under pressure. Siebe Gorman next proposed built-in breathing equipment for supplying a safe mixture of air to escapers -- until the moment of exit -- from large bottles attached to the submarine. In 1951 this equipment, used with immersion suits, started to replace the earlier apparatus for free ascent from submarines. 
During the Second World War, Siebe Gorman, relocated at Chessington, Surrey, assisted in the development of 'chariots' -- the so-called human torpedoes, also X-craft, and other midget submarines, human mine clearance units, and anti-blast clothing. In 1951 the firm helped to pioneer the use of underwater television to investigate the sinking of the submarine 'Affray' and the Comet aircraft disasters, and in 1953 it provided oxygen sets for the successful British climbing expedition to Mount Everest. 
Davis devoted his life to the study of problems confronting those called on to work in unbreathable atmospheres. Among several publications his most important and comprehensive was 'Deep Diving and Submarine Operations' (1920), which had run to six editions by 1955. His total absorption for sixty-two years with Siebe Gorman, in a field where his expertise was unrivalled, virtually precluded other interests. Knighted in 1932, and awarded an honorary DSc by Birmingham University, he attended the office regularly until 1964, although he had formally retired in 1960. He died at his home, San Toi, Jackson Close, Epsom, on 29 March 1965. 


@@@@@


doc= 56875


Hodgson, William Hope (1877-1918), author, was born on 15 November 1877 at Blackmore End, Essex, the second of the twelve children of Samuel Hodgson (1846-1892), an Anglican clergyman, and Lissie Sarah (1852-1933), daughter of Burdett Lambton Brown, an engineer. He attended St Margaret's, a boarding-school in Margate, but ran away at thirteen with the intention of going to sea. An apprenticeship in the mercantile marine was obtained for him in 1891; he was eventually certificated as third mate and rose to the rank of lieutenant. Although short in stature, he took a keen interest in body-building and in 1899 left the sea to found his own school of physical culture in Blackburn, Lancashire. He was also an enthusiastic photographer; he used pictures taken during his travels to illustrate lectures which he gave for commercial reasons and to assist his assiduous campaigning for better conditions for seamen. 
When Hodgson's school was forced to close in 1902 he began writing articles for popular magazines, soon branching out into fiction. His first published story was 'The Goddess of Death' in the April 1904 issue of the 'Royal Magazine'. He found his metier with weird tales of the sea featuring various kinds of monstrous creatures. His most famous story of this kind was 'The Voice in the Night' (1907), and his first published novel, 'The Boats of the 'Glen Carrig'' (1907), featured eighteenth-century castaways menaced by a whole series of exotic life forms. 
Hodgson's second novel, 'The House on the Borderland' (1908), uses an account of a house 'haunted' by swinish invaders from another dimension as a bracketing device for a series of visions, which include a remarkable account of the cosmos revealed by contemporary astronomy and the future evolution of the solar system. 'The Ghost Pirates' (1909) replaces the house with a ship which slips into the borderland between this world and another and is eventually invaded by its horrid inhabitants. Similarly swinish creatures continued to crop up in Hodgson's work; one is glimpsed in 'The Hog', the final (posthumously published) adventure of the occult detective whose early adventures were collected as 'Carnacki the Ghost-Finder' (1910), and another such creature assumes command of an experimenter trying to make spiritual contact with the absolute in 'Eloi, Eloi, sabachthani' (first published in abridged form as 'The Baumoff Explosion' in 1919). 
The last novel Hodgson published -- though it may have been the first he wrote -- was 'The Night Land' (1912), in which a medieval visionary embarks on a hallucinatory odyssey in a far future when mankind is on the brink of extinction. An inhabitant of the 'Last Redoubt' must cross an eternally dark landscape inhabited by exceedingly strange and menacing life forms in order to rescue the woman who is the reincarnation of the dreamer's dead lover. 
Hodgson always struggled to make a living as a writer, although his less exotic tales of life at sea, collected in 'Men of the Deep Waters' (1914), 'The Luck of the Strong' (1916), and 'Captain Gault' (1917), were better received in his own day than his fantasies. On 26 February 1913 he married Bessie Gertrude Farnsworth (1877-1943) in London. The couple initially settled in the south of France but returned to Britain in 1914 when the First World War broke out. Hodgson joined the University of London Officers' Training Corps and was commissioned in the Royal Field Artillery in 1915. He was discharged from active service in 1916 after a head injury sustained when he was thrown from a horse, but persuaded the RFA to recommission him a year later, and was posted to France in October 1917. He was killed by a shellburst near Ypres on 19 April 1918, while reporting from a forward position on the accuracy of his battery's fire, and was buried at the foot of Mont Kemmel. 
Hodgson was eventually recognized as an important pioneer of modern imaginative fiction. He was one of a handful of writers -- the others included H. G. Wells, M. P. Shiel, and J. D. Beresford -- who produced visionary scientific romances extrapolating from ideas in contemporary science as far as the literary imagination could take them. The figures of menace in his short horror stories are always rationalized by reference to biology or metaphysical speculation; in his longer works he attempted to cultivate a sense of the sublime which recognized the awesome magnitude of the universe revealed by contemporary science. 


@@@@@


doc= 56877


Onions, (George) Oliver (1873-1961), novelist, was born on 29 July 1873 at 37 Ripon Street, Bradford, Yorkshire, the eldest child of at least three children of George Frederick Onions, a cashier, and his wife, Emily Alice, 'nee' Fearnley. His interest in art took him to London and Paris to study, and he tried to make a living at posters, book designing, and similar work. It was poorly paid, so he turned to writing for periodicals. Sketches and other pieces were collected in 'The Complete Bachelor' (1900), and short stories of Yorkshire written for magazines were collected in 'Tales from a Far Riding' (1902) before he leapt, as he said, from the frying pan of journalism into the 'fire of authorship' with the autobiographical novel 'The Odd Job Man' (1903). 

'The Odd Job Man' was followed by a string of mostly realistic fictions: 'The Drakestone' and 'Back o' the Moon' (both 1906), 'Admiral Eddy' (1907), 'Pedlar's Pack' (1908), 'Draw in your Stool' and 'Little Devil Doubt' (both 1909). On 10 June 1909 Onions married the novelist Amy Roberta (Berta) Ruck (1878-1978). 'The Exception', a tale of blackmail, was published in 1910, and the supernatural work 'Widdershins' followed in 1911. 'Widdershins' gained him critical approval -- he always maintained an uncritical popular readership by following the fashions -- which the weakness of his next novel, 'Good Boy Seldom' (1911), could not destroy. 

'Good Boy Seldom', like 'Little Devil Doubt', concerned an ambitious and not over-scrupulous young man, a favourite theme of Onions. He used it again in 'In Accordance with the Evidence' (1912), a popular book that was followed by two more along the same rather sensational lines: 'The Debit Account' (1913) and 'The Story of Louie' (1914). They were successful in Britain, from Secker in London, and from Doran in New York. Frank Swinnerton and others liked their 'veracity', a term which at the time covered a multitude of sins (and exculpated some sinners, too). 
The readership this trilogy established stuck with Onions through the rest of his busy career as he moderated his early preachiness (J. B. Priestley had complained of intrusive 'author's remarks' in a 'London Mercury' review; Ashley, 233), embraced topicality, titillated with somewhat sordid relationships, introduced new women and fellow authors as characters, toyed with psychological analysis, and entertained with historical novels and ghosts and misty moors. In 1918 Onions changed his name by deed poll to George Oliver, but by then he had established himself as a popular writer and all his work was signed both before and after that date Oliver Onions. Ever striving for success, he remained inventive -- and industrious, although it was said that he 'wrote with difficulty, even with anguish', perhaps over-sensitive to adverse criticism of his work ('The Times'). Yet Onions published some forty books, including collections of short stories, ending with the posthumous 'A Shilling to Spend' (1965). 
A reviewer in 'The Atlantic' hailed Onions in 1914 as 'the cleverest' and 'the most advanced of the younger English novelists' (Ashley, 233), but in the event, Onions had to compete with Conrad, Galsworthy, Joyce, Woolf, and D. H. Lawrence, among others. However, he entertained a public who did not read such giants of literature. When Onions died on 9 April 1961 at Bronglais Hospital, Aberystwyth, British fiction had left him behind. 'The Poor Man's Tapestry' (1946) is his best historical novel. 'The Collected Ghost Stories of Oliver Onions' (1935) is his work most likely to last. 


@@@@@


doc= 56878


Cannan, Gilbert Eric (1884-1955), translator and writer, was born on 25 June 1884 at 24 Great Cheetham Street West, in Broughton, Manchester. One of nine children, he was the second son of Henry Angus Cannan, an ill-paid Scottish shipping clerk, and (Grace Charlotte) Violet, the daughter of the Revd Francis Arbuthnot Wright, an Anglican clergyman whose enthusiasms and hospitality did not match his income. Cannan's parents were loving, but feckless, and as a child Cannan wondered sometimes whether he was a changeling. Overshadowed by Angus, his tough-minded and clever elder brother, he was given to long bouts of crying, which were probably the first symptoms of the insanity which was eventually to cast a cloud over his life. Cannan attended Ducie Avenue board school from where, to his parents' surprise, he won a foundation scholarship to Manchester grammar school in 1898. Here he quickly made his mark in modern languages, winning prizes every year until he left in 1902, with an open modern languages exhibition to King's College, Cambridge, partly on the strength of a brilliant essay on Schiller. At Cambridge he was noted for an aloofness, which may have masked a sense of insecurity. He read voraciously in German, French, and English, made no close friends, and left with a formidable knowledge of European culture, but only a pass degree, which suggests either a breakdown in health, or a failure to adhere to the prescribed texts. 
After university Cannan read for the bar, but later abandoned the law in order to write. He was tall and fair with an emperor's nose, and also quickly gained a foothold in literary and theatrical circles. Following a passionate but unconsummated love affair with Kathleen Bruce, who married Robert Scott, the explorer, Cannan became involved with Mary, 'nee' Ansell (1868/9-1950), James Barrie's wife, while working as secretary of the Society for the Abolition of Censorship. In 1909 he was cited as the co-respondent in the divorce which ensued and, against the advice of H. G. Wells and others, married her out of a sense of chivalry on 28 April 1910. 
Cannan started his translation of Romain Rolland's four-volume masterpiece, 'Jean Christophe', in 1907. His own first novel, 'Peter Homunculus' (1909), was published in the year he became a theatre critic and, from that time on, novels, reviews, sociological and philosophical books, short plays, poems, and translations poured from Cannan's pen. In 1913 he reached a wider public with 'Round the Corner', a novel based on the life of his maternal grandfather and family, whose perverse and flamboyant lifestyle gave Cannan ample scope for a dense and deeply felt story. Other novels draw on the lives of his paternal forebears and relatives: 'Little Brother' (1912) cruelly depicts Edwin Cannan (1861-1935), the economist, who supported Cannan financially until his marriage, and in 'The Stucco House' (1917) is a vivid portrait of Cannan's grandfather, James Cannan, a provincial journalist, bank clerk, and theatre critic for the 'Manchester News'. At twenty-five, Cannan declared, he had a very clear conception of the industrial revolution seen through the spiritual history of his family. 
In 1913 the Cannans moved to a converted windmill in Cholesbury, Buckinghamshire, where they entertained writers and artists, including D. H. Lawrence, Katherine Mansfield, David Garnett, and Compton Mackenzie. They were also taken up by Ottoline Morrell. Mark Gertler used the mill's garage as a studio; Vladimir Polunin decorated Cannan's study with a frieze; and S. S. Koteliansky worked with him on translations from the Russian. In 1916 Cannan's novel 'Mendel', based on the life of Mark Gertler, caused outrage. His marriage broke up; he fled to London, and, living alone in shabby rooms, became increasingly unstable, but continued to write and translate. 
On 11 April 1918 Mary Cannan was granted a judicial separation after Cannan fell in love with a radiant nineteen-year-old South African, Gwen Wilson, an affair which probably postponed his final breakdown. The couple rented a studio in St John's Wood, London, and took as a lodger Henry Mond, later Lord Melchett. This arrangement subsequently resulted in a 'menage a trois' which became a talking point in literary London. In 1920, while Cannan was lecturing in North America and raising money for D. H. Lawrence, Mond married Gwen Wilson, a blow from which Cannan never recovered. Desolate, he travelled across Africa, mostly by horse, sending back dispatches to the 'New York Freeman', which were published in a book, 'Letters from a Distance' (1923). On his return, homeless and alone but still writing, he descended into violent madness. Certified insane in April 1924, Cannan became a patient in The Priory, Roehampton, London, where he wrote paranoic letters destined for the dustbin. His translation of 'A. O. Barnabooth: his Diary' came out to good reviews that autumn. 
In fifteen hectic years Cannan wrote twenty-seven books, countless articles, scores of poems, and at least fourteen one- and two-act plays, of which the best-known were 'Everybody's Husband' (1917) and 'Miles Dixon', which the 'Manchester Guardian' critic likened to the work of Synge. In 1913 Henry James had described Cannan as one of four up-and-coming authors, with D. H. Lawrence 'in the dusty rear' (Farr, 116). St John Hankin remarked that 'Shaw, Barker and Galsworthy all believe Cannan is going to wipe them out' (ibid., 88). Such praise caused resentment. Lawrence in a furious moment called Cannan a 'soap pill' (J. Boulton, ed., 'The Letters of D. H. Lawrence', 7 vols., 1979-93) and Lytton Strachey described him as 'an empty bucket' (Farr, 65). Yet few knew his fate, for only Gwen Melchett and, later, Edwin Cannan's widow, Rita, were allowed to visit him at The Priory. 
In 1952 Cannan was moved to a freer regime at Holloway Sanatorium, Virginia Water, Surrey, where he died of cancer on 30 June 1955, leaving one possession, a barrister's moth-eaten wig. He was cremated in Woking. 


@@@@@


doc= 56879


Armstrong, Martin Donisthorpe (1882-1974), poet and novelist, was born at 2 Jesmond Gardens, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 2 October 1882, the son of Charles Francis Armstrong, architect, of Brisco Hill, Carlisle, Cumberland, and his wife, Edith Lucy, 'nee' Donisthorpe. He came from a well-to-do family and enjoyed a comfortable childhood, the memories of which he later recounted in his autobiographical novel, 'Victorian Peep-Show' (1938). He was educated at Charterhouse School, Surrey, and at Pembroke College, Cambridge, where in 1908 he earned a BA in mechanical science. After working for two years in an architect's office, he spent a year in Italy studying pre-Renaissance and Renaissance Italian art. In April 1911 he met the American poet Conrad Aiken in Florence, and they developed an intense personal and professional relationship that lasted well into the 1920s. 
Armstrong's first collection of poetry, 'Exodus and other Poems' (1912), was published after his return from Italy. However, his fledgeling literary career was suspended shortly thereafter with the outbreak of the First World War. In 1914 Armstrong enlisted as a private in the Artists' Rifles, obtained a commission in 1915 in the 8th (Middlesex) regiment, and in 1917 was sent to the French front, where he remained until the armistice. Upon his return to England he was appointed to a post in the Ministry of Pensions. A year later he resigned to resume his literary career in earnest, and in the early 1920s he began regularly publishing his poetry and literary criticism in a variety of journals, including 'The Bookman', the 'London Mercury', and 'The Spectator', where he was associate literary editor from 1922 to 1924. He also published two more volumes of poetry, including 'Thirty New Poems' (1918) and 'The Buzzards and other Poems' (1921). Much of his popularity during this period was due to his association with the Georgian poets, Walter de la Mare and Edmund Blunden among them, who were celebrated in 'Georgian Poetry', published annually by London's Poetry Bookshop until 1922. 
During the mid-1920s Armstrong began devoting his efforts to story-writing and novels. In subsequent years he published several volumes of stories, including 'The Bazaar and other Stories' (1924), 'Saint Hercules and other Stories' (1927), and 'Sir Pompey and Madame Juno, and other Tales' (1927). His first novel, 'The Goat and Compasses', was published in 1925, followed closely by 'Desert: a Legend' (1926), 'The Stepson' (1927), 'The Water is Wide' (1927), and 'Saint Christopher's Day' (1928), the last a considerable commercial success. In September 1929 his friend, the poet John Freeman, fondly described Armstrong's personal outlook as 'sane and humorous, avoiding tragedy as far as he possibly can.... He has preserved the English tradition of reticence and restraint'. Freeman also praised Armstrong's poetry and prose, and noted that he was more than merely a poet or a novelist, but rather 'a man of letters in a closer application of the phrase than is commonly justified' (Freeman, 287). Indeed, the variety of Armstrong's literary pursuits confirms Freeman's conclusion, for in addition to his verse, short stories, criticism, and novels, he had published an English translation of Pedro Antonio de Alarcon's 'El sombrero de tres picos' (as 'The Three-Cornered Hat', 1928) and a biography, 'Lady Hester Stanhope' (1927). On 15 January 1930 he married Jessie Aiken, 'nee' McDonald (1889-1970), a Canadian, and the divorced wife of Conrad Aiken; they had one son, David. 
In 1931 Armstrong's 'Collected Poems' appeared, and in 1934 the popular volume 'The Major Pleasures of Life', which he edited, was published. He published six additional novels in the ensuing decade: 'The Romantic Adventures of Mr Darby and of Sarah his Wife' (1931), 'Lover's Leap: a Story in Three Voices' (1932), 'The Foster-Mother' (1933), 'Venus over Lannery' (1936), 'The Snake in the Grass' (1938), and 'The Butterfly' (1941). Although the novels published during the latter part of his career received considerable praise in the English press, they never enjoyed the commercial success of his earlier works. He also published three more volumes of short stories, including 'General Buntop's Miracle and other Stories' (1934), 'A Case of Conscience and other Tales' (1937), and 'Simplicity Jones and other Stories' (1940). 
During the Second World War, Armstrong was instrumental in organizing a civil defence administration for the Sussex countryside, where he also served as air raid warden. After the war he began to advance his career into still more diverse media, often at the behest of his literary agent, the renowned A. D. Peters. In 1944 he began writing a weekly column, 'The spoken word', for the BBC's flagship journal, 'The Listener', and it ran for nearly thirteen years. Some of his most popular endeavours appeared on the radio in the 1940s, and he was a frequent contributor to the BBC's 'Children's Hour', where his novel for children, 'Said the Cat to the Dog' (1945), was immensely popular and enjoyed many repeat performances. The sequel, 'Said the Dog to the Cat', was published in 1948. 'The Essential Mary Webb', which he edited, was published in 1949, and an anthology of his short stories, 'Selected Stories', appeared in 1951. 
Anthony Bertram, the novelist and art critic, remembered Armstrong as being: 'essentially level-headed, and his keen mind, his tolerance and his wit were never marred by prejudice. It was that balance which enabled him to write such exquisite prose; and it was a fine human sympathy, working unostentatiously under his dry exterior, that flowered in the tenderness of his stories. Through his poems, but never in his workaday life, one saw into a glamorous and tragic imagination. (Bertram, 53-4)' Armstrong's novels, his most substantial artistic accomplishment, were written in the Edwardian tradition of John Galsworthy and Arnold Bennett and are characterized by carefully drawn portraits of figures from the upper-middle-class society into which he was born. The characters often reflect the class values that he himself averred, especially his respect for justice and tradition, his love of the countryside, and his concern for social harmony in relationships between the sexes. At the same time, however, his novels frequently assault the class values which he deplored, particularly snobbery, materialism, and indifference. Together, these conflicting elements converge and impinge upon the characters in his troubled fictive world, forging a kind of novel of manners in which his characters search for love and justice in a universe where often neither is to be found, or, if at all, only after a long and difficult struggle. The amalgamation of these figures in his canon of novels produces an intriguing critique of Edwardian class values, while at the same time offering a selection of characters of great interest for their personal cultivation and sensitivity. Armstrong died at his home in Sutton, near Pulborough, Sussex, on 24 February 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 56880


Cory, Annie Sophie (1868-1952), novelist, was born on 1 October 1868 in Rawalpindi, Punjab, the youngest of the three daughters of Colonel Arthur Cory ('bap'. 1831, died 1903), an army officer and later newspaper proprietor, and his wife, Elizabeth Fanny Griffin (1834-1916), daughter of Alfred Griffin (1811-1867), a barrister and landowner; Annie sometimes used her mother's maiden name, calling herself Vivian Cory Griffin. The poet Adela Florence Nicolson (1865-1904), was her middle sister. Her sisters went to school in Richmond, Surrey but there is no evidence that she did. Her father resigned from the army in 1876, becoming editor and co-proprietor of the 'Civil and Military Gazette' in Lahore until 1882; in 1884 he moved to Karachi to become editor and proprietor of the 'Sind Gazette'. Annie Sophie matriculated at London University aged nineteen in 1888, but although she passed the intermediate examination in arts as an external student in 1890, partly qualifying herself for a BA pass degree, she did not graduate, either because she failed the final examination or because she abandoned her course of study. 
Cory's first traceable publication as Victoria Cross was 'Theodora: a Fragment', which was published by John Lane in the 'Yellow Book', 4 (January 1895), an extract from a very daring manuscript novel she had offered him, which was not to appear until 1903, when Walter Scott published it as 'Six Chapters from a Man's Life'. In August 1895 Lane published 'The Woman who Didn't' by 'Victoria Crosse' in the Keynotes series. Many critics have been misled, as no doubt were some contemporaries, into believing that the book was written as a riposte to Grant Allen's 'The Woman who Did', published in the same series in February 1895. In fact it is very different, an account of a brief unconsummated encounter on board ship between an officer in the Indian army and an unhappily married woman, and the title seems to have been a bit of clever marketing. The titillating evocation of sexual desire was to be the main selling point in the fiction of Victoria Cross (as she called herself on the title-page of 'Paula: a Sketch from Life' (1896), and from then on). The reticence which characterizes 'The Woman who Didn't' was shaken off in such works as 'Anna Lombard' (1901), one of her best-sellers (she claimed it had sold 6 million copies by 1928), about an Englishwoman torn between her lust for an Indian and love for an Englishman. She marries them both, and eventually murders her child by the former to save her marriage to the latter. 'Five Nights' (1908), about a woman's affair with her painter cousin, made Elinor Glyn's 'Six Weeks' (1907) seem pretty tame. Her books are ostentatiously nonconformist in their attitude to marriage, often have spiritualist or mystical elements, but are dubious about religious conformity. Like many feminists of her generation Cory was a keen anti-vivisectionist (being a patron of the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection), and she opposed conventional medicine, denouncing the pernicious effects not only of vaccination but also of appendicectomy. Another conspicuous theme is a horror of childbearing, in its effects both on women's bodies and on relationships between men and women. Surviving correspondence with T. Werner Laurie, Cory's main publisher, indicates that her books had very large sales, especially in cheap form, into the early 1920s. Several were dramatized or filmed. Thereafter, although she went on publishing until 1937, her popularity declined. Her work is extraordinarily uneven; it often focuses on the disabling effects of gender roles in a way that is startling for its date. It can be witty, but it can also be pretentious and absurd. Even in the 1930s, by which time her power to shock the conventional had declined, she was capable of producing intermittently fascinating work, such as 'A Husband's Holiday' (1932), about a prim woman who disguises herself as a coarse one to win her husband back, only to realize that he is not worth it; and the futurist 'Martha Brown, MP' (1935), set in a world in which women rule and men are dim, shallow, and whining. Her letters indicate that she was convinced of her own greatness; perhaps if she had been less isolated from her contemporaries it might have been better for her work. 
Her adult life seems to have been luxurious and peripatetic but almost devoid of friendships outside her family. Her father's death in 1903 was followed in 1904 by the death of her brother-in-law General Nicolson and the suicide of his widow. Cory and her mother set up home with the latter's brother Heneage Mackenzie Griffin (1848-1939), who had made a fortune mining in the USA. They travelled widely, especially after her mother's death in 1916. They were in England during the First World War, but thereafter spent their time in the grand hotels of the Italian lakes and the south of France, mostly at the Riviera Palace Hotel, Menton. Heneage Griffin died in September 1939 and his niece spent the war in Geneva. She died in a nursing home, the Clinica Capitanio, in Milan on 2 August 1952, her novels out of print and forgotten, leaving a large estate to be the subject of litigation between rival claimants. 


@@@@@


doc= 56883


Goldring, Douglas (1887-1960), writer, was born in Greenwich, London, on 7 January 1887, the youngest of five children of Frank Goldring, an architect, and Constance Anne Morris, daughter of William Morris, barrister. Goldring described his early home life as unhappy, owing to the incompatibility of his irresponsible father and rigid, humourless mother, whom Goldring described as 'devouringly possessive'. When Goldring was three the family moved to Brussels, and then resided in Brighton for a time before settling in Oxford. Goldring attended three schools: one at Hurstpierpoint, Sussex; Magdalen College School, Oxford; and Felsted School, a Church of England school in Dunmow, Essex, where he recalled being a 'self-conscious little prig' and was flogged for 'insubordination' (Goldring, 'Odd Man Out', 34). He began writing verse and at seventeen had a poem accepted by 'The Academy'. In 1906 he went up to Oxford University, where he matriculated from Marcon's Hall (one of the private halls). Although 'a complete nervous wreck' (ibid., 60) on leaving school, at Oxford he quickly cultivated a circle of aesthete friends, most notably Somerset Maugham, who introduced him to the poetry of Baudelaire and Verlaine among others. 
Financial constraint forced Goldring to leave Oxford after a year, and he joined the editorial staff at 'Country Life'. In London, Goldring met Ford Madox Hueffer (later Ford), 'the principal formative influence of his life' (Goldring, 'South Lodge', xvi), who told the aspiring poet that he would never be 'a real poet' (ibid., 36); nevertheless, before the war Goldring published two volumes of poetry, including 'A Country Boy' (1910), influenced by A. E. Housman. He also produced a light novel of romance, 'The Permanent Uncle' (1912), and several well-received travel books. Two of these focused on the French, whom Goldring admired for their genius at the art of living and about whom he wrote throughout his life. In addition, Goldring became involved in various publishing ventures: as sub-editor under Ford of the short-lived but influential 'English Review'; from 1910 as editor of his own high-calibre magazine, 'The Tramp'; from 1910 to 1912 as literary editor of the publishing firm Max Goschen; as adviser to Wyndham Lewis's modernist journal 'Blast'; and in 1915 as founder of Selwyn and Blount publishers. 
The First World War temporarily curtailed Goldring's prodigious publishing efforts. He enlisted in August 1914 but in October succumbed to acute rheumatism and was invalided out of the army, to his bitter disappointment; by 1916, when he was again fit, he had become a conscientious objector. In an autobiographical novel, 'The Fortune' (1917), Goldring expressed his strong pacifist views through a character who becomes a pacifist under the overriding influence of an aristocratic schoolfriend only to be brutally murdered during the Easter rising in Dublin. Despite generous reviews, including one by T. S. Eliot, who deemed it 'unquestionably a brilliant novel' ('Egoist', June 1918), the novel sold only between 300 and 400 copies in England. Not until the expression of anti-war sentiment became acceptable in the late twenties was the ground-breaking nature of this novel fully appreciated. In a 1931 preface to it, Aldous Huxley wrote that ''The Fortune' contains what is, I believe, the earliest, indeed the only contemporary, fictional account of war-time pacifism. So far as it goes, this account is excellent'. The war, along with the injustices Goldring witnessed while in Ireland in 1916-18, radically politicized him; thereafter he referred to himself as a 'propaganda novelist' (Goldring, 'Odd Man Out', 142). Goldring's anti-war, anti-imperialist, socialist views come most strikingly to the fore in 'The Black Curtain' (1920) and 'Nobody Knows' (1923), the latter his most highly praised and widely read novel (ibid., 255). 
On 27 November 1917, in Dublin, Goldring married Beatrice (Betty) Duncan, with whom he had two sons. Her family connections drew him into the literary circles of Yeats, George Moore, and others. Goldring spent the immediate post-war years in London, with frequent trips to the continent. His marriage was dissolved in 1922. In 1925 he obtained a lectureship in Goteborg, Sweden, where he met Malin Nordstrom, whom he married on 24 April 1927. They moved to the south of France, and in the late twenties and early thirties Goldring penned vivid travel books, notably 'The French Riviera' (1928), while indulging his wanderlust. While in England in the 1940s he turned his hand to memoirs of historical periods, as in 'The Twenties' (1945), and of literary figures, notably Violet Hunt and Ford Madox Ford and the 'English Review' circle in 'South Lodge' (1943) and 'The Last Pre-Raphaelite' (1948). Through these later works Goldring has obtained a niche in literary history. However, his highly individual travel books and the politically engaged novels clearly in advance of their time, notably 'The Fortune', deserve critical consideration, at the very least as social documents of the 'lost generation'. In appearance Goldring was tall and blond. By conviction he was an eclectic Christian-influenced socialist with the integrity and courage to voice unpopular opinions. He lived latterly at Stonar House, Deal, Kent, and died on 9 April 1960. 


@@@@@


doc= 56887


Pugh, Edwin William (1874-1930), novelist, short-story writer, and critic, was born on 22 January 1874 at 47 Foley Street, Marylebone, London, the second of four children of David Walter Pugh (1843-1887), a theatrical property maker, Covent Garden orchestra player, and sometime member of the Moore and Burgess Minstrels, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Harris (1845-1925), a Covent Garden wardrobe mistress. Pugh attended a local board school, leaving aged thirteen in 1887 to work in an iron factory, where he worked fourteen hours a day for three months. He then worked in a lawyer's office for eight years and later drew on his experiences in his writings. 
Pugh began his writing career by publishing a short story when he was twelve. His first collection was 'A Street in Suburbia' (1895), a series of sketches of London working-class life, closely followed by his first novel, 'The Man of Straw', in the following year. The former, though rather sentimental, was similar in style to the work of Arthur Morrison, the latter to that of Dickens. Both books were favourably reviewed and Pugh turned to full-time writing as a result. His early work dealt with the life and times of the London East End cockney, and he established himself as a member of the 'cockney school' of writers, which included William Pett Ridge (1860-1930) and Henry Nevinson (1856-1941). Pugh's enthusiasm for the East End and its inhabitants was a reflection of his own early background and his ability to better himself. 
Pugh's depiction of working-class life is over-sentimental and unrealistic. Unlike Morrison he fights shy of the vicious, criminal life of the East End, writing rather of the unkind circumstances and ugliness of life, of poverty, and of the problems caused by personal relationships. A good example is the novel 'Tony Drum: a Cockney Boy' (1898), a story of the trials and tribulations of a very untypical cockney. He is physically deformed and an innocent; all that is good in his life is destroyed, including in the end his own life itself. This is the essence of Pugh's attitude towards the working class; his characters are frequently untypical and he portrays a rather false picture. In his essay 'Real realism' in 'Slings and Arrows' (1916) Pugh was critical of writers who painted a one-sided picture of East End life, emphasizing the brutal and criminal aspects, and neglecting much that was good in the everyday. Pugh himself, however, was guilty of such bias. 
Autobiographical elements appear in a number of Pugh's books, especially in 'The Eyes of a Child' (1917) and 'The Secret Years' (1923). In these two novels the character Tobias Morgan relates the trials and tribulations of his early life and his working in a factory at the age of thirteen and then, after a breakdown, finding employment in a lawyer's office. 
In his essay 'The decay of the short story' Pugh wrote that 'the short story has fallen into decay, not because we lack living authors capable of excelling in that form of literature, but because we deceive ourselves with false notions of what the public needs' ('Slings and Arrows: a Book of Essays', 1916, 199). Here Pugh, to a certain extent, must include himself, not only as a short-story writer but also as a novelist. At the turn of the nineteenth century the vogue for working-class novels of the cockney school was in decline and by the end of the first decade interest had virtually ceased. Despite this Pugh continued to write of the East End, publishing 'Harry the Cockney' (1912) and 'The Cockney at Home' (1914). 
Apart from his cockney novels Pugh produced two novels on alcoholism: 'The Heritage' (1901), in collaboration with Godfrey Burchett, and 'The Fruits of the Vine' (1904). Pugh greatly admired Dickens, publishing 'Charles Dickens: the Apostle of the People' in 1908, and he saw Sam Weller as 'the typical Cockney' of the late Victorian period ('The Charles Dickens Originals', 1912, 206). If Pugh is remembered today it is for his cockney novels and stories, but he also wrote a mystery novel, 'The Purple Head' (1905), and various books about London including 'The City of the World' (1912). 
Pugh always had to struggle to make a living and he supplemented his novel writing by his many contributions to journals and newspapers including the 'Sun', 'Morning Leader', 'New Review', 'Idler', 'To-Day', 'English Illustrated Magazine', 'Chapman's Grand Magazine', the 'Bookman' (where he was a reviewer for many years), and the 'New Age'. In the last of these Pugh expounded his socialist views in articles with such titles as 'Why I joined the Fabian Society' ('New Age', 1, 1907, 40) and 'Socialism and suburbia' ('New Age', 3, 1908, 330). He also contributed 'The Mere Clerk', a series of articles in volume 1. 
Pugh suffered from financial problems from the beginning of the twentieth century and applied on four occasions to the Royal Literary Fund between 1902 and 1916. He received a civil-list pension of $100 in 1929. 
Thomas Burke described Pugh as 'short, stocky in build, with a high colour, and hair, before it went white, of jet-black -- altogether Welsh' (Burke, 187). He also had a beard in later life. Pugh died in sad circumstances. According to Burke he was found in Putney unconscious, battered, and bruised, and died a few days later in hospital on 5 February 1930, aged fifty-six. Yet the death certificate records that Pugh died of alcoholism at 164 St John's Hill, the address of the Lambeth, Battersea, and Wandsworth public assistance committee local offices: the hospital was next door. Pugh was saved from a pauper's burial through a subscription raised by the writer Arthur St John Adcock and was buried at Magdalen Road cemetery, Wandsworth, on 8 February 1930. 


@@@@@


doc= 56888


Ridge, William Pett (1859-1930), novelist and short-story writer, was born at Chilham, near Canterbury, Kent, on 22 April 1859, the second son in the family of at least two sons and four daughters of James Ridge, a railway porter, later stationmaster, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Pett. Very little is known of his early years, except that he was educated at Marden, Kent, where his father was stationmaster. When he went up to London in 1880, living at Deptford with his widowed mother, he attended evening classes at Birkbeck Literary and Scientific Institute (now Birkbeck College). During a long day from nine to seven o'clock he toiled as a clerk in the railway clearing house for 1 guinea per six-day week. Somehow he managed to find the energy to write, and in 1890 he published his first sketches of London life for the 'St James Gazette' under the pseudonym Warwick Simpson. 
Pett Ridge's first novel, 'A Clever Wife' (1895), 'made more stir than most first novels do' (Adcock, 274), according to contemporary Arthur St John Adcock, but it was not until Pett Ridge's fifth, 'Mord Em'ly' (1898), that he achieved popular success. Its appeal lay mainly in the feisty south London protagonist, Em'ly, and her defiance of authority, particularly philanthropists bent on improving her lot. For Em'ly there is no better place than her territory just south of Waterloo, where she possesses an identity as a member of a female gang, in striking anticipation of contemporary urban life. Pett Ridge does not depict London life in a grim or brutal way, however, as had Arthur Morrison in 'A Child of the Jago' (1896). Instead, his characters enjoy their amusements much more fully than their drab, boring middle-class counterparts. This attitude became the signature motif of the so-called cockney school, and was initially received enthusiastically, with Pett Ridge 'boldly breaking away from the tragic convention of the slums' (Keating, 210). Cockney school novelists, including Henry Nevinson, Edwin Pugh, Arthur St John Adcock, and Pett Ridge did, however, owe a great deal to Dickens, particularly his portrayal of the virtuous poor; unlike Dickens, Pett Ridge's work as a whole explored the East End proper, that is, east of Aldgate pump. Later critics of Pett Ridge and the others saw their work as sentimental and facetious, an instrument for assuaging middle-class guilt. 
On 28 February 1910 William Pett Ridge married Olga Hentschel ('b'. 1873/4), daughter of his friend Carl Hentschel, a newspaperman and editor of the London 'Playgoer'. They had one son and a daughter. The other fictional terrain that Pett Ridge explored was suburbia, notably in 'From Nine to Six-Thirty' (1910), and he became known for his portrayal of modern young women asserting their independence as clerks or typists. 
Above all Pett Ridge was a humorist. This is captured in his description of meeting Mark Twain when he was introduced as 'the Mark Twain of England': ''What he meant to say', [Ridge] interrupted, 'was that you are the Pett Ridge of America'. 'Ah', said the old man [Twain], taking my arm pleasantly, 'now I know we shall get along together'' (Pett Ridge, 44). Pett Ridge's wit and geniality made him a popular after-dinner speaker and an eminently clubbable man; among others he joined the Yorrick and Boz clubs, was elected to the Garrick on nomination by J. M. Barrie, and latterly was president of the Omar Khayyam Club. 
Pett Ridge had always taken an interest in children, especially those from the London slums, and he continued his charitable work there even after he moved his family to Ampthill, Willow Grove, Chislehurst, Kent, where he died on 29 September 1930. 'The Times' obituary noted that he was an enthusiastic committee member of King Edward's Hospital Fund for London and observed that the capital would miss his 'kindly presence and never-failing humour' (quoted in Jasper, 303). 
In photographs Pett Ridge, with his dark eyes and slightly hooded lids, seems solemn, and this deceptive appearance apparently served well his dry wit. Although he was prolific, producing over sixty novels and short-story collections as well as two charming memoirs, by the end of his career his literary following had drastically diminished. He is likely to remain a minor writer because he was innovative neither in style nor subject matter; his main flaw was that he ignored the devastating impact of severe deprivation on his east London characters and instead perpetuated the sentimental Victorian myth that cockneys with enough character could triumph over all obstacles. 


@@@@@


doc= 56890


Browne, Stanley George (1907-1986), leprologist and medical missionary, was born on 8 December 1907 at 77 Bousefield Road, New Cross, London, the second of the five children of Arthur Browne (1874-1967), Post Office clerk, and his wife, Edith Lillywhite (1887-1927). His formal instruction started when, after much pleading, he entered Waller Road elementary school, New Cross, at the age of three. In 1919 Browne left to continue his education at Brockley central school, but, because of the prolonged illness of his father, he left here in 1923 and obtained the post of junior clerk in the town clerk's department at Deptford town hall. He studied at night school and passed matriculation in the first division in June 1926. Browne was awarded one of the first London county council (LCC) non-vocational scholarships in 1927 and entered King's College, London, the following autumn. His two-year scholarship was extended to three, which enabled him to follow a medical course, and he obtained a further LCC scholarship which enabled him to complete his medical studies, qualifying MB, BS, at London University in 1933. Browne won many prizes during his medical education and also took the theology course available to students who were not studying divinity; he passed as an associate of King's College with first-class honours. He became a member of the Royal College of Physicians in 1934 and a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1935. 
Browne spoke fluent French and, in 1936, after obtaining the diploma in tropical medicine from the Institut de Medecine Tropicale Prince Leopold, Antwerp, he joined the staff of the Baptist Missionary Society hospital at Yakusu in the Belgian Congo. As well as his duties in the hospital he undertook the training of the African 'infirmiers', or medical auxiliaries, and carried out disease surveys in outlying areas, where he discovered that the incidence of leprosy was extremely high. He also undertook missionary duties. Browne returned to Britain on leave in 1939 and, just before his return to Africa in 1940, he met his future wife, Ethel Marion Williamson ('b'. 1912), known to her family as Mali, a teacher, and the daughter of the general foreign secretary of the Baptist Missionary Society. Browne returned to Yakusu in April 1940 where he was joined by Ethel; they married on 15 November 1940 and their three sons were all born in Africa. 
When he was in England on furlough Browne continued preaching in chapels all over the country. Soon after his return to Yakusu a leprosarium was opened nearby at Yalisombo. Because of the painful and unreliable treatment with chaulmoogra oil, along with food shortages in the settlement, the leprosarium had an uncertain beginning; but the American Mission to Lepers sent out a new drug, diasone, for Browne to try, which proved more effective. In 1954 he also worked on the increasing rate of onchocerciasis, or river blindness, and the control of its vector, the blackfly 'Simulium damnosum', whose larval stage he discovered. The leprosarium at Yalisombo became internationally known and Browne was urged to concentrate on leprosy by the distinguished leprologist Robert Cochrane, a suggestion which was opposed by some who interpreted medical and missionary policy differently, and by others out of professional jealousy. 
After his return on leave to England in 1958 Browne resigned from the Baptist Missionary Society and the following year he was invited by the Nigerian government to become senior leprologist at the Leprosy Research Unit, Uzuakoli in eastern Nigeria. There he continued his work with trials of new drugs, in particular B663 (subsequently called clofazimine), and maintained his lecturing and preaching. During 1963 sponsorship by the World Health Organization enabled him to visit leprosy research centres throughout the world. He was invited to be chairman of the working group on the treatment of leprosy at the International Congress on Leprosy at Rio de Janeiro in 1963, and was asked to advise on the establishment of the All Africa Leprosy Training and Rehabilitation Centre. He recommended its placement at Addis Ababa. 
During these years Browne published extensively in both English and French on leprosy, onchocerciasis, and other tropical diseases, as well as on medical ethics. At the beginning of 1966, in succession to Robert Cochrane, he took up the appointment of director of the Leprosy Study Centre, London, and remained in the post until the centre's closure in 1980. Browne campaigned against the stigma attached to the disease, and it was in part as a result of his efforts that the Mission to Lepers changed its name to the Leprosy Mission. He was awarded many international prizes and honours both for his work on leprosy and for his missionary activities, and was visiting lecturer on leprosy to hospitals throughout the world. He was appointed OBE in 1965 and the CMG in 1976, as well as receiving Belgian honours. He was president of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene from 1977 to 1979, and president of the Baptist Union from 1980 to 1981. Browne's manner demonstrated great warmth and friendliness to all and he had the gift of making others feel that what they did was of great value. 
Browne made a visit to China soon after receiving treatment for cancer of the larynx. He died suddenly at his home, 16 Bridgefield Road, Sutton, Surrey, on 29 January 1986, from a ruptured aorta; his funeral took place at Sutton Baptist Church on 11 February 1986, and he was cremated. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 56891


Cade, Sir Stanford (1895-1973), surgeon, born on 22 March 1895 in Dvinsk, Russia, was one of five children and the youngest son of Samuel Kadinsky, a diamond merchant. Born Saloman Kadinsky, he changed his name to Stanford Cade by deed poll in 1924, having become naturalized British in 1920. Cade was sent to school in Brussels, Belgium, in 1903. He matriculated in 1913 and entered the University of Brussels as a medical student, in his eighteenth year. At the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 he joined the Belgian army as a private and served at the defence of Antwerp. Evacuated to the United Kingdom, Cade was unable to enlist in the British army because of his insufficient knowledge of English. However, he was given permission to take the first part of his conjoint medical examination in French. Having passed this successfully, he was admitted as a medical student to King's College, London, and then obtained an entrance scholarship to Westminster medical school for his clinical studies. He qualified MRCS, LRCP, in 1917, and also won the Bird prize and gold medal and the Chadwick prize. 
After qualification Cade held a series of junior surgical appointments at Westminster Hospital, London, and obtained fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1923. He was deeply influenced by three surgeons on the Westminster staff: Walter Spencer, Arthur Evans, and Ernest Rock Carling. All three were particularly interested in the treatment of malignant disease, and this topic became fundamental in Cade's subsequent career. In 1924 Cade was appointed assistant surgeon and in 1937 full surgeon on the staff of Westminster Hospital, a position he held until 1960. In addition Cade served on the staffs of the Radium Institute and of Mount Vernon Hospital. Cade was one of the early pioneers of radiotherapy in Britain, obtaining the first supply of radium for his hospital from the Radium Institute in Paris. He published 'Radium Treatment of Cancer' in 1929; his encyclopaedic 'Malignant Disease and its Treatment by Radium' was published in four volumes between 1948 and 1952. 
At the outbreak of the Second World War, Cade joined the medical branch of the Royal Air Force as a squadron leader; he reached the rank of air vice-marshal in 1946. He made a great contribution both to surgical organization and to the surgical care of pilots. His services were recognized by his appointment as CB in 1944 and KBE in 1946. He continued as honorary civilian consultant to the air force after the war until 1965. Cade also held numerous appointments of distinction. At the Royal College of Surgeons he served on council from 1949 to 1965; he was vice-president from 1959 to 1961; and he gave many eponymous lectures there, including three Hunterian lectures, the Bradshaw lecture in 1960, and the Hunterian oration in 1963. He held high offices in the British Empire Cancer Campaign and received numerous honorary diplomas, including fellowships of the American (1955), Edinburgh (1957), and Irish (1960) colleges of surgeons. He became MRCP (1941) and FRCP (1960). 
In 1920 Cade had married Margaret Hester (1887-1951), daughter of William Agate, organist at Paisley Abbey, and a nurse at Westminster Hospital. Her death on 31 August 1951 of malignant malaria while in Africa was a profound tragedy. They had three daughters, one of whom, Irene, became a radiotherapist at St Mary's Hospital, Portsmouth. 
Cade, who was small of stature, was an indefatigable worker, teacher, operative surgeon, diagnostician, and counsellor. He exuded energy, and after exhausting his surgical team he would frequently work in his office until two or three in the morning on his letters and publications. He was a brilliant lecturer and this was accentuated by his picturesque foreign accent, which he never lost. However, his command of English, both spoken and written, was superb. His excitable nature sometimes gave rise to outbursts which were misinterpreted as irascible, for he would not tolerate stupidity either in opinion or, more importantly, in action. To those who did their best for him, and to his patients, he proved a kind friend. 
Cade's contributions to the treatment of cancer included his pioneer work on radium and radiotherapy, his concept of the team treatment of malignant disease, and his ground-breaking studies on adrenalectomy in the treatment of advanced cancer, the subject of his third Hunterian lecture, in 1954. His Wednesday tumour clinics at Westminster Hospital were crowded with patients from all over the country and indeed the world, and were attended by surgical visitors from many countries. His encyclopaedic knowledge of the management of cancer was matched by his skill at microscopic pathology. 
After retirement Cade settled at Southsea, Hampshire, to be near his daughter Irene. He died at another of his residences, Wick Farm, Finchdean, Hampshire, of bronchopneumonia on 19 September 1973; he was cremated, and his ashes were scattered on the garden of remembrance, at Chichester crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 56892


Joules, Horace (1902-1977), physician, son of Richard Edgar Joules (1872-1949), master grocer, and his wife, Emily Ann Hyatt ('b'. 1875), was born at Woodseaves, High Offley Road, Newport, Shropshire, on 21 March 1902. He was educated at Newport grammar school before studying medicine at Cardiff and at Middlesex Hospital medical school; he qualified MB, BS, in 1925. In 1928 he was awarded the MD from London University, with gold medal. In 1930 he married Mary Sparrow ('b'. 1906); they had two sons and a daughter. 
After a period as registrar to the Middlesex and Brompton hospitals, and as resident physician to the Selly Oak Hospital, Birmingham, Joules became the first senior physician at the Central Middlesex Hospital in north-west London in 1935 and was appointed its medical director shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War. He was elected FRCP in 1943. By the start of the National Health Service in 1948, Joules had helped to raise the Central Middlesex to a dominant place among the non-teaching hospitals of the country. His passion for preventive medicine came from his experience with his own patients: young women with pulmonary tuberculosis, older men with chronic bronchitis or lung cancer, miners crippled with silicosis. He was indignant when he saw his patients suffering needlessly from their environment or their own habits. After the black smog of December 1952, which caused 4000 extra deaths in London, Joules, as a member of the Central Health Services Council, pressed for a 'Clean Air Act'. It became law in 1956 and resulted in the disappearance of this type of smog from London and other cities. 
At the end of the war tuberculosis was a serious problem and 11,000 patients were awaiting treatment in British hospitals. The high incidence of tuberculosis and the consequent risk to nurses caused many general hospitals to refuse admission to these patients. In 1945 Joules opened two wards for tuberculosis at the Central Middlesex but he took great care to safeguard nurses' health by insisting on masks and protective clothing. As a result very few nursing staff became infected, far fewer than in the London teaching hospitals or in those of the London county council. Following the work of Richard Doll and Austin Bradford Hill in 1952, Joules also campaigned strongly against cigarette smoking. A heavy smoker for thirty years, he managed to break himself of the habit. 
Joules was inspired by Somerville Hastings and was a founder member of the Socialist Medical Association. During the Spanish Civil War he worked with the Spanish medical aid committee. He visited the Soviet Union and China where some aspects of their health services greatly impressed him. Many students remembered Joules best, however, for his popular Friday afternoon teaching rounds. He towered above all others, wagging his finger for emphasis. There was a dynamic cut and thrust at the bedside, and woe betide the student who did not know the occupation and social background of his patient. 
In private life Joules was a keen gardener. He also enjoyed birdwatching in the Essex marshes, accompanied by a volume of the writings of his favourite poet and natural philosopher, John Clare. In 1962 the illness that had first shown itself during the war returned and forced him into early retirement. When his manic depression was at last controlled he lived quietly at home. He died in Colchester on 25 January 1977 and was cremated at Colchester crematorium on 30 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 56893


Lawrence, Robert Daniel (1892-1968), physician, was born on 18 November 1892 in Aberdeen, the second son of Thomas Lawrence, brush manufacturer, and Margaret Lawrence. He was educated at Aberdeen grammar school and at the university, and graduated MB in 1916. He joined the Royal Army Medical Corps and served in India until being invalided home in 1919. He intended a career in ear, nose, and throat surgery and took a junior appointment at King's College Hospital, London. While practising a mastoid operation on a corpse a bone chip flew in his eye. Because the injury was slow to heal he was admitted to hospital where it was found that he had diabetes, a diagnosis which at that time and at his age was fatal. Determining not to be a burden on his family and to eke out his remaining time as pleasantly as possible he moved to Florence to practise among the British colony there. Then came a dramatic telegram from his friend G. A. Harrison, biochemist at King's College Hospital: 'I have got some insulin. It works. Come back quick.' Lawrence arrived on 29 May 1923 and had his first injection of insulin the next day. His life was saved. 
Lawrence rapidly learnt how to manage diabetes and he acquired a large practice in the specialism. From the beginning he realized how important it was that doctors, nurses, and above all patients learned how to manage the disease. He published his famous and well-named book, 'The Diabetic Life', in 1925, and in 1929 he produced a practical guide, especially to his 'line' diet, 'The Diabetic ABC'. Both works ran to numerous editions. Lawrence married Doreen Nancy (Anna) Batson (died 1964), daughter of Thomas Batson, schoolmaster, on 7 September 1928. They had three sons. 
Lawrence's professional achievements came quickly -- membership (1927) and fellowship (1932) of the Royal College of Physicians, and appointment as physician in charge of the diabetic department at King's College Hospital in 1939, a department he had himself created with the help of friends and well-wishers and which became the largest in Britain. Doctors and patients came from all over the world to see 'RDL'. He made special contributions to the treatment of diabetic coma and of pregnancy in the diabetic (with his colleague W. G. Oakley) -- previously nearly half the babies born to diabetic mothers had died. In 1934 with the public support of his friend and patient H. G. Wells he founded the Diabetic Association (later the British Diabetic Association); he was chairman of its executive council from 1934 to 1961. In 1950 he helped found the International Diabetic Federation and was its president until 1958. In that year he had a stroke and retired from hospital practice, though he continued in private work. 
Lawrence was awarded the Banting medal of the American Diabetes Association in 1946 and was its Lilly lecturer in 1955. He was Banting lecturer of the British Diabetic Association in 1949, and honorary life president from 1962 to 1968. He was Oliver Sharpey lecturer of the Royal College of Physicians in 1946. In 1964 he was awarded an honorary LLD from Toronto University. 
Lawrence was a highly individual, even flamboyant figure as a consultant physician, but few doctors have made a greater contribution to the care of patients. He dominated the diabetic scene in Britain to a unique extent from the mid-1920s until the 1950s. He was an enthusiastic golfer, a keen player of hockey and tennis (real and lawn), and a fisherman; and he loved music. He was Presbyterian by upbringing but lost his religious faith in early adult life. He died peacefully at his home, 7 Sheffield Terrace, London, on 27 August 1968. 


@@@@@


doc= 56894


Harkness, Margaret Elise (1854-1923), author and journalist, was born on 28 February 1854 at Great Malvern, Worcestershire, the second of five children of Robert Harkness (1826-1886), a Church of England clergyman, and Elizabeth Bolton Toswill (1821-1916). At the time of her marriage to Robert Harkness, Elizabeth, whose maiden name was Seddon, was a widow with a daughter. Margaret's mother was related to the family of Beatrice Potter, later Webb; Margaret and Beatrice were second cousins. Her father's family was related through marriage to George Henry Law, bishop of Bath and Wells, and this connection may be in part responsible for Margaret Harkness's decision to adopt the pen name of John Law for most of her published work. 
Harkness was educated at home, although at the age of twenty-one she was sent to Stirling House, a finishing school in Bournemouth. From there she went to London in 1877 to be trained as a nurse at Westminster Hospital. On completion of her training she took up a post at Guy's Hospital, although letters of the time suggest she had little aptitude for the nursing profession. Some time early in the 1880s, therefore, she decided to try to earn her living by her pen, perhaps prompted by Beatrice Potter, who, with her sister Kate, helped Harkness financially and introduced her to a circle of intellectuals whose chief meeting-place was the reading-room of the British Museum. 
Harkness now began to take an increased interest in radical politics, and her direct experience of poverty in London's East End, together with her friendship with such women as Eleanor Marx and Annie Besant, helped shape her growing conviction that socialism offered a solution to the problems of social inequality, poverty, and hardship which she saw about her. She was for a short time a member of the Social Democratic Federation, and through her membership met Henry Champion (1859-1928), John Burns, and Tom Mann, with all of whom she would work during the London dock strike of 1889. Her major contribution to the strike was her visit to Cardinal Manning on 5 September 1889, which may have been instrumental in persuading him to intervene. When she came to write of her experiences of working in the labour movement, in 'George Eastmont: Wanderer' (1905), she dedicated the book to 'the memory of His Eminence Cardinal Manning with whom the author was associated during the Great Dock Strike of 1889'. 
By the time of the strike Harkness was the author of two novels. The first, 'A City Girl' (1887), had drawn favourable comments from Engels, to whom she had sent a copy. Her second and finest novel, 'Out of Work' (1888), is concerned with key events in London during jubilee year, especially the famous occasion of 'bloody Sunday', the march of the unemployed on 13 November 1887 which ended with police charging the crowd that had assembled in Trafalgar Square. One man was killed, many injured, and Burns was arrested and then sentenced to six weeks' imprisonment. Harkness puts the occasion to good use in her novel. 
In 1888 Harkness also published in book form a series of articles she had edited for the 'British Weekly: a Journal of Social and Christian Progress' on the temptations awaiting young men and women in London. From this came her best-known work, originally called 'Captain Lobe: a Story of the Salvation Army' and republished two years later under the title by which it is still known, 'In Darkest London'. In 1890 she published 'A Manchester Shirtmaker', based on a short stay in that city. She also worked in Scotland in 1887 and 1888 as a contact for Champion with the Scottish miners' leader Keir Hardie. Other trips took her out of England, to Germany, and then in 1891 to New Zealand and Australia, where, after a brief return, she seems to have stayed for some years. 
After that Harkness's movements become increasingly difficult to trace. From 1906 until the outbreak of the First World War she appears to have spent most of her time in the Indian subcontinent. Annie Besant seems to have introduced her to Theosophy, which led her to attend the annual convention in Madras in 1907. However, she soon became more interested in Indian nationalism and set out to explore Indian life: 'Glimpses of Hidden India' (1909), revised and reissued under a new title, 'Indian Snapshots' (1912), tells something of her wanderings. By now she had abandoned socialism -- conjecturally as a result of the failure of her relationship with Henry Champion -- in favour of the ideals of the Salvation Army. Her last known work, 'A Curate's Promise: a Story of Three Weeks, September 14-October 5 1917' (1921), recounts a curate's decision to join the Salvation Army rather than become an army chaplain. During her last years she lived in France and then Italy. She died at the Pensione Castagnoli in Florence on 10 December 1923. 


@@@@@


doc= 56895


Stern, Bertha Gladys (1890-1973), novelist, who wrote under the name G. B. Stern, was given the name of the paternal grandmother who died in the week her newest granddaughter was born. She was known as Gladys as a child, later substituted Bronwen for Bertha, and was called Peter by her friends (but Tynx by Rebecca West). She was born at home on 17 June 1890 at 99 St Mark's Road, North Kensington, London; the family home was later nearby at 42 Ladbroke Road, Notting Hill. She was six years younger than her sister Clara May (later Mrs Malden). Her father, Albert Stern, was a German-born trader and her mother was Elizabeth (formerly Elise) Schwabacher (1859-1939), whose family had left Vienna for London in 1872; her maternal grandfather was a Rakonitz, the name appropriated for the family in the 'matriarch' novels. It was a comfortable childhood dominated by 'the family' and 'the approved standards of that particular little clump of German-Jewish families dwelling in Hampstead and Bayswater; a high-minded and affluent little clump... some of It was German, and lots of It was Jewish (mildly, not aggressively so)... and It regarded the most secret affairs of every single member of It as common property. (Stern, 'Pantomime', 24, 26)' The walks in Kensington Gardens, the nannied summers in Kent at Broadstairs, ended in 1904 with the Vaal River diamond smash and Gladys began 'eleven years of nomad existence' (Stern, 'Monogram', 265) in hotels and furnished flats. Educated from April 1898 to July 1907 at Notting Hill high school, at day school in Wiesbaden, Germany, and at finishing school at Montreux, Switzerland, she attended the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London from April 1908 to June 1909. 
G. B. Stern wrote plays from the age of eight, published her first poem aged seventeen and aged twenty-four her first book: 'Pantomime' was light-heartedly autobiographical about the heroine's shock when her fiance confesses to a mistress: for the family's 'women were all cultured, elegant -- and as ignorant of realities as canaries in a cage' (Stern, 'Pantomime', 24). In 1919 came 'Children of No Man's Land', about a young man's discovery that he had been born in Germany ('I don't 'like' Germans... I'm English -- like other chaps' (p. 79). In that year G. B. Stern married Geoffrey Lisle Holdsworth, a good-looking but mentally unstable New Zealander who was a friend of Noel Coward, 'whom she helped to select the nostalgic period-songs used in 'Cavalcade'' (Kunitz and Colby). They lived in Italy for six years, in a house among the olive groves of Diano Marina in Liguria, but were divorced at the end of the 1920s and Stern never used his name. 'Tents of Israel' (1924; 'The Matriarch: a Chronicle' in the United States) was the first of a series about the family and its Viennese matriarch (based on G. B. Stern's great-aunt Anastasia Schwabacher). It was dedicated to John Galsworthy. This novel, and the sequels, 'A Deputy was King' (1926), 'Mosaic' (1930), 'Shining and Free' (1935), and 'The Young Matriarch' (1942), are the works for which G. B. Stern will be remembered, describing as they do 'that easy and opulent Jewry which, rooted in Central Europe, was robustly at its ease wherever its fortunes carried it, to the south of France, to South Kensington, to the East Sixties in New York, wherever there was good talk, good food, good humour. (Golding, 'Stern')' In 1929 Mrs Patrick Campbell starred in the stage version; indeed much of G. B. Stern's work was for the theatre (she wrote several plays) or about it -- notably 'Little Red Horses' (1932), one of her best novels. She had many theatrical friends, but was also a friend of writers such as Rebecca West (whose sharp tongue -- or pen -- often wounded her sensitive friend), Somerset Maugham, and Pamela Frankau. Her closest male friends for many years were the playwright John Van Druten and his friend Jack Cohen. 
G. B. Stern wrote nearly fifty novels, short stories, two books about Jane Austen with Sheila Kaye-Smith, and a great deal of journalism (always dictating to a succession of put-upon secretaries). In her later work 'she became professionally competent and vivacious [but] often too studiously light and amusing' ('The Times', 20 Sept 1973). She had homes in London, Cornwall, New York, Hollywood (where she wrote film scripts in 1933), the south of France and, after the late 1940s, Mill Brook Cottage, Blewbury, Berkshire. Her London home was destroyed by a bomb in 1940; later she had rooms in London at A4 Albany, Piccadilly. In 1947 she became a Roman Catholic and described this in 'All in Good Time' (1954). 'And Did he Stop and Speak to You?' (1958) consists of sketches of, among others, Max Beerbohm, Ronald Knox, and John Betjeman. Five volumes of autobiographical philosophizing (1936-56) were all curiously uninformative about herself: 'Miss Stern has a 'profound interest' in wine, wolf-dogs, talking, ping-pong, and collecting walking-sticks' (Kunitz and Colby). 'Swift, rich, radiant, extravagant' (Golding, 'Borzoi', 92), in later life she was 'formidable, rather manly... normally dressed in black' ('Betjeman: letters', 69). Perhaps something of an outsider, it is likely that G. B. Stern lived to regret her detachment from the family that had once been her security; but she could not forget that 'resentments remained -- against the continental quality of it all, the loudness, the insistence on family duty, and on the superior treatment accorded to males' (Neuberger, xv). G. B. Stern died on 18 September 1973 at St Mary's Hospital, Wallingford, Berkshire, of bronchial pneumonia after a stroke. She was buried in the cemetery near her home at Blewbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 56897


Young, Emily Hilda (1880-1949), novelist, was born on 21 March 1880 at Whitley, Northumberland, the fourth of the seven children of William Michael Young, shipowner, and Frances Jane Young, 'nee' Venning, of Cornwall. She was educated at Gateshead high school and Penrhos College, Colwyn Bay, Wales. An accomplished rock climber, she returned on holiday to north Wales many times. 
In 1902 Young married John A. H. Daniell (1874-1917), a Bristol solicitor. He was killed at Ypres in 1917. The Clifton landscape, though it was Young's home for only sixteen years, became the setting (fictionalized as Radstowe) for all but three of her eleven novels. During these years Young read classical and modern philosophy and prepared for her vocation by writing fortnightly essays. During the First World War she worked as a stables groom and then in a munitions factory; in the Second World War she was active in air raid precautions. 
Through her husband Young met Ralph B. Henderson (1880-1958), headmaster of Alleyn's School in Dulwich, London. After Daniell's death, Young moved to Sydenham Hill, London, to live with Henderson as his lover, in the same house with his wife. Upon his retirement, Henderson and Young moved to Prior's Close, Bradford-on-Avon, Wiltshire, where they lived until Young's death. Henderson encouraged Young to write and watched the growth of her work 'from the first word written to the last word printed' (Henderson). 
For some years Young left the house every morning to write in the drawing-room of a nearby friend. The routine included a mid-morning coffee break with her friend, but Young never discussed the progress of her work. Her antipathy to publicity seems to have been lifelong; throughout her career she maintained that her works must stand on their own merits or not at all. 
Between 1910 and 1947 Young published eleven novels, several short stories, and two children's books; she published as E. H. Young. Several of her novels were later dramatized as radio plays. The beloved Clifton landscape -- the placid downs leading to steep cliffs, the dramatic gorge and suspension bridge over the Avon River, and the Somerset country on the far side of the bridge -- became a favourite symbol for the duality of her characters. For example, in 'The Misses Mallett' (1922) (originally titled 'The Bridge Dividing') and in 'Miss Mole' (1930), which was awarded the James Tait Black memorial prize, the country both reflects and complements the characters' natures, inspiring confidence in a natural order, instilling in them a sense of rootedness, and offering them a release from the restrictions of societal structures. 
How this natural heritage can be integrated into the social order of the town is a question raised by many of the novels, frequently manifested as a conflict between a convention-bound character and one who searches for truth independently of societal codes. Notably in 'The Vicar's Daughter' (1928) and in 'Miss Mole', characters' preoccupation with female chastity and with sexual transgression gives rise to evasion and misunderstanding, but also to self-examination and growth. Young handles these themes in a tone of fundamental seriousness leavened with humour. Characteristically, her sentences embody an ironic vision; for example, a clergyman in 'The Vicar's Daughter' is 'conscious that his calling set him apart from other men and losing, in the consciousness, what might have been the power of his position'. 
Some contemporary reviewers compared Young to Jane Austen. In the words of one: 'she wisely narrows her field, and within her limits she excels all her competitors because she does not allow her brain to override her heart' (Mais, 148). Young's novels demonstrate that the domestic realm can be the source of experience as significant as the public sphere: 'here, in little, were most of the emotions, preoccupations and duties common to mankind' (E. H. Young, 'Celia', 1937). Young's philosophical perspective manifests itself in the human questions her characters address: What is beauty and how is it related to good? How ought we to act if we cannot foresee the consequences of our actions? 
Young modernized the domestic novel by writing frankly about marital discord in 'William' (1925), the most successful of her novels; 'The Curate's Wife' (1934); 'Celia'; and 'Chatterton Square' (1947), her patriotic final novel invoking the domestic realm to reflect on and respond to the Munich agreement. Another mark of her modernity is her focus on the complexity of characters' internal responses to events. 
Throughout her life, E. H. Young's remarkable qualities commanded admiration and love. 'She was quite the most observant person I've ever met', said a friend. Another observed her transforming influence on those she met even casually. She died of lung cancer on 8 August 1949 at Prior's Close. 


@@@@@


doc= 56898


Bell, Adrian Hanbury (1901-1980), writer, was born on 4 October 1901 at 5 Birch Avenue, Stretford, Lancashire, the son of Robert Bell (1865-1949), news editor of 'The Observer', and his wife, Emily Frances Jane Hanbury (1873-1954), artist. His family moved to London, and he was educated at Glengorse School, Eastbourne, and from 1915 to 1920 at Uppingham School, Rutland. 
After working for a very short time at 'The Observer' Bell left London for Suffolk in 1920 to be a farm apprentice to Victor Savage at Great Lodge, Hundon, a decision partly influenced by recurrent migraine, which had closed off many careers. In the early 1920s he bought a small farm, Stephenson's in Stradishall, and later added to it Seabrook's Farm. He sold up in 1929 and began to fulfil an ambition to write, calling on his experiences of rural life. His first novel, 'Corduroy' (1930), was written at The Gables, Sudbury, recalling his farming apprenticeship, and the second, 'Silver Ley' (1931), recreated Stephenson's Farm. 'The Cherry Tree' (1932) completed the trilogy. In 1930 he set the first 'Times' crossword, and he continued to devise crosswords for the paper for the next fifty years. On 12 January 1931 Bell married Marjorie Hilda Gibson (1908-1991). They had three children: Anthea, Sylvia, and Martin (the international news reporter, and independent MP for Tatton from 1997 to 2001). He followed up his success with 'Folly Field' (1933), 'The Balcony' (1934), 'By-Road' (1937), 'The Shepherd's Farm' (1939), 'Men and the Fields' (1939), 'Apple Acre' (1942), and 'Sunrise to Sunset' (1944). 
After the war and for the next three decades Bell wrote 'A countryman's notebook' for the 'Eastern Daily Press', for which he was affectionately remembered. From the 1940s he lived at many places in East Anglia including Redisham, Barsham, Gillingham, and Beccles. In Westhall, near Beccles, he bought Brick Kiln Farm with the proceeds from 'Apple Acre'. He sold that in 1949 and ceased farming. He continued to write books including 'The Budding Morrow' (1946), 'The Flower and the Wheel' (1949), 'The Path by the Window' (1952), 'A Young Man's Fancy' (1955), 'A Suffolk Harvest' (1956), 'The Mill House' (1958), his autobiography, 'My Own Master' (1961), and 'The Green Bond' (1976). He published over twenty-five books including two collections of poetry. 
Bell's books are often fictionalized autobiography, documenting his agricultural experiences, and he gained a literary reputation that matched those of H. J. Massingham, A. G. Street, or C. Henry Warren. His early writing had as its context the inter-war rural depression in East Anglia. In 'By-Road' he discussed 'new' farming methods -- modern machinery, motorized transport, factory farming, new marketing and business methods, hedge removals, fruit specialization, and so on -- showing options for the future. However, his own sympathies clearly lay with older styles of farming, and he had a great respect for earlier rural artefacts, horse power, hand technologies, and the people skilled in them, even though he knew he was describing the passing of a whole culture. The lantern was giving way to electricity, pantiles to sheet iron. Agriculture, he thought, was 'the basis of all culture', but it was now highly transitional. A persistent theme in his farming work and 'land literature' was an effort to link past, present, and future in village life, to find 'some basis of unity, the germ of a new coherence'. 
Bell had an animated and original turn of phrase and an approachable and evocative style. He wanted 'to put into words the way unrelated things came together and formed a relation'. He was a particularly strong interpreter of small episodes and happenings, and he fondly drew out their significance, their vitality, and often their humour, bringing their details into artistic life. He revealed expansive significance in things that were small and immediate to the senses, expressing the beauty of that which is circumscribed, domestic, and locally known. His senses were acutely alive to noise, colour, dust, tools, animals, and people. Whether he was describing Suffolk or Westmorland (in 'Sunrise to Sunset'), his atmospheric language conveyed a vivid sense of landscape, of animal life, of the friendliness of people connected in rural work, and of how these fused to create a spirit of place. For Bell the physical experience of work was fundamental to provide meaning in life, to connect means with ends. Family farming -- 'rich in fundamental relationships', having 'a natural coherence' -- was always central to his writing: 'I felt as though I could not bear life to be any the less than the aliveness I felt in me when I was first in love. I am always seeking some recognition of it also in other people... It is only through this that I have been impelled always to try to bring something out of nothing, a poem out of my head, or a potato out of the earth, doing what I wanted to do in my own time and in my own peace, at whatever cost in money and security. (Bell, 83)' Bell had a gift for friendship, and among his friends were Edmund Blunden, F. R. Leavis, H. J. Massingham, Alfred Munnings, John Nash, Henry Warren, and Henry Williamson. He was a member of the inter-war group Kinship in Husbandry. He died on 5 September 1980 at his home, 9 Hemmant Way, Gillingham, Norfolk, and was buried in Barsham churchyard, Suffolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 56901


Lehmann, Hermann (1910-1985), biochemist and human geneticist, was born on 8 July 1910 in Halle, Saxony, Germany, the youngest of the four children of Paul Lehmann (died 'c'.1927), publisher, and his first wife, Bella, 'nee' Apelt (died 'c'.1913). His parents were both German. His eldest sister, Bertha, left Germany in the mid-1930s for New York, where she worked as a trained nurse. His second sister, Ruth, had left Germany earlier for Jerusalem as the wife of Ernst Wertheimer, a professor at Hadassah University. His third sister died aged eighteen. He also had a half-brother, from his father's second marriage, who settled in England and pursued a business career. 
Lehmann received his early education at a state school in Halle. In 1923, following the collapse of his father's business, Lehmann's family moved to Dresden, and until 1928 he attended the Gymnasium zum Heiligen Kreuz. Wishing to pursue a career in medicine, in the summer of 1928 he enrolled on the medical course in the University of Freiburg im Breisgau. Later, he moved to the medical school at Frankfurt, where his family had settled after the death of his father, and passed the pre-clinical examination in July 1930. After a short spell of laboratory training in Berlin he went to Heidelberg to complete his clinical training. His work towards an MD degree was carried out in Heidelberg, but because of Nazi policies affecting Jews, it was presented in Basel in 1934. Lehmann subsequently returned to Heidelberg to work as an unpaid assistant in the laboratory of Otto Meyerhoff at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute, where he developed his love of biochemistry, carried out his early research, and published his first scientific papers. 
In 1936 Lehmann moved to Cambridge (having already worked there briefly with Frederick Gowland Hopkins), where he obtained a PhD in 1938 with a thesis entitled 'Aspects of carbohydrate metabolism in the absence of molecular oxygen', which was awarded the Darwin prize at Christ's College. After a short period of internment as a 'friendly alien' at the beginning of the Second World War, Lehmann married Benigna Norman-Butler, a music teacher and accompanist, in 1942. They had four children: Susanna, a musician and translator; Ruth, also a part-time musician; Paul, an associate professor of microbiology in the medical school at Toledo, Ohio; and David, who died aged eighteen as the result of an accident. In 1943 Lehmann became an officer in the Royal Army Medical Corps. It was during his service in India and, later, Uganda, as a colonial medical research fellow, that he developed his lifelong research interest in inherited blood diseases, particularly those of haemoglobin. After returning to England in 1949 he became consultant pathologist at Pembert Hospital, Kent, before being appointed to St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, as senior lecturer in chemical pathology in 1951. In 1963 he moved to Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge and was appointed honorary director of the Medical Research Council's Abnormal Haemoglobin Research Unit, and in 1967 he became the first professor of clinical biochemistry at Cambridge University -- a position he held until 1977, when he became emeritus professor. 
While in Uganda, Lehmann had become interested in sickle-cell anaemia. Stimulated by Linus Pauling's work in the USA showing that this disease was an inherited disorder of haemoglobin, he began a systematic search for abnormal human haemoglobins in many different populations throughout the world. As the techniques of protein chemistry became more sophisticated Lehmann was able to characterize many of these variants at the molecular level. This work provided important information about the origins of human races and how inherited abnormalities of a protein such as haemoglobin can give rise to a variety of different diseases. He also made early observations on the inheritance and causes of the thalassaemias, the commonest inherited disease of humans, also, like sickle-cell anaemia, caused by defective haemoglobin production. This work culminated in 'Molecular pathology of human haemoglobin' ('Nature', 219, 1968, 402-9), a brilliant paper written in collaboration with M. F. Perutz, in which the authors were able to relate the many different inherited abnormalities of human haemoglobin to its structure and function, both in health and disease. 
Lehmann also made important contributions in other fields, including the study of myoglobin, the population genetics of blood groups, inherited disorders of human enzymes, and the characterization of the haemoglobin of many different species. But he was, more than anybody, responsible for cataloguing the enormous wealth of human genetic variation reflected in the human haemoglobin variants and hence for providing important insights into human population genetics, evolution, and the clinical diversity of disorders that result from inherited diseases. 
Because of his international research interests Lehmann was well known in laboratories the world over, and he published widely with collaborators from many different countries. His laboratory in Cambridge was a training ground for young haematologists and human geneticists from many countries. He was extremely kind to young people and had broad cultural interests and an unquenchable curiosity and enthusiasm for his field. In 1977 he travelled together with D. J. Weatherall throughout China to search for haemoglobin diseases. During this trip he had a major confrontation with officials because he wished to enter Mongolia to obtain blood samples to search for a particular abnormal haemoglobin. Although almost seventy, in poor health, and with the full might of bureaucracy against him, he won the day and was able to find his beloved haemoglobin variant in the Mongolian races. 
Lehmann was widely honoured for his work and was elected FRS, in 1972, and to many other fellowships and honorary degrees. He became CBE in 1980. He died in Cambridge after a short cardiac illness on 13 July 1985, and was buried there. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 56903


Brophy, John (1899-1965), journalist and novelist, was born on 6 December 1899 at 87 Everton Road, Liverpool, the son of John Brophy, an earthenware dealer, and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Bodell. At the age of fourteen, he escaped from a dull adolescence in that city, and joined the army upon the outbreak of the First World War. It was while on infantry service in France and Belgium that he accumulated the information that was to be the basis of much of his writing. 
Brophy did not write about the First World War right away. When he was demobbed he returned to Liverpool, took a degree at Liverpool University, and then spent a year at Durham University. On 6 June 1924 he married Charis Weare Grundy (1895/6-1975), the daughter of James Grundy, a clergyman from Chicago. Brophy then took a teaching job in Egypt, but the couple returned to England after two years, Charis Brophy being ill. Brophy found a position writing advertising for a large store in Liverpool and then moved to London to be head copywriter for a leading British advertising firm. He began to take an interest in literature and became the chief reviewer of fiction for the 'Daily Telegraph'. He wrote also for 'Time and Tide' and for the BBC. 
It was Brophy's first novel, however, which truly launched his literary career. 'The Bitter End' (1928) was a war novel which featured an attractive semi-autobiographical hero, Donald Foster, who gave voice to the sense of loss and disappointment in England a decade after 'the war to end war'. The novel marked Brophy as an author to watch, particularly in its development of the mixture of nostalgia and anger that was to give a popular appeal to his disillusioned descriptions of the horrors of war. 
The Brophys' daughter, Brigid Antonia Brophy (1929-1995), also a writer, was born in the following year, and Brophy was determined to support his new family as a professional writer. In 1929 he published his second and third novels, 'Pluck the Flower' and 'Paul Lavelle', as well as an anthology, 'The Soldier's War'. In 1930 he edited, with Eric Partridge, 'Songs and Slang of the British Soldier, 1914-1918' (later revised as 'The Long Trail', 1965). Through the 1930s he published at least one novel a year, never equalling his first, and he also wrote 'English Prose' (in the 'How and Why' series, 1932), contributed to 'The Writer's Desk Book' (1934), and wrote 'Ilonka Speaks of Hungary: Personal Impressions and an Interpretation of the National Character' (1936) and 'The Five Years' (1936), a rather personal history of the First World War. It was not until 1939 that he had a real success, not with his collection of stories 'The Queer Fellow' nor with his novel 'The Ridiculous Hat' -- both published in that year -- but with his fictional life of Shakespeare, 'Gentleman of Stratford' (1939). 
The Second World War found Brophy editing 'John O'London's Weekly' and serving in the Home Guard, for which he wrote handbooks and manuals and, eventually, 'a character study', 'Britain's Home Guard' (1945). Brophy came more alive during the war and produced an 'entertainment' called 'Solitude Island' (1941) and several action novels well received on both sides of the Atlantic, including 'Immortal Sergeant' (1942); 'Spear Head' (published in the United States as 'Spearhead', 1943), about commando raids on France and Norway; and 'Target Island' (1944), about the brave resistance of Malta. Of these, and in fact of all his work, 'Immortal Sergeant' is the best. In 1943 a film was made based on the novel, starring Henry Fonda as Corporal Spence, who rises to the occasion in the Libyan desert war when his sergeant is killed. The film served to enhance Brophy's reputation, which, however, declined after the war. 
Brophy's post-war work was more copious than compelling. He collected 'Selected Stories' (1946), edited some letters of Sarah Curran (1955), and wrote an introduction to those of Holbrooke Jackson (1960). He also wrote a number of books on art which reflect the keen visual sense shown in his novels: 'The Human Face Reconsidered' (1962), recalling his 'The Human Face' (1942); 'The Face in Western Art' (1963); and 'The Face of the Nude' (1965). In addition to a 1964 profile of W. Somerset Maugham written for the British Council, he continued to publish novels such as 'City of Departures' (1946), 'A Woman from Nowhere' (1946), 'Sarah' (1948), 'Julian's Way' (1949), 'Turn the Key Softly' (1951), 'The Prime of Life' (1954), and 'The Day they Robbed the Bank of England' (1959). This last made a successful caper film in 1960, with Peter O'Toole and Aldo Ray. The cinema not only provided Brophy with more money for his passion for old master drawings but made the neat if sometimes sentimental character sketching and swift plotting in his novels known to larger international audiences than those who read his books. John Brophy died at the Royal Waterloo Hospital, Lambeth, London, of heart failure on 12 November 1965; his wife survived him. Brophy's novels were enjoyable, often insightful, well-constructed entertainments, popular in their day. They were translated into sixteen languages and based, in large part, on the personal experience of a sensitive and articulate Englishman of a war-torn century. 


@@@@@


doc= 56904


Cannan, Joanna Maxwell (1896-1961), novelist and children's writer, was born on 27 May 1896 at Magdalen Gate House, Oxford, the third and youngest daughter of Charles Cannan (1858-1919), dean of Trinity College, Oxford, and secretary to the delegates of Oxford University Press, and his wife, Mary (1857-1943), daughter of Andrew Wedderburn-Maxwell, a Scot in the Indian Civil Service. May Wedderburn Cannan was her elder sister. Charles Cannan was intellectual, immersed in Aristotelian scholarship, and Mary Cannan preferred adult company. Apart from three mornings a week at Wychwood School, their daughters lived in solitude at home, playing out romantic dramas based on favourite books, or the heroic tales of their Scottish ancestors. Holidays spent riding and boating in the highlands, or climbing in the Lake District and Switzerland, reinforced their ideals of courage and determination. Cannan grew up with a lifelong philosophy of persevering against the odds, and meeting success or failure with light-hearted gallantry. 
Cannan was educated at Wychwood School in Oxford from 1902 to 1913, and then went to finishing school in Paris. She planned to study at the Slade School of Fine Art, but the 1914-18 war prevented this. On 11 June 1918 she married Captain Harold James Pullein-Thompson (1885-1957), son of James Pullein-Thompson, a Church of England clergyman ministering in London, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Darbyshire. He had an impressive war record, and Cannan admired his commanding ways with waiters and taxi drivers, but his inability to make a peacetime living shook her. Marooned in suburban Wimbledon, she determined to earn money herself by writing. Her first novel, 'The Misty Valley' (1922), was well received, and followed quickly by others, until in 1931 Cannan felt wealthy enough to buy The Grove, Peppard Common, a white Oxfordshire dower house. 
Here, with her husband, four children, and innumerable animals, Cannan created a congenially bohemian lifestyle. After her restricted childhood she wanted freedom for her family and herself. There might be domestic and financial crises, bantams in the kitchen and hiccups with the boiler, but, ensconced in her small parlour, she worked away steadily at her novels. These were witty, satirical, even cynical, and usually well reviewed. She presented clashes between idealists and materialists, with no easy solutions. Often she drew on her own experiences. 'The Misty Valley' dissects a difficult marriage; 'High Table' (1930) depicts Oxford dons; 'Ithuriel's Hour' (1931) portrays the stresses of mountaineering. Later in her career she tried some traditional English detective stories. From 'Death at The Dog' (1940) to 'Murder Included' (1950), they featured a socially inept detective, Pryce, who became a further butt for Cannan's sarcastic wit. 

'A Pony for Jean' (1936) was Cannan's first children's story. Previously pony books were animal biographies, like 'Black Beauty'. Cannan, watching her children and their ponies, switched the focus of interest to the rider, establishing a major new trend, later followed by her daughters, Josephine, Diana, and Christine Pullein-Thompson. After Cannan most 'pony books' were 'rider books', stories of children schooling much-loved, if recalcitrant, ponies; yet hers, with their passion for animals and country life, and their stylish writing, remain pre-eminent. Jean, the brave determined girl who is also the heroine of two sequels, 'Another Pony for Jean' (1938) and 'More Ponies for Jean' (1943), is a self-portrait; while the Pullein-Thompson girls provided inspiration for the lively, horsy children of 'They Bought her a Pony' (1944), who bicker, and fall off, and make gymkhana stars of their unpromising mounts. 
Small, slight, and fair, with myopic grey-green eyes, Cannan lived enthusiastically, but hard work and wartime privations undermined her health. In 1952 tuberculosis was diagnosed. Weakened further by surgery, she died of heart failure following influenza at Blandford Cottage Hospital, Dorset, on 22 April 1961, reciting Landor's 'I strove with none, for none was worth my strife' to maintain her courage to the end. She was buried at Fairmile cemetery, Henley-on-Thames. 


@@@@@


doc= 56906


Golding, Louis (1895-1958), writer, the second son of the four children of Philip Golding (died 'c'.1916), religious orator and teacher, and his wife, Yetta (died 'c'.1913), was born at Red Bank, Manchester, on 19 November 1895. His parents were Orthodox Jews who had immigrated to Manchester from Cherkassy on the Dnieper River a year or two prior to Golding's birth. Educated at the Waterloo Road elementary school, he won a scholarship to Manchester grammar school, wrote for the school magazine, and gained awards for his poetry. In November 1913 Golding won a scholarship to read history at Queen's College, Oxford, matriculating in October 1914. When the First World War broke out, rather than studying he attempted to enlist in the Officers' Training Corps. Rejected because, as he wrote in his autobiographical 'The World I Knew' (1940), 'The authorities disliked my eyes, my tonsils, and my lungs' (Golding, 22), he became a hospital orderly and then a YMCA worker engaged in hospital duties serving in the Fifth Canadian Hospital in Salonika, Greece. After returning to Oxford in the autumn of 1919, he changed to English literature but illness prevented him taking his final examinations in 1921. 
In 1919 a book of poems, 'Sorrows of War', based on the war and Golding's war experiences was published. 'Forward from Babylon', an autobiographical novel set in the north of England and at Manchester grammar school, appeared in 1921. From 1919 to 1921 Golding contributed upwards of sixty pieces including poems, short stories, and review essays to 'Voices', a Manchester-based literary magazine. Subsequently he received a grant from the Royal Literary Fund. Advised by doctors to seek warmer climates rather than to risk a somewhat delicate constitution, he began his travels abroad and the life of a professional writer. He also sold books. 'Seacoast of Bohemia' (1923) was a satirical novel based upon his early travels. For the travel narratives 'Sunward' (1924), and 'Sicilian Noon' (1925), Golding drew upon his travels in Italy; Capri and Sicily, with its Homeric landscape, especially appealed to him. 'Sunward' in particular received high critical praise, A. E. Coppard writing in 'The Spectator' (11 October 1924), 'there is wit, whimsical fancy, a deal of impertinence, and some beautiful writing' (p. 514). 
Golding used his Jewish inheritance for his 'Three Ancient Lands: being a Journey to Palestine' (1928), an account of his journey from Port Said to Palestine. The book is noteworthy for its powerful descriptive travel narrative and photographs of early Jewish settlements including the early kibbutzim (collective farms). Golding's semi-autobiographical novel 'Day of Atonement' (1925), set in Russia, the north of England, and Sicily, drew upon his family experiences. In the summer of 1928 Golding was in Morocco. In 1929 and 1930 he visited Spain and Paris where he wrote 'The Prince or Somebody' (1929) and 'Give up your Lovers' (1930), which uses the theme of his earlier works -- the love between Jew and gentile. 
Golding's fame rests upon his best-selling novel 'Magnolia Street', published early in 1932. The novel concentrated on the relationships between Jews and non-Jews in a district of Manchester during the 1910-30 period. Translated into twenty-seven languages, and selling more than a million copies, banned by Hitler and Mussolini, serialized in the London 'Daily Express', a new edition appeared as late as 1958 -- the year of Golding's death. Golding dramatized the novel and C. B. Cochran produced it at the Adelphi Theatre, London, in 1934. Writing in the 'New Statesman and Nation', Gerald Bullett described the novel as 'a magnificent achievement: copious, humorous, romantic, tragic, genial, ironical, angry, wise; alive with action in every part, and crammed with the rich stuff of humanity' (23 Jan 1932, 96). 
During the writing of 'Magnolia Street' Golding spent time in 1931 in Berlin. In the summer of 1932 he went to Russia. In 1935 he accepted the suggestion of the London publishers Rich and Cowan that he follow Moses's ancient journey from the Nile bullrushes to Mount Pisgah. This trip formed the foundation for 'In the Steps of Moses the Conqueror' (1943). During the 1930s Golding also travelled widely in the United States. Golding wrote short stories, anti-fascist propaganda, Jewish history, radio drama, and literary criticism. Film scripts included 'Theirs is the Glory' about the Arnhem operation during the Second World War. He wrote three books on boxing: 'Boxing Tales: a Collection of Thrilling Stories' (1948), and in the same year 'My Sporting Days and Nights'. This was followed in 1952 by 'The Bare-Knuckle Breed'. His monograph 'James Joyce' (1933) was one of the first books to be devoted to the great writer. His versatility is further demonstrated by 'We Shall Eat and Drink Again: a Wine and Food Anthology', which he edited with Andre L. Simon (1944). 
Golding was included on George Orwell's 1948-9 listing of 'Crypto-communists and fellow travellers'. Orwell describes Golding as 'only a vague sympathizer' (Orwell, 247). Golding's work by no means focused on Jewish themes. Black magic and the Sicilian Mafia provide the background for the ironically titled 'The Camberwell Beauty' (1935). 'The Loving Brothers' (1952) focuses upon two very contrasting brothers. 'Good-bye to Ithaca' (1955), his final travel narrative, 'details the differences between a modern traveller going on an odyssey and the hardships that the ancients must have encountered' (Reed, 130). 
Sequels to 'Magnolia Street' include 'Five Silver Daughters' (1934), 'Mr. Emmanuel' (1939), and 'The Glory of Elsie Silver' (1946). 'Five Silver Daughters' goes beyond Manchester to encompass a European canvas. The Nazi persecutions become the theme of 'Mr. Emmanuel'. The heroic but tragic Warsaw ghetto uprising preoccupies 'The Glory of Elsie Silver'. This was the first western European novel to focus on this important resistance to oppression. 'Mr. Emmanuel', according to Kushner, 'was the only one of 20 Golding novels converted into film' and 'was the only major British anti-Nazi film produced' during the Second World War (Kushner, 219). 
Critics spoke of Golding's over-production. Rumours circulated in literary circles that his later works were ghosted by writers such as Emanuel Litvinoff, and this may possibly have been the case with the posthumously published 'The Frightening Tale' (1973). Known to be homosexual (private information), Golding lived in the last years of his life in a 'large, tall house in St. John's Wood' (16 Hamilton Terrace) with a 'large, book-lined study' (Simons, 112). He married on 12 March 1956 a childhood friend, Mrs Annie Carrie Weintrobe, daughter of Abraham Sugarman, a commercial traveller; her previous marriage had been dissolved. She had been the inspiration in 1932 for the character of Bella in 'Magnolia Street'. 
On 9 August 1958 Golding died of carcinoma of the pancreas in St George's Hospital, London, three weeks after an operation. He was cremated at the Golders Green crematorium in Middlesex on 13 August. For the Anglo-Jewish novelist Alexander Baron, Golding was the last 'link with the past... he was still at home in that old world of 'Yiddishkeit' that such writers as Sholem Asch and Zangwill represented in their different ways'. Although as a man emotionally reticent, his writings 'achieved moments of real power and... represent their only consistent treatment of their subject in modern British literature... the larger drama of the Jewish people' (Baron). Jacob Sonntag, the editor of the 'Jewish Quarterly', observed that 'he accepted his own Jewishness without any doubt or reservation, considering it real enough in a historical and personal (though not in a religious) sense' (Sonntag). 


@@@@@


doc= 56907


Household, Geoffrey Edward West (1900-1988), novelist, was born on 30 November 1900 in Clifton, a suburb of Bristol, the son of Horace West Household (1870-1954), secretary of education for Gloucestershire, and his wife, Lucy Beatrice Noton (1870-1955). Household's grandfather had inherited an estate in Norfolk, but this had to be sold following the agricultural depression of the 1870s. His father qualified as a barrister and then took up a career in education. Household was educated at Durnford preparatory school, and at Clifton College. He then went to Magdalen College, Oxford, where in 1922 he took a first in English. He had no particular ambition, and might easily have followed his father into the civil service; instead, through a Magdalen connection, he joined the Ottoman Bank and was sent to Bucharest. So began twenty-five years of almost uninterrupted residence abroad. 
Bucharest was the making of Household. Thanks to the very favourable exchange rate he could live like a prince on $400 a year. The callow former public schoolboy became a discriminating hedonist, well versed in the pleasures of the table and the bed. About banking he was less enthusiastic, so that when, in 1926, he had to choose between his job and Elisaveta (Betty) Kopelanoff, the Americanized Russian emigree he would later marry, he chose Betty. But neither party relished domesticity, and it was not until 1935, five years after they were married, that they began, 'reluctantly', to cohabit (Household, 93). They were divorced in 1942. From 1926 to 1929 Household sold bananas in Spain for Elders and Fyffes. He fell in love with the Basque country and its 'noble' inhabitants but could not persuade Betty to settle there ('Lives and times of Geoffrey Household'). Instead he joined her in the United States, in Los Angeles, reckoning that there would be jobs to spare in Hollywood now that the talkies had arrived. But nobody made him an offer, so he followed Betty to New York, arriving just as the stock market crashed. Reduced to living off bread and bananas, he landed a job writing entries for a children's encyclopaedia. He did this and similar tasks for two years until, tiring of hack writing and bathtub gin, he returned to England. There followed four peripatetic years in Europe, the Near East, and South America as a traveller in printing inks. Then in 1935, with an advance from the Atlantic Monthly Press, to whom he had sent a long short story, he began work on his first novel, 'The Third Hour'. This was followed by a book of short stories and then, in September 1939, came 'Rogue Male', the spare, tense thriller that put Household firmly and forever on the map. 
A passionate believer in European civilization, Household blamed Hitler personally for perverting it. 'The man had to be dealt with, and I began to think how much I would like to kill him' ('The Times', 7 Oct 1988). This is the departure point for 'Rogue Male', in which a laconic English sportsman sets out to bag 'the biggest game on earth' (G. Household, 'Rogue Male', 1973 edn, 7-8), only to be hunted down in his turn. Reviewers were enthusiastic, but Household was too preoccupied to register more than a 'detached pleasure' (Household, 211) in what they said. He was back in Bucharest, attached to a section of the British military mission, whose task was to blow up the Romanian oil wells if and when the Germans invaded. But in June 1940 the increasingly pro-axis Romanians got wind of the section's plan and it had to be aborted. Three months later, after various central European adventures, Household arrived in Cairo. There he joined field security -- 'the only branch of Intelligence in which a free-lance could enjoy the care and companionship of a unit under his own command' (Household, 121) -- and was almost immediately sent with his section to Greece. 
In his autobiography, 'Against the Wind', Household admitted that it was not simply the urge to have a crack at Hitler that impelled him to join the special reserve of officers during Munich week. Like many others who had just missed the First World War, he had a 'burning curiosity' (Household, 99) to know what it was like to be under fire. His curiosity was satisfied in April 1941 during the Greek debacle, from which he managed to extricate his men 'naked, but reasonably unashamed' ('The Times' 7 Oct 1988). He then served in Palestine, Syria, and Iraq, rising to the rank of lieutenant-colonel and being mentioned in dispatches. 
Household returned from the war with a family. In 1942 he married Ilona Maria Judith Zsoldos-Gutman ('b'. 1914), a Hungarian he had met in Jerusalem, and by 1945 they had a son and a daughter (a second daughter was born in 1953). Providing for his dependants proved a struggle until, reluctantly (for he disliked the brutality of the genre), he wrote two further thrillers, 'A Rough Shoot' and its sequel, 'A Time to Kill'. Rather more to his taste were picaresque novels of suspense such as 'The Lives and Times of Bernado Brown', whose hero 'is in trouble with everyone and yet is not what is commonly called a criminal' ('Lives and times of Geoffrey Household'). He felt most at home with the short story, and said he would prefer to be judged by collections like 'Tales of Adventurers' and 'Sabres in the Sand' than by any of his novels. 
Household had always intended to settle in the country, but was unable to leave London permanently until 1957, when he and Ilona moved from Chiswick to Buckinghamshire. There, every morning, he would write between 700 and 1000 words in pencil, knock off for lunch, garden in the afternoon, and then type up the morning's work between tea and dinner. Apart from his family, his writing, and his garden, he took pleasure in animals, especially cats, log fires, good food and wine, and reading history and biography. He loathed mediocrity and bureaucracy in equal measure, and when, in 1970, it looked as if a third London airport might be built nearby, put his saboteur's skills at the disposal of the local resistance movement. 
Household once described himself as 'an Englishman with no national prejudices', but in 'Against the Wind' he admitted to being 'at bottom far more typical of my countrymen than it pleases me to think' (Household, 71, 131). With his lean frame, deep, fruity voice, pink cheeks, and bristling moustache, he had ex-officer written all over him. He published his last novel in 1988, and died shortly afterwards from heart failure on 4 October 1988 at Wardington House, Banbury, Oxfordshire; after a funeral service at St James's Church, Newbottle, his remains were cremated in Oxford crematorium on 11 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 56908


Leslie, Doris (1891-1982), novelist, was born at 66 Westbourne Grove, London, on 9 March 1891 of Jewish descent. Her parents were Samuel Oppenheim, a tobacconist, and his wife, Sarah Elkan. Doris was evasive about her early life. She said she was educated privately in London and Brussels, and then after she showed a gift for drawing her father sent her to a school of art in London. It is certain that at fifteen she decided to become an actress against her father's wishes, and won a scholarship to the drama section of the Guildhall School of Music. Her stage debut was as Viola in 'Twelfth Night' at the Old Vic. She also appeared with the Birmingham repertory theatre. While still in her teens she married John Leslie, another actor. He died shortly after the marriage; she kept his name for the rest of her life. Her second marriage was to R. Vincent Cookes, but she did not publicly acknowledge this marriage for 'religious reasons' (Ashley). 
After her first husband's death Doris Leslie lost interest in acting and resumed her art studies, this time in Florence. She kept regular diaries while in Italy and realized that writing was her vocation. On her return to England she wrote her first novel, 'The Starling' (1927), set in Florence. Its success committed her to writing, although she later dismissed her four subsequent novels, 'Fools in Mortar' (1928), 'The Echoing Green' (1929), 'Terminus' (1931), and 'Puppets' Parade' (1931), as trivial. But 'Full Flavour' (1934), a fictional account of the long life of a woman who makes a success of her father's business, in the then popular dynasty chronicle genre, established her reputation. It was quickly translated into five languages and adapted for the stage. It was dedicated to her mother, who did not live to see it published. In 1936 Doris Leslie published 'Fair Company', another 'leisurely' tale, this time spanning four generations of an English family from the Regency up to the 1930s. 
Some of the many characters in 'Full Flavour' and 'Fair Company' reappear in the crowded pages of the Victorian-to-First World War chronicle of 'Concord in Jeopardy' (1938), but Leslie's loose style and uninspired plotting were beginning to make readers unhappy with just well crafted historical backgrounds. Moreover she unsuccessfully attempted to psychologize Concord and make him a symbol. 'Another Cynthia: the adventures of Cynthia Lady Ffulkes (1780-1850) reconstructed from her hitherto unpublished memoirs' (1939), a tale of a Moll Flanders figure who snares titled lovers, was more 'lively'. This was a word often used by critics to describe Leslie's work, although the diary format she used in fact renders action as more reported than experienced. On 21 November 1936 she married Walter Fergusson Leisrinck Hannay (1904-1961), a London physician who was knighted in 1951. There were no children of the marriage. 
During the Second World War Leslie was slightly wounded while serving in civil defence as an air raid warden. The battle of Britain featured in 'House in the Dust' (1942), in which a bombed house triggers the memories of her central character, Jennifer. However, the twentieth-century anachronisms, in what was largely a tale of Victorian childhood, irritated the critics. Also in the 1940s came a series of 'fictional biographies', first of Chopin in 'Polonaise' (1943), and then of Lady Arabella Stuart in 'A Wreath for Arabella' (1948). These were not scholarly works of biography but vivid and colourful portraits designed to entertain. She also produced novels such as 'Folly's End' (1944) and 'The Peverills' (1946). In the 1950s Leslie published 'The Great Corinthian' (1952), an entertaining biography of the prince regent, and novels which included 'Peridot flight: a novel reconstructed from the memoirs of Peridot, Lady Mulvarnie, 1872-1955' (1956). Hutchinson reprinted 'Another Cynthia', 'Folly's End', and 'The Peverills' in 1956 as 'Tales of Grace and Favour'. 
After Sir Walter's death in 1961 Doris Leslie converted to Roman Catholicism, moved to Devon, and began to breed and show English bulldogs. She became a real celebrity when BBC television broadcast her 'Peridot' series. Over her lifetime she wrote more than sixteen popular novels and seventeen biographies, and while they were not critically esteemed, particularly as historical fiction came under fire in the 1960s, her books were widely enjoyed in Britain and America. Her biographies, which later included works on Francois Villon (1962), Elizabeth Chudleigh (1974), and Richard the Lionheart (1977), were often as finely wrought as her best historical novels. 
Doris Leslie was a striking woman with very dark eyes and black bobbed hair. Unable to type, she wrote all her books in longhand and had her hand insured for a large amount of money. She had settled near East Grinstead, Sussex, when she died of renal failure on 31 May 1982 at the Royal Sussex County Hospital, Brighton. 


@@@@@


doc= 56909


Raymond, Ernest (1888-1974), novelist, was born on 31 December 1888 at Argentieres in the Haute Savoie, France. His parents were married to other partners. To give the child the semblance of legitimacy, he was baptized as the son of William and Florence Bell Raymond of Paris. Raymond's true father was Captain, later Major-General, George Frederic Blake of the Royal Marines (1836-1904). His mother was Ida Wilkinson, 'nee' Calder (1846-1918). Ernest Raymond was brought to England in 1891 and raised in London believing his mother was his aunt. Responsibility for bringing up the child was given to Emily Calder, Ida's younger sister, who was strict and narrow-minded. The general lodged with them until 1901, when his estranged wife died. Known affectionately as Dum, he was kindly, amusing, and generous. He then moved away and married Lilian McKellar. The one other permanent member of the unconventional menage was Dorothy Makepeace. She was Raymond's elder half-sister, and though not acknowledged as such was the daughter of Emily and the general. Despite the unusual circumstances, Raymond's childhood was comparatively untroubled and happy. He discovered the complexities of his parentage in early manhood. 
Raymond was educated at Colet Court preparatory school, Hammersmith, 1898-1901, and St Paul's School, London, 1901-5. Dum's death and a consequent lack of funds meant that Raymond spent his last year of education at a cheap boarding-school where he was restless and unhappy. At seventeen he left to become a clerk for the Army and Navy Stores. He had formed an abiding ambition to be a writer, but was persuaded to enter the teaching profession. From 1908 to 1911 he taught classics at Glengorse School, Eastbourne, then from 1911 to 1912 at St Christopher's, Bath. At Bath Raymond caught 'the splendid fever of Anglo-Catholicity' from a friend. (Raymond, 'The Story of my Days', 114.) He proceeded to Chichester Theological College, where he graduated first in his class, and then took a first-class degree preliminary to holy orders at Durham University in 1914. He was priested on Trinity Sunday 1915. 
At the outbreak of the First World War, Raymond immediately applied to the chaplain-general for service overseas with the army. He served as chaplain to the 10th Manchester regiment (1915-17), to the 9th Worcestershire regiment (1917 and 1919), to the East Lancashire territorials in Gallipoli in August 1915, and on five other fronts: Sinai, France and Belgium, Mesopotamia, Persia, and Russia. No other campaign for him proved half so memorable, poignant, or glamorous as Gallipoli. 'In the secret places of his heart' he retained unsullied his patriotic idealism (Raymond, 'The Story of my Days', 131). In 1917 Raymond witnessed the dreadful slaughter at the Ypres salient, but on the whole his campaigning experience was comparatively comfortable and safe. During the war Raymond composed a religious work, 'God's wheat'. The manuscript was lost when the ship bearing it to England was torpedoed. The project was never resurrected. 
Demobilized in 1919, Raymond returned to England and took up a curacy in the busy, prosperous parish of Brighton. In 1921 he married Zoe Irene Maude Doucett; they had two children. In 1922 Raymond published 'Tell England: a Study in a Generation'. As a schoolmaster Raymond had begun a novel about his schooldays. While in Gallipoli he first realized that he might incorporate the material in a more ambitious work about young men who were called to fight and to die for England. This notion grew to become his first and most famous novel. Rejected by thirteen publishers 'Tell England' was finally published by Cassell and reprinted twenty times in its first two years; it was still in print fifty years and forty impressions later. The reading public, anxious to be reassured that the sacrifice of a generation had been worth while, approved the novel's elegiac quality, its sentimentality, the mixture of patriotism and piety, the celebration of sacrifice, and not least the unquestioning acceptance by the protagonists of their destiny. The critics were hopelessly divided. It was acclaimed as an epic, and also condemned as commonplace, illiterate, and nauseating. It was made into a very successful film by Anthony Asquith in 1931. The book's success cast a long shadow over Raymond's other work. He was constantly reminded that nothing he wrote would ever match the amazing success of his first novel, while as a writer he was condemned for years to be labelled as a popular sentimentalist. 
With Raymond's career as a writer spectacularly launched, each subsequent year produced a new novel. 'Rossenal' (1922) recounted the experiences of a schoolmaster, 'Damascus Gate' (1923) the tribulations of an aspiring novelist, and 'Wanderlight' (1924) the agonies of conscience suffered by a young ordinand who withdraws from the priesthood. Throughout his training as deacon and priest Raymond retained his absolute devotion and loyalty to Anglo-Catholicism. As doubts began to grow, however, he realized he had been naive and uncritical. Insupportable misery now replaced joyous belief and in 1923 he decided he must quit holy orders. Though his belief in God the creator remained inviolate, he found it impossible to accept the Trinity. During forty years of anguished self-exile, he never abandoned his love for the church, and when the church declared partial agnosticism to be admissible, he returned immediately. 
From 1925 Raymond was a full-time writer producing novels of varying quality. His most successful book was a collection of essays, 'Through Literature to Life' (1928), reprinted four times before the end of the year. On the strength of it he took part in a conference on literature and leisure in Vancouver in April 1929. In Toronto he started a two-year love affair with Hazel Reid Marsh. In 1929 he published 'A Family that Was' (1929), the first novel in a three-volume family saga, the other volumes of which were 'Mary Leith' (1931) and 'The Jesting Army' (1930); they were published in one volume as 'Once in England' (1932). In 1929 he turned his hand to drama; his play 'The Berg', based on the sinking of the 'Titanic', had a short run in the West End and was adapted for screen as 'Atlantic'. 
In 1933 Raymond was made president of the Young PEN society and at a meeting in 1935 he met the novelist Diana Joan Young (1916-2009). They married in 1940 after Raymond's divorce from his first wife in the previous year; they had one son. In 1935 'We, the Accused' was a considerable critical as well as commercial success, surprising many reviewers by its gritty realism. It won the Book Guild medal in 1935. It combined the story of a murder with informed criticism of the legal system. This novel was the first of a series of sixteen known collectively as 'A London Gallery'. 
During the Second World War, Raymond was an air raid warden and a member of the Home Guard in 1940. He produced a number of novels during the war, including 'The Last to Rest' (1941) and 'The Corporal of the Guard' (1943). With his son Patrick, Raymond wrote 'Back to Humanity' (1945), an impassioned call for a return to human values after the alienation of war. Raymond wrote more than forty novels. Such later works as 'A Georgian Love Story' (1971) satisfied his considerable and loyal readership; his last novel, 'Under Wedgery Down' (1974), was published posthumously and is evidence of his lifelong energy and creativity. He also wrote biographical studies of Keats, Shelley, the Bronte family, and St Francis (on the strength of the last book he was made a knight officer in the order of merit of the Italian republic). Raymond's considerable contribution to popular literature was belatedly acknowledged by his appointment as OBE in 1972. He was made president of the Dickens Fellowship in 1971, and he campaigned to have Coleridge's remains reinterred in St Michael's, Highgate, London. He lived in Hampstead for thirty-five years and was on Hampstead council's libraries committee, and in 1961 served as a Liberal councillor. In 1966 he visited Israel in an effort to restore his lost faith; an account of this appears in 'The Bethany Road' (1967). 
Raymond died on 14 May 1974 at his home, 22 The Pryors, East Heath Road, Hampstead, London, of uraemia and an enlarged prostate; he was buried in Hampstead cemetery. His wife Diana survived him. 
Raymond was a fluent, compelling story-teller. His novels are illuminated by his deep affection for the north of England and, above all, for London, where he lived for most of his life. There was a strong didactic streak in Raymond though he and his work shared an optimism and a robust, even Dickensian, humour. His stories allowed him to examine social and religious themes with his own radical ideals and ideas; this was done without apology and with uncompromising moral earnestness. This, combined with his reputation for sentimentality, perhaps explains his fall from critical favour. 


@@@@@


doc= 56910


Smith, Naomi Gwladys Royde- (1875-1964), literary editor and writer, was born on 30 April 1875 at Craven Edge, Halifax, the eldest of six daughters and two sons of Michael Holroyd Smith (1847-1932), an electrical engineer responsible for the electrification of the City and South London Railway, as well as an inventor of a helicopter and a boomerang, among other things, and Anne (Daisy), 'nee' Williams (1848-1934), the daughter of the Revd Ebenezer Williams of Penybont, Wales, and 'a zealous student of the 'Bible'' (private information, M. Royde Smith). Matthew Smith, the painter, was a cousin. 'In the Wood', a novel written in 1928, was in part a description of her Yorkshire childhood. When the Holroyd Smith family moved to London (the children all taking the surname Royde-Smith), Naomi and her sisters attended Clapham high school; her education was finished in Switzerland at Geneva, and she then began to earn her living, becoming a well-respected reviewer. She also wrote poetry but did not publish any. 
From 1904 onwards Naomi lived in London with her sister Leslie ('b'. 1884) in rooms in Oakley Street, Chelsea (later she also had a cottage at Holmbury St Mary, near Dorking, Surrey) and worked at the 'Saturday Westminster Gazette', both reviewing and writing the 'Problems and prizes page'. By 1912 she had become literary editor, the first time a woman had held this position, publishing early work by, among others, Rupert Brooke, D. H. Lawrence, and Graham Greene. Her large circle of friends included J. C. Squire, William Beveridge, Hugh Walpole, and Middleton Murry. 'Miss Royde-Smith had risen entirely through her own ability and drive. She had a forceful personality, sharp-tongued and sharp-witted; she was extremely well read and, while quite able to tackle men on their own terms, she was also fair-haired, feminine and a successful hostess (Whistler, 173)' wrote the biographer of Walter de la Mare, the poet, who met Naomi in the spring of 1911 and was to be in love with her for the next five years (writing her nearly 400 letters). On Naomi's part she 'felt a great need to be artist's Muse. She wanted the men she loved to be men of genius... Her chief usefulness was the confidence she gave him' (ibid., 178, 187); she was, however, ambivalent towards men sexually. A close friend at this period was the novelist Rose Macaulay; in the years after the First World War 'she and Rose, acting jointly as hostesses, received such diverse authors as Arnold Bennett, W. B. Yeats, Edith Sitwell and Aldous Huxley' (Smith, 100) at Naomi's flat, 44 Prince's Gardens, Kensington, where, Mary Agnes Hamilton remarked, 'everybody in the literary world, the not yet arrived as well as the established, was to be met' (Emery, 191) and where Naomi 'dressed a la 1860; swinging earrings, skirt in balloons... sat in complete command. Here she had her world round her. It was a queer mixture of the intelligent & the respectable' ('Diary of Virginia Woolf', 5 June 1921). Rose Macaulay was to satirize Naomi at this period of her life in 'Crewe Train' (1926), where she appears as Aunt Evelyn, 'a fashionable, meddling, arch-gossip' (Emery). 
It was only after Naomi had given up her job in 1922 that she began to write fiction: 'The Tortoiseshell Cat', which was in some ways her best novel, appeared in 1925, and over the next thirty-five years she went on to publish nearly forty more novels, several biographies (for example of Mrs Siddons and of Maurice de Guerin), and four plays. The novels are admired by some but others are of the opinion that 'in spite of a good style, intelligence and frequent touches of truth to character, her novels have no great imagination. Too often the romantic parts suffer from wish-fulfilment studies in masculine Genius that remind one uneasily of many inferior passages in her letters to de la Mare. (Whistler, 342)' Lovat Dickson wrote that 'none of her novels... is likely to survive' ('The Times', 30 July 1964) but Betty Askwith responded by saying that 'The Delicate Situation' (1931) should be remembered and deserved comparison with Alain-Fournier's 'Le grand Meaulnes'. She observed that 'any writer might be proud to have written just one book on that level' ('The Times', 4 Aug 1964). Other novels that are admired are 'For Us in the Dark' (1937) and 'The Altar-Piece: an Edwardian Mystery' (1939). 
On 15 December 1926, at Lynton parish church, Devon, Naomi married the Italian-American actor Ernest Gianello Milton; she was fifty-one, fifteen years older than her husband (but pretended to twelve). She gave up her hectic social life, although continuing to review and being for a period art critic of 'Queen' magazine, and settled into a surprisingly successful marriage -- 'a triumph over unlikeliness by the strong-minded, romantic woman she was, and the histrionic, highly-strung, generous-minded actor. He placed her, for life, on a pedestal of admiration, though not by temperament drawn to her sex' (Whistler, 342). 
The Miltons lived variously in Hatfield in Hertfordshire, Chelsea in London, Wells in Somerset (during the 1930s), and then (during the 1940s and 1950s) in a house in Winchester once lived in by Nell Gwyn, 34 Colebrook Street in the shadow of the cathedral, and later on nearby at Flat 4, 43 Hyde Street. In 1942 both became Roman Catholics. At this period of her life Naomi Milton was, according to her niece, Jane Tilley, 'hugely amusing, chain-smoked, was large and uncorseted, and wore large patterns'. 'The sheer luxuriance of Naomi's discourse is what stays with me' was the impression of her nephew, Michael Royde Smith. She continued to write in spite of increasing blindness. At the end of her life she and Ernest went to live in London at Abbey Court Hotel, 15 Netherhall Gardens, Hampstead. She died from renal failure at the Hospital of St John and St Elizabeth, Marylebone, on 28 July 1964 and was buried in Hampstead cemetery. Her husband survived her. 


@@@@@


doc= 56912


Warren, Marjory Winsome (1897-1960), geriatrician, was born on 28 October 1897 at 15 Scarborough Road, Stroud Green, Hornsey, London, eldest of five daughters of Walter Richard Warren (died 1930), barrister, and his wife, Annie 'nee' Dixon. Her younger sister Enid Charis Warren later achieved prominence as a medical social worker. Marjory was educated at the North London Collegiate School and trained in medicine at the Royal Free Hospital, London; she qualified LRCP MRCS in 1923. After junior posts at the Queen's Children's Hospital, Hackney, and at the Royal Free and Elizabeth Garrett Anderson hospitals, she became assistant resident medical officer at the Isleworth Infirmary in 1926. She was promoted to be deputy medical director in 1931, and after the inception of the National Health Service in 1948 she became consultant physician. 
Warren's early interest was in surgery but she later concentrated on medicine and medical administration. In 1935 the Isleworth Infirmary took over responsibility for the adjacent workhouse (Warkworth House) to form the West Middlesex County Hospital. During 1936 Warren systematically reviewed the several hundred inmates of the old workhouse wards. 'In the same ward were to be found senile dements, restless and noisy patients who required cot beds, incontinent patients, senile bed-ridden patients, elderly sick patients who were treatable, patients who were up and about all day, and unmarried mothers with infants' ('Lancet', 656). Warren helped some of the unmarried mothers back into the community by finding them employment and was able to discharge other patients to their own homes or to residential care by providing active rehabilitation and appropriate equipment. Many of the patients were old and infirm and for these Warren's approach was to match care to needs by a system of classification. The success of her active approach to the rehabilitation of stroke victims had a particular and lasting impact on medical practice. She also initiated the upgrading of wards, thereby improving the morale of both patients and staff. 
In two seminal papers, in the 'British Medical Journal' (25 Dec 1943, 822-3) and the 'Lancet' (8 June 1946, 841-3), Warren advocated the creation of a medical speciality of geriatrics, the provision of special geriatric units in general hospitals, and the teaching of medical students in the care of elderly people by senior doctors with specialist interest and experience in geriatrics. Her work aroused the interest of the Ministry of Health and during the 1950s geriatric medicine became a recognized medical specialism within the National Health Service. In 1947 she was one of eight doctors who founded the Medical Society for the Care of the Elderly (later renamed the British Geriatrics Society). She was founding chair of its committee under the presidency of Lord Amulree, the medical officer at the Ministry of Health who first appreciated the significance of her work. Many visitors from elsewhere in the UK and from overseas came to Isleworth to observe and learn from her methods. Warren was invited to lecture in Canada, Australia, and the USA, and she served as international secretary of the International Association of Gerontology. As chief of a busy medical team she expected high standards from those who worked with her, but her personal influence was enhanced by an energetic and engaging personality that earned her the affection as well as the respect of colleagues. 
Warren was active in many professional and voluntary fields. She had a keen interest in nursing and nursing education and was an examiner for the General Nursing Council. She was an enthusiastic member of the London Association of the Medical Women's Federation and shortly before her death was elected its president. She was appointed CBE in 1959. 
Warren was fatally injured in a road accident on her way to a conference in Germany, and she died in hospital in Maizieres-les-Metz, France, on 5 September 1960. Her body was cremated in Strasbourg, and a memorial service was held on 1 October 1960 at St Pancras Church, London. She never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 56913


Wilson, John Robinson (1919-1973), surgeon and author, was born at 31A Ellers Road, Leeds, on 19 November 1919, the son of John Cooke Wilson, wholesale butcher, and his wife, Lilian ('nee' Robinson). Wilson was educated at Stonyhurst College and Leeds University. He graduated in medicine in 1943 and worked briefly at hospitals in Leeds and Sheffield before joining the merchant service as a ship's surgeon. He spent two years with the Orient Line before returning to Leeds for surgical training. He became a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1951 and spent two further years working as a trainee surgeon in London. 
In 1954 Wilson changed direction in his career by joining the staff of the international pharmaceutical company Lederle Laboratories; he became its British medical director in 1958. Wilson's eight years with the company gave him the opportunity to travel widely, and he also became familiar with the workings of major multinational business concerns and with the realities of scientific research -- two themes that were prominent in his writing. 
Wilson's first novel, 'A Bed of Thorns', was published in 1953, and from that time on he published a book every two or three years. All but one were works of fiction, the exception being 'Margin of Safety' (1963), an account of the development of the polio vaccines. Thirty years later this was still being quoted as an authoritative source and it remains an outstanding example of science writing for general readers. 
In 1960 Wilson moved to 32 South Eaton Place in Belgravia, London, where he lived for the rest of his life with his wife, Sheila. They had no children. In 1962 Wilson became an assistant editor on the 'British Medical Journal'. Shortly afterwards he began to write regularly for 'The Spectator' and in 1965 he left the 'BMJ', giving as his reason his wish to be able to devote more time to writing. In fact Wilson's time at the 'BMJ' had not been entirely happy; his own fictionalized account appeared in 1968 in 'The Side of the Angels', which was set in a research institute deep within the Soviet Union but with a director, Suvorin, who was closely modelled on the then editor of the 'BMJ', Hugh Clegg. 'BMJ' staff also provided models for four of Suvorin's senior colleagues, including one whose actual suicide was mirrored in the book. 
Wilson next became part-time international editor of 'World Medicine'. In the late 1960s and 1970s this fortnightly magazine entertained and stimulated doctors by its outspoken criticism of the pomposities and arrogance of the leaders of the medical profession. Wilson was a fine exponent of deflating criticism, but he was careful to avoid the trap for campaigning journalists of believing in conspiracies. One of his favourite aphorisms was that 'when treated badly always suspect inefficiency rather than malice'. 
In 1971 Wilson joined his former colleague Hugh Clegg in editing a journal for doctors in developing countries, 'Tropical Doctor', and he became sole editor in 1972. He continued to publish novels; his last, 'Barrington' (1971), which was a reworking of the story of Albert Schweitzer, was thought by some critics to be his best work of fiction. Wilson died suddenly in Orga, Kyrenia, Cyprus, on 23 May 1973. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 56914


Wood, Paul Hamilton (1907-1962), cardiologist, was born on 16 August 1907 at Coonoor, India, the second son of Richard Boardman Wood, civil servant, and Geraldine, daughter of Alfred Tomson, land agent. After his early education at Yardley Court, Tonbridge, Kent, Wood's father retired to Tasmania and Wood continued his education at Launceston College, Tasmania (1920-24), and Trinity College, University of Melbourne (1924-31). He excelled at sports but seems not to have displayed any outstanding academic ability at that time; a contemporary described him as 'busy... in the cultivation of friendships and the enjoyment of life' ('Medical Journal of Australia', 683-4). Certainly he needed two attempts to complete his final examinations before qualifying MB, BS, in 1931, and he subsequently failed to obtain a house appointment in Melbourne. He served as house physician and house surgeon at Christchurch Hospital, New Zealand, between 1931 and 1932. 
In 1933 Wood returned to England, obtained a house-physician post at the Brompton Hospital in London, and passed the examination for membership of the Royal College of Physicians. He had still not shown himself to be in any way out of the ordinary and was uncertain about his next move. On 29 December 1934 he married Elizabeth (Betty) Josephine, daughter of John Guthrie, senior surgeon at the Christchurch Hospital, New Zealand; they had two sons and a daughter. About the same time Wood contemplated applying for an appointment at the National Hospital for Nervous Diseases. No such appointment was available but he met a fellow Australian who was resident medical officer at the National Heart Hospital and was looking for a 'locum tenens'. Wood took the job and began a rise to eminence in cardiology for which only the hackneyed adjective 'meteoric' seems appropriate. In 1935 he was invited by Francis Fraser to be one of his assistants, with full clinical and teaching duties, at the newly founded British Postgraduate Medical School at Hammersmith Hospital, and in 1937 he was appointed physician to out-patients at the National Heart Hospital. At the outbreak of the Second World War, Wood was given charge of an Emergency Medical Service unit at Mill Hill for the investigation and treatment of effort syndrome; he proved, for the first time, that this was a psychosomatic disorder. In 1940 he was awarded his MD by Melbourne University and in the same year he was elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, where he was Goulstonian lecturer in 1941 and Croonian lecturer in 1958. He became consultant cardiologist at the British Postgraduate Medical School, Hammersmith, in 1941. In 1942 Wood joined the Royal Army Medical Corps. He served in north Africa and Italy, reaching the rank of brigadier, and in 1946 he was appointed OBE. 
After the war Wood returned to the Hammersmith as physician and senior lecturer, but he gave up this appointment in 1948, owing to increased responsibilities at the National Heart Hospital -- he had become dean and director of its newly formed Institute of Cardiology in 1947. He was also appointed cardiologist at the Brompton Hospital and it was at these two institutions that he spent the remainder of his career; he also maintained a private consultant practice. 
By the late 1940s Wood was already held in high regard by his peers but it was the publication of his book 'Diseases of the Heart and Circulation' (1950) which established his international reputation. Many other publications followed, mostly on those types of heart disease which could be treated surgically. He lectured throughout the world but it was at bedside teaching sessions that his unusual gifts of perception, analysis, and exposition were most prominently displayed. His ability to determine the exact nature of a patient's symptoms, by close questioning together with the sharpness of his eyes, the sensitivity of his fingers, and the acuity of his hearing, meant that he could acquire the maximum information from an encounter with a patient. These skills, together with an unusually rapid speed of thought and the ability to present his findings in precise and lucid English, were the basis of his reputation as a teacher. He was particularly noted for his ability to relate clinical findings to data obtained by investigations such as cardiac catheterization. To be able to interpret, in terms of disordered physiology, what could be seen, felt, or heard on examination was a skill which many learnt from Wood. Supreme at the bedside, he was never an experimentalist and his only weakness was his lack of formal training in physiology, which he himself lamented. Certainly some of his accounts of pathophysiology, outside his own particular field, verged on the simplistic. 
Physically Wood was short, with a rather ascetic appearance but with what was described as an 'impish' sense of humour. In debate he was forthright and he was certainly not always a comfortable colleague; he could make provocative, or even mischievous, interventions in discussions. Delighting in, and perhaps a little vain of, his speed of thought, with which he could appraise a new concept or demolish a weak argument, he could give offence to some who were struggling to keep up with him. Yet any tension was often dissolved by laughter and he was also described as having a warm, endearing personality. 
Such little time as Wood had for relaxation he devoted to his home and garden, and he could apply his mind to a garden catalogue as assiduously as to a case history. Fishing near his country house, Fair Lady Lodge, West Runton, Norfolk, was another leisure pursuit. A cigarette smoker before the medical profession was fully aware of its hazards, he succumbed to a smoking-related disease. He had a heart attack while at work and made it clear that, if he were to suffer a cardiac arrest, resuscitation was not to be attempted. Wood died in the Middlesex Hospital, London, on 13 July 1962, survived by his wife and children. A memorial service was held at All Souls, Langham Place, London, on 30 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 56915


Ryan, James (c.1770-1847), mining engineer and inventor, was born in Ireland. His early years are obscure but he had 'from a youth, a powerful predilection for the study of minerals, and their various geological character and position' (J. Ryan, 'Address to coal owners of Tyne and Wear', 15 Nov 1843, 2). By 1800 he was employed as 'mineral surveyor' to the Grand Canal Company of Ireland. In 1803, the company became involved in establishing the Doonane collieries at Castlecomer, in the hope of building up trade on the canal. By late April 1804 Ryan was based at these collieries, the site of the first Newcomen and Watt steam engines in Ireland. About this time Ryan was also involved with north Welsh collieries, including that at Bagillt, Flintshire. His involvement in mining seems to have inspired his invention of a new mine-boring apparatus, first reported at a meeting of the Dublin Society on 19 April 1804. The device brought up cores from potential mining sites using a cylindrical trepanning cutter. With the encouragement of the Dublin Society and a loan from the Grand Canal Company (to which he was now named engineer), Ryan obtained an English patent for his corer on 28 February 1805. The device was used for mineral exploration near Clonmel and Wexford in Ireland, but after a report on their Doonane collieries, the Grand Canal Company decided it had no further use for Ryan's services. 
Ryan moved to mainland Britain where his invention was demonstrated to the board of agriculture and the British Mineralogical Society in 1807, and to members of both the Royal Society and the Geological Society of London in 1808. All these groups reported favourably on its novelty. The 1808 demonstration to the Geological Society was arranged by James Sowerby (1757-1822), an early advocate of the importance of William Smith's stratigraphic discoveries. This introduced Ryan to Smith's methods, and Ryan sent stratigraphically arranged suites of geological specimens both to Sowerby, for use in his 'Mineral Conchology' project, and to the Geological Society from 1808. In this same year Ryan's device was used in exploratory borings for Richard Trevithick's Thames Tunnel project. 
In 1806 Richard Lovell Edgeworth had noted that Ryan's invention could be used in boring special wide passages to improve mine ventilation. This application was soon put into practice in the particularly dangerous south Staffordshire coalfield, and Ryan lectured on his new methods at the Royal Institution in 1810. With the foundation of the Society for Preventing Accidents in Coal Mines in 1813, mine ventilation became a highly political matter. Views were polarized as to whether better illumination (with the Davy and Stephenson 'safety' lamps) or better ventilation (as encouraged by Ryan) was more needed. The Royal Society and Royal Institution favoured the first, while the Society of Arts favoured the second, awarding Ryan 100 guineas with a gold medal in 1816. 
In 1818 Ryan moved to Montgomeryshire to mine lead and then feldspar for the Staffordshire pottery industry. This involvement was to cause Ryan major financial embarrassment, and litigation was still continuing in 1840. Nevertheless, Ryan had by 1831 erected a school there for instructing 'young men in my System of mining' (Wedgwood MS 21874). This was the first such purpose-built school in Britain. Ryan's last years were spent continuing to promote his scheme of mine ventilation. In 1840 this had drawn praise from a Belgian director of mines and the 1842 'Report of the South Shields Committee' was also very favourable. Yet another disaster, in a poorly ventilated mine at Haswell, Durham, in 1844, inspired a commission of inquiry under Charles Lyell and Michael Faraday. Ryan was not allowed to speak at the inquest but Faraday noted that Ryan's 'principle seems very beautiful' (M. Faraday, 'The ventilation of mines', 'Civil Engineer and Architects' Journal', 8, April 1845, 118). 
Ryan died on 21 July 1847 at the house of Mr Brooke, Wolverhampton Street, Dudley, the town which he had made his home since 1808. He was buried on 25 July at St Thomas's, Dudley. He had latterly been receiving an annual pension of $50 from the revenues of Lord Ward's mines, whose safety he had so much promoted. He had married in or before 1811 (his wife's name was Mary), and, following his death, his only child, Mary Jane, was allowed a reduced pension of 10's'. a week. Ryan's last moments none the less were 'comparatively those of a pauper' (Johnson, 194), his reward for developing a mine system which was more expensive than the one it should have replaced and, perhaps, for being Irish. 


@@@@@


doc= 56916


Williams, John (c.1732-1795), mining engineer and archaeologist, was born in the parish of Ceri, Montgomeryshire, where the frequency of his surname and the state of record keeping conceal his parentage. After education in the village school, and having found farming not to his liking, Williams entered the mining profession. He was first involved with lead mines in mid-Wales and copper mines in Anglesey, but subsequently he moved to Scotland -- probably in the mid-1740s. He is first recorded there as a surveyor for the military survey of Scotland (1747-55). He was also involved in lead mining at Leadhills and near Edinburgh. 
From 1763 to 1775 Williams was employed by the commissioners for the forfeited annexed estates. His first mineral discoveries were in the north of Scotland: in 1764 George Clerk Maxwell and James Hutton set out on a fact-finding geological tour to the north of Scotland, apparently as a result of Williams's early findings. From 1764 to 1769 Williams also leased the mine at the small isolated coalfield of Brora in Sutherland. Here he made major investments, erecting a wagon-way and steam engine. However, the latter caught fire and, as a result, he sustained heavy losses. 
Williams was married by 1765 but was involved in a second relationship at Brora, which produced at least one illegitimate child and caused Williams to be threatened by the kirk officers. This, together with financial difficulties, forced Williams to move on, and he became an itinerant mineral surveyor for the forfeited annexed estates commissioners (1769-75). During this period he also reported on the 'parallel roads' (former lake strand-lines) of Glenroy and discovered the vitrified forts in northern Scotland, on which he published his first book in 1777 (later translated into Russian). He thought the stonework of these hill-forts had been intentionally vitrified by the action of fire. 
About 1776 Williams moved to superintend coal works at Blackburn near West Calder, becoming overseer and factor to Gilmerton colliery in 1778. The proximity of the latter works to Edinburgh allowed Williams to become a founding 'associated artist' of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland in 1780. He read four papers to this society, only the last of which, on reafforesting the highlands, was published, in 1792. 
Williams had been recommended to Gilmerton by the earl of Buchan (David Stuart Erskine (1742-1829)) who much encouraged him. One outcome was the essay Williams wrote on supplying the want of coal in the highlands. Both this essay and his suggestions for improving the fisheries of Scotland gained him awards from the Highland Society in 1785. Williams hoped implementation of these ideas would discourage emigration from the region at the end of the American War of Independence, but neither work was published until 1799. 
Williams's coal essay became the foundation for his major work, a two-volume 'Natural History of the Mineral Kingdom', first published in 1789. It filled a vacuum in scientific and technical literature in English -- its subject matter was not then taught in British universities. The book carried a first (negative) reaction to James Hutton's newly announced 'Theory of the Earth'. But it drew Williams to wide attention and brought him a gold medal from Empress Catherine of Russia, and in July 1792 he was introduced, in Edinburgh, to a rich Venetian nobleman, Count Alvise Zenobio (1757-1817), who held revolutionary views. Zenobio wished to improve his Venetian estates by locating and utilizing their mineral resources, and in 1793 Williams duly set out to survey them. 
However, unbeknownst to Williams, Zenobio's activities as an undesirable alien soon came to the attention of the British authorities. Initially asked to leave the country, in February 1794 Zenobio was imprisoned in London for debt. Meanwhile Williams was collecting samples and wandering round north Italy like a 'dumb pilgrim' (De Rubeis, 1795, 17-8), since he spoke neither Italian nor French. He contracted typhoid and died on 29 May 1795 at Count Zenobio's house at Verona. The mineral observations he had made on his travels passed to the Italian zoologist Giuseppe Olivi (1769-1795) who hoped to publish a summary. However, he too died within months, and the work was lost. 
A second edition of Williams's 1790 book was published in 1810 and portions were translated into German and published in America. For a largely self-educated miner this was a remarkable achievement. He had noted in 1787 how he 'had spent more of my time in the mines... than perhaps any other mineral man on earth' and, on this basis, believed that 'Britain receives more benefits from the bowels of the earth than perhaps any other nation' (Williams). 


@@@@@


doc= 56917


Barrow, George (1853-1932), geologist, was born in London on 11 December 1853. He was the fifth child (and the third son) in the family of eight of John George Barrow ('b'. 1805/6), a general practitioner at the Royal College of Surgeons, and his wife, Eleanor ('b'. 1827/8). After study at the Philological School under Dr Abbott, Barrow matriculated at London University in 1871, holding a Turner scholarship. Admitted to King's College, he studied science, winning prizes in mathematics and geology. He then entered employment as secretary to the distinguished geologist and banker George Poulett Scrope, who, being aged, deaf, and blind, engaged him to read loudly for six hours a day. Presumably giving satisfaction in this, Barrow was recommended to Andrew Ramsay and was appointed to the geological survey on Scrope's death in 1876. Barrow gained much mineralogical knowledge from Allan Dick of the Royal School of Mines, and eventually advanced to district geologist for the London region in 1909. He retired in 1915. 
Barrow's early survey work was carried out around Cleveland, Yorkshire, whence he moved to the south-eastern highlands of Scotland, to south-west England, to the midlands, and, finally, to the London region. In the midlands, Barrow worked on the Staffordshire coalfields and around Cheadle. In the south-west, he studied the Isles of Scilly and granitic regions such as Bodmin, with their 'aureoles' of metamorphosed rocks. In the London area, he was active in economic geology, studying the water supply and advising on the construction of the underground system. It was, however, in Scotland, where he worked from 1884 to 1900, that Barrow made his most notable contributions, through his study of metamorphic rocks of the south-east Grampians, particularly in the lonely region between Glen Esk and Glen Clova in Forfarshire. Here he found it possible to analyse the region's schists according to their subsidiary minerals -- biotite, garnet, staurolite, kyanite, and sillimanite. Barrow took these to indicate the degree of metamorphism of the original argillaceous rocks, resulting from the action of different intensities of heat and pressure. Thus Barrow found an invaluable tool (for which there were some less well-developed precedents) for subdividing and mapping metamorphic rocks, and the notion of such 'Barrovian zones' has become well established in geological theory. 
However, though Barrow's originality was recognized and admired by his colleagues, his tenacity of views was not always appreciated. For example, extrapolating his zone concept, he held that the three main metamorphic regions of Scotland (later called Lewisian, Moinian, and Dalradian) were derived from the same source, being of Lewisian age but metamorphosed to different degrees. This notion was not accepted, and indeed was not formally published, apart from some comments to a paper by Cecil Tilley (1925). Eventually, Barrow's disagreements with his colleagues became such that it was thought best to move him from Scotland to the less controversial geology of the English midlands. 
Barrow is recorded by his colleague Edward Greenly as having the demeanour of a schoolboy, but possessed of 'one of the most daring minds that modern geology has known' (Edward Greenly, 'A Hand through Time', 1938). He had the reputation of being a keen sportsman, a good shot and expert fisherman. He was awarded the Royal Geological Society of Cornwall's Bolitho medal (1912), and the Geological Society's Murchison medal (1913). He was president of the Geologists' Association for 1916-18 and led many of its field excursions in south-east England. Barrow died of angina at Clovelly, Haddon Road, Chorleywood, Hertfordshire on 23 July 1932. 


@@@@@


doc= 56918


Hunton, Louis (bap. 1814, d. 1838), geologist and chemist, was born at Hummersea House, Loftus, North Riding of Yorkshire, and baptized on 6 August 1814. He was the son of William Hunton (1789-1863), manager of the local alum works and ship-owner, and Jane, 'nee' March (1791-1878). Little is known of his earliest years but he was probably educated at the school provided for children at the alum works by Lord Dundas. In 1832 Hunton entered King's College, London. He is said to have spent two years at King's, during the period when Charles Lyell and John Phillips were teaching geology there. However, he is recorded only as an occasional student of German language and literature. In 1835 Hunton went, for one year, to University College, London, where he attended courses on comparative anatomy, fossil zoology (both taught by Robert Grant), and natural philosophy. 
On 25 May 1836 Hunton's only geological paper was communicated to the Geological Society of London by J. F. Royle (1799-1858) of King's College. Published the following year, it recorded the results Hunton had obtained from detailed study of the Upper Lias and Marlstone strata exposed at Rockcliff, to the east of his father's Loftus works on the Yorkshire coast. Nearly one hundred years later, this paper was described as 'a truly remarkable document' showing 'remarkable qualities' (Arkell). Hunton was the first to urge that accurate information about the distributions of fossils in rocks could only come from the study of samples taken from material still 'in situ' within the beds in question; loose materials accumulated at the foot of cliffs should never be used. When 'in situ' materials were used, they demonstrated how certain species, especially ammonites, showed much more limited vertical distributions through rocks than had previously been realized. Such discoveries greatly helped the more accurate discrimination of both strata and time in the geology of the next decade. Hunton's geological paper brought him election as a fellow of the Geological Society in November 1836; he was proposed by Robert Grant. The same year he discovered a fine 5 metre long ichthyosaur, which was presented to the Whitby Museum in 1867. 
Hunton's only other published scientific work appeared in the 'London and Edinburgh Philosophical Magazine' in 1837. The paper, on his other interest, chemistry, discussed combinations of sugar (of interest to any alum maker) with alkalis and metallic oxides. By this time, however, Hunton was ill with consumption and had had to abandon further scientific research. He travelled to Nimes in the south of France hoping his health would recover. It did not and on 18 February 1838 he died at rue des Lombards 12, Nimes, aged twenty-three. He was posthumously remembered by an ammonite named after him by Martin Simpson in 1843. 


@@@@@


doc= 56919


Kennedy, William Quarrier (1903-1979), geologist, was born on 30 November 1903, at the Orphan Homes of Scotland in Bridge of Weir, Renfrewshire, the youngest of five children of John Gordon Kennedy, headmaster of the Orphan Homes school, and his wife, Peterina, 'nee' Webster. He had a happy childhood at their riverside home; he idolized his father (a stern Presbyterian who made his family go to church twice on Sundays). It was his father and his elder brother Ian who first made him interested in sciences and literature, especially poetry. He was educated at his father's school and at Glasgow high school, and he entered Glasgow University in 1921 to study agriculture. He graduated in 1926 and he proceeded to an honours degree in geology, graduating with first-class honours in 1927. While a student, Kennedy obtained a Royal Society grant for cave exploration, which led to his first geological publication in 1930. He was a member of council of Glasgow University Geological Society, probably his only ever service on a scientific society council. 
On graduating, Kennedy won a J. R. K. Law scholarship for research in applied sciences abroad; he chose Zurich Technische Hochschule. He studied magnetite deposits in Traversella, Piedmont, under Professor Paul Niggli. On his return to England (fluent in German), he applied for a post with the geological survey. Offered appointment in September 1928, he reported at the Edinburgh office the following day, thus joining a group including such outstanding geologists as E. B. Bailey (1881-1965), J. E. Richey (1886-1968), and H. H. Read (1889-1970). Kennedy was assigned to geological mapping in the midland valley and in the highlands. 
During his career Kennedy developed two main geological interests; in the Precambrian Moine rocks of the west highlands, and in the processes by which volcanic rocks of the midland valley and Western Isles evolved in the mantle and lower crust. Both were discussed in papers of major significance, and systematically described on geological maps and in memoirs. He made the spectacular discovery of a 65 mile wrench on the Great Glen fault, and recognized the simple domal pattern (displaced by the fault) of metamorphic zones in the highlands. 
In 1945 Kennedy left his beloved Scotland to become professor of geology at Leeds University. The department there had concentrated on northern England geology; Kennedy shifted its research emphasis to petrogenesis, tectonics, and global problems. Disliking committee work, or answering letters, he nevertheless obtained staff, equipment, and eventually a new building for a department of earth sciences, which incorporated geophysics, geochemistry, and geology. He attracted a thriving group of research students, for he was an inspiring teacher and a lucid lecturer, and he was always happy to discuss problems with students. 
In research, Kennedy continued to think about Scottish problems. In 1953 he read a paper to the Geological Society reinterpreting the Morar structures, an interpretation which was initially rejected and which led to Kennedy's shunning the society thereafter. Later, John Sutton (1919-1992), one of the chief dissenters, acknowledged that Kennedy was right. 
In 1951 Kennedy and the Uganda geological survey jointly led an expedition to the formidable Ruwenzori range. However, owing to the complexity of the geology, and the small scale of the expedition, no report resulted. Becoming increasingly interested in research and mineral exploration in Africa, Kennedy established contacts with mining companies. A chance meeting with Sir Ernest Oppenheimer, head of Anglo-American Corporation, resulted in 1955 in the establishment at Leeds of a research institute of African geology, funded by the corporation. Thereafter Kennedy concentrated on African research, initially on Karoo volcanics and mineralization in eastern Rhodesia, on geochemical provinces and minerals in pegmatites, younger granites, and kimberlites. 
In 1960 Kennedy spent time in hospital: after a leave of absence from 1965, he retired in 1967. Apart from a brief visiting lectureship at St Andrews and a few papers, ill-health ended his scientific work. Nevertheless his contribution had been outstanding. Through his career he had gained many honours, including the Geological Society's Bigsby (1948) and Lyell medals (1967), the Geological Society of Edinburgh's Clough medal (1966), and fellowships of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1948) and the Royal Society (1949). 
Kennedy's personal life reflected his temperament; H. H. Read called him sensitive as a ballet dancer. He had an unassuming charm, interest in people, and humility. His first marriage, on 3 October 1933, to Elizabeth Jane Lawson McCubbin ('b'. 1911/12), daughter of Thomas McCubbin, structural engineer, began with eclat; they had a son and two daughters. However, it ended unhappily with separation. After some years of loneliness in his house in Leeds, he married Sylvia Margaret Grieves in 1962; they were happily married and had two children. On his retirement they moved to Elie, Fife. Despite pneumonia and ill-health, he enjoyed golf, gardening, and the odd flutter. He died peacefully, in Harrogate, on 13 March 1979. 


@@@@@


doc= 56920


Vaughan, Arthur (1868-1915), geologist, was born on 7 March 1868 at 34A Pembroke Square, London, the son of William Vaughan, a civil service clerk and later actuary to the Board of Trade, and his wife, Julia Ward. From University College School, he entered University College, London, in 1885, gaining a first-class degree in mathematics. He then entered Trinity College, Cambridge, with a mathematical scholarship and in 1891 was awarded first-class honours in the part two mathematical physics tripos. In the same year, on 28 July, he married Frances Catherine (died 1962), daughter of Walter Hawkes, butcher. On leaving Cambridge he accepted a post as senior science master at the army coaching establishment in Clifton, Bristol. There he remained until 1910 when he was offered a lectureship in geology at Oxford University. 
While at University College, Vaughan had come under the influence of Professor Bonney, then also president of the Geological Society of London. Thus Vaughan's earliest scientific papers were on the physics of the earth. However, soon after his move to Bristol, Vaughan came under the twin influences of Edward Wilson (curator of the Bristol Museum) and Sidney Reynolds (professor of geology at the University College in Bristol) -- influences which led him into the fields of stratigraphy and palaeontology. 
In all, Vaughan published twenty-six geological papers, mainly on palaeontology and stratigraphy of the Lower Carboniferous Limestone in the Bristol district. It was his mastery of this field which was to win him the Oxford lectureship and world renown. Vaughan demonstrated persuasively, on the basis of examining strata exposed in the Avon Gorge in Bristol, that there was a sequence of coral and brachiopod species in the limestones and that this could be used for detailed correlation with strata in other areas. In the Avon Gorge limestones, Vaughan established twelve biozones, each characterized by a distinctive species and fossil assemblage, through 800 metres of sediment from the base of the Carboniferous to the beginning of the Millstone Grits (a span later recognized as 30 million years). At the time, this was an immense leap in precision correlation. Vaughan soon extended his correlation to south Wales and to Ireland, and later to Belgium, demonstrating the wide validity of his principles. Some of Vaughan's contemporaries had doubts, and thought that the species ranges represented not time zones but environmental habitats, which might disappear, only to reappear again at a later time, in perhaps another place; so the correlation could be ecological and not evolutionary. Notwithstanding these doubts, the Vaughan scheme was adopted throughout Britain and used for over sixty years until a lithologically based stratigraphy was introduced in the late 1960s. Vaughan's pioneering researches were based on painstaking and prolonged fieldwork, often done in his spare time, with little if any financial support, and often while suffering from poor health. They earned him many distinctions and his contributions have played a major role in the evolution of understanding of Lower Carboniferous stratigraphy. 
Vaughan courageously fought increasing limitations to physical activity during the last decade of his life. His outstanding mental powers for clear-sighted logical analysis remained with him to the end. To his many friends he was always genial and loyal. He died at his home, 315 Woodstock Road, Oxford, on 3 December 1915, survived by his wife and two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 56921


Smith, Walter Campbell- (1887-1988), mineralogist and petrologist, was born on 30 November 1887 at 41 York Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, the second son of George Hamilton Smith (1860-1929), paper merchant, and his wife, Charlotte Eliza (1859-1935), daughter of Henry William Ashford, chairmaker, of Birmingham and his wife, Charlotte. Known always as Campbell Smith, the hyphenated form of the name was formalized by deed poll in 1959. 
After attending Solihull School (1895-1906), Campbell Smith entered Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, graduating with first-class honours (1910) and becoming Wiltshire prizeman in mineralogy in 1909. On 1 December 1910 he joined the mineralogy department at the British Museum (Natural History) initially to work on minerals but, with the arrival in 1913 of the geological specimens collected by the 'Terra Nova' Antarctic Expedition, he was assigned to describe their physical properties. Thereafter he became first and foremost a petrologist. 
In 1910 Campell Smith joined the Territorial Army (Artists' Rifles) and was mobilized on the declaration of war in 1914, serving throughout, mainly in France. In 1917 he was awarded the Military Cross for gallantry on the Blaireville-Ficheux front the previous year. He was demobilized on 11 April 1919 and was made a brevet lieutenant-colonel in 1935. He was later awarded the Territorial decoration. 
Between the wars the British Colonial Geological Surveys were investigating the complex geology of Africa and Campbell Smith's help was sought in examining carbonate rocks collected by Frank Dixey from within igneous complexes in Nyasaland. From his microscopical observations Campbell Smith concluded, contrary to contemporary opinion, that these were igneous carbonatites rather than sedimentary limestones. He continued to develop his ideas as more occurrences were investigated and he chose carbonatites as the subject of his presidential address to the Geological Society in 1956. This, together with a similar review by Pecora in the USA, changed world opinion. Since that time many more carbonatites have been discovered and their economic potential has been increasingly exploited. In addition to his Antarctic and African work Campbell Smith wrote about one hundred articles on minerals, meteorites, and other petrological topics. He was also well known for his work on Neolithic jadeite implements and he was awarded the ScD degree in 1939. 
On 24 June 1936 Campbell Smith married Susan Finnegan (1903-1995), a zoologist and the first woman to be appointed to the senior staff of the British Museum (Natural History). They had a son ('b'. 1938) who became vicar of Goudhurst, Kent, and an adopted daughter ('b'. 1942). Campbell Smith became deputy keeper of the mineralogy department on 1 April 1931 and keeper on 27 May 1937. He was appointed CBE in 1949 and retired on 30 November 1952. 
Campbell Smith was president of the Geological Society (1955-6), secretary (1921-32), and Murchison medallist for 1945. He was president also of the Mineralogical Society (1945-8), general secretary (1927-38), foreign secretary (1959-67), managing trustee (1949-55), and four times a councillor. He contributed greatly to the founding of the International Mineralogical Association. 
Slim and erect, Campbell-Smith was regarded highly by his scientific colleagues, his regimental association, and his many friends. The warmth of his personality was such that the word 'gentleman' most accurately describes him. The cordiality and affection of his home meant much to him, as did his personal faith; he was a lifelong member of the Anglican church. Campbell-Smith died of old age at his home, Roof Tops, Back Lane, Goudhurst, on 6 December 1988 and was cremated at Tunbridge Wells on 13 December. His long life and distinguished career were celebrated at a memorial service in the parish church at Goudhurst later that day. 


@@@@@


doc= 56922


Brighton, Albert George (1900-1988), palaeontologist and curator, was born on 29 December 1900 at 13 Conyers Road, Streatham, London, the son of George Freeston Brighton, gardener, and his wife, Susan Alice Jayne. He was educated at St Leonard's School, Streatham, and Westminster City School, before gaining a scholarship to read natural sciences at Christ's College, Cambridge. Despite showing considerable early promise of a first, and becoming joint winner of the Wiltshire prize for geology and mineralogy, Bertie, or Peter as he was best-known, graduated from Cambridge with a second-class degree in 1922. There he remained, committed to a career in palaeontology, and eventually began a doctorate which he did not complete. Brighton's first paper, on cretaceous echinoids from Nigeria, was published in 1925. Over the next decade his rate of publication steadily decreased as his palaeontological interests found a new direction, curation. He continued to lecture on fossil echinoids and nurtured many notable research students, but it is for his pioneering curatorial work on the fossil collections of the university's Sedgwick Museum that he is most widely known. 
In the late 1920s the Sedgwick Museum remained much as it had been at the end of the nineteenth century, inaccessible, disorganized, and largely neglected. Owen Thomas Jones (1878-1967), who was elected Woodwardian professor of geology in 1930, immediately sought to resurrect its fortunes and appointed Brighton, who was a keen voluntary worker at the museum, to the post of curator in 1931 (the year in which, on 18 June, Brighton married Edith May, daughter of John Martin, accountant). Brighton estimated the museum then held half a million uncurated specimens, most only documented by the label tablets to which they were attached. The collection became his life's work as he slaved tirelessly at its identification, cataloguing, and arrangement. His preoccupation with these tasks perhaps reflected his largely unambitious and reclusive nature, and his obsessively ordered lifestyle. In the early years he also maintained correspondence with academics around the world but was happy to delegate these duties on the appointment of an assistant in 1954. 
Brighton was autocratic and donnish, and he imposed rigour and methodology, qualities manifest in his indexes and in the 'shelf catalogues' which he developed as physical specimen databases. In a career spanning thirty-seven years he curated 375,000 specimens, and in so doing probably processed three times that number. The Sedgwick collections were transformed into a fully functioning modern palaeontological museum, which also now held a large collection of notebooks, maps, and annotated monographs chronicling its history. Brighton's selfless dedication had produced an unusually data-rich resource which became the basis for pioneering work on the computerization of museum records, work he encouraged and which was ultimately to influence such developments nationally. On his retirement in 1968 Brighton left the museum without ceremony, seldom to return. 
Though he lacked social graces Brighton was a cultivated man: he was extremely well read, a fine artist, an accomplished pianist, and a lover of the cigarette. Edith by contrast was very sociable, even charismatic, and their elegant house on Parkers Piece became something of a haven for the fashionable of Cambridge in the post-war years. Both were keen letter writers. Together, diminutive and eccentric, they were a perfect match. Peter Brighton died of emphysema at Langdon House, Scotland Road, Chesterton, Cambridgeshire, on 9 April 1988, and was cremated in Cambridge on 14 April; Edith survived him, dying on 22 September 1994. Brighton's personal memorial was a collection so perfectly curated that those who effortlessly used it failed to realize or credit the labour that had been involved. In 1992, the Geological Curators' Group (GCG), a specialist group of the Geological Society of London, instituted a medal in Brighton's honour. The aims of the GCG mirrored those of Brighton; the A. G. Brighton medal now celebrates those who, in the Brighton mould, have made an outstanding contribution to geology through the interpretation and preservation of geological material in museums. 


@@@@@


doc= 56923


Harris, Thomas Maxwell (1903-1983), palaeobotanist, was born on 8 January 1903 in Leicester, the first of the four children, and only son, of Alex Charles Harris, engineer and inventor, and his wife, Lucy Frances, daughter of Arthur Evans of Leicester. He attended Wyggeston grammar school, Northampton grammar school, and Bootham School, York. He went on to University College, Nottingham, in 1919, where he obtained a London University pass degree of BSc in chemistry, physiology, and botany. While at Nottingham, he obtained a scholarship to Christ's College, Cambridge, and in 1922 he embarked on a science tripos, graduating with a BA in botany two years later. Contact with the palaeobotanist Albert Seward brought him the chance of a studentship from the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (1924) to investigate the Triassic fossil plants of east Greenland, research which led to the award of his PhD in 1927. In 1926 Harris went to Greenland with a party led by the Dane Lauge Koch, and overwintered on the east coast. His energetic and meticulous collecting, together with his exploitation of fossil cuticle preparation, gave the most comprehensive picture of a Mesozoic flora then known. The flora was published in five parts (1931-7) in 'Meddedelser om Gronland'. In 1927 Harris married Katherine Massey (died 1984), daughter of Harold Massey and his wife, Margaret MacKennall. They had met on an excursion to the Lake District, during a meeting of the British Association at Leeds. She was a lecturer in botany at Manchester, with a research interest in algae that she maintained throughout her life. They had four children. 
Harris's main research was on the Jurassic flora of Yorkshire, and was carried out over a period of nearly forty years. He started this research soon after becoming professor of botany at Reading University, (a post he held from 1934 to 1968) and published the final volume of 'The Yorkshire Jurassic Flora' in 1979. During this period Harris changed the ethos of palaeobotanical research. He believed that a palaeobotanist should collect his own material rather than waiting for it to be brought to him by geologists, since he alone would know what was worth collecting. He eschewed large eye-catching specimens of fossil plants, demonstrating that these could often be less scientifically rewarding than the small scraps which could be made to yield vital details of the living plant. His goal was always to reassemble 'the whole plant' using microscopic features of detached fragments, and their associated occurrence in many localities, to link the separated parts. By such detective work he radically changed the knowledge of many groups of Mesozoic plants, most notably the Caytoniales, the cycads, the Czeckanowskiales, and the genus 'Pentoxylon'. 
Harris's approach to palaeobotany was always practical, and often unconventional. Over the years he must have walked and cycled many hundreds, probably even thousands, of miles across Yorkshire on his collecting excursions. He experimented with the process of fossilization, burying rubber balls in grass clippings to see how pollen grains behave in a rock matrix, and fed his goat and ducks pollen grains to see how they survived passage through the gut. He burnt dead plant material, and even a beetle, buried in sand, to study the formation of fossil charcoal. Harris regarded the occurrence of charred wood as evidence for the occurrence of forest fires in the Mesozoic. In this, he rejected the view of Marie Stopes and others that such fusainized plant material could be formed biologically, without involving fire (a process which has not been found to occur in any modern environment). 
Harris's approach to teaching was equally forthright and enterprising. He led many student parties on ecological excursions to Cadair Idris in north Wales, camping and cooking with the minimum of facilities. He regarded this combination of a physical and intellectual 'assault course' as a vital element in university education. He travelled widely, lecturing and encouraging aspiring young palaeobotanists in many parts of the world, most notably in India. He was elected to the Royal Society in 1948, and was a foreign member of both the Danish and the Swedish academies of science. He died following a heart attack on 1 May 1983, at his home, 74 Bird Hill Avenue, Reading. He left his body for science and his remains were subsequently cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 56924


Rowe, Arthur Walton (1859-1926), doctor and geologist, was born on 27 September 1859 at 1 Gooch Street, Margate, the son of Thomas Rowe, a medical practitioner in the town, and his wife, Ellen Rosa ('nee' Betts). He was educated at King's School, Canterbury, and, after deciding to pursue a medical career, he attended St Mary's Hospital, London. He became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1883, and then went to the University of Durham, where he graduated with first-class honours in 1884. Although offered a position as house surgeon at St Mary's Hospital, where he had held other posts, his father's poor health led to Rowe's joining the family practice in Margate. Later, after building up the practice, he held various posts as medical adviser and surgeon at local hospitals and institutions. On 12 November 1887 he married Emily Barton ('b'. 1856/7), the daughter of George Kingston Barton, physician, of Fulbeck, Grantham, and Hong Kong. 
Rowe's first geological interest was in the Cretaceous and Lower Tertiary formations around Margate. He instituted new methods of preparing invertebrate fossils and utilized dental machinery for extracting and cleaning chalk fossils, a process he described in his first paper (1896). Rowe never allowed his research to interfere with his medical practice and he carried it out during spare time after a day's work; most of his fieldwork was achieved each year during his spring and late autumn holidays. Aided and encouraged by C. Davies Sherborn, Rowe provided the first comprehensive account of the coastal sections of the English Chalk in a succession of papers dealing with Kent and Sussex (1902), Dorset (1903), Devon (1904), Yorkshire (1905), the Isle of Wight (1908), and Lincolnshire (published posthumously, by Sherborn and Withers, 1930). In these he established the value of fossils in determining chalk stratigraphy. His pertinacious collecting demonstrated the value of systematically obtaining quantities of material throughout a sequence and resulted in a prolific collection (some 30,000 fossils). However, his collecting was neither consistent nor as meticulous as he claimed and its accuracy has subsequently been questioned. 
The Chalk papers were inextricably linked with Rowe's earlier research; 'The evolution of the genus 'Micraster'' (1899) was the first paper to deal with the variation and changes that occurred in Cretaceous Echinodermata, but it made no attempt to explain them. This classic has been regarded as 'one of the warhorses of English palaeontological literature' (Eldredge and Gould). But initially, as the ideas in the paper were ahead of its time, the council of the Geological Society were very wary of publishing it until Rowe finally lost his patience, writing, 'You can take it or leave it, and I do not care a damn which!' (Norman, 42) In 1910 Rowe's wife inherited a considerable sum of money, which enabled him to retire from medicine and devote his time to geological research. 
Rowe was elected a fellow of the Geological Society of London in 1893 and was awarded the Wollaston fund in 1901 for his work on 'Micraster'. In 1911 he was awarded the Lyell medal, in recognition of the importance of his work on the zones of the English Chalk. His own knowledge of the chalk fauna was so extensive that these papers remained the most important source of information until the 1950s. Yet his forceful advocacy of zonal stratigraphy, together with his denigration of the use of lithology in correlation, hindered research until the recent revival of studies on chalk sedimentology. 
In later life, Rowe became interested in local archaeological finds, and continued his investigations into the past history of Margate. Over the years he had been active in establishing several local societies; he served on the town council and in the chamber of commerce. Ill health interrupted his research on the chalk, but in his last years he was engaged on describing the Serpulae (marine worms) occurring in that formation. Unfortunately his refusal to have medical treatment for an infected tooth led to the more general illness that lasted for over a year and ended in his death on 17 September 1926 at his home, Shottendane, Margate. (He was buried on 23 September in Margate cemetery.) Rowe has always been recognized as a highly gifted geologist, who made important contributions to chalk stratigraphy and evolutionary palaeontology, but who had remained an amateur owing to his medical career. He was said to have had 'an unfailing charm of manner, a personal magnetism, and a cheery optimism' (Kitchin), qualities that endeared him to all those he attended in his medical capacity. 


@@@@@


doc= 56925


Fisher, Osmond (1817-1914), Church of England clergyman and geologist, was born at the vicarage, Osmington, Dorset, on 17 November 1817. His father, John Fisher (1788-1832), was archdeacon of Berkshire and canon of Salisbury, but is chiefly remembered as the friend and painting companion of John Constable (1776-1837). His mother, Mary, was the daughter of Canon William Cookson, a dean of Windsor, and was a cousin of the poet William Wordsworth. John Fisher died when Osmond was fifteen, and the boy, who had been a pupil at Eton College in 1828-30, went to live with his uncle, Canon William Fisher, at Poulshot, Wiltshire, where he pursued his scientific interests. The following year he was sent to the newly opened King's College, London. His principal at King's, William Otter (1768-1840), later bishop of Chichester, encouraged him to go to Jesus College, Cambridge, where he entered for the mathematical tripos. He graduated in 1841 as eighteenth wrangler and was elected a fellow in 1844. 
In 1845 Fisher was ordained priest and became curate-in-charge of All Saints, Dorchester, where he quickly became involved in the founding of the Dorset County Museum. Here he made several donations of geological material and gave the first public lectures on geology. In 1853 he returned to Jesus College as a tutor. 
Fisher's early years at Cambridge produced some important contributions to geological science, including his papers on the Purbeck strata of Dorset ('Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society', 9, 1856, 555-81) and on the Bracklesham beds of the Isle of Wight basin ('Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society', 18, 1862, 65-93). He married Maria Louisa Middleton (1837-1867) in 1857, and was given the college living of Elmstead, near Colchester, which gave him the opportunity to work on many of the Tertiary deposits of East Anglia. In 1867 he was left a widower with five sons to bring up, a few weeks after moving to another college living at Harlton, near Cambridge. 
At a time when there was much speculation on the nature of the earth's interior, but no effective geophysical hardware for investigation, Fisher used mathematics in an attempt to provide some answers to the problem. He countered the deduction of William Thomson (1824-1907), later Lord Kelvin, that the earth is completely solid, by showing that a shrunken solid earth would not have the observed range of mountain elevations, research published as 'On the formation of mountains viewed in connection with the secular cooling of the earth' ('Geological Magazine', new ser., 2nd decade, 1, 1874, 60-63). His work in this direction culminated in what is certainly the first textbook of geophysics, 'Physics of the Earth's Crust' (1881). He produced a revised edition in 1889 and an appendix in 1891. His geophysical work continued almost to the end of his long life, with his final paper, 'On the rigidity of the earth and on Colonel Burrard's theory of the Himalayas', being published in the 'Geological Magazine' in 1913. Indeed, his work anticipated many of the findings of modern plate tectonics. 
Fisher was greatly respected in his lifetime. He received honorary fellowships from King's College, London, in 1882, and from Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1892. The Geological Society awarded him the proceeds of the Lyell fund in 1887, the Murchison medal in 1893, and the Wollaston medal in 1913. He resigned his Harlton living in 1906 and went to live with his eldest son, the Revd Osmond P. Fisher, at the rectory in Gravely, near Huntingdon, where he died on 12 July 1914. He was buried beside his wife at Harlton churchyard, Cambridge, on 15 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 56926


Harrison, John Vernon (1892-1972), geologist and explorer, was born on 16 March 1892 at Bloemfontein, Orange Free State, the son of J. Frederick Harrison, a civil engineer. Of Scottish parentage, he was educated at George Watson's College, Edinburgh, and Allan Glen's School, Glasgow, before proceeding to Glasgow University where the inspiration provided by the great explorer professor John Walter Gregory was to set the pattern for Harrison's whole professional life. 
Harrison graduated in 1914, and became an explosives chemist before being commissioned in the Royal Engineers, where he was concerned with water-supply problems in Mesopotamia. In late 1918 he was seconded to the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, joining their staff on demobilization and remaining with the company for the next twenty years. During this period he undertook geological exploration in Central and South America, Borneo, and the West Indies, as well as the work in Persia for which he became best-known. Harrison's gifts of observation coupled with vivid geological imagination enabled him to visualize in three dimensions the large-scale geological structures with which he was confronted, particularly in the Zagros Mountains, and the sometimes singular processes which had given rise to them. Striking results emerged from arduous fieldwork carried out in the roughest of terrains; it is said that many mules died nobly in Harrison's service in Persia. Among some forty published papers, those with G. M. Lees on salt dome emplacement and with N. L. Falcon on gravitational tectonics long retained classic status. 
In 1938 Harrison accepted a university demonstratorship in geology at Oxford where he undertook all the undergraduate teaching in structural geology and in petrology. The field classes he led, clad in a kilt of no recognized tartan, to Arran, Skye, and Assynt became legendary and he played a major role in the training of many geologists. His outstanding research record, as well as his qualities as a teacher, stressing rigour and accuracy, were recognized by his election to a readership 'ad hominem' in 1956. Harrison's Oxford years saw no diminution in his urge to continue geological exploration in remote regions, and he surveyed thousands of square kilometres of the Peruvian Andes in a series of summer expeditions on which he was often accompanied by one or two of his students, who would return exhausted, but with vivid travellers' tales. 
Harrison (universally known simply as 'J. V.'), believing that any young geologist who married was placing fetters upon his activities to the extent of being unfaithful to his science, did not himself marry until 1939 when, predictably, he married another Scottish geologist, Janet Mitchell Dingwall. They were active churchgoers and a devoted couple until her death following a road accident in 1971. 
Harrison was tall and spare of build, with a short pointed beard. On first acquaintance he could seem cold, austere, remote; the humanity, together with a keen wit and acid sense of humour, became apparent later. He was fond of music and was an enthusiast for Scottish dancing. But the predominant passion of Harrison's life remained exploration geology in remote places, carried out under the most arduous conditions that could be arranged. 
Harrison's work was recognized by his election to FRSE in 1934, by the award of the Lyell medal by the Geological Society in 1961 and by his appointment in 1957 as a grand officer of the Order al Merito por Servicios Distinguidos by the Peruvian government. He died at Oxford on 31 July 1972. 


@@@@@


doc= 56927


Howel Williams (1898-1979), geologist, graduated from Liverpool with a first-class BA degree in geography (1917) followed by an MA in 1923. Like his brother, and again owing to the intercedence of Boswell, he became interested in geology, taking his MSc in 1924 and his DSc in 1928 in that subject. In 1923-6 his geological studies were furthered as an 1851 Exhibition scholar at Imperial College, London, where he worked on a geological study of Snowdon, mainly under the supervision of W. W. Watts. The volcanic rocks encountered in this area fired his interest in the subject and he was soon able to take up a Commonwealth fellowship to study volcanic rocks under A. C. Lawson at the University of California at Berkeley (1926-9). Except for a brief return as a demonstrator at the Royal School of Mines (1929-30), the rest of his career was based in the United States. 


@@@@@


doc= 56928


Williams, David (1898-1984), geologist, was born on 12 October 1898 at 74 David Street, Toxteth, Liverpool. He and his twin brother, Howel (1898-1974) ['see below'], were among the youngest of the eight children of William Williams (1856-1934) and his wife, Laura, formerly Davies (1860-1931), originally from the vicinity of Betws-y-coed, Caernarvonshire. They had moved to Liverpool about 1887 so that William Williams could secure a better livelihood as a timber merchant. 
The Williams twins were educated almost entirely in Liverpool, first at Holt secondary school and then at Liverpool University. Their education was interrupted by the First World War. After a period of service with the Lancashire Fusiliers, David graduated in civil engineering in 1921 and geology in 1922, going on to gain an MSc in 1923; in 1925 he gained his PhD for studies on the Lower Palaeozoic volcanic rocks between Nant Peris and Nant Ffrancon, close to the family's roots at Betws-y-coed. His career as a professional geologist began in earnest in 1926 in Northern Rhodesia where he was employed as a prospector exploring the geological and geophysical aspects of the industrially important copperbelt. Two years later he moved to Spain. His years there were important both professionally and personally: he became chief mining geologist for Rio Tinto mines and met, and in 1929 married, Dorothy Welland Shepard (1904-1991). Their daughters, Branwen and Nona, were born during his years in Spain and his classic paper on the geology of the Rio Tinto mines (which won him the Consolidated Gold Fields gold medal of the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy in 1934) was also conceived at this time. 
Following his doctoral studies, Williams had spent some months at Imperial College, London. In 1932 he was invited to return there by P. G. H. Boswell who, when teaching at Liverpool University in the 1920s, had been a seminal influence on the young geologist. Thus began a distinguished academic career in which Williams was successively: lecturer, reader, and professor of mining geology; head of the department of geology (from 1951 to 1964); and dean of the Royal School of Mines (from 1952 to 1959). Williams's main achievements related to his university department rather than to personal research. While he in no way neglected geology as a pure science, under his direction the study of mining geology prospered at Imperial College and, as the department grew, geophysics, applied geochemistry, engineering geology, and other aspects of applied geology were incorporated. 
Williams's deep interest in applied geology is further evidenced by the fact that he is said to have spent his long hours of fire-watching duty during the Second World War arranging and cataloguing the Royal School of Mines' enormous collection of rock and mineral specimens of economic importance. During the expansion of Imperial College in the 1960s the collection was rehoused; it has subsequently been renamed the David Williams Museum of Economic Geology, as a visible reminder of his contribution to geology. He was also ever-active professionally outside the college. A stalwart of the Geological Society of London (elected a fellow in 1927) he was a member of its council from 1938 to 1953, honorary secretary from 1942 to 1951, twice vice-president (1951-3; 1964-5), and finally foreign secretary from 1970 to 1973. He was also awarded the society's Lyell medal in 1959. 
Williams was a long-time member of the council of the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy (1948-70), serving as vice-president from 1954 to 1957 and president in 1960-61. He was subsequently created an honorary fellow of the institution in 1969. Further honours included election as president of the Geologists' Association in its centenary year, 1958-60, and by 1968 he was a fellow of Imperial College of Science and Technology. His publications included part of a Geologists' Association guide on the geology of Snowdonia (1959 and later edns) and 'Minerals and Mineral Deposits' (1948, co-authored with W. R. Jones) as well as a number of papers in geological and mining journals. 
Williams retired from his academic post in 1966 and enjoyed a long retirement, maintaining contact with his old department until his death. He had lived at Epsom since his return from Spain and died at Epsom District Hospital on 8 May 1984. He was cremated shortly afterwards at Ashtead crematorium where his ashes lie. A very warm personality full of lively Welsh 'hwyl', he brought an infectious enthusiasm to the teaching of geology and is remembered chiefly for his contribution to education in the field of applied geology, notably in mining. 


At first an associate professor, by 1937 Williams was a full professor of geology at the University of California and between 1945 and 1949 he was chairman of the department of geology there. During these important post-war years he played a crucial role in establishing the department as one of the nation's foremost centres of geological learning. In 1950 he was elected to the National Academy of Sciences. After his retirement much of his work was done at the University of Oregon. Among his research interests was the volcanic geology of the Sierra Nevada and the Cascade range (particularly Crater Lake), but Hawaii, Tahiti, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and the Galapagos Islands also all received his attention. A prolific author, to his credit are many important books on volcanic geology as well as on other aspects of geology. 
Williams became a naturalized American citizen and was twice married in that country, the first time in 1930 to Roberdeau Hoffman whom he divorced, and later to Ruth Goldstone. He outlived his second wife and no children were born of either marriage. He died in California in 1979. 
The Williams twins were always full of fun and as children and young men liked nothing better than trying to mislead people as to which of them was which. They also shared other qualities, notably as geologists who had an ability to impart knowledge and inspire others. 


@@@@@


doc= 56929


Whitaker, William (1836-1925), geologist, was born on 4 May 1836 at 69 Hatton Garden, London, the only child of William Whitaker (died 1893), perfumerer and wine merchant, and Margaret Burgess Michie ('bap'. 1806, died 1894), both Londoners. He was educated at a school in St John's Wood and at St Albans grammar school, and took a BA in chemistry from University College, London, in 1855. 
Following a short period at the Geological Society, Whitaker joined the geological survey as an assistant geologist in 1857, being promoted to geologist in 1863. On 25 August 1869 he married Mary (1846-1916), daughter of Thomas Keogh, publisher, at the consul's office, Calais. They later had three children, but had separated by 1891. By this time Whitaker had, in 1882, been promoted to district surveyor, despite a superior's report in 1880 which described him as lazy, obstinate, obstructive, controversial, mutinous, and stubborn. 
Most of Whitaker's time at the survey was taken up with applied geology in surveying, mapping, and writing of district memoirs and water supply papers that confirmed and greatly expanded the pioneering work of Professor Joseph Prestwich. However, his 1867 publication on subaerial denudation, which finally ended the belief that escarpments were formed by marine erosion, was more theoretical, original, and closely researched; it was highly praised by Charles Darwin. As early as 1889 Whitaker correctly predicted the occurrence of workable coal deposits in the south-east of England. Although he personally surveyed the major part of Essex, Suffolk, parts of Norfolk, and Cambridgeshire, his most important work was centred on London and the Thames valley, resulting in the publication of two major works in 1872 and 1889. Aubrey Strahan (1852-1928) described the latter, 'The Geology of London and of Part of the Thames Valley', as probably the most detailed account of the geology of any region that had ever been published. 
In addition to his fieldwork Whitaker meticulously compiled bibliographies on the geology of English counties and carefully collected details of wells and borings which then appeared as appendices to official publications. He has been described as the father of English hydrogeology. On his official retirement in 1896 he moved to 3 Campden Road, Croydon, Surrey, and worked as a water engineer. His knowledge of every deep well and boring from Hertfordshire to the English Channel ensured there was no better opinion on the site for any building, housing development, or sewer. Even in retirement he found time to write or assist in the production of fifteen major official water supply publications. 
Whitaker made a great contribution to many national societies. He was elected a fellow of the Geological Society in 1859, was awarded its Murchison medal (1886), Prestwich medal (1906), and Wollaston medal (1923), and served as president (1898-1900). He was elected FRS in 1887 and served on the Royal Society's council (1907-9). He became an honorary member of the Geologists' Association in 1875, served two terms as president (1900-02 and 1920-22), and led fifty-two excursions. For two weeks in 1900 he was president of the Geological Society and the Geologists' Association, a unique achievement. In addition he was at one time delegate to the yearly meetings of the British Association, an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers, and a fellow of the Royal Sanitary Institute, and in 1890 received a silver medal from the Society of Arts. He was president of several local societies including the South Eastern Union of Scientific Societies in 1899, the Croydon Natural History Society in 1899, 1900, and 1911, and the Essex Field Club in 1911-14. Whitaker was a member of the Belgian, Liverpool, Manchester, Norwich, and Yorkshire geological societies, the Hampshire Literary and Philosophical Society, Hampshire Field Club, and Hertfordshire Natural History Society. For twenty years he was co-opted vice-chairman of Croydon libraries committee. He was a staunch liberal and a member of the National Liberal Club and Croydon Liberal Association. 
In his later years Whitaker's appearance was dominated by his long white hair and beard. He was regarded as a kind, good-tempered, unaffected, and honest gentleman. Strahan, who knew Whitaker for more than fifty years, never heard him utter an unkind word, and did not believe he ever had an unkind thought, stated: 'Probably no one has rendered better service to his fellow men than Whitaker in the applications of geology to the needs of civilised life' (Strahan, 'PRS', xi). Whitaker died of cancer at his home in Wellesley Court, Croydon, on 15 January 1925 and was buried in Croydon cemetery, Mitcham Road, on 19 January. He was survived by his son Harry Lynn Whitaker and a daughter, Mary de Fraine Skeats, who was living in Australia. 


@@@@@


doc= 56930


Sarah Mawe (bap. 1767, d. 1846), mineralogist and dealer in minerals, was baptized at All Saints, Derby, on 9 June 1767, the daughter of Richard Brown and his wife, Ann Hind. Sarah Mawe often took charge of the London shop while her husband was away for long intervals. She became a highly competent mineral appraiser, purchaser, and identifier in her own right, and supplier of shells and fossils to naturalists in Europe and North America. While John Mawe was in South America, Henry Heuland, a rival dealer in London, wrote to the mineral collector Philip Rashleigh, 'dealers of Mineralogy in a few years will be very thin in this capital, and Mrs and Mr Maw will be the moon that shines on the Collectors. Indeed that Lady is quite grand now' (letter, 20 Dec 1808, Rashleigh MSS). 


@@@@@


doc= 56931


Murchison, Charlotte, Lady Murchison (1788-1869), geologist, was born, according to the inscription on her tombstone, on 18 April 1788, probably in the family's home, Nursted House, near Petersfield, Hampshire, one of at least three children of General Francis Hugonin (died 1836) and his wife, Charlotte (died 1838), daughter of Mileson and Elizabeth Edgar. Nothing is known of her childhood or youth. 
In early summer 1815 Charlotte Hugonin met Roderick Impey Murchison (1792-1871); she married him on 29 August 1815 in the church of Buriton in Hampshire. They had no children, but a daughter of Roderick's brother lived with them for some years. From 1816 to 1818 the Murchisons toured the continent. It is likely the tour was Charlotte's idea, an attempt to curb her husband's spending and to interest him in intellectual pursuits. They travelled through Italy, visiting Genoa, Naples, and Rome, where they became acquainted with Mary Somerville (1780-1872), the scientific writer, who became a lifelong friend. It was also in Rome that Charlotte caught a malarian fever that nearly caused her death, and whose symptoms returned at intervals all through her life. After returning to England in 1818 the Murchisons lived at Barnard Castle, co. Durham, at the house of Charlotte's late grandfather. In 1820 or 1821 they moved to Melton Mowbray where Roderick Murchison dedicated himself to fox-hunting. Charlotte constantly tried to interest him in more intellectual pursuits, and finally succeeded in 1824, aided by Humphry Davy (1778-1829) and by financial problems. The couple moved to London, and Roderick Murchison began to attend lectures on geology and chemistry. 
In the summer of 1825 the Murchisons undertook geological fieldwork along the south coast of England, with Charlotte collecting fossils and sketching the outcrops along the coast. In Lyme Regis she went fossil-hunting with the palaeontologist Mary Anning (1799-1847); the two women became good friends and soon established a frequent correspondence. The following year the Murchisons undertook fieldwork in Yorkshire and the Hebrides. Charlotte carried out the actual fossil-hunting, and collected many specimens which Sowerby (1788-1871) later described in the 'Mineral Conchology of Great Britain' (1812-34). She also made many sketches of outcrops and fossils. Sowerby named one of the cephalopods 'Ammonites murchisonae' 'as a just tribute for the ardour with which [Mrs Murchison] has pursued the study of fossil conchology, the pleasing effects of which those who are so happy as to be acquainted with her know how to appreciate' (Sowerby, 6.96). Other palaeontologists including William Buckland (1784-1856) used Charlotte's collection of fossils for their work. In 1828 Charlotte accompanied her husband and Charles Lyell (1797-1875) to the Auvergne region of France and to northern Italy. Again she participated actively in the expedition, and Lyell esteemed her as 'an invaluable assistant' ('Life, Letters, and Journals', 184). Two years later the Murchisons were exploring Germany and the Alps. From the early 1830s until 1838, Roderick Murchison worked on greywacke deposits in Wales, and again Charlotte was frequently at his side. A number of her sketches are reproduced in her husband's 'The Silurian System' (1839). 
On her mother's death in 1838 Charlotte Murchison inherited a fortune, and this enabled the couple to move in 1840 to fashionable Belgrave Square. Their soirees there became an important meeting place for scientists and politicians, and their success was mainly due to Charlotte's social abilities. However, as the years passed, her health became steadily worse. She was unable to accompany her husband to Russia, although in 1847 they both travelled in the Alps and Italy, combining science and the therapeutic benefits of a better climate. In time Charlotte was confined to her home, although it appears she still participated mentally in her husband's work and advised him in his scientific activities, and was probably able to visit people in the locality. After a prolonged phase of feeble health, Charlotte Murchison died from bronchitis at her home, 16 Belgrave Square, on 9 February 1869; she was buried at Brompton cemetery, London, on 13 February. 
Whereas contemporaries knew and cherished her influence and abilities, she later became considered a mere appendage to her husband. However, without her Roderick Murchison would have never been a geologist. As Mary Somerville said: 'Mrs Murchison was an amiable accomplished woman, drew prettily and what was rare at the time she had studied science, especially geology and it was chiefly owing to her example that her husband turned his mind to those pursuits in which he afterwards obtained such distinction. (Patterson, 29)' It was she who introduced him into the geological world, and it was her money and social position which helped him achieve such extraordinary prominence within it (he was knighted in 1846 and made baronet in 1866). She took an active part in the scientific pursuits which she had initiated, and her views are intimately connected with Roderick Murchison's work. Charlotte Murchison also played a role in making higher education accessible to women: in 1831 it was her wish to attend Lyell's geological lectures at King's College that caused them to be opened to both sexes. 


@@@@@


doc= 56932


Basing, Adam of (d. 1262x6), draper, is believed to have been the son of the aldermanic landowner Peter of Basing; he was the grandson of Solomon of Basing, alderman of London and mayor in 1217. Adam became a draper and city merchant, achieving eminence as a supplier to the royal household while at the same time pursuing a successful civic career. Little detail is known of his political activity in London, but the fact that he was elected an alderman of Cheap ward in 1247-60, was sheriff 1243-4, and mayor 1251-2 is evidence of his high standing. 
The full range of Basing's mercantile activities is not known, and it is as the supplier of large quantities of cloths of gold, fine silks, embroideries, and ecclesiastical vestments to Henry III between 1238 and 1260 that he is best-known. Some were for domestic use, either for the king himself or for his family: in 1238, for example, he provided rich silk cloths for a quilt and mattress for the king's sister Eleanor, and in 1251 vestments for the chapel of the king's daughter Margaret on her marriage to Alexander III, king of Scots. However, a large part of the goods supplied by Basing were silk vestments -- chasubles, copes, and mitres -- or the decorative elements to adorn them, destined to be presented by the king to esteemed clerics visiting his court or to churches visited by the king. Not surprisingly Henry bestowed many upon St Peter's, Westminster, the church that he favoured above all others. 
Because so much of Basing's trade was in vestments or embroideries it has been suggested that he ran his own tailoring and embroidery workshops. There is no evidence to support this conjecture and it is equally possible that he purchased or commissioned such goods directly from city craftsmen. The circumstances under which medieval embroideries were worked are unknown and may have been more domestic in nature; the embroideries that Basing traded in were often orphreys, the jewel-enriched or embroidered bands used to adorn vestments, which could be worked in frames in limited accommodation. 
Adam of Basing's marriage to Desiderata, the daughter of Arnulf fitz Alulf and Dyonisia Viel, further strengthened his family's links within the London aldermanic class. His son Thomas, like a nephew also named Thomas, became an important woolmonger; he died young, however, and the fortunes of the family were advanced by Adam's grandson Peter, who married into the Frowicks, another wealthy aldermanic family. In 1247 Adam of Basing had acquired the soke of Aldermanbury, within the northern boundary of the city, which included six shops and the advowsons of three churches. To this he gradually added further property in the locality, in Cheap and in Wood Street, as well as land in more distant parishes such as St Giles and St Pancras. The imposing mansion he built in Aldermanbury in the 1250s was destroyed by irate Londoners during the troubles of 1263. The family name is commemorated in that ward in Basinghall Street, Basing Lane, and Bassishaw. Basing was alive in 1262, but had died by August 1266, when the king granted the wardship of his son and heir, Thomas, to a member of another aldermanic family. 


@@@@@


doc= 56934


Lloyd, Thomas (1803-1875), naval architect and engineer, was born at Portsea, Hampshire, on 29 October 1803 and educated at Portsmouth grammar school. He became an apprentice shipwright at Portsmouth and in 1819 passed the entry examination for the School of Naval Architecture, where his father was an instructor. After graduation in 1826 he worked at Portsmouth for four years, rated as a shipwright though he seems to have been employed on design work, before going to sea as trials officer for six months in the corvette 'Columbine'. On completion of the trials he was appointed to the surveyor's office in Somerset House but was sent on a course to study steam machinery. 
In 1831 Lloyd took charge of Marc Brunel's block making machinery at Portsmouth before moving to the Woolwich steam factory as inspector of steam machinery in 1833. He remained at Woolwich until 1847, with a brief seagoing appointment in 1837, rising through various posts and becoming chief engineer of the factory in 1842. The growing importance of machinery was marked by an increase in the salary of this post to $650 and the provision of a house. This period spanned the navy's industrial revolution, seeing the introduction of steam fighting ships, iron hulls, and the screw propeller. The steam factory was set up to maintain the engines of the rapidly increasing number of steamships in the navy but it soon became much more. The training of apprentices produced many good engineers, some of whom set up their own engine factories on the Thames. The Woolwich steam factory was also the navy's engineering development centre. 
In 1840 Lloyd, together with a Captain Chappell, was in charge of the trials of Petit Smith's original screw steamer, 'Archimedes'. As a result of Lloyd and Chappell's enthusiastic report the Admiralty decided to build a prototype screw warship -- completed in 1844 as the 'Rattler'. Lloyd was fully involved in the design and was instrumental in getting the stern lines lengthened to improve the flow into the propeller. This caused a short dispute with I. K. Brunel, who had a similar idea and accused Lloyd of plagiarism, but they soon became friends, and Lloyd assisted in the trials of Brunel's 'Great Britain'. Lloyd also arranged for a thrust meter to be inserted into the propeller shaft of the 'Rattler' so that performance could be quantified. The trials of the 'Rattler' were most successful, and well before they were complete the Admiralty ordered many large screw steamers and was planning the first screw battleships. 
Lloyd retained his interest in the effect of flow into the propeller and in 1846 he carried out trials on the tender 'Dwarf' in which wooden packing was added to the fine stern, reducing the original speed of 9 knots to 3 knots with a bluff stern. As chief engineer at Woolwich, Lloyd was also chief adviser to the Admiralty on engineering matters. In 1847 he became the first chief engineer of the Royal Navy, with an office in Somerset House and a staff of four. In 1850 the comptroller of steam machinery retired; the post was abolished and Lloyd was appointed chief engineer and inspector of steam machinery. 
The first steam battleships had gone to sea in 1846, but they were crude conversions. Even so, the report of their performance in the manoeuvres of 1850 said that it was unlikely that the navy would ever again fight under sail. In 1851 the surveyor with Lloyd and Isaac Watts, the chief constructor, visited France and their report added urgency to the building of the first British steam battleship, the 'Agamemnon'. There were many problems to be solved, particularly in finding a stern gland which would remain watertight under the rubbing and vibration of the propelled shaft. 
During the Crimean War, Lloyd was shown, on a visit to Paris, the drawings of the French armoured screw-propelled batteries for attacking forts. At that time the proposed protection consisted of boxes of cannon balls, but at Lloyd's suggestion this was changed to 100 mm rolled iron plates. 
In the reorganization of 1859 Lloyd moved to Whitehall at a salary of $900 and worked with Watts on the 'Warrior'. Seemingly these two great engineers had mutual respect but their relationship was not warm. 
Lloyd was always interested in new developments and was involved in early trials of the compound engine, but the technology of the day was inadequate. In 1866 he tried, again unsuccessfully, the use of oil fuel. He was involved in the design of the machinery to lay the first trans-Atlantic cable in 1858. It is a great tribute to Dr Inman, the principal of the School of Naval Architecture, that so many of his graduates achieved fame in areas far removed from the wooden sailing ships on which their education was focused. 
Lloyd served on many important committees, notably that of 1871 which reviewed ship design after the loss of the 'Captain', and was frequently consulted by commercial engine builders. Lloyd became a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1841. He was a founder in 1851 of the Royal Navy Engineers' Club in Portsmouth, which for fifty years was a centre for technical discussion. He was one of the original vice-presidents of the Institution of Naval Architects in 1860. Though he joined in debates he published no paper of his own outside the Admiralty. Within it his importance was recognized by that great surveyor Spencer Robinson, who wrote on Lloyd's retirement that there was no public servant who had so largely contributed to the advance of practical science, pointing out that the Royal Navy's lead in screw propulsion was largely due to Lloyd. 
Lloyd was made a CB in 1868, and retired the following year. He never married and died at his home at 84 Finchley Road, Hampstead, London, on 23 March 1875. 


@@@@@


doc= 56937


Shakespeare, John Howard (1857-1928), Baptist minister, was born on 16 April 1857 in Malton in the North Riding of Yorkshire, the second of three children of the Revd Benjamin Shakespeare (1817-1887) and his wife, Mary Anne, 'nee' Hithersay (1825-1886). Both his parents were Baptists. His higher education took place in London between 1878 and 1883: he gained an MA in philosophy at University College and was trained for the Baptist ministry at Regent's Park College. In 1883 he was invited to the pastorate of St Mary's Baptist Church, Norwich, and soon gained a national reputation as a preacher and organizer. On 5 September 1883 he married Amy Gertrude Goodman (1862-1960), the daughter of the Revd William Goodman and his wife, Mary. They had six children, the second of whom was Sir Geoffrey Shakespeare. 
Having been elected to the council of the Baptist Union of Great Britain and Ireland in 1885, Shakespeare made his mark when, in 1892, he delivered a paper appealing for greater co-operative efforts to be made in establishing new churches. In 1898 he was invited to become secretary of the union, taking up residence in Highgate, Middlesex. He immediately began to apply himself to the development of the Baptist Union as a strong, centralized organization directing the affairs of the denomination. His style of leadership was autocratic and the changes he made were rapid and far reaching. He raised a large national fund, primarily for the purpose of building new Baptist churches, and erected a London headquarters for the denomination that was opened in 1903. Previously disparate Baptist activities were increasingly brought under the umbrella of the union. In 1906 Shakespeare's first major work was published by the National Free Church Council, entitled 'Baptist and Congregational Pioneers'. 
Another major initiative spearheaded by Shakespeare was an attempt to facilitate the movement of Baptist ministers between local churches, and to support those who were in financial need. A significant part of his scheme, as it was eventually implemented in 1916, involved the division of Britain into areas, each overseen by a superintendent minister who was answerable to the union. Some saw this controversial step as the beginnings of episcopacy. Shakespeare was also largely responsible for the formation of the Baptist World Alliance, organizing its inaugural congress in London in 1905 and serving as its European secretary. 
Shakespeare was, throughout his ministry, a keen advocate of Free Church unity, and was influenced by earlier leaders of the Free Church Council movement such as the Wesleyan Hugh Price Hughes. He wanted to increase the free churches' effectiveness and to raise their status. At the outbreak of war in 1914, supported by his fellow Baptist David Lloyd George, Shakespeare persuaded the War Office to allow new recruits to register as free churchmen and to commission Free Church chaplains. In December 1914 he created the United Army and Navy Board to nominate chaplains, and served as its chairman and secretary. Throughout the war he remained a loyal supporter and confidant of Lloyd George. 
In 1916 Shakespeare was elected president of the National Free Church Council, and proposed the formation of a United Free Church of England. In 1919 the denominations agreed to come together into a federation, and the Federal Council of Evangelical Free Churches was formed, with Shakespeare as its first moderator. His views on church unity were expressed in his second major publication, 'The Churches at the Cross Roads' (1918). In it he not only advocated Free Church union, but also made a plea for union with the Church of England. In October 1919 he was honoured for his contribution to the cause of church unity by the archbishop of Canterbury and the prime minister, together with many other church leaders, when a portrait in oils by John Collier and an illuminated address were presented to him. He also received an honorary DD from Glasgow University. 
Shakespeare won the respect and co-operation -- and often the affection -- of those with whom he worked. He was passionate and energetic, frequently working for fifteen hours a day. He often appeared pale and drawn, and suffered from periodic bouts of nervous and physical exhaustion. In 1923 he came to believe his work was over, and retired because of ill health in 1925. He died following a stroke on 12 March 1928 at Fallowhurst, Bow Lane, Finchley, Middlesex, and was buried in the family grave at The Rosary, Norwich. In the tributes that were given at his memorial service in the City Temple in London, he was remembered for his dream of church unity, his statesmanlike leadership of the free churches during the war, his passionate commitment to supporting the Baptist ministry, and his creation of the Baptist Union as an effective national body. 


@@@@@


doc= 56938


Deneke, Helena Clara (1878-1973), German scholar, was born on 19 May 1878 at 89 Denmark Hill, London, the oldest child and elder of the two surviving daughters of Philip Maurice Deneke (1842-1925), a wealthy London merchant banker born in Germany, and his wife, Clara Sophia Overweg (1847-1933), who came from a landed Westphalian family. She was educated at home and at St Hugh's Hall, Oxford, then still a very small society. In 1903 she was placed in the first class of the new honour school of English language and literature, and in October 1904 she became librarian of St Hugh's, where she first taught English, changing to German at the suggestion of Ernest de Selincourt and becoming tutor in German in 1909. What were later described as her 'precise linguistic standards... and her extraordinary familiarity with a wide range of literature' ('The Times', 4 Oct 1973) had their origin in this early experience of moving with ease from philology to English literature to German, possible in the days before more restricted academic specialism became the norm. Her broad interests had been fostered too during her stimulating younger years in the family's London homes, where music predominated and a succession of distinguished musicians visited and played, the celebrated violinist Joseph Joachim among them. 
Helena Deneke was an enthusiastic supporter of the first principal of St Hugh's, Annie Moberly, but soon developed an uneasy relationship with her vice-principal, Eleanor Jourdain, whose inevitable election to the principalship she saw as being potentially disastrous. She was also unhappy with the events surrounding the publication, in 1911, of 'An Adventure', an account by Moberly and Jourdain of their supposedly supernatural experiences in the grounds of Versailles during a trip they made there in 1901, and was unconvinced by Jourdain's evidence of the experience. This doubt lent further weight to her decision to resign 'with a heartache' from the society she had so loved, lest she become 'unwillingly a sort of centre of disaffection' (H. Deneke to Kathleen Kenyon, 16 Aug 1966, Deneke MSS). During the 'row' at St Hugh's in 1923/4 Deneke, accused of 'German rancour' by Miss Jourdain, rallied support for Cecilia Ady, the dismissed tutor, with whom she had a close and affectionate relationship. 
In 1913 Helena Deneke became bursar and tutor in German at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, and was a fellow from 1926 until her retirement in 1938. She was a popular and energetic Oxford tutor ('exacting but genial and constructive') who inspired an enduring affection in her pupils. The famous music room at Gunfield, the Gothic villa in Norham Gardens where she lived for five decades with her sister, the musicologist Margaret Deneke (1882-1969), witnessed 'much music making, not a little of it memorable' (M. Deneke, 'Ernest Walker'). Generations of Oxford undergraduates, colleagues, and friends enjoyed the Denekes' hospitality at the many Gunfield concerts. For some twenty-seven years the Oxford Chamber Music Society met there free of charge, with Margaret Deneke making up any deficits; the society owed its survival, particularly during the Second World War, to the generosity of the Deneke sisters. Marga Deneke, herself a talented pianist, was choirmaster at Lady Margaret Hall and, raising considerable sums of money through concerts and lecture recitals, became one of the college's benefactors. Among Helena Deneke's enduring achievements at Lady Margaret Hall was the design of the college gardens; she became garden steward in 1924 and held the post for over forty years. 
Helena Deneke's scholarly efforts went into teaching rather than research, and she wrote little: a piece on Jean Paul in the 'Festschrift' to H. G. Fiedler (1938) and a popular biography (1946) of her contemporary Grace Hadow, principal of the Society of Oxford Home-Students, together with various articles on her post-war work in Germany, including an important report, 'Women in Germany' (1947), written with Betty Norris. 
Helena Deneke had become involved with the work of Women's Institutes following her resignation as treasurer of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies after the First World War, and she was to serve at various times as secretary, chair, and president of the Oxfordshire Federation of Women's Institutes. It was this involvement with women's groups that led to her being invited to play a part in the democratic development of women's organizations in Germany. In the considerable task of educational 'reconstruction' in Germany after the Second World War the help of public-spirited figures with a deep knowledge of Germany and its institutions was actively sought, and from 1946 to 1951 Helena Deneke made many official visits to the country, addressing women's groups, attending meetings under the aegis of the Allied Control Commission, and broadcasting in German. Hers was a robust, common-sense approach to the encouragement of democracy among the women of Germany, fully cognizant as she was of the dilemma faced by an occupying power in having the right to impose procedures which by their nature challenge the notion of imposition. In promoting the development of non-party-political, non-sectarian groups she did much to shape the future development of women's organizations in Germany. Following the closure of the department for women's affairs in 1951, she served on the academic council of Wilton Park, and so was able to continue an involvement with Anglo-German exchanges. Helena Deneke died, following a stroke, on 26 September 1973, at Freeland House, Freeland, Oxfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 56939


Lee, Margaret Lucy (1871-1955), headmistress, was born at Hartley Wintney, Hampshire, on 14 July 1871, the elder of the two daughters of Revd Thomas William Lee (1833/4-1921) and his wife, Margaret Anne, daughter of Revd C. H. Lyon of Glen Ogil. Her father was headmaster of Hartford House, a preparatory school, but in 1875 became vicar of Leafield, near Witney, Oxfordshire. Lucy, as she was known at home, was taught to read by her mother, and by the age of six she had read much of 'Paradise Lost'. She was then educated by governesses, from whom she gained a good knowledge of French and German. By the time she was twelve, the experience of taking a Sunday school class convinced her that teaching was her vocation. In 1888 she was sent to a fashionable girls' school in Warrington Crescent, London, where she formed a close relationship with one of the teachers, Miss Annie Sophia Batty (died 1934). This developed into 'the most lasting intimate relationship of her life' (Lee, 11). She left Warrington Crescent in December 1889, determined to go to Oxford and then to return to assist Miss Batty in her teaching. 
In 1890, overcoming her father's doubts about the value of higher education for women, Margaret Lee entered St Hugh's Hall, Oxford, a college particularly suitable for her, since it had been founded by Elizabeth Wordsworth specifically to cater for those (especially daughters of the clergy) who could not afford the fees at Lady Margaret Hall. She studied English literature under Professor A. S. Napier and philology under Professor Joseph Wright, gaining first-class honours in English in the Oxford University examination for women in 1892. This successful result appeased her father, who permitted her to remain at Oxford a further term, reading German and French and assisting Joseph Wright in preparing his grammatical works for the press. She also produced an edition, from a manuscript in the Bodleian Library, of 'Narcissus: a Twelfe Night Merriment' (1893). 
After teaching for two years with Miss Batty at Warrington Crescent, Miss Lee returned to Oxford in 1895 as vice-principal of St Hugh's, a post she held until 1896. In 1897 she became a lecturer in Middle English to the Association for Promoting the Education of Women in Oxford, which provided the bulk of teaching for women students. In 1898, at the invitation of Lilian Faithfull, she was appointed a part-time lecturer at King's College for Women, London, where her pupils included Edith Morley and Caroline Spurgeon. She resigned this in 1919. From 1915 until 1926 she also held a lectureship at University College, Reading. At Oxford, where she graduated MA by decree in October 1920 when degrees were opened to women, she was tutor in English to the Society of Oxford Students, comprising women students at Oxford living at home or lodging with families in the city, from 1913 to 1926. She never published original literary or philological work; teaching absorbed all her creative energies. 
In addition to her work as a university lecturer, Margaret Lee founded with Miss Batty a private school at Oxford, originally intended for the daughters of dons. It grew rapidly and, after several moves, settled at 74 Banbury Road in 1918, when it became known as Wychwood School. The school (which was the subject of an article in 'Queen' magazine, 3 September 1922) broke away from many of the conventions of contemporary girls' schools. A form of self-government was adopted, key decisions being made at weekly meetings of the school council, which included elected representatives of the pupils. Arts, crafts, and drama were encouraged. Former pupils at Wychwood recalled her Monday morning addresses to the school (which conveyed both practical sense and her enthusiasm for causes aimed at the betterment of mankind), her 'expressive bright blue eyes', and her taste for 'beflowered or beribboned' hats (Lee, 24-5). She was a vegetarian and teetotaller. Remaining as co-principal of Wychwood School until 1954, she was a notable example of those late Victorian college-educated women who set out to improve the tradition of girls' private school education. Margaret Lee died, unmarried, at her home, 77 Banbury Road, Oxford, on 26 December 1955. 


@@@@@


doc= 56942


Henderson, George (1866-1912), Gaelic scholar, was born on 18 February 1866 at Heughden, Kiltarlity, Inverness-shire, the son of Elizabeth Fraser, daughter of a farmer; his reputed father was George Henderson, general merchant, of Inverness (d. cert.); he had a half-sister, Wilhelmina Fraser. He was educated at Raining's School, Inverness, under Dr Alexander Bain, the Gaelic lexicographer, whose 'Outlines of Gaelic Etymology' Henderson was to edit in 1909, and at Edinburgh University, where he studied the arts curriculum in English literature, philosophy, and Celtic, the last under Professor Donald MacKinnon. He graduated in 1888. He was awarded the MacPherson scholarship in Celtic, and became examiner for the Celtic MA. 
In 1892 Henderson spent some time in South Uist and made an important collection of oral Gaelic literature there, still mostly unpublished. He formed a friendship with Father Allan McDonald, then parish priest at Daliburgh. Early in 1893 he went on a Dickson travelling scholarship to Vienna, where he acquired a PhD degree, and may have studied Old Irish under Julius Pokorny, who wrote articles on the subject for the 'Celtic Review'. In 1893-6 Henderson collected and edited, with a memoir, John Morison's 'Dain Iain Ghobha', two volumes of religious verse very popular and influential in Gaelic circles. He returned from abroad in 1896 and went to Jesus College, Oxford, obtaining a BLitt degree for his work on Scottish Gaelic dialects, later published in the 'Zeitschrift fur Celtische Philologie', volumes 4 and 5. 
From 1892 to 1900 Henderson corresponded with Alexander Carmichael over corrections and suggestions in 'Carmina Gadelica' (1900), becoming a friend of Carmichael and his family. It is said that the Carmichaels had hoped that Henderson would marry their daughter Ella, and it came as a shock to them to hear that he had suddenly married a lady called Agnes Neighbour (on her marriage certificate) or Agnes D. Niebuhr (in Henderson's later entry in Scott's 'Fasti ecclesiae Scoticanae'); they married in the parish church at Iffley near Oxford on 30 May 1901. In June 1901 he went to Edinburgh for ordination as a Church of Scotland minister, and subsequently to the remote parish of Eddrachillis in north-west Sutherland as assistant and successor to the Revd Kenneth MacKenzie, the parish minister. 
In 1906, however, Henderson accepted an offer of the Kelly MacCallum lectureship in Celtic at Glasgow University. Between 1901 and 1906 he came into the possession of the valuable collection of Gaelic folksongs and their tunes collected on the Isle of Skye by Frances Tolmie (1840-1926). In 1908 Henderson recommended publication of the collection by the Folksong Society, which was done in 1911; the delay allowed the appearance of the first volume of Marjorie Kennedy-Fraser's 'Songs of the Hebrides' (1909), though Miss Tolmie had begun collecting as early as 1860. Henderson added notes to Tolmie's volume. 
Henderson's output of published material was large, but at times erratic and inconsistent; his erudition seemed to get out of control. One of his most important works was an edition of 'Fled Bricrend' ('The feast of Bricriu'), done for the Irish Texts Society as its second volume in 1899; a fourteen-page review in the 'Zeitschrift fur Celtische Philologie', 3 (1901), by J. Strachan was mostly devoted to correcting errors in the translation. Other works of importance were 'Leabhar nan Gleann' (1898); his work on Gaelic dialects in 'Zeitschrift fur Celtische Philologie'; and the Fionn Saga published in the 'Celtic Review' (vols. 1, 2, and 3), beginning with a general discussion of the subject and concluding with a good version taken down on Eriskay with some assistance from Father Allan McDonald and never completed (the final part is in one of McDonald's notebooks). This was followed by 'The Norse Influence on Celtic Scotland' (1910), an important early discussion of this subject, and 'Survivals in Belief among the Celts' (1911). He also published 'Arthurian Motifs in Gadhelic Literature' (1912). By this time Henderson's health was failing, and he died from nephritis and uraemia on 26 June 1912 at 28 Viewpark Drive, Rutherglen. His wife died on 19 September 1937. 


@@@@@


doc= 56945


Smith, Michael Holroyd (1847-1932), engineer, was born on 22 December 1847 at Wade Street, Halifax, Yorkshire, the second of six sons, and the fourth of the eleven children of Matthew Smith (1819-1880), wire manufacturer, and his wife, Mary Sutcliffe, 'nee' Holroyd, daughter of Richard Holroyd of Halifax. His paternal ancestors were Yorkshire dissenting ministers who had settled in Halifax in the eighteenth century. His father managed a wire mill in Birmingham before returning to Halifax in 1864 to enter into partnership in the wire manufacturing firm of Frederick Smith & Co. founded by his younger brother in 1859. He died during his term of office as mayor of Halifax in 1880. His mother, renowned for her beauty, was a Halifax watchmaker and jeweller's daughter. He was educated at King Edward's School, Birmingham. After serving an apprenticeship with Francis Berry & Sons, machine tool makers of Sowerby Bridge, Yorkshire, he worked with the family firm in Halifax before embarking on a career as a consultant engineer, designing mills, testing engines, and investigating the causes of industrial accidents. He then became a partner in Smith, Baker & Co., of Cornbrook, Manchester, and made some of the earliest telephones, telephone exchanges, and phonographs in Britain. On 22 June 1874 he married, at the English Presbyterian Chapel, Tywyn, Machynlleth, Montgomeryshire, Anne Williams (1848-1934), the daughter of Ebenezer Williams, a Welsh nonconformist minister. He and his wife lived in Wales after their marriage, at Maenan Hall, Llanrwst, Denbighshire. Their eldest daughter was the writer Naomi Gwladys Royde-Smith. 
Smith was considered within the family to have lacked the business acumen of his elder brother, Sir George Henry Fisher-Smith, but he was a brilliant and prolific inventor, who became a pioneer of the electric tramway, earning the sobriquet 'the father of electric traction' ('Halifax Courier', 6 July 1932). By 1882 he recognized the potential advantages of electric traction over cable traction. In 1883 he built three experimental narrow-gauge electric tramways, one in his father's warehouse, the other two in the grounds of Moorside, Skircoat Green, Halifax, the home of a friend, the carpet manufacturer Louis John Crossley, who had installed a private electrical laboratory in his home. From his experimental work in Halifax Smith arranged a demonstration of a standard-gauge conduit tramway line at his Manchester works and then at the winter gardens, Blackpool. This led to the formation of the Blackpool Electric Tramway Company in 1885 and the commissioning of a 2 mile service along the promenade from Claremont Park to South Shore. This was the first electric tramway for public use in Britain, powered by a conduit in the track which was later superseded by overhead power transmission. Six of the ten directors of the tramway company were from Halifax, including the chairman, Richard Horsfall, and the tramway was constructed by Halifax engineers. 
Smith was later responsible for the electrification of the City and South London Railway. He also developed an early interest in aviation, delivering in 1879 a lecture to the Halifax Literary and Philosophical Society illustrated with airborne models, and he contributed to the design of the aeroplane propeller blade. He also designed his own reel for engaging in his favourite sport of angling. He was a prolific lecturer and conducted pioneering evening classes in engineering at the Halifax Mechanics' Institute until 1885, contributing to the development of technical education. He was described by Sir Hiram S. Maxim as 'a very clever and scientific engineer' (Bond, 'Transactions of the Halifax Antiquarian Society', 133). He was affable by nature and regarded by one of his friends as 'the most lovable man I know' (Smith, 88). A photograph of him in middle age reveals a man of slim build with receding fair hair, an aquiline nose, and neatly trimmed moustache. He was deeply religious, attending regularly Sion Congregational Chapel in Halifax, where he became Sunday school superintendent, until his move to Wales. He died at his home, Maenan Hall, Llanrwst, Denbighshire, on 6 July 1932, from gastric influenza and kidney failure. 


@@@@@


doc= 56948


Volk, Magnus (1851-1937), electrical engineer, was born on 19 October 1851 at 35 (now 40) Western Road, Brighton, Sussex, the eldest child of Magnus Volk (1824-1869), a clockmaker from Langenbach, Germany, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Maynard (1825-1909). There were also six daughters, of whom five survived their father. Volk was educated partly at home and at Philip Capon's proprietary school, one of many elementary schools in Brighton. Although he learned basic clockmaking from his father, he was apprenticed to a scientific instrument maker, but this was cut short when his father died in 1869. 
With Volk's help Sarah Volk carried on her late husband's shop, which in 1867 had moved to 51 Preston Street. He sought new sources of supply in Paris as soon as it was safe to travel there after the Franco-Prussian War. However, new technology interested him far more than old, and in the early 1870s he designed and produced an electric telegraph instrument for household use. In 1877 he was described as 'telegraph apparatus manufacturer' and when, on 8 April 1879, he married Anna ('b'. 1857), the daughter of Frederick Banfield, a Brighton merchant, his occupation was recorded as 'electrician'. He wrote articles about electricity, which, combined with his mechanical ability, led to work for an armaments firm, the London Ordnance Works. He built a short telephone line linking his home with a friend's, and in 1880 installed electric lighting in his home, using a dynamo from Siemens of Woolwich and a Crossley gas-engine. In 1881 he successfully demonstrated a fire alarm system, and was appointed agent to the United Telephone Company, which opened an exchange in Brighton in 1882 for which Volk supplied equipment. A large electric light installation in the Royal Pavilion was completed in 1883. 
Volk then had time on his hands, and his thoughts turned to an electric railway. Electric traction was first demonstrated in Berlin in 1879 and he would have known of early experiments. He had a set of generating equipment spare as his house now used mains electricity, and an electric motor from a cancelled contract. On 14 June 1883 he wrote to Brighton corporation asking for permission to lay a 2 ft gauge line along Madeira Road. This was granted and Volk's Electric Railway opened on 4 August 1883, the first permanent electric railway in Great Britain. Following storm damage the line was relaid in 1884 to a 2 ft 81/2 in. gauge. 
Volk's next transport venture was an electric dog-cart in 1887, which led to an order by the sultan of Turkey. This is believed to have been the first export order for a British motor car. The motors for these vehicles were supplied by Moritz Immisch of London. By now Volk was in severe financial difficulties, and he agreed to install and manage the charging stations for an electric launch service Immisch was planning on the River Thames. Having filed for bankruptcy in January 1888, he was discharged in August 1891 and returned to Brighton in 1892. He was able to devote more time to the railway, and another new venture -- the Brighton and Rottingdean Seashore Electric Tramroad. This bizarre line, involving a car mounted on four stilts running on a pair of tracks laid on the seabed, and advertised as offering 'a sea voyage on wheels', was officially opened on 28 November 1896. Although abandoned in January 1901, this venture demonstrated the versatility of electric traction. 
In 1901 Magnus Volk Ltd was registered to take over Volk's businesses to give financial stability, and his eldest son, Herman, became a director, gradually taking responsibility for managing the railway. Herman was particularly interested in aviation, and in 1913 established a seaplane station near the line, of which Magnus did not quite approve. In 1903 Magnus moved to Hassocks, seven miles north of Brighton, where he was an active member of the Congregational church and ran the children's Sunday school. In June 1914 he moved back to Brighton. He managed the railway during Herman's absence in the First World War, and also supplied X-ray and other equipment to a military hospital in Brighton. 
In later life Volk, who had a daughter and six sons, was an active member of the Church of England and a generous supporter of the Royal Alexandra Hospital for Sick Children. After taking part in the opening of the rebuilt terminus of his railway at Black Rock on 7 May 1937, he died peacefully at his home, 38 Dyke Road, Brighton, on 20 May 1937. He was buried on 25 May in the churchyard at Ovingdean near Brighton. Shortened at one end and greatly extended to the east, the line built by Volk remains in business during the summer and is the world's oldest electric railway. In 1933, on its fiftieth anniversary, it was described as 'an epoch in the history of Brighton. It is even a milestone in the progress of the world' (Volk, 223). Although Volk is credited with numerous inventions and patents, his importance lies in his practical application of new technologies which were later taken for granted. 


@@@@@


doc= 56949


Stevenson, Dorothy Emily (1892-1974), novelist, was born at 45 Melville Street, Edinburgh, on 18 November 1892, the elder of two daughters of David Alan Stevenson (1854-1938), a civil engineer, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Roberts ('c'.1862-1945). Her father belonged to a dynasty of civil engineers who specialized in the design of lighthouses, and his first cousin was Robert Louis Stevenson -- 'they often played together when they were boys' (autobiographical sketch). Her mother, the daughter of William Roberts, an East India merchant, was a first cousin of the military hero Frederick Sleigh Roberts, Baron Roberts of Kandahar. 
Dorothy Stevenson and her sister were educated at home and by a governess. She began to write when she was eight: 'My head was full of stories and in the box-room between two large black trunks with a sky-light overhead I made a little nest where I would not be disturbed. There I sat for hours -- and wrote and wrote' (autobiographical sketch). But 'my parents were not encouraging' ('The author's point of view') and her childhood was lonely: she and her sister used to sit on the window-seat in the nursery and look down at the people passing by and 'I told her stories about them' (autobiographical sketch). Summers were spent at North Berwick. 'We had bathing parties and tennis parties and fancy dress dances, and of course we played golf' (ibid.). (Later she was asked to play in the Scottish golf team but was not able to do so as she was by then married and expecting a baby.) Every spring the Stevensons, who were old-fashioned and strict in their ideas, took their two daughters travelling in Europe. Meanwhile Dorothy wanted an intellectual education to the extent of defying her parents' wishes, managing to sit and pass the entrance exams for the women's colleges at Oxford and being offered a place. However, her parents forbade her to go, deeming an education 'unsuitable for a woman' (Bevan, 381). 
In 1913 Stevenson came out as a debutante; but within a year the war had put an end to gaiety. By now the family had moved to 14 Eglinton Crescent and it was from here, on 20 January 1916, at St John's Church, Edinburgh, that she married James Reid Peploe (1887-1969), a captain in the 6th Gurkha rifles, who was from another Edinburgh family; he was the son of James Reid Peploe, major in the 4th Highland light infantry, and was the nephew of the painter Samuel Peploe. At the start of the Peploes' marriage, 'the busiest time of my life... we moved about from place to place (as soldiers and their wives and families must do)' (autobiographical sketch), they established several different homes. Two sons and two daughters were born between 1916 and 1930; the eldest daughter died in 1928 when she was eleven. The family lived at Bearsden, Glasgow, while Major Peploe (as he now was) first commanded the university officer training corps and then was in charge of the Glasgow University athletics ground. 
In 1915 and 1926 D. E. Stevenson (the name under which most of her works appeared) published two books of poetry; in 1929 came her novel 'Peter West'. But her first success was in 1932 when, anonymously, she published 'Mrs Tim of the Regiment'. This account of the life of an officer's wife grew out of her diary -- many of the incidents were true. Her fourth novel was the best-selling 'Miss Buncle's Book' (1934), which had two sequels in 1936 and 1943. It was about an unmarried woman writing a novel about her village under the pseudonym John Smith, and the villagers gradually realizing that they have a viper in their midst: 'It is the truthful depiction of people, and the exposure of their faults, that makes Barbara Buncle's writing dangerous' (Bevan, 377). D. E. Stevenson, 'a quiet woman with blue eyes and a low-pitched, unforgettable voice' (Templeton, viii), wrote ten novels altogether during the 1930s. Her daughter Rosemary remembered 'her writing constantly every single day, lying with her legs up on the sofa, and a board on her lap to lean on, smoking endless cigarettes in a very long cigarette holder' (ibid., 376). Then came the eight wartime books in which she 'pictured everyday life in Britain during the war and tried to show how ordinary people stood up to the frightfulness and what they thought and did during those awful years of anxiety' (autobiographical sketch). One of her sons won the MC and her daughter, an officer in the WRNS, was commended for her work; D. E. Stevenson herself organized the collection of sphagnum moss for the Red Cross (it was then sent away to be cleaned and used as medical dressings). 
In 1943, after the Glasgow docks were bombed, the Peploes moved to North Park, Well Road, Moffat, Dumfriesshire. D. E. Stevenson continued to publish a novel a year, each one about, as she put it, 'people everyone would like to meet' (Templeton, xii). She travelled away from home only rarely and 'was content with the life of an ordinary, well-to-do middle-class woman in a Scottish country town with the gentle entertainments of tea parties with neighbours, drives in the beautiful Borders countryside, her crossword puzzles and her voracious reading' (viii) and her novels, which continued to be 'noted for their smoothly flowing style and for the warmth and friendliness of the many characters represented' (Sir William Collins in 'The Times', 5 Jan 1974). 
Stevenson's books were translated into six European languages. During the 1960s more than twenty of her novels were reissued as Fontana paperbacks and in this edition alone 'they sold 250,000 copies a year' ('Books and Bookmen', Feb 1970, 15); 'more than four million copies of her novels have been sold in Great Britain and three million in America' ('The Times', 5 Jan 1974). In her later years D. E. Stevenson, 'a lovely person, with white hair parted on one side, very neat and dressed in tweeds' (Hogg), suffered from severe osteoarthritis. Her husband died on 12 April 1969. She died in Moffat on 30 December 1973 from bronchopneumonia, perforation of the small intestine, and diverticulitis, and was buried in the cemetery above Moffat on 3 January 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 56950


Wilson, Florence Roma Muir (1891-1930), novelist, was born at 30 Collegiate Crescent, Ecclesall, on 26 December 1891 to Arnold Muir Wilson, a solicitor, of Whiteley Wood Hall, Sheffield, and Amy Letitia Wilson, 'nee' Dearden. From the age of two until sixteen she lived 'in a dark old manor house on the edge of the moors just outside Sheffield'. During her childhood the family spent summers at the seaside and also frequently travelled to the continent. For four years from the age of fifteen she attended West Heath School, Ham, in the Thames valley. In 1911 she studied law at Girton College, Cambridge, where she 'existed' 'with considerable boredom'. She passed her examinations in 1914 'with mediocre honours'. A professor influenced her to try her hand at fiction and she initially wrote 'rubbish for a typewritten private magazine' (Kunitz and Haycraft, 1532). 
The First World War destroyed her hopes of enjoying a pleasant social life after university, but the enforced inactivity prompted her in the summer of 1915 to begin a draft of her first novel, 'Martin Schuler'. Although she completed the first half in three weeks, she reached an impasse, and eventually threw the manuscript out. A friend retrieved it and Wilson continued working on it in 1917, finishing it in another three weeks. During these years she also contributed to the war effort by selling potatoes for the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries. 

'Martin Schuler' (1918) tells the story of an obsessionally driven German composer, who ruthlessly exploits people, particularly women, in his pursuit of inspiration and fame. Schuler does succeed in producing an operatic masterpiece, but dies on the opening night of its production in Berlin in 1914. Several influences can be detected in the work: Schuler himself is influenced by Wagner; his selfish lust for genius at any cost suggests a Faustian pact with the devil and also brings to mind Oscar Wilde's Dorian Gray; in his belief in his superiority, especially over women, he resembles the Nietzschean 'Ubermensch'. The tragic denouement suggests a strong critique of these conceptions of the artist and a subtext of fear of German dominance, though on the surface the novel seems oblivious to the war, as several reviewers noted. Edward Shanks termed the novel an 'extraordinary 'tour de force' of the creative imagination' (Shanks, 343), and recalled that it created something of a sensation in artistic circles when it was published in October 1918. 
Wilson's second novel, 'If All These Young Men', written before this date, directly confronts the enervating impact of the war on the home front, and unusually expresses another fear, of 'England's ruin and the ruin of humanity in an endless war' (R. Wilson, 'If All these Young Men', 1919, 88). With slight satire, Wilson traces the unstable relationships of several characters emotionally drained by the war. Josephine Miller feels particularly constricted, displaced, and impotent because of her ambiguous role as a woman in wartime. 
Following the novel's publication in 1919 Wilson turned her hand to writing a play, entitled 'The Social Climbers' (published in 1927), and then quickly immersed herself in 'The Death of Society', the novel that garnered her the most attention of all her novels as well as the Hawthornden prize in 1921. This novel portrays the transcendent love that a solitary Englishman, Rane Smith, develops for an older Norwegian woman, Rosa, the wife of the philosopher Karl Ingman, while a guest at the couple's home. Though very modern in its critique of societal mores that thwart true love, the novel suffers from some distinctly purple passages and from the curious detail that the lovers cannot understand each other's language, which makes the relationship's profundity less believable. 
While in Italy correcting proofs on her next novel, 'The Grand Tour' (1923), about a French sculptor, Wilson met the anthologist Edward Joseph H. O'Brien (1890-1941) of Boston, USA, whom she married in 1923. They had one son. From 1928 the family resided at the Villa Pauliska in Locarno, Switzerland. Her subsequent novels, notably the modern pastoral romance 'Greenlow' (1927), express a longing for harmony with nature as a means of overcoming the ravages of industrialization. Wilson also produced a romantic biography of Emily Bronte, several collections of fairy-tales, and a collection of short stories, 'Tender Advice' (1935), featuring studies of the artistic temperament, her forte. 
In appearance Wilson was tall and slim, with dark hair. According to Robert Nichols, 'Her face, of singular beauty... bore an extraordinary resemblance to that of Keats.... The great eyes had the same dark fervour, brilliance, and depth.... She talked wonderfully. Her speech was... elliptical, gnomic, the flight of a winged horse' (Kunitz and Haycraft, 1532). Like Keats, she died of tuberculosis, on 11 January 1930 in Lausanne. 
Surprisingly, Wilson has received virtually no contemporary critical attention. In 1930 Shanks likened the moments of poetic lyricism in her novels to those in Walter de la Mare's fantasies; her contributions to post-war lyric fiction need to be assessed as well alongside her female contemporaries Stella Benson, Katherine Mansfield, and Virginia Woolf. 


@@@@@


doc= 56952


Eyles, (Margaret) Leonora (1889-1960), novelist and journalist, was born on 1 September 1889 at 5 Eastcott Street, Swindon, the eldest of three children of Andrew Tennant Pitcairn (1861-1905) and his wife, Rosa, 'nee' Bevan (1863/4-1902). Her family were Staffordshire china manufacturers whose fortunes declined after her birth. She was brought up at Tunstall, near Stoke-on-Trent, and educated at day school and then a local board school, passing the examination entitling her to stay at school as a pupil teacher at the age of fourteen. After her mother died, her father remarried, and following his death shortly afterwards she was left in the care of a young stepmother whom she detested. Forbidden to take up a place at a teachers' training college to which her matriculation results had entitled her, Leonora ran away to London where, at the age of eighteen, she scraped together a meagre living by addressing envelopes in a basement office. She sold one or two things left by her mother to raise the passage to work as a domestic servant in Australia. There, in about 1909, she married Alfred William Eyles ('b'. 1880), whose father, Alfred Eyles, later became accountant-general of the Royal Navy. Her husband, a medical student, then journalist, left her after they had had a daughter, born in New South Wales in 1910, and a son and daughter, born in London in 1912 and 1914. Forced to bring up their children on her own, she eventually obtained a divorce. 
At the age of twenty-four Leonora Eyles found herself living in a terraced house in Peckham in the East End of London, where she supported her family as best she could through poorly paid jobs including factory garment making and typing. She found more congenial work when, pushing her pram up Peckham Rye where William Blake had once seen a tree of angels, she chanced upon an advertisement for an appeals writer for the Dr Barnardo's group of orphanages, and was the successful candidate from five hundred applicants. 
After the outbreak of the First World War, Eyles volunteered to become a munitions worker in the Woolwich arsenal, where she greatly enjoyed the camaraderie of some 2000 women workers. The experience of urban poverty and economic deprivation affected Eyles deeply. Her observations formed the basis of a book, 'The Woman in the Little House' (1922), a documentary study of working women's lives, which appeared in serial form in the journal 'Time and Tide'. Like Maud Pember Reeves's 'Round about a Pound a Week' (1913), 'The Woman in the Little House' directed the attention of the reading public to the struggles against poverty and hardship which formed the day-to-day existence of women in the inner-city slum. After the war Eyles was much in demand to address trade union meetings recruiting women workers. She argued that the state should recognize the importance of motherhood and was a strong advocate of the family allowance. Eyles wrote regularly for socialist publications including George Lansbury's 'Labour Leader' and the 'Daily Herald', and edited the women's page in 'The Miner' before becoming a columnist in 'Woman's Own' and the country's best-known 'agony aunt' before the 'Daily Mirror''s Marjorie Proops. She married the journalist David Leslie Murray (1888-1962), editor of the 'Times Literary Supplement' (1938-44) on 21 May 1928, but continued to publish as Leonora Eyles. She and Murray lived on the south coast of England for some of their married life. A pacifist and lifelong socialist, and also a vegetarian, Eyles was converted to theosophy in later life and abandoned her pacifist ideals at the start of the Second World War. 'For my Enemy Daughter' (1941) is addressed to her elder daughter, who had married an Italian and was resident in Italy during the Second World War. 
The first of Eyles's slum novels contrasting urban deprivation to rural freedom was the best-selling 'Margaret Protests' (1919). The subtext of 'Margaret Protests', published shortly after Marie Stopes's 'Married Love' (1918) and 'Wise Parenthood' (1918), is birth control, a subject about which Eyles had learned from reading Havelock Ellis and Stopes. Faced with a feckless husband and then unexpected widowhood, Margaret Wayre, the central protagonist of 'Margaret Protests', supports herself by trading in abortifacients before realizing the folly of her ways and trekking out to the countryside to begin life anew. Like several of Eyles's novels, 'Margaret Protests' is concerned with women's spirituality and depicts with unusual sensitivity and compassion a resourceful and resilient unsupported mother. 'Margaret Protests' was followed by 'Hidden Lives' (1922), the story of a woman doctor in an inner-city practice, and other novels including 'The Hare of Heaven' (1924) and 'Captivity' (1922), based on her own marriage. Eyles wrote two novels based on religious themes, 'The Shepherd of Israel' (1929) and 'Strength of the Spirit' (1930), as well as the successful crime thrillers 'They Wanted him Dead' (1936), 'Death of a Dog' (1936), and 'No Second Best' (1939). 
Leonora Eyles became the trusted confidante of hundreds of working women who read her journalism and wrote to her about their problems. Although she lived in comfort in later life, she never lost the insights into poverty and hardship which her years in the East End of London had given her. Her column in the inaugural issue of 'Woman's Own' (15 October 1932) introduced her as 'the woman who understands'. She wrote several popular books offering advice on subjects including good housekeeping, sex education, nutrition, and family relationships. 'Women's Problems of To-Day' was a best-seller in 1926. Other manuals included 'Careers for Women' (1930), 'Common Sense about Sex' (1933), and 'Eat Well in War-Time' (1940). Her autobiographical fragment is 'The Ram Escapes: the Story of a Victorian Childhood' (1953). Leonora Eyles died on 27 July 1960 at her home, 32 Eton Avenue, Hampstead, London, from intestinal problems and diabetes mellitus. 


@@@@@


doc= 56953


Jones, Emily Beatrix Coursolles (1893-1966), novelist, was born on 15 April 1893 at 6 St John's Park, Blackheath, London, the youngest of the eight children of Major Charles Jones (1840-1896) of the Royal Artillery, formerly of Toronto, Canada, and his wife, Mary Jane Ross (1855-1936), who, with her siblings, including her brother, Robert Baldwin Ross (1869-1918), had left Upper Canada in 1872. Nicknamed Topsy, Emily was brought up from 1900 onwards at Jesmond Hill, near Pangbourne, Berkshire, and educated by governesses and for one term at St Felix's School, Southwold. 
During the First World War, E. B. C. Jones worked for the food control ministry and was assistant editor of the 'Common Cause', the suffragette weekly. Later she lived at home, a menage described by her friend Romer Wilson in 'If All These Young Men' (1919), where Susan has 'hair cut straight at the sides and twisted up at the back in the Spanish fashion... she looked like a thin modern intellectual doll with black hair and red blotched cheeks' (Wilson, 49), and with her sister Petica Robertson and her husband at 56 Bateman Street, Cambridge. Here she became friends with contemporaries such as Rosamond Lehmann and Dadie Rylands. E. B. C. Jones published twelve poems in 'Windows' (1917) and her first novel, 'Quiet Interior', in 1920; this was praised by Kathleen Murry (Katherine Mansfield) for 'its distinction of style' (Mansfield, 308), while Rebecca West saw 'a sense of character that can be brilliant or touching', adding: 'Miss Jones has caught perfectly the tone of life as it is lived among pretty young people with enough money to give them power to amuse themselves, but not so much money that they need move out of Bayswater' (West, 82). 
On 17 February 1921, at the register office in Cambridge, E. B. C. Jones married Frank Laurence (Peter) Lucas (1894-1967), a fellow of King's College. They appeared compatible even though Virginia Woolf observed: 'she, I suppose, had a deeper experience of life, & somehow vouched for all sorts of things which, with his... scholar's unworldliness, he was ready to take on trust' ('Diary of Virginia Woolf', 2.156). At their home, The Pavilion, 20 West Road, Cambridge, she 'would lead the conversation, fixing her guests with a bright, determined, searching gaze and firing leading questions at them in a deep voice... demanding frankness' (Lehmann, 139). Three more novels were published between 1921 and 1924; in 1927 'Helen and Felicia' was described by Cyril Connolly as a 'moving and conscientious study of fondness written with sobriety and grace' (Connolly). In that year an affair with 'Rex' (probably Warner) made it inevitable that the Lucases be 'separated for ever, owing to her flirtatious ways' ('Diary of Virginia Woolf', 3.225), and E. B. C. Lucas moved to London. 'Morning and Cloud' (1932) found a publisher only with difficulty although Dora Carrington, for example, preferred it to previous novels. The shock of the deaths of her and Strachey, the publishers' rejections, as well as the unsatisfactory nature of her emotional life, partially explained her ceasing to write after such a promising beginning; she did, however, write reviews and a few critical pieces and remained friends with writers such as Dorothy Richardson and Walter de la Mare. 
In 1930 E. B. C. Lucas fell in love with (Frederick) Donald Livingstone (Ian) McIntyre (1905-1981), a barrister, later QC, who had 'desperate reserve' but was 'the handsomest man I ever saw' (private information, R. Cohen). They lived at 2 Peel Street, Kensington, and after 1934 at Craston's Orchard, Yattendon, Berkshire. She had no children, saying 'she had fared much better with two much loved nephews who returned her devotion' (ibid.); these were the sons of Petica Robertson. During the war Ian McIntyre was a prisoner of war in the Far East, where he displayed enormous fortitude. Afterwards they lived in somewhat uneasy harmony until her death, at Newbury District Hospital, from a stroke on 30 June 1966. Her body was cremated at Reading crematorium on 8 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 56954


Robertson, Eileen Arbuthnot (1903-1961), novelist and film critic, was born on 20 January 1903 at Moor Cottage, South Holmwood, near Dorking, Surrey, the daughter of George Arbuthnot Robertson, a surgeon, and his wife, Elsie Margaret, 'nee' Binns; she had one sister, Maye (later Mrs Ernest Herbert Leslie White). Uprooted from an idyllic country childhood at Templeton, The Holmwood, Dorking, in 1917 she regretfully moved with her family to London, first to 27 Gordon Square, Bloomsbury, and then to 8 Kensington Park Road, Notting Hill. In order to distance herself from 'the stultifying atmosphere of a household resolved to escape all mental effort by way of laughter and/or water-sports' (Robertson, 'Titles to Fame', 186), she turned early to writing and became a precocious reader; by the age of eight she was able to recite R. M. Ballantyne's 'The Gorilla Hunters' to her sister. After Greenwood School, Eastbourne, Eileen went to Sherborne School from January 1918 to July 1919, commenting in 1934, 'it is nice to feel that no misfortune that happens to me... can possibly make me quite as unhappy as I was there' (Robertson, 'The Old School', 153). For the following two years she was educated in France and in Switzerland. 
By the age of nineteen Eileen Robertson was on the staff of the magazine 'Answers' and years later 'still wonders uneasily whether any of the advice she handed out, on marriage, politics, investments and self-control was ever followed by readers who wrote in for it' (Norrie and Norrie, 167). At this time she was 'long limbed, needle thin with red-gold hair, anonymously famous as the model for a much reproduced painting 'The Red Haired Girl' by James MacBey' (Devlin, introduction, 'Ordinary Families'). On 26 February 1927, at Kensington register office, she married Henry Ernest Turner (1891-1961), general secretary of the Empire (later Commonwealth) Press Union, who was the son of John George Turner, journalist. It was a successful marriage, 'very largely by his efforts. Emotionally she liked an audience and he provided it unstintingly... he was her mate in every sense and he was very happy' (ibid., quoting Gordon Turner). The Turners shared a passion for sailing and owned their own yacht. In the late 1920s they adopted a son, whom they called Gordon Hugh Clement Turner. 
E. Arnot Robertson published her first novel, 'Cullum', about unrequited love for a 'philandering and unscrupulous male charmer and egotist' ('The Times', 23 Sept 1961), in 1928. Her second, 'Three Came Unarmed', published in the following year, described three orphans from Borneo, living with their aunt in West Mersea, Essex, who come up against 'the desire of the majority to see, to hear, to tolerate, no new thing' (E. A. Robertson, 'Three Came Unarmed', 1929, 300). These novels were successful but her next two, each of them a best-seller, were her masterpieces; both caused some consternation by their sexual explicitness. 'Four Frightened People' (1931) is a brilliant adventure story, full of 'ruthless psychological dissection' ('The Times', 23 Sept 1961), 'with a clear-eyed objectivity which ranks it with Buchan or Haggard' (Ackroyd), set in the Malayan jungle; its author had not been there and backed 'the British Museum Reading Room against travel' (Devlin, introduction, 'Four Frightened People', x). (In fact she travelled widely, partly because of her husband's job.) She found her true voice in 'Ordinary Families' (1933) with a 'rich, lightly malicious comedy of family affections' ('The Times', 23 Sept 1961) set in a Suffolk sailing village; after its publication critics such as Harold Nicolson placed her at the forefront of modern British novelists. 
From 1936 to 1946 the Turners lived in London at 96 Heath Street, Hampstead, thereafter next door in the larger 98. It was Arnot, as she was known, who allegedly remarked that Hampstead is not just a place but a way of life. She worked for the Ministry of Information during the Second World War, was a frequent broadcaster, and after the war lectured to British forces in central Europe and north Africa. In 1947 she began a battle with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, who found her reviews 'unnecessarily harmful to the film industry' ('The Times', 23 Sept 1961). Although the House of Lords found against her, the moral victory was hers: passionately individualistic, she was in part fighting 'sentimentality, over-statement, tradition, patriotism, cruelty, the self-regarding eye' as well as frivolity, considered by her to be 'the worst thing about current English novels' (Robertson, 'Titles to Fame', 173, 186). 
E. Arnot Robertson's last five novels (one of which was published posthumously) did not add to her reputation, for although she was 'at her best a writer of witty and ironical accomplishment, pointedly unromantic in temper' and 'seemed at one time likely to develop into a novelist of considerable comic substance and power' ('The Times', 23 Sept 1961), this did not, alas, happen. By now rather eccentric, Arnot would walk about Hampstead in the 'old pair of trousers which was her usual garb' (private information, Ianthe Carswell), 'looking as though she had just stepped out of bed... resembling an elderly actor-manageress playing Ophelia' (private information, Ian Norrie). But she had many devoted friends and according to one was 'memorable to meet and unforgettable to know' ('The Times' 28 Sept 1961). After her husband's accidental death untangling weeds round the propeller of their boat 'in the River Thames off Powells Wharf, Bermondsey' (probate declaration), Lady Turner, as she had become in 1951, 'simply felt that life wasn't worth living' (Gordon Turner, in Devlin, introduction, 'Ordinary Families') and on 21 September 1961, at her house in Hampstead, took an overdose of sleeping pills. Her body was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 56955


Seymour, Beatrice Mary Kean (1886-1955), novelist, was born on 1 September 1886 at 27 Peardon Street, Clapham, London, the second daughter of David George Stapleton ('b'. 1862/3), a journeyman farrier, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' North ('b'. 1860/1861). Her memories were to be of a 'Puritanic upbringing, with its revivalist meetings and distrust of everything which seemed to me to make life worth living' (Seymour, 140). Yet her mother would tell stories as she did the housework and in her turn Beatrice told stories to her classmates. She decided to be a writer early on; after secretarial college she earned her living (Horatio Bottomley was one of her employers), possibly studied English literature at King's College, London, and wrote numerous short stories. Encouraged by one of the teachers at the secretarial college, she had entered and won a short story competition with a story written when she was seventeen. After this she wrote regularly for women's magazines and also had stories accepted by more literary publications such as 'Bystander', 'Queen', and 'Magpie'. She could not attempt a full-length book because she 'left the house at nine, and frequently did not return to it until ten' at night (ibid., 139). With her marriage to William Kean Seymour (1887-1975) on 23 August 1915 came the leisure to attempt a novel, since her husband earned a living as a bank clerk (and would later be a bank manager, poet, parodist, and anthologist, and fellow of the Royal Society of Literature). It took her 'three years to write down, in the intervals of running a small house, cooking the meals, doing odd secretarial jobs, teaching shortand to young women... and... visiting a husband stuck up on a bleak Lincolnshire plain with what was then the Royal Naval Air Force (Seymour, 140)' the novel that was to be 'Invisible Tides' (1919). This was in part 'a study of the war years seen by a young woman who hated them and stayed at home' (ibid., 141). Kean Seymour declared her first love to be the short story but wrote novels because she believed only they could be used as a vehicle for social ideas; however, her twenty-seven novels written at the rate of almost one a year over thirty-six years were almost entirely rather aimless upper middle-class family sagas. Alas, it was fairly remarked by her critics that she was unthinkingly verbose; for example Rebecca West called 'Intrusion' (1921) 'immensely and incompetently long. Plainly, the idea that art is a selective process as well as a response to life, and demands treatment as well as statement of situations, is not present in Mrs Seymour's mind' (Kunitz and Haycraft, 1265). Nevertheless, her obituarist in 'The Times' called her a novelist of 'charm and power' ('The Times', 2 Nov 1955). 'Three Wives' (1927), 'Youth Rides Out' (1928), and 'False Spring' (1929) were reprinted as early Penguins in 1936, 1937, and 1941. 'Daughter to Philip' (1933) is one of her more interesting novels. Like so many other women writers (G. B. Stern, Sheila Kaye-Smith, Margaret Kennedy, and Elizabeth Jenkins, for example) she wrote a study of Jane Austen (in 1937). The Kean Seymours lived in London, spending weekends at Brown's Gate, Bucklebury, Berkshire. Beatrice Kean Seymour was an exceptionally private person and one has to commend the resourcefulness of Messrs Kunitz and Haycraft who, when compiling their volume 'Twentieth-Century Authors' in 1942, commented ruefully that she: 'speaks in one of her novels of 'those beautifully rare people who can be content to know a man or woman's work without wishing to pick over the rags of their private lives'. In her 'Who's Who' biography Mrs Seymour [only] records her address, the name of her publishers, the customary list of her books and the name of her husband. (Kunitz and Haycraft, 1265)'. Towards the end of Beatrice's life she and her husband divorced and William married Rosalind Herschel Wade (1909-1989), also a novelist, who was appointed OBE for her services to literature; they had two sons. Beatrice lived on her own at 49 Elm Park Court, Pinner, Middlesex. She was a great dog lover. Her close friend was Constance Evelyn Redfearn. She died aged sixty-nine of heart failure on 31 October 1955 at Northwood Cottage Hospital, Ruislip, Middlesex, and was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 56957


Whipple, Dorothy (1893-1966), novelist, was born on 26 February 1893 at 9 Edgeware Road, Blackburn, Lancashire. She was the second of eight children (two of whom died, leaving ten years between the older and younger siblings) of Walter Stirrup (1865-1955), architect and land agent, and his wife, Ada, 'nee' Cunliffe (1868-1942), who had come from 'an old-fashioned sort of family: nine children living with their parents in a comfortable house' -- as her daughter would write in her memoir of her own idyllic childhood (Whipple, 'The Other Day', 15). In 1900 the Stirrups moved from the 'steep terrace' (ibid., 39) where Dorothy was born to Elmbank, 52 St Silas's Road; to Hillside, East Park Road, in 1903; to The Hawthorns, 41 Dukes Brow, in 1906; and also at this time began to spend summers (previously spent on the Isle of Man) at Mylah Cottage, Rimington, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, 25 miles from Blackburn. From 1905 to 1910 Dorothy Stirrup contributed more than forty short stories (mostly about fairies, that were first tried out on her younger siblings) to the 'Blackburn Weekly Telegraph's' 'Children's corner'. She went to Miss Barrett's school in nearby Shear Bank Road, then from 1903 to 1905 attended Blackburn high school (which she disliked because she was unsporty and her writing was dismissed as plagiarism), and from 1905 to 1911 the convent of Notre Dame, after which she spent a year in France at a convent at Sens-sur-Yonne. On her return she started work as secretary to the director of education for Blackburn. 
In the first week of the war her friend George Owen was killed; she never forgot him, remaining close to his sister Gwen for the rest of her life. Briefly, she tried to be a Red Cross nurse; however, she 'fainted at operations, cried when the patients cried' ('Time' magazine, 21 Nov 1932). On 1 August 1917 at Gisburne parish church near Rimington, she married her employer, (Alfred) Henry Whipple (1869-1958), a widower with a first from Cambridge whose career in the education service had begun in the year his second wife was born. The couple lived at Glenesk, 8 Merlin Road, Blackburn. In 1925, when Henry Whipple became director of education there, they moved to 35 Ebers Road, Nottingham, later spending weekends at nearby South Lodge, Newstead Abbey, Linby. 
Despite her early work it seemed not to have occurred to Dorothy to write more than the occasional short story (and at first she must have hoped to have children) until, a decade after her marriage, she completed a novel. 'Young Anne' (1927) suffered only one rejection before being taken by Jonathan Cape ('I'm not lost any more. I know what I have to do with my life. I have to write'; Whipple, 'Random Commentary', 11) but they rejected 'High Wages' (1930), saying it would not be a commercial success (it has rarely been out of print since), so that John Murray became her British publisher for all her books except two volumes of non-fiction and a final volume of short stories. (Whipple was a great success in America, was translated into many languages, and was published by Tauchnitz.) Her novels are domestic, have 'a kind of North-Country Jane Austen quality' (J. B. Priestley, 'The Times', 21 Sept 1966) and in all of them 'her characters struggle sturdily towards individual salvation. Though she is perfectly aware that too high a price may be paid for security, she realises that without it dignified living is impossible' ('Cornhill Magazine', February 1937). Hugh Walpole described 'Greenbanks' (1932), a Book Society choice, as: 'a picture of a quite ordinary English family... with some of the best creation of living men and women that we have had for a number of years in the English novel... in Mrs Whipple we have a new novelist who will in all probability be of true importance. ('Book Society News', September 1932)' Six more novels appeared between 1934 and 1953 -- 'The Priory' (1939), which was partly based on Newstead, was also a Book Society choice -- and three volumes of short stories in 1935, 1941, and 1961. 'They Knew Mr Knight' (1934) and 'They were Sisters' (1943) were made into successful films in 1944 and 1945. 
In 1939, upon Henry Whipple's retirement, he and Dorothy moved to Barton End, 1 Ridgeway Road, Barton Seagrave, near Kettering, partly in order to be near her sister. 'Someone at a Distance' (1953), the only novel not set in or around Blackburn or Nottingham, can now be seen as Whipple's most important book -- yet it received no major reviews and was the first of her novels since 'Young Anne' not to be a Book Society choice or recommendation. A reply from the publisher to his depressed author gave a partial explanation: 'editors have gone mad about action and passion' (John Murray archive, NL Scot.); and she may have remembered St John Ervine's remarks fifteen years before when he dubbed her 'one of the best story-tellers we have... but [he implies 'which is why'] the editor of 'Who's Who' seems not to have heard of her' ('Good Housekeeping', January 1937). She was to be passed over for another ten years. Whipple also had the disappointment of seeing her last volume of short stories -- eventually dubbed 'illuminating and startling' by Anthony Burgess ('Yorkshire Post', 6 April 1961) -- rejected by Murray and not finding a publisher for several years. Towards the end of her life she wrote three successful children's books, as well as 'Random Commentary' (1966), an autobiography compiled from her working notebooks 1925-45. 
Upon her husband's death in 1958 Dorothy Whipple immediately returned to Blackburn, to 3 Whinfield Place, but lived there for only seven years before dying from a stroke on 14 September 1966 at the Royal Infirmary, Blackburn. She was cremated at Pleasington on 16 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 56958


Dixon, Ella Nora Hepworth (1857-1932), novelist and journalist, was born on 27 March 1857 at Essex Villa, Queens Road, Marylebone, London, the seventh of the eight children (two of whom died young) of William Hepworth Dixon (1821-1879), author and traveller, who came from Yorkshire, and his wife, Mary Ann MacMahon, a forward-looking Irishwoman. Hepworth Dixon's reminiscences, 'As I Knew Them: Sketches of People I have Met on the Way' (1930), portray some of the people she met at her parents' parties. Privately tutored, she went briefly to school in Heidelberg and studied painting in Paris. After her father died she began a career as a journalist, writing for 'The World', the 'Daily Telegraph', and the 'Daily Mail'. She was the 'Westminster Gazette''s art critic and published short stories in 'Lady's Pictorial', 'Woman's World', the 'St James's Gazette', and 'Woman'. Her first book, published under the pseudonym Margaret Wynman, was 'My Flirtations' (1892), light-hearted pieces about contemporary life. 
In 1894 Hepworth Dixon published 'The Story of a Modern Woman', a realistic novel which explores (by implication) the difficulties women have in writing truthfully about their lives. Partly autobiographical, it is about Mary Erle, who attends art school while living with her eminent scientist father; after his early death she is close only to Alison Ives and Vincent Hemming. The former dies after visiting her fiance's abandoned mistress; on her deathbed she exhorts Mary: 'If women... were only united we could lead the world' (Dixon, 'Modern Woman', 213). Vincent rejects Mary and marries for money, unhappily; she becomes an illustrator and journalist. In the end she refuses to become her lover's mistress but chooses instead a life that is fulfilled, if lonely. Her motive is solidarity with Vincent's wife: 'All we modern women mean to help each other now' (ibid., 255). This phrase, Hepworth Dixon said, was the keynote of the book: 'It is a plea for a kind of moral and social trades-unionism among women' ('Review of Reviews', 71). An additional theme is a satire on Grub Street, as Mary is shown trying to earn her living despite the prejudices of male editors who tell her that, unlike newspapers, fiction has to be written for 'healthy English homes' ('Modern Woman', 181). Published to huge acclaim by William Heinemann, 'a lifelong friend', the novel 'led to many literary friendships' (Dixon, 'As I Knew Them', 187) in England, America, and Europe -- it was translated into French -- and also led to the nickname the 'New Woman' for its author. 
Hepworth Dixon never published another novel but led an extremely sociable life, describing in her reminiscences people such as Oscar Wilde, H. G. Wells, Max Beerbohm, Yeats, Osbert Sitwell, and Somerset Maugham. Her life is an example of the seductive rewards of literary success leaving little time for further serious literary work; also an example, perhaps, of someone whose emotional life was blighted by the death of an adored parent. Hepworth Dixon edited 'The Englishwoman' from March to August 1895 (and increasingly came to champion women's rights); in 1904 she published 'One Doubtful Hour, and other Side-Lights on the Feminine Temperament', a collection of short stories. In 1908 her one-act play 'The Toy-Shop of the Heart' was produced in London. She continued in her 'pleasant, easy style' ('The Times') to write numerous articles for magazines on subjects such as 'Is marriage a failure?' or 'Wardrobes'. She was vice-president of the committee of the Femina Vie Heureuse and Northcliffe prizes for literature. A charming-looking woman with curly brown hair and a pert nose, Ella Hepworth Dixon died unmarried, of respiratory disease, on 12 January 1932 at the Savoy Court Hotel, 23 Granville Place, London, and was cremated three days later at Golders Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 56963


Hull, Edith Maude (1880-1947), writer, was born at 28 Marlborough Hill, London, on 16 August 1880, the only daughter of James Henderson ('b'. 1851/2), a Liverpool shipowner, and his Canadian wife, Katharine (Katie) Thorne, formerly Sancton ('b'. 1851/2). Little is known of Edith's early life, except that she made a visit to Algeria, most probably the inspiration for her novels set in north Africa, with a female friend. On 31 August 1899 she married Percy Winstanley Hull (1869-1944), who was eleven years older than her. The couple lived in Stanwell, Middlesex, before settling in Hazelwood, Derbyshire, at The Knowle, the Hull family estate, and the second largest private home in the district (Smith, 34). Percy's father was William Winstanley Hull (1794-1873), liturgical writer and hymnologist; Percy became a gentleman farmer and a breeder of prize-winning pigs. While he was away serving in the First World War, Edith wrote her first novel, 'The Sheik', merely as a personal distraction from her isolation. 
Published in 1919 under the author name E. M. Hull, 'The Sheik' was an immediate 'succes de scandale', going through 108 British impressions before 1923. In America its huge popularity was fuelled by the Hollywood mogul Jesse Lasky's risky decision to make a film version using, in the lead role, the little-known Rudolph Valentino, who came to epitomize the male romantic lover. Eventually 125 million people saw the film, making it the most popular of the age (although it has been suggested that Hull did not reap the financial rewards of her book because of unfortunate contracts). 'The Sheik' generated catch-phrases (such as 'Shriek for the sheik will seek you too') and popular songs, notably 'The Sheik of Araby'; it gave a new connotation of seducer to the word 'sheik'. 
This first novel by a reticent, provincial Englishwoman had become not only a huge best-seller but also a cultural phenomenon, despite being reviled by the few reviewers who did not consider it altogether beneath their contempt: 'Poisonously salacious in conception', decried the 'Literary Review' in a typical response (quoted in Raub, 126). Yet it was salaciousness purveyed within the safe realm of romantic fantasy that accounts for the impact of 'The Sheik'. On the surface the plot is rather flimsy: Diana Mayo, a cold but spirited young girl with a quality of boyishness, takes a month-long trek into the Sahara desert. On the second day she is captured by Arabs, and their sheikh, Ahmed Ben Hassan, transports her to his luxurious tent where he rapes her. For several weeks the sheikh forces himself on her, breaking her will, until her fear and hatred of him are swamped by passionate love. When a vile rival sheikh abducts her and attempts to assault her, Ahmed rescues her. Wounded in the effort and now realizing his love for her, Ahmed is so ashamed of his previous behaviour that he feels he must renounce Diana and return her to England. She implores him to let her stay with him, fails, and attempts to shoot herself. Ahmed deflects the bullet, and confesses his love, and the couple embrace as the novel closes. It is conveniently revealed that Ahmed is actually not an Arab but the son of a cruel English aristocrat and a Spanish woman, thus rendering the supposed sheikh a perfect matrimonial prospect. 
This novel did not initiate the so-called desert romance, as some have claimed, but rather drew on the tradition of female nineteenth-century British travellers, and probably on the scandalous life of Jane Digby, a divorced aristocrat who married Sheikh Medjouel al-Mesrab (Bettinotti and Truel, 186-7). In fiction the most famous precedent was 'The Garden of Allah' (1904) by the decadent novelist Robert Hichens, also a runaway best-seller. Elinor Glyn's 'Three Weeks' (1907), which advocated that a 'woman will stand almost anything from a passionate lover', also provided a model for the seduction scenes. Hull's viewpoint is similar, but the originality of 'The Sheik' lies in its merging of villain and hero in the figure of the sheikh and even more strikingly in the heroine's response to the villain's brutal caresses; Diana the victim becomes an equal sexual partner, and neither she nor her villain lover is punished for their extramarital liaison. 'The Sheik' also subverts traditional romance, in that the passionate couple have no plan to marry or return to the safe, civilized world. 

'The Sheik' spawned numerous imitations through the 1920s. Hull herself brought out a sequel, 'Sons of the Sheik' (1925), also filmed with Rudolph Valentino, as well as a handful of other romances in the same vein, including 'The Shadow of the East' (1921), 'The Desert Healer' (1923), 'The Lion Tamer' (1928), and 'The Captive of Sahara' (1931). None of the others achieved the success of 'The Sheik'; 'Sons of the Sheik', as the title suggests, follows the lives of Diana's and Ahmed Ben Hassan's less virile sons, and it plummets from melodrama into sentimentality. 
Despite the popularity of her work, Hull shunned publicity. She frequently travelled abroad to America, India, and Europe, and was away from Derby when the film of 'The Sheik' premiered there in 1923. In her 'Camping in the Sahara' (1926) she recounts her voyage to Algeria in the early 1920s, which she undertook with her daughter and only child, Cecil Winstanley Hull (1902-1981), who took the photographs illustrating the book. In it Edith conveys her admiration for the stern yet just leadership of the chieftains she encountered; the admiration was obviously reciprocated since she earned the title 'friend of the Arabs', which thrilled her. Cecil (so named because the Hulls had wanted a boy) was equally fearless on this rather daring journey. During the Second World War she served as an army colonel and later as chief commander of the Auxiliary Territorial Service stationed at Leicester; she was awarded an OBE. Edith herself took her part in the war, serving as local representative of the Soldiers', Sailors' and Airmen's Families Association. 
During her lifetime Hull's novels were translated into fourteen languages, but for reasons unknown she ceased publishing in 1939; her final novel was 'The Forest of Terrible Things'. Eight years later, on 11 February 1947, she died after a short illness at her home, Holmeside, in Hazelwood, the town where she had quietly lived for most of her life. She was buried at Hazelwood church on 14 February 1947. E. M. Hull has been described as a modest, gentle, clever woman, and a hard-working professional author who guarded her privacy ('Derbyshire Advertiser'). A photograph taken in her later years reveals a woman with a serious, even careworn expression, perhaps conveyed by hooded eyes behind rather severe wire-rimmed glasses. Her hair is pinned into a roll and her face is squarish, with just the suggestion of a dimple in her chin, and there is nothing in this glimpse of her that evokes the author of wildly popular, racy desert romances. 
Despite their flaws, including purple prose and melodramatic plotting, Hull's novels have had a lasting power, as is evidenced by the recent reprint of five of them and a resurgence of critical interest in her. Feminist scholars such as Patricia Raub have argued that 'The Sheik' can be seen as a precursor of the Harlequin romances which became popular in the late 1950s, with its portrayal of a woman who gains power over her love (Barbara Cartland, the queen of Harlequin romances, abridged several of Hull's novels). While contemporary audiences may find the sado-masochism, racism, and sexism of 'The Sheik' unpalatable, Hull's open exploration of female desire from a woman's perspective, and her depiction of sexual experience as the basis for identity, can be seen within a wider context of liberalized sexuality. 


@@@@@


doc= 56965


Jacob, Naomi Eleanor Clare (1884-1964), writer and actress, was born on 1 July 1884 at 20 High Saint Agnes Gate, Ripon, Yorkshire, the daughter of Samuel Jacob, a German Jew and schoolmaster, and Selina Sara (Nina) Ellington, 'nee' Collinson ('b'. 1863), a writer who published under the pseudonym Nina Abbott. She had a younger sister. Naomi Jacob's father's ancestors had migrated from Spain to Holland and then Poland, where his grandparents had been killed in the pogroms; Samuel Jacob's father had escaped from Poland to Germany as a boy. The Collinsons, in contrast, were yeomen who had been firmly rooted on the same plot of land in Yorkshire for over three hundred years. Naomi saw her lively mother as the greatest influence on her, claiming in 'Me: Yesterday and To-Day' that she inherited her literary skills from her. Her mother 'had the gift of making whatever she talked of -- live' and was also a rebel, a trait she passed on to Naomi ('Yesterday and To-Day', 143), while she recollected that her father was 'always stern and Teutonic about things that didn't really matter' (ibid., 208). It is thought that he may have been a model for the brutish Yorkshire husbands she repeatedly portrayed in her novels (Jasper, 208). However, she was proud of his Jewish heritage, reacted strongly against antisemitism throughout her life, and warmly portrayed Jewish life in her Gollantz novels. 
While Jacob remained very attached to Yorkshire, using the setting and its people as subject matter in her fiction, she hated her schooling in and around Yorkshire. She attended a number of private schools, including Skelfield and Sharow, before moving on to Leeds higher grade school. Her gawky boyish appearance and acerbic manner did not endear her to her teachers, who accused her of 'showing off' ('Yesterday and To-Day', 33). Ironically, at the age of fifteen, Jacob was forced to take up teaching at a school in Middlesbrough owing to 'family reverses', which may have included her father's death (Jasper, 209). Although she loved children, she 'hated the petty restrictions' of the profession and left it at the age of eighteen to become the secretary of variety performer Marguerite Broadfoote ('Yesterday and To-Day', 35). Broadfoote was possibly Jacob's first female lover. It has been suggested that as a young woman Jacob was married for a fortnight, but this was never mentioned in her memoirs (Baker, 302). Thus began her long association with the stage, including performing in vaudeville before the First World War. 
Jacob converted to Roman Catholicism when she was about eighteen, having been brought up in the Church of England. She also plunged into socialism (she was a Labour Party campaigner) and the suffrage movement (she joined the Women's Social and Political Union in 1912). At the outbreak of war several of her passions found a focus in the Actresses' Franchise League, a branch of which assigned volunteer tasks to women. Jacob acted as secretary for a toy factory before founding the Three Arts Employment Fund with the purpose of directing actors into war work. During the last two years of the war she served as a captain in the Women's Legion and ran a munitions factory in Willesden, before tuberculosis forced her to enter a sanatorium. 
By 1920 Jacob had recovered, returned to the stage, and begun acting in films. (Most notably she appeared with John Gielgud in 'The Ringer' in 1936.) She published her first novel, 'Jacob Ussher', a best-seller, in 1925. After rapidly writing several more, Naomi had health troubles again, and in 1930 she was ordered to leave England for a warmer clime. She chose Sirmione on Lake Garda, Italy, where she lived for most of the rest of her life. In 1928 Jacob appeared for the defence of lesbian novelist Radclyffe Hall's 'The Well of Loneliness', and she developed a friendship with Hall and her companion Una Troubridge. They frequently visited Jacob's 'Casa Mickie', (named after the nickname Naomi adopted when she began to express her masculine identity more openly), which she shared intermittently with her lovers Sadie Robinson and later Marjorie Zamble, a married woman with two children. 
During the 1930s Jacob embarked on the Gollantz series of novels and achieved widespread recognition with the third volume, 'Four Generations' (1934). It chronicles the tribulations of Emmanuel Gollantz, the eldest son of a Jewish antique dealer. Though married for only two years, Emmanuel and his smart wife, Viva, willingly agree to separate and later divorce: she pursues livelier men and he returns to Italy and the great love of his life, Juliet, an opera singer ten years his senior. He experiences a year of bliss with Juliet, before she dies and leaves him with their infant to raise. The novel is essentially a late version of the Edwardian marriage-problem novel, with a modern glaze of frankness and a taste of bitterness. The series as a whole, however, is Edwardian in its assumption of the importance of inherited family traits, with the Gollantz family described as tribal and quixotic. 
In 1940, after Italy had entered the Second World War, Jacob was evacuated to England via France and Gibraltar with nothing much except the clothes on her back. She joined the Entertainments National Service Association, and became famous for her flamboyant appearance -- signature monocle, crew-cut hair, and First World War Women's Legion uniform -- and humorous performances throughout the Mediterranean and Africa. 
On returning to Sirmione following the war, Jacob continued to produce two books per year. Increasingly she nostalgically focused on Yorkshire settings and romantic plots. Typically her alienated heroines make sacrifices, perhaps in loveless, even abusive marriages before their brutish first husbands die and they discover their soulmates, as in 'Late Lark Singing' (1957). The best of these novels are well crafted, and contain vividly realized settings and some fine psychological analysis. From the 1930s Jacob also wrote a series of 'Me' memoirs, beginning with 'Me: a Chronicle about other People' (1933) and ending with 'Me and the Stage' (1964). 'Me and the Swans' (1963) recounts her friendship with Hall and Troubridge. In these quirky hybrids of reminiscence, advice, and essays Jacob leaps from interest to interest 'like an elderly gazelle', as she admits: topics include flowers, her beloved cats, travel recommendations, music-hall memories, Italian art, and nuggets of wisdom ('Yesterday and To-Day', 252). One topic she never broaches in her books (she wrote over seventy) is lesbianism, a sensitive exploration of which might have given her conventional stories greater staying power. 
Although Jacob described herself as 'inordinately shy', she loved the limelight and, according to her friend Bransby Williams, was 'a jolly, boisterous laughing companion' ('Yesterday and To-Day' 112, 211). She was short and stocky, a physique she called 'foursquare', and this in combination with her short, brushed-back wavy hair, heavy horn-rimmed glasses, and traditional male attire left an impression not easily forgotten (ibid., 113). Jacob died in Sirmione on 27 August 1964 of a heart attack. Her books still claim a wide readership. 


@@@@@


doc= 56969


Elliott, George Henry (1882-1962), black-face minstrel and music-hall entertainer, was born on 3 November 1882 at the George and Dragon inn, Blackwater Street, Rochdale, Lancashire. His publican father, Henry, was locally well known as a pianist, while his mother, Alice ('nee' Gray), was an actress and accomplished contralto vocalist. From the age of three Elliott's childhood was spent in North America, to where his parents emigrated. He first appeared on stage at the age of five as a 'child soprano' and from then on continuously secured a number of theatrical parts culminating in the title-role of Frances Hodgson Burnett's 'Little Lord Fauntleroy', with which he toured Canada and the northern and southern United States. He continued a touring life with Primrose and West's minstrels, whom he joined at the age of nine as a singer and dancer. It was with this troupe that he consolidated his early stagecraft, as well as first appearing in black-face, and it was with this abundant early training that he returned to England with his family in 1894. He started in the smaller provincial halls favoured by a largely working-class clientele, and for three years in the early 1900s worked with Harry Reynolds's minstrels at such seaside resorts as Rhyl and Colwyn Bay. With Reynolds's troupe, as well as delivering his 'coon' speciality, he sang ballads and comic and eccentric songs with equal facility, performed in sketches, burlesques, and acrobatic stunts, and with another member of the troupe worked up a musical double act in which he played several instruments. 
Elliott made his London debut on 10 March 1902 at Sadler's Wells Theatre, and later that year was engaged at Gatti's, Westminster Bridge Road, earning $4 for the week. Big-time success came quickly after this, with his first West End engagement at the Oxford Music-Hall in October 1903, and it was then that he earned his theatrical nickname, the Chocolate-Coloured Coon. He remained in demand for the rest of his long career, on record and radio as well as on stage, though he was at the height of his powers in the first three decades of the twentieth century. He topped the bill for the first time at the Parthenon Music-Hall in Liverpool. Towards the end of the First World War, and during the subsequent armistice period, he appeared as the star of a concert party organized by the RAF. With his infectious gaiety and ability to win over an audience, regardless of the size of venue, he made a considerable impression on those he entertained. After the death of Eugene Stratton in 1918, Elliott assumed Stratton's sentimental 'coon singer' mantle and revived many of the Leslie Stuart songs that Stratton had popularized (including 'Lily of Laguna' and 'Little Dolly Daydream'), though he always meticulously acknowledged Stratton as their original singer and offered them as his personal tribute to the Dandy Coloured Coon (Stratton's own sobriquet). He did not possess the same authority of stage presence as Stratton, who was said to be able effortlessly to fill the stage with a sudden pose, and his rendition of Stratton's songs was not quite as assured, especially in his later years. None the less, Elliott was a memorable performer in his own right, having a light, tenor voice of 'flute-like clarity' (Midwinter, 105). His intense mode of singing was full of heartfelt conviction. Harry Reynolds's evaluation of him as Britain's 'leading coon exponent' and 'always a fine and conscientious artiste' (Reynolds, 238), rarely disappointing his public, is echoed in many reviews and memoirs. He assimilated ragtime material into his minstrelized routine, and also built up his own repertoire of material, written by divers hands. This included such favourites as 'I want to go to Idaho', 'Hello, Susie Green', 'The Honeysuckle and the Bee', 'If the man in the moon were a coon', 'Sue, Sue, Sue', 'I've had my fortune told', 'In Arizona', 'My Southern Maid', 'I'se a-waitin' for yer, Josie', and 'Rastus Brown'. He was known most of all for 'I used to sigh for the silv'ry moon', which he first performed at the Hackney Empire in 1908 -- he named his home in Saltdean, Sussex, Silvery Moon in tribute to its success. Elliott had a distinctive stage persona, always being a dapper, even snappy, dresser, appearing with aplomb in white linen suit and trilby to offset his minstrel make-up, and was adept at soft-shoe dancing, using this part of his act as a form of break between verses, or a way of suavely rounding off vocal performances. He appeared twice before royalty, first at the Alhambra in a royal variety performance on 12 February 1925 and second on 1 November 1948, when in a command performance at the London Palladium he combined with six other old music-hall performers in Don Ross's show, 'Thanks for the Memory', which had earlier enjoyed a very successful national tour. 
Elliott married twice, first to Emily Hayes, singer, and then, on 28 July 1943, to Florence May Street, herself a variety artist. He had one son, Anthony. Elliott continued to give occasional performances throughout the early 1950s, coming on stage with his second wife, whom he addressed minstrel-style as his Lindy Lou. He made his farewell tour of the remaining halls in 1955. Elliott's act was developed in the long tail-end of the black-face tradition, and by the end of his life his whole metier had become rather archaic, not to say racially offensive; yet at the peak of his career he achieved as much success as Gracie Fields and Norman Evans, both also born in Rochdale, and was regarded by many as a consummate practitioner of the early twentieth-century variety stage. He died of a heart attack in a Hove nursing home at 14 New Church Road on 19 November 1962, shortly after his eightieth birthday. 


@@@@@


doc= 56970


Walker, William Robert (1869-1918), diver, was born William Robert Bellenie on 21 October 1869 at 124 Hill Street, Walworth, Surrey, one of four sons and one daughter in the family of William John Bellenie, a carpenter of Italian ancestry, and his wife, Frances Jane Rose. As an adult William Robert changed his surname by deed poll to Bellenie-Walker, and later shortened it to Walker at the request of his second wife. 
Walker joined the Royal Navy as a boy entrant aged sixteen, and in 1887 he started training as a deep-sea diver at HMS 'Vernon', graduating as a first-class diver. During this period he gave the future George V, then a cadet, his first lesson in diving. In 1892 Walker left the navy to become an employee of the diving firm Siebe Gorman & Co. of Westminster Bridge Road, London. He worked for four years in Gibraltar on the new dockyard, and, as his skill was recognized, was in constant demand to deal with flooded coal and lead mines, and to undertake wreck work. He participated in experiments for his firm, whose doctors were collaborating with Admiralty physicians on the subject of underwater pressure, and he made a near record dive to 189 feet. Walker was working on a new jetty at the Victoria docks, London, when he was sent to Winchester Cathedral for the five-year project for which he was to achieve national fame. 
The repair works at Winchester had begun in November 1905 under the direction of Thomas Jackson, then diocesan architect, and the consultant engineer Francis Fox. A decision had been made to underpin the cathedral by digging a random series of trenches (drifts) at right angles to the cathedral walls and replacing the inadequate medieval footings by cement concrete, down to the solid gravel 24 feet below ground level. The high water table in Winchester (only 10 feet below the surface) meant that a powerful pump was initially used in an attempt to empty the drifts; this was felt to be hazardous as there was a risk of removing solid material from beneath the cathedral walls. Progress was slow, and the problems were resolved only at the end of March 1906, when Francis Fox suggested that the initial stages of the underpinning work might be done under water, using a diver and obviating the need for pumping. Walker and another diver began work in Winchester within a week. It was intended that they should work alternate shifts, using one set of equipment, but Walker's output and skill proved far superior to that of his colleague who eventually was taken off the project. 
Walker quickly achieved popular renown as the key figure in the preservation operation at Winchester, in which up to 150 other workmen were involved. He worked for two four-hour shifts a day, which allowed time for two three-hour periods under water. There, in almost total darkness caused by the turbidity of the water, Walker worked at a depth of some 15-20 feet, completing the excavation of the drifts, and laying two to three layers of bags of cement concrete, which sealed the ingress of water from below. It was then possible to pump out the drift so that masons could complete the underpinning. Eventually the foundations of all the outer walls of the cathedral were renewed in this way. 
Walker's work at Winchester was completed by August 1911. On 15 July 1912, St Swithun's day, the preservation works were commemorated by a service of national thanksgiving, attended by the king and queen. Walker was present at the service and received an honourable mention in the sermon given by the archbishop of Canterbury, Randall Davidson, who presented Walker to George V after the service. His former pupil congratulated him 'upon [his] feat in saving the Cathedral' (Henderson and Crook, 118). At the end of 1912 Walker was made a member of the Royal Victorian Order, an honour in the gift of the sovereign. 
Walker was a robust man. His job required considerable stamina, and he scarcely lost a day's work through ill health, attributing this to the pipe which he regularly smoked in silence between shifts, claiming that it preserved him from the harmful effects of working in ground then considered to be infected by 900-year-old graves. He returned each weekend to his family home at South Norwood, on one occasion making the journey by bicycle. A modest man, he spoke little about his exploits, despite constant media attention. 
Walker was a Freemason: a member of the Royal Jubilee Lodge, and grand master of Malta. He married Hannah, daughter of Thomas John Cashman, a scaffolder, of Cork. The marriage produced five children, the last, Edward, being born in Gibraltar in 1900 while Walker was working in the dockyard there. Hannah died within a year of Edward's birth, and Walker sent the young family home to the care of Hannah's younger sister, Alice, then aged nineteen. On the children's arrival Alice discovered that two of them had contracted typhoid fever during the voyage home. She nursed them back to health and married their father on 30 December 1907. Seven children resulted from this second marriage. 
On 27 October 1918 Walker fell victim to the Spanish influenza epidemic, and died on 30 October of acute lobar pneumonia at his home, 112 Portland Road, South Norwood. He was buried in Elmers End cemetery, Beckenham. He was survived by his second wife. In 1964 a statuette of a diver by Sir Charles Wheeler was unveiled in Winchester Cathedral in honour of the man who had 'saved the cathedral with his own two hands' (Henderson and Crook, 126); owing to a confusion the effigy was in fact modelled on a photograph of Francis Fox in diver's dress. In 1989 Walker's neglected grave was restored by public subscription. In June 2001 the error over the diver's memorial was finally corrected when a bronze portrait bust of Walker by Glyn Williams was unveiled. Walker is remembered annually at Winchester Cathedral's patronal festival. 


@@@@@


doc= 56971


Relph, Harry (1867-1928), music-hall entertainer, was born on 21 July 1867 at Cudham, Kent, the sixteenth child of Richard Relph (1790-1881), a farmer and publican, and his Irish-born second wife, Mary, 'nee' Moorefield or Murphew (1835-1893). He was born with an extra finger on each hand and both hands were slightly webbed. He also effectively stopped growing at the age of ten and reached a height of only 4 feet 6 inches. This combination of physical characteristics made him extremely self-conscious and resulted in his seeking privacy when off stage. His stature, however, became essential to his act and to the publicity surrounding it. 
When he was ten, Harry Relph began work as a lather-boy in a barber's shop in Gravesend, while at the same time performing as a dancer and tin-whistle player in public-house concerts and free and easies. By 1880 he had developed a 'blackface' act and was good enough to secure engagements at the nearby Rosherville Pleasure Gardens and at Barnard's Music Hall, Chatham. He eventually made his London debut at the Foresters in 1884. Initially he used the stage name 'the Infant Mackney', an allusion to E. W. Mackney, a leading blackface performer of the period, but by the early 1880s he was billed as 'Young Tichborne'. Finally, in late 1884, he adopted the title 'Little Titch', though the 't' soon disappeared. 'Tichborne', or 'Tich', was a childhood nickname, which he, along with many other children of stout build, had to tolerate at this time. It was originally a reference to the corpulence of a celebrated claimant to the Tichborne family inheritance. It was Little Tich's eventual fame that resulted in the name's gaining its current usage, indicating small stature rather than wide girth. 
Little Tich's act matured and gained considerable critical acclaim during a tour of the United States between 1887 and 1889. In particular, Tich dropped the blackface act to concentrate on dancing and character sketches. A major success in 'Babes in the Wood' at Manchester in 1889-90 led to a series of engagements at London halls, notably the Pavilion, and in Drury Lane pantomime. By the early 1890s Tich was a leading figure within British music-hall and comic theatre. Between 1896 and 1902 he ran and performed in his own musical theatre company and also spent much of his time in Paris, where he was an enormously popular variety artist; by 1900 he was a good enough linguist to perform in French, and in 1910 he was made an officer of the Academie Francaise for his services to French theatre. Although he was no longer at the absolute pinnacle of the variety profession by the early 1920s, he remained a popular performer until his death. 
Little Tich was famed above all for his talent as what contemporaries referred to as an 'eccentric dancer' and as a character comedian. His most famous routine was the so-called big boot dance, which he developed during his American tour in the 1880s. Each boot was 28 inches in length, and Tich used them as both comic props and the basis for quite remarkable tricks of comic agility. Aided by his being double-jointed, he was able to stand on the points of his shoes and lean out at extraordinary angles. The cry of 'Oo'er' when he appeared to stand on his fingers during the dance was a particular trademark. The act was extremely demanding and he tired of it both physically and mentally in his later years, abandoning it from about 1915. In the 1890s he developed a burlesque of the 'Serpentine dance' used by the American dancer Loie Fuller, which lead to the invention of Little Miss Turpentine, one of his most successful stock characters. Other richly imagined characters included the Tram Conductor, the Gas Inspector, and the Spanish Senora, all of whose tribulations were acted out in meticulously prepared costumes. It is significant that few of Tich's songs ever gained widespread popular currency. J. B. Priestley, a devotee, noted that they were 'sung at a frantic speed, delivered to you as if they were so much routine rubbish, perhaps a minor item in a contract' (Priestley, 189-90). Tich's forte was his agile and acrobatic dancing and mime, his range of facial expression, and his droll, sometimes minimalist, patter: Priestley recalled the simple phrase 'comic business with chapeau' closing a piece which had involved endless failed attempts to pick up a hat. 
Little Tich was a member of the charitable Grand Order of Water Rats and was King Rat in 1906. He was also a strong supporter of the 1907 variety strike. He painted in oils and watercolours, played the cello, and was a talented linguist. His personal life was complex. He married an English dancer, Laurie Brooks (died 1901), in Illinois on 20 January 1889. Their son, Paul (1889-1948), later had a generally unsuccessful theatrical career which borrowed extensively from his father's act. The marriage ended in 1897 when Laurie departed, along with a considerable amount of her husband's savings and furniture. He lived with a Spanish dancer, Julia Recio, from about 1898, and eventually married her on 31 March 1904. Their relationship was far from happy, and Tich had a number of liaisons before meeting the actress Ivy Latimer (1892-1973) (born Winifred Emma Ivey), in 1916. They had a daughter, Mary, in 1918, who was the co-author of an informative biography of her father. The couple married three months after Julia's death in 1926. 
Shortly after receiving a heavy blow to the head in an on-stage accident in November 1927, Little Tich suffered a stroke from which he never recovered. He died at his house, 93 Shirehall Park, Hendon, London, on 10 February 1928, and was buried in Marylebone cemetery. He was undoubtedly one of the most popular music-hall and variety acts of all time and influenced a number of British and European performers. Many commentators claimed that the visual trickery employed by many early film comedians owed much to his example and imagination. 


@@@@@


doc= 56972


Marshall, Herbert Brough Falcon (1890-1966), actor, was born on 23 May 1890 at 36 Fitzroy Road, Primrose Hill, London, the son of Percy Falcon Marshall, comedian, and his wife, Ethel May Turner. He was educated privately and at St Mary's College, Harlow, Essex, after which he was engaged as an articled clerk with a firm of chartered accountants in the City. He became the business manager of impresario Robert Courtneidge before making his acting debut at the Opera House, Buxton, as a servant in 'The Adventure of Lady Ursula' by Anthony Hope (1911). His London debut was at the Prince's Theatre as Tommy in 'Brewster's Millions', the comedy by G. B. McCutcheon, W. Smith, and B. Ongley (1913), after which he toured the United States and Canada with Cyril Maude's company. He served in the British expeditionary force during the First World War but lost a leg. Subsequently, although he had a slightly stiff walk, his career was unaffected. On 14 August 1915 he married Hilda Lloyd Bosley, known as Mollie Maitland; they were later divorced. 
After the war Marshall initially joined the company of the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith, but soon became a popular and busy West End star. Additionally he toured the United States and Canada with Marie Lohr (1921), and appeared in New York in 'The Voice from the Minaret' by R. S. Hichens and 'Fedora' by H. Merivale (both 1922), and 'These Charming People' (1925). He played Prince Keri in Noel Coward's 'The Queen was in the Parlour' in London at the St Martin's (1926) and was in New York again, in 'The High Road', a comedy by Frederick Lonsdale (1928), with Edna Best (1900-1974). She became his second wife in 1928. Marshall and Best became a popular team, both on stage ('Michael and Mary' and F. Molnar's 'The Swan', both 1930, and 'There's always Juliet', 1931-2), and on screen. Marshall's film debut was 'Mumsie' (1927) but it was his performance as the lover in 'The Letter' (1929), made in Hollywood from Somerset Maugham's novel, which attracted attention and led to a contract with Paramount Studios. The Marshalls had film commitments in Britain: he was excellent in Alfred Hitchcock's 'Murder' (1930), and together they appeared in 'Michael and Mary' and 'The Calendar' (both 1931) and 'The Faithful Heart' (1932). Back at Paramount he was suddenly starring in big films opposite major actresses -- in Josef von Sternberg's 'Blonde Venus' with Marlene Dietrich and as the suave jewel thief in Ernst Lubitsch's wonderful 'Trouble in Paradise' with Miriam Hopkins and Kay Francis (both 1932). 
During the 1930s Marshall starred with many of Hollywood's leading actresses. 'He was urbane, soft-spoken and somewhat distant, but he let the ladies act rings round him -- except perhaps in comedy, where his skill added much to the sophistication of some of the screen's best pieces' (Shipman, 369-70). Certainly his polish and assurance enabled him to appear well at ease in any setting of culture and gentility. Among the highlights were 'Riptide' with Norma Shearer and 'The Painted Veil' with Greta Garbo (both 1934), 'If You Could Only Cook' with Jean Arthur, William Wyler's excellent 'The Good Fairy' with Margaret Sullavan, and 'The Dark Angel' with Merle Oberon (all 1935), 'A Woman Rebels' with Katharine Hepburn (1936), 'Breakfast for Two' with Barbara Stanwyck (1937), and 'Mad about Music' with Deanna Durbin (1938). He also appeared back on the stage, in Santa Barbara, California, alongside Helen Hayes in 'Ladies and Gentlemen' (1939). Marshall's second marriage, which had produced a daughter, later the actress Sarah Marshall, broke up in the mid-1930s, leading to divorce in 1940. In the same year he married Elizabeth Russell, known as Lee. They, too, had a daughter. 
Marshall then enjoyed a brief purple patch, being in Hitchcock's splendid 'Foreign Correspondent' and Wyler's remake of 'The Letter', although this time as the cuckolded husband (both 1940). He also appeared in William Wyler's film 'The Little Foxes' from Lillian Hellman's play (1941), and played the narrator in the film adaptation of Somerset Maugham's 'The Moon and Sixpence' (1942) but this was virtually his last leading role. Marshall's natural reserve, his mannered style, and his age were forcing him into character roles, although his charm and his cultured voice ensured that he remained busy. He was one of over eighty chiefly British stars of 'Forever and a Day' (1943), appeared (for the first time on screen with a walking stick and a limp) in 'The Enchanted Cottage' (1945), and also in the underrated 'Crack-up' (1946). He was again cast as Somerset Maugham in a film version of that author's philosophical novel 'The Razor's Edge', and was in David O. Selznick's epic production, 'Duel in the Sun' (both 1946). In an excellent film adaptation of 'The Secret Garden' by Frances Hodgson Burnett he played the unfeeling guardian (1949). 'The Underworld Story' was his first 'B' film (1950). He also starred in the radio series 'The Man called X' (1944-52), hosted the television series 'The Unexpected' (1952), and made a number of other television appearances through the 1950s. After a divorce from Lee Russell, in 1947 he married the actress Patricia Mallory (1913-1958) (known professionally as Boots Mallory), with whom he had a third daughter. Better films in his final decade of film-making were 'The Virgin Queen' as Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, opposite Bette Davis's Elizabeth (1955), 'The Fly' and Sidney Lumet's 'Stage Struck' (both 1958), 'Midnight Lace' (1960), and John Huston's gimmicky 'The List of Adrian Messenger' and 'The Caretakers' (both 1963). His final film was 'The Third Day' (1965). Marshall divorced Mallory (who died in 1958) and married again in 1960; his fifth wife was Dee Anne Kahmann. He died of a heart attack on 22 January 1966 in Beverly Hills, Los Angeles, California. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 56978


Oberon, Merle (1911-1979), actress, was born in Bombay, India, on 19 February 1911; she was baptized on 16 March at Emmanuel Church, Gorpori, Bombay, the daughter of Arthur Thompson, a British-born railway engineer, and his Ceylonese wife, Constance (BL OIOC, N/3/105, fol. 27). Oberon's dark beauty, her inheritance from her mother, was an embarrassment in her search for a successful career in films in colour-conscious America. For many years her mother travelled and lived with Oberon, but was always referred to as her maid. 
After probably being educated in India, Oberon surfaced in London at the age of seventeen, under the name of Queenie O'Brien, working as a cafe hostess, and as an extra in British films. She graduated to playing small parts under the name of Estelle Thompson, although this aspect of her career is again open to question as she later admitted having invented several credits, 'to make myself appear more interesting' (Shipman, 425). During this period, she was spotted by the film director Alexander Korda, who added further touches to her grooming as a film star, including the name by which she is known. 
In the early 1930s, after playing a variety of small roles, including a harem girl in the Crazy Gang's 'Alf's Button' (1930) and several temptresses and 'other women', a type of role she found it hard to escape in her early career, she graduated to playing leading roles in British films. A significant moment was when Alexander Korda cast her as Anne Boleyn in 'The Private Life of Henry VIII', starring Charles Laughton, in 1933. Literary figures also became an area of casting for which her beauty, poise, and unforced photogenic attraction seemed to suit her. She had a compelling presence on the screen but brought no idiosyncratic features, which made her a malleable persona which a strong director could fashion as he wished. She was taken to Hollywood by Korda, who sold part of her contract to Sam Goldwyn. Throughout the 1930s she commuted between London and Hollywood, from success to success. She was nominated for an Academy award for her role as Kitty Vane in 'Dark Angel' (1935), a melodrama, in which, for once, she played the central role in a love triangle; the story cast her as the fiancee of a blinded war hero who tries to persuade her to marry his best friend without her discovering his condition. 
As well as in Hollywood films with largely contemporary settings, Oberon continued during the 1930s to appear in British period films, often with literary settings. After Anne Boleyn she appeared as Antonia, supporting Douglas Fairbanks senior as an ageing philanderer, in 'The Private Life of Don Juan' (1934) and as Marguerite Balcony, supporting Leslie Howard, in 'The Scarlet Pimpernel' (1935). In 1937 she starred in Korda's most ambitious project, a film version of 'I, Claudius', with Charles Laughton in the leading role. During the filming Oberon was involved in a near fatal car crash, which miraculously left her beauty intact, but which led to the film's being cancelled. After some mediocre films, in Britain and Hollywood, she returned to major projects as Cathy, partnered by Laurence Olivier, in 'Wuthering Heights' (1939). In this she looked beautiful and posed romantically, but never reached the emotional complexity of the character. Her performances always displayed a sense of style and polish, which led to her being cast in more historical roles or period melodramas. She appeared, and narrowly escaped being a victim of Jack the Ripper, in 'The Lodger' (1944), in which she had to dance the cancan twice, or, as one critic commented, the 'can't-can't' (Shipman, 426). She appeared as Georges Sand in 'A Song to Remember' (1945), a film which well deserves to be remembered as the worst biographical film ever; the dialogue included the line 'Chopin, I want you to meet Franz Liszt'. She played the Empress Josephine in 'Desiree' (1954) and Sigmund Romberg's lyric writer Dorothy Donnelly in 'Deep in my Heart' (1954). Along with these were a string of comedies and lachrymose romances that are best forgotten, some of which never rose above B-feature distribution. She continued to be a star, but rarely in star vehicles. Late in her career she had several roles in which her beauty, poise, and age combined to make her suitable to play fading stars and aristocrats. In two of these films her performance significantly raised inferior material to a superior level: 'The Oscar' (1965), and 'Hotel' (1966). 
On 3 June 1939 Oberon married Alexander Korda (1893-1956), divorcing him in 1945 to marry Lucien Ballard, a film cameraman. That marriage ended in divorce in 1949. Her third husband, from 1957, was Bruno Pagliai, a wealthy industrialist, with whom she lived in Mexico, largely suppressing her film career to live as a wealthy socialite. When the marriage ended in divorce in 1973 it left Oberon a rich woman. She had no children of her own, but adopted two children, Bruno junior and Francesca, during her marriage to Bruno Pagliai. 
Throughout her film career Oberon worked with prestigious directors (including Korda, Ernst Lubitsch, Rene Clair, Jules Duvivier, King Vidor, and William Wyler), though not necessarily in their best pictures. The leading men who played opposite her included Gary Cooper, Charles Laughton, Douglas Fairbanks senior, Leslie Howard, Laurence Olivier, George Sanders, and Marlon Brando. Academy awards eluded her, but her dark beauty and svelte appearance added distinction and star quality to the films in which she appeared. In this, she complemented the more outstanding talent of the actors who played opposite her, and provided a fitting and enhancing setting for the display of their talents. There was a smouldering energy beneath her poised appearance which threatened to break loose from all control; it never did, but it attracted and sustained the cinema audience's attention. In 1973, the year of her divorce from Bruno Pagliai, she made a comeback in 'Interval', in which she starred and was also the producer. The film followed the story of a young man, played by Robert Wolders, who falls in love with an ageing star, played by Oberon. Ironically, she later married Wolders in 1975. From then on, she retired from films and she and Wolders entertained high society lavishly. Oberon died of a stroke, aged sixty-eight, in Los Angeles, on 23 November 1979. She was survived by Wolders. 


@@@@@


doc= 56979


Hurley, James Francis (1885-1962), photographer and film producer, was born on 15 October 1885 in Glebe, Sydney, Australia, the third in the family of three sons and two daughters of Edward Harrison Hurley, a typesetter at the 'Sydney Morning Herald' and a trade union official, and his wife, Margaret Agnes Bouffier, from a family of wine growers from Alsace Lorraine. At thirteen he ran away from home and found work as a fitter's handyman in R. W. Sandford's ironworks in Lithgow, where he spent two years before being transferred to work on a ship in the Sydney docks. He remained in Sydney, taking evening classes in engineering, and became a partner in a picture-postcard business in 1905. 
When Douglas Mawson advertised for an official photographer to accompany the Australasian Antarctic Expedition in 1911 Hurley applied, and was accepted. On the 'Aurora', the expedition reached Cape Denison, in Commonwealth Bay, and set up a base from which to make sledging journeys during the Antarctic summer. Despite ferocious winds Hurley managed to take a series of dramatic photographs, including 'In the Blizzard' -- a shot of two men trying to cut ice from a glacier -- and a panorama colour photograph of the foreshore of Commonwealth Bay, featuring penguins and sea elephants. He was one of the party of three that made an eight-week sledging expedition to the interior in November 1912 to make magnetic observations at the south magnetic pole. In the face of continuous blizzards and sub-zero temperatures, and suffering from snow-blindness and frostbite, he always remained cheerful: 'he was an ideal mate for such a trip. His fertile brain and imagination made a comedy of the most desperate situation' (Laseron, 199). An imaginative cook, his 'tour de force' was the 'plum pudding' that he concocted for Christmas dinner on the way back from the south pole, when rations were running low, by grating three biscuits with a saw, adding sugar and seven raisins flavoured with methylated spirits, mixing them with snow, and boiling them in an old sock over the primus stove. On his return to Australia in 1913 he put together his cine film of the expedition, 'Home of the Blizzard'. 
It was the success of this film that led Sir Ernest Shackleton to invite Hurley in 1914 to join his Antarctic expedition, during which he hoped to cross the south polar continent on foot. Hurley made a photographic record of life on board the 'Endurance', the beauty of the Antarctic scenery, and the hardships suffered by the party after the destruction of the ship in the ice; these included a five-month drift on ice floes until they were able to launch the lifeboats and reach Elephant Island, where they waited while Shackleton took one of the boats to South Georgia to get help. The photographs show scenes of dogs being exercised on the ice, the crew playing soccer on the ice floe, seals being skinned to extract the blubber to fuel the stove that Hurley had created out of materials salvaged from the wreck, and the 'Endurance' covered with rime on a moonlit night; he thought the ship was at its most beautiful 'when the bright moonlight etched her inky silhouette, or transformed her into a vessel from fairyland' (Hurley, 158-9). He also filmed the 'Endurance' as it was forced out of the ice and crushed by moving slabs of ice, and the masts crashing down before the ship eventually sank. Although Shackleton had made Hurley leave his glass negatives on board when they abandoned ship, he went back in before the ship broke up, and 'bared from head to waist probed in the mushy ice' to retrieve them, only to be forced to select what could be stored in one tin; he was able to save only 150 out of more than 500, and smashed the remaining negatives lest he should change his mind. After his return he made a special expedition to South Georgia to take pictures for his book and to finish shooting the film of the voyage, 'In the Grip of the Polar Ice'. He also printed his still photographs, often using 'combination printing' to enhance their effect; these were montages made by superimposing several negatives to combine into one picture. He published his account of the expedition, 'Argonauts of the South', in 1925 and rewrote it as a children's book, 'Shackleton's Argonauts' (1948). 
In 1917 Hurley was appointed official war photographer to the Australian Imperial Force and given the honorary rank of captain, a title that he continued to use for the rest of his life. He covered the third battle of Ypres, and his colour slides are among the very few colour photographs of the First World War. Still making composite pictures, he superimposed clouds, exploding shells, and fighter aircraft onto the original images to increase the drama of the battle scenes, as in his most famous photograph of the war in France, 'Over the Top'. In December 1917 he was sent to Cairo to cover the participation of General Chauvel's light horse in Allenby's drive on Jerusalem, and turned the film that he shot into 'With the Australians in Palestine'. In Cairo, in April 1918, he married Antoinette Thierault, an opera singer, daughter of a French army officer and his Spanish wife, of Alexandria, whom he had met ten days earlier; they had three daughters and one son. 
Having returned to Sydney, Hurley was asked by the Anglican missions to make a film about their work in New Guinea. The success of 'Pearls and Savages' (later retitled 'The Lost Tribe'), completed in 1921, led to tours of the United States in 1923 and England in 1924, during which he gave live commentaries during showings of the silent film; he also published 'Pearls and Savages' as a book, in 1924. The Stoll Film Company financed his two feature films, 'The Jungle Woman' and 'Hound of the Deep', which was filmed in New Guinea and released in 1926 to great acclaim. 
After a year working as pictorial editor of 'The Sun' in Sydney, in 1929 Hurley joined the British Australian and New Zealand Antarctic Research Expedition (BANZARE), led by Sir Douglas Mawson, which was aiming to continue the exploration of the Antarctic region to the south of Australia and claim more territory for the British crown. Hurley was on both voyages of the 'Discovery', in 1929-30 and 1930-31. On the second cruise he was able to make a filming trip in a whaling cruiser while the 'Discovery' was taking on coal, and also shot a film sequence of Mawson on a reconnaissance flight in bad weather. He made two films of these expeditions: 'Southward Ho! with Mawson' (1930) and his first film with a soundtrack, 'Siege of the South' (1931), 'in story, sound and song', billed as 'An Epic of Man's Glorious Struggle with Nature in the Frozen South'. 
After the success of these films Cinesound, in Sydney, appointed Hurley chief cameraman, and for the next eight years he wrote, filmed, and produced documentaries, as well as several feature films, including 'Lovers and Luggers' (1937), which included underwater photography. His first documentary for Cinesound was 'Jewel of the Pacific' (1931), about the inhabitants of Lord Howe Island; others included 'Symphony in Steel' (1932), about the building of the Sydney harbour bridge (reviewers said he must have clung to every girder to get some of his shots); 'Pageant of Power' and 'Brown Coal to Briquettes', both produced in 1935 for the state electricity commission of Victoria; 'Oasis' and 'Here is Paradise', tourist films for the South Australian government, made in 1936; and 'A Nation is Built' (1938), commissioned by the Australian government as part of the 150th anniversary celebrations. 
In 1941, following the outbreak of the Second World War, Hurley was put in charge of the Australian Broadcasting Commission's photographic unit in the Middle East; he spent three years with the Australian forces there, making two-reel films to be shown on newsreels. 'Advance into Libya' (1941) was the first film of the fighting in the western desert to be shown in Australia, and 'The Siege of Tobruk' (1941) was shown all over the world. He was awarded the OBE in 1941. In 1943 the British Ministry of Information appointed him director of British army features and propaganda films; he travelled over 250,000 miles in the Middle East during the next three years, filming contributions for British newsreels and making documentary films, including 'The Holy Land', a history of Palestine under the British mandate. 
Hurley returned to Australia in 1946, after six years in the Middle East, and embarked on a project to photograph its different regions; he produced a series of lavishly illustrated photographic books between 1949 and 1956, of which 'Australia' (1955) ran to four editions. As he grew older he lost his joviality and became less sociable. Restless and tireless, he lived for photography and spent more time away from home than he did with his wife and family. He died on 16 January 1962 at his home, Stonehenge, Edgecliffe Boulevarde, Collaroy Plateau, Sydney. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 56981


Philippe de Remi (1250-1296), administrator and jurist, who should not be confused with his father the poet, succeeded to the title of sire de Beaumanoir after the death of his brother Girard. He was 'bailli' of Clermont (1279-82), seneschal of Poitou (1284-8) and of Saintonge (1287-8), went on a mission to Rome (1289), then was successively 'bailli' of the Vermandois (1289-91), Touraine (1292), and Senlis (1292-6). He died on 7 January 1296, and was buried at Compiegne. This second Philippe de Remi was responsible for the massive 'Coutumes de Beauvaisis' (drafted 'c'.1280- 'c'.1283, and continually enlarged and emended), an invaluable early codification of French customary law. The ordered expositions and the pragmatic style of his prose, however lengthy its enumerations, specifications, and provisions, reflect his experience as an administrator and jurist in France's civil courts. As he observed, 'clerks have a fine way of talking in Latin, but laymen who must plead against them in civil court do not understand their words even when they say them in French' (Remi, 'Coutumes', section 196). The 'Coutumes de Beauvaisis' employed simple French vocabulary wherever possible, and provided meticulous definitions to clarify technicalities and ambiguities of the law. Philippe de Remi's codification of legal practices involving treachery, feudal responsibility, property, and, indeed, guilt, crime, and punishment generally, remains a unique source of information about thirteenth-century French law. 


@@@@@


doc= 56982


Samuelson, George Berthold (1889-1947), film producer and director, was born on 6 July 1889 at 41 Nevill Street, Southport, the youngest of the five children of Henschel Samuelson, formerly Metzenberg (1829-1889) and his wife, Bertha (1854/5-1918), daughter of Solomon Weile and his wife, Rahle. The Metzenberg family were Jews from Lissa, Prussia. Members emigrated to Ireland and about 1846 changed the family name to Samuelson. Henschel Samuelson, a tobacconist, died seven weeks after Bertie Samuelson's birth, and the children were brought up in Southport by their mother. The three boys of the family who survived infancy all went on to flourishing careers in the arts: Julian Wylie (as he became known) became famous as a producer of pantomimes, Lauri Wylie wrote for the theatre, and Bertie Samuelson rose high in the film trade. He was educated at University School, Southport, but left at the age of fourteen. After several attempts to found a career, he became interested in the emergent film industry, and initially ran a cinema in Southport, before turning to film rental and establishing in 1910 the Royal Film Agency, which he moved to Birmingham at the end of that year. 
The business was a success, and provided Samuelson with the capital to realize his idea of a grand feature film on the life of Queen Victoria. In 1913 he approached producer Will Barker to make the film 'Sixty Years a Queen' at Ealing, which Samuelson financed and distributed. The film, a bold patriotic pageant, was a triumph and made his fortune. It persuaded him to expand into production, which he did in 1914, by purchasing Worton Hall, Isleworth, which he converted into studios, and hiring the skilful George Pearson as director. Their first production, an adaptation of the Sherlock Holmes mystery 'A Study in Scarlet', was a noteworthy success, and set the pattern for Samuelson Film Company productions: well-made dramas, generally based on literary properties, with a preference for sentimental scenes from the past. 
The war years were Samuelson's finest and saw such productions as 'The Great European War' (1914), made within days of the declaration of war (a typically bravura action), 'John Halifax, Gentleman', 'Little Women', 'Hindle Wakes', and his probable masterpiece, 'Milestones', based on the Arnold Bennett and Edward Knoblock play, which employed the kind of multiple-story narrative that he often favoured. Pearson left him after fifteen months, unable to keep up with his ceaseless energy, and subsequent Samuelson productions were directed by Alexander Butler, Fred Paul, and others, including Samuelson himself. A flurry of good productions in 1919 seemed to offer much post-war promise, but the competition of lavish American product, the iniquities of the block-booking system, which held up the release of British films, and the poverty of both budgets and imagination in too many British films spelt doom for Samuelson and his kind. He was more enterprising than most, however, and took a company of British actors and technicians to Hollywood in 1919-20 to make six features that were somewhat too hastily produced. A hoped-for cross-Atlantic exchange agreement with an American production unit never materialized. In 1923 he married Marjorie Vint (1901-1989). Their four sons also went into the film industry. 
Samuelson had a fearless approach to film-making, and took on such bold subjects as venereal disease, in his version of Eugene Brieux's 'Damaged Goods' (1919), and birth control, in 'Married Love' (1923), with a scenario by Marie Stopes. He also diversified into the coach business, at the time of a threatened rail strike. The Samuelson Transport Company, offering trips to seaside resorts, opened in May 1921 and was immediately swamped by business. Samuelson's coaches rapidly became famous, but the venture was heavily dependent on vehicles purchased on credit, and a public flotation was a failure. The strike did not materialize, the fine summer ended, and Samuelson was left with little but debts. He returned to film-making, but the British film industry was now in a slump. In 1922 he started a new company, British Super Films, which lasted only a few months, then formed Napoleon Films, when he made an ambitious drama about Napoleon, 'A Royal Divorce' (1923), his last success. Further production floundered in the industry's mid-1920s depression, and a bold move to film Rider Haggard's 'She' in studios in Berlin became a singularly ill-fated and costly venture that effectively ruined him. He was made personally bankrupt in 1929. Thereafter he could remain only on the fringes of the film industry, directing cheap 'quota quickies' during the 1930s. He tried other enterprises, including a circulating library, and eventually took a job as a clerk in the offices of film producers British Lion. During the Second World War he was superintendent of two nitrate film depots outside Birmingham, where his film career had properly begun. In his latter years he was afflicted by diabetes. 
In his heyday G. B. Samuelson was an unmistakable figure. He was large in frame, dynamic and unstoppable in his enthusiasm, generous and trusting, a lover of all that the cinema could show, but in the end not hardhearted enough to survive long-term in the tough film business. In the 1910s his films were a beacon for the native film industry; those of the 1920s increasingly suffered from poor judgement and poorer budgets, and he in any case belonged to a more innocent age of film-making. 
Samuelson died on 17 April 1947 at Crook House, Crook Lane, Great Barr, Aldridge, Staffordshire. His body was cremated. Sadly, he did not live to see the Samuelsons become virtually the first family of the British film industry. He told his sons, 'If you must go into the film industry, be a technician and not a producer' (Dunham and Samuelson, 394). They followed this sound advice. Sydney Samuelson trained as an editor and cameraman, then as a director of documentaries, before founding Samuelson's Film Service, where he was later joined by brothers David (heading the technical side), Michael (operations), and Anthony (finance). The business grew into the Samuelson group to become the world's largest supplier of audio-visual equipment. Sydney Samuelson, beneficiary of many film industry awards, became CBE in 1978 and was knighted in 1995. Between 1991 and 1998 he was the first British film commissioner. David became a noted news and documentary cameraman and his manuals for film technicians are used the world over. Michael, made a CBE in 1989, became a specialist in sports documentaries. Succeeding generations of Samuelsons also took up work behind and in front of the camera, honouring further a distinguished name. 


@@@@@


doc= 56984


Howard, Peter Dunsmore (1908-1965), journalist and leader of Moral Re-Armament, was born at 8 Laburnham Road, Maidenhead, Berkshire, on 20 December 1908, when his forenames were registered as Hereward Peter. He was the elder of two sons of Ebenezer Cecil Howard (1881-1960), a preparatory school teacher who was also a non-practising barrister, and his wife, Evangeline Bohm (died 1953), who was of Austrian descent. He was educated from 1916 at Crescent House School, Cliftonville, Brighton, of which his father was headmaster and part owner, and from 1922 at Mill Hill School, north London. In 1928 he entered Wadham College, Oxford, where much of his time was devoted to writing for 'Isis', the student newspaper, and especially, against considerable difficulties, to achieving success in rugby union. Howard had been born with a deformed left leg, which though straightened by an operation when a baby remained so thin that as a child he wore iron leg supports, and which left him with some lameness and a lopsided run. Nevertheless, assisted by being otherwise strong and over 6 feet in height, he drove himself to become a good back-row forward, playing for his school, then for Old Millhillians, Sussex, Oxford University (against Cambridge in 1929 and 1930), and England, winning eight caps during 1930-31 and once acting as captain, and later for the Barbarians and Middlesex. 
Having neglected his studies and with large debts, in early 1931 Howard left the university without taking a degree. While working as a private tutor in Switzerland he met Doris (Doe) Metaxa ('b'. 1911), a leading French lawn tennis player, who in June 1932 shared the Wimbledon women's doubles title. They were married in Marseilles on 17 December 1932, and had two sons and a daughter. As Mrs P. D. Howard, Doe continued to compete in international tennis tournaments until 1939. In that year her husband briefly returned to sport at the bobsleigh world championships at Cortina, in the British four-man team that broke the course record but came second overall. 
Early in 1931 Howard joined Oswald Mosley's New Party, more for its energetic and youthful appeal than any formed political opinions, and in September Mosley employed him as secretary of its youth movement. He wrote for the party newspaper, 'Action', and during the October 1931 general election worked on Mosley's campaign tours as organizer of the stewards recruited to deal with left-wing counter-demonstrations, some of which led to violent scuffles in which Howard was involved. After the defeat of all New Party candidates, the party organization was reduced but Howard retained his post until its final disbandment in April 1932, on Mosley's turning definitely to fascism. Howard himself was never a blackshirt. 
While training as a solicitor and supplementing his income as a rugby reporter for the 'Sunday Express', Howard came to the attention of the newspaper's owner, Lord Beaverbrook. From the summer of 1934 Beaverbrook employed him full-time as a political columnist, teaching him a distinctively terse, pungent, and populist prose style, and becoming a leading influence on Howard's life. Beaverbrook reinforced what Howard had learned from Mosley and visits to Glasgow slums during the 1931 election campaign: disrespect towards established politicians of all parties. His political journalism was 'of the most bludgeoning character' (Howard, 16), sardonic, contrary, and amusing, exposing the private personalities behind the public reputations. He also acted as Beaverbrook's voice, upholding his causes and expressing his enmities, especially towards the Conservative leader, Stanley Baldwin. Howard became feared, admired, and very successful, from 1937 writing also for Beaverbrook's 'Daily Express' and 'Evening Standard' on a wide variety of subjects and under various pseudonyms. By 1939 he was among the highest paid journalists in Fleet Street and able to buy a farm near Brent Eleigh in Suffolk. From May 1940, however, Beaverbrook's appointment in Churchill's wartime coalition government placed pressure on Howard and his colleagues to curb their political polemics. This became particularly irksome after the British army's defeat and evacuation from Dunkirk. Sharing a widespread dismay at the defence and foreign policies which seemed to have produced this military disaster, in July 1940 three 'Evening Standard' leader writers -- Frank Owen, Michael Foot, and Howard -- under the pseudonym Cato published 'Guilty Men', a diatribe against the 1930s governments of Baldwin and Neville Chamberlain. Reprinted many times, it helped to crystallize a wartime disillusionment with the Conservative Party and to establish an enduring popular myth of the National Government's 'failure' to recognize and rearm against the threat from Nazi Germany ['see 'Guilty men]. 
Still unhappy with restraints on his political journalism, later in 1940 Howard was introduced to members of the Oxford Group, the Christian renewal movement. Considering himself an atheist, he intended to write an expose of an organization suspected by most journalists of pacifism or pro-Nazi sympathies; but he not only became convinced that the suspicions were false but underwent a form of religious and moral conversion. In disputed circumstances, in April 1941 he resigned from the Express newspapers in order to publish a defence of the Oxford Group, or Moral Re-Armament (MRA) as it became more widely known. This book, 'Innocent Men', also promoted its cause of personal transformation by 'listening' to and 'surrendering' to God, and by adherence to four 'absolutes' of honesty, purity, unselfishness, and love. In characteristic Oxford Group style he apologized to his family and associates for past unkindnesses, in August 1941 even travelling to Worcestershire to apologize to Baldwin. He also sought Baldwin's aid, unsuccessfully, for a campaign to exempt the group's workers from military conscription, which prompted him to write a further defence of the movement, 'Fighters Ever' (1942). Howard's main occupation and source of income was now farming, but as the war ended he resumed his writing, though from 1941 all his royalties went to MRA. 'Men on Trial' (1945) was a collection of political sketches, but 'Ideas on Legs' (also 1945) took up MRA's widest themes: moral renewal of individuals as the means to resist the 'organised, militant Materialism' that lay at the root of both fascism and communism, and to create a new social order under 'God control'. 
In 1946 Howard travelled to the United States to meet the MRA leader, Frank Buchman, the second and greatest influence on his career. He joined an MRA mission that over six months visited some twenty North American cities, and for the rest of his life toured the world as an MRA evangelist, often working in the USA but also visiting many western European countries and various Asian and African nations, as MRA widened its appeal to members of other religious faiths. Howard also became the leading MRA publicist, not just with further books (including two on Buchman), but also from 1954 as author of fifteen plays and musicals. These were overtly propaganda pieces, dramatizing MRA's values and appeals, and often the focus of its campaigns: 'Vanishing Island' (1955) was part of a 'world mission', performed in eighteen countries. Many thousands of people across the world bought Howard's books and saw his plays, as during the cold war MRA offered an ideology to resist communism and preserve democracy, an appeal that won attention from political leaders in many countries, including the USA. In Britain it remained controversial and attracted little political interest, but had substantial numbers of supporters and was an important influence over Mary Whitehouse and her Clean-Up TV campaign and National Viewers' and Listeners' Association. Howard anticipated some of the Whitehouse criticisms in 'Britain and the Beast' (1963), attacking more permissive sexual attitudes as a dangerous immorality that corrupted the nation's public life. His last book was a study of Beaverbrook (1964), with whom he had resumed his friendship and who contributed to and revised the text: Howard gave it the unlikely implication that Beaverbrook might yet 'become an Oxford Grouper' (Taylor, 677). 
After Buchman's death in August 1961 Howard became the international leader of MRA. In early 1962 his daughter Anne's engagement to Patrick Wolrige-Gordon, the MP for East Aberdeen, attracted much political attention, because it precipitated an unsuccessful attempt by the constituency's Unionist association, already critical of the time Wolrige-Gordon spent on MRA activities, to have him deselected as their candidate at the next election. Howard's last tour for MRA was to South America, where he died of viral pneumonia on 25 February 1965 in Lima, Peru. After a funeral service on 4 March 1965 at St Peter and St Paul's Church, Lavenham, he was buried in Brent Eleigh churchyard. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 12 April 1965. 


@@@@@


doc= 56993


Smith, Sir (Charles) Aubrey (1863-1948), actor and cricketer, was born on 21 July 1863 at 9 Finsbury Place South, London, the son of Charles John Smith, a doctor, and his wife, Sarah Ann Clode. He was educated at Charterhouse School and St John's College, Cambridge (1881-4), where he studied medicine. Smith earned a great reputation as a cricketer, captaining the university eleven and, on graduating from Cambridge, becoming captain of the Sussex county team in 1886 and subsequently captain of the England eleven on tour in Australia and South Africa. 
Aubrey Smith first appeared on the professional stage with A. B. Tapping's company at Hastings in 1892. In 1894 he played Aubrey Tanqueray on tour with Mrs Patrick Campbell's company in Arthur Wing Pinero's 'The Second Mrs Tanqueray'; and first appeared on the London stage on 13 March 1895, playing the Revd Amos Winterfield in another Pinero play, 'The Notorious Mrs Ebbsmith'. He rapidly became a well-known leading actor, appearing with John Hare, George Alexander, Fred Terry, Mrs Patrick Campbell, Johnston Forbes-Robertson, and other famous actor-managers. On 15 August 1896 he married Isabella Mary Scott ('b'. 1871/2), daughter of Major Alexander Wood. 
Between 1898 and 1900 Aubrey Smith was the business manager of the St James's Theatre but returned to acting in 1900. From 1904 onward he began to accept engagements in the United States as well as in London. There was no year, indeed, between 1900 and 1930, when he did not appear in a new production (sometimes of a new play, sometimes of a revival) in either London or New York, his first appearance in the latter city being in 1911. In the pursuit of this international acting career he is said to have crossed the Atlantic over a hundred times -- in an age when each journey took five or six days each way. 
From 1915 onward Aubrey Smith appeared in numerous silent films and successfully negotiated the tricky transformation to sound films in the 1930s. From then on he became better known as a film actor than a stage actor; he was never a 'film star' but was a very sound and reliable player of supporting 'character' roles, specializing in upper-class English gentlemen, and being seen in dozens of films. These included 'Lives of a Bengal Lancer' (1934) and 'Clive of India' (1934). Aubrey Smith made his home in the USA during the 1930s and 1940s, where he resided in Beverly Hills, close to Hollywood. 
As a stage actor Aubrey Smith was most at ease in light, popular 'entertainment' plays. Unlike his near-contemporary Robert Loraine, who enjoyed and rose to the challenge of playing Strindberg and Shakespeare, he very rarely undertook plays of any very serious import. However, he did once play a Shakespearian role (as Frederick in 'As You Like It' in 1896) and he appeared in 'Votes for Women!' by Elizabeth Robins at the Court Theatre, under Harley Granville Barker's direction, in April and May 1907. He also played the lead in the first production of Clemence Dane's 'A Bill of Divorcement' at the St Martin's Theatre in 1921. St John Ervine, the theatre critic for 'The Observer', noted that he managed in this 'to do what was almost impossible, retain sympathy for a sympathetic character at a moment when that character is behaving in an incomprehensible and unsympathetic fashion' (20 March 1921). The play was something of a 'cause celebre'. Among the better-known popular plays of the day in which Aubrey Smith also played leading parts were 'The Liars' by Henry Arthur Jones (1916), A. A. Milne's 'Mr Pim Passes By' (1922), W. Somerset Maugham's 'The Constant Wife' (1926, in New York), and J. Galsworthy's 'Old English' (1941 and 1943, in San Francisco and on tour in America). 
Aubrey Smith was never a great actor, but he was a very popular performer of great charm, technical proficiency, energy, and industry. Early in his career, Max Beerbohm, then a distinguished theatre critic, was struck by his limitations, which sprang from a certain over-solemnity and a trivializing lack of inner seriousness. Reviewing one of his early performances, in 'The Finding of Nancy' (1902) by Netta Syrett, Beerbohm wrote that 'Smith, in manner and costume, was more like a cavalry officer than an obscure journalist. He came amiss in the milieu of the play. But he did his best' (Beerbohm, 'More Theatres', 467). Beerbohm was equally critical of his role in Oscar Wilde's 'Lady Windermere's Fan' in 1904. As Lord Darlington, Smith had to say 'the extravagant and silly things' for which Lady Windermere reproves him. Unfortunately, Beerbohm considered that he spoke 'with all the portentousness of an eminent physician examining an invalid' (ibid., 103-4). In 1905 Aubrey Smith played Colonel Gray in the first production of J. M. Barrie's 'Alice Sit-by-the-Fire'. Beerbohm commented that he 'might surely manage to behave rather more like an amiable and quite ordinary colonel who is glad to be home among his family, and rather less like a distinguished general whose career has just been blasted by failure in a crucial campaign. He might, in fact, play lightlier' (ibid., 155-6). 
Even in 1905 Aubrey Smith was an old-fashioned actor: tall, handsome, deft, and assured, he was as immune from the uneasy influence of the new drama of Ibsen, Shaw, Strindberg, Chekhov, Hauptmann, and Schnitzler as he was from the new theatre practices of Antoine, Stanislavsky, Copeau, Craig, and Meyerhold. Sensibly, he recognized his own metier. With the help of his agreeable personality and his abundant native energy he made a busy and successful career, especially in the USA. 'Who's Who in the Theatre' lists no fewer than eighteen plays, between 1902 and 1943, in which Aubrey Smith played the part of a titled gentleman. His roles included Lord Darlington, Colonel Gray, Sir Marcus Ordeyne, the Marquis of Tallemont, the Hon. Geoffrey Stoner, Sir Philip Lilley, Sir Christopher Deering, Sir George Knowsley, Sir Theodore Frome, Sir Basil Winterton, and Sir Thomas Ryecroft. Finally, in 1944, he was himself knighted 'for services to the theatre'. 
Sir Aubrey Smith died at his home, 629 North Rexford Drive, Beverly Hills, California, on 20 December 1948 at the age of eighty-five. He was survived by his wife and a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 56994


Powys, Llewelyn (1884-1939), writer, was born on 13 August 1884 at Rothesay House, South Walks, Dorchester, the fifth son and eighth child among the eleven children of Revd Charles Francis Powys (1843-1923), vicar of Montacute, Somerset, and his wife, Mary Cowper Johnson (1849-1914). His mother was the daughter of the Revd William Cowper Johnson of Yaxham, Norfolk, who was related to the poet William Cowper (1731-1800). Llewelyn Powys's elder brothers were the novelists John Cowper Powys (1872-1963), and Theodore Francis Powys (1875-1953). Llewelyn Powys was educated first at Sherborne preparatory school (1895-9) and then at Sherborne School, Dorset (1899-1903), before he went on to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge (1903-6). At none of these places did he show an aptitude for scholarship. He was a slow starter, and his personality, indulged by his older sisters and brothers, responded mainly to nature, companionship, and passing pleasures. This was shown in the cultivation, at Cambridge, of important early friendships, such as that with Louis Wilkinson, and with his founding of an epicurean society, the Club of the Honest Cods, in 1904. But it also resulted in his 'ploughing' the Cambridge tripos and having to re-sit the finals for a pass BA degree in November 1906. 
On leaving Cambridge, Powys drifted rather forlornly into schoolmastering, first at Broadstairs and then at Bromsgrove (1907), before becoming a private tutor to a family at Calne, Wiltshire (1908) (which he described in 'Confessions of Two Brothers'). Partly to release him from the drudgery of an uncongenial profession, his brother John arranged for him to visit America on a lecturing programme in December 1908. Here he spoke on the English poets and on some contemporary writers in Philadelphia and in New York state for four months, but was ill-equipped to cope with the task. He returned disheartened to school teaching at Sherborne preparatory school (1909), where his brother Littleton had become headmaster. 
On 3 November 1909 the direction of Llewelyn Powys's life suddenly changed when he suffered a serious haemorrhage due to contracting pulmonary tuberculosis. In December he was sent to Clavadel sanatorium, Davos Platz, Switzerland, where he remained for sixteen months. In addition to combating his illness, he had the leisure to read extensively and to cultivate the writing skills which he needed to fulfil his ambition to be a writer. His admired brother John encouraged him in this pursuit, and Powys began to keep a diary which became a remarkable testament to his life's struggle at this time, and a quarry for some of his later writing. 
On returning to England, Llewelyn Powys spent a summer and autumn of recuperation at the family home at Montacute and with his brother Theodore at East Chaldon, Dorset (a period about which he wrote revealingly in 'Skin for Skin'). A return to Switzerland in early 1912 brought on a further haemorrhage when Powys unwisely walked over a mountain pass between Arosa and Davos, but he recovered sufficiently to return to England in March. Here, in convalescence in the summer and winter of 1912-13, he began writing in earnest 'for the papers' -- mostly stories and vignettes in the style of Guy de Maupassant, the first of which to be published was 'Death' in the 'New Age' in April 1913. 
In 1914, after his mother's death and to help his recovery from consumption, Powys travelled to join his brother William on his farm in the East Africa Protectorate. However, with the outbreak of the First World War and his brother volunteering to fight, he was left to manage a stock ranch, and so remained in Africa for the duration of the war. In 1916 he published 'Confessions of Two Brothers', which was written with John and in which Llewelyn's section consisted of short autobiographical fragments. 
After the war Powys returned to England for a year and then sailed for America, where he spent another five years, mostly in New York but also in California. He gained a considerable reputation between 1921 and 1924 on the east coast, through his journalism and book reviews for periodicals such as 'The Dial', 'The Freeman', and 'The Mentor', as well as for notable New York newspapers such as the 'New York Evening Post' where he wrote vividly about his experiences in Africa. 'Ebony and Ivory', his first book, containing some of the early stories of 1912-13, came out in America in 1923, with 'Black Laughter', which made his name there, following in 1924. 
On 30 September 1924 Llewelyn Powys married Alyse Gregory (1884-1967), the managing editor of 'The Dial', and returned with her to England and to a coastguard cottage on a Dorset headland called the White Nothe near Weymouth. There were no children. Powys published the autobiographical 'Skin for Skin' in 1925 and 'The Verdict of Bridlegoose', about his experiences in America, in 1926. In 1927 Powys and Gregory briefly returned to New York, where Powys was appointed visiting critic of the 'New York Herald Tribune' (books section) for a four-month period, at a time when his reputation in America was at its height. He also began an affair with the poet Gamel Woolsey (1895-1968), which resulted in a miscarried pregnancy. Powys's letters to Woolsey were published as 'So Wild a Thing' in 1973; her letters to him were published in 1983. 
After returning briefly to England, Powys and Gregory travelled through Europe to Palestine. In consequence of this visit Powys, who for most of his life was an anti-Christian rationalist, wrote three books of religious observation, including 'The Cradle of God' (1929), a survey of the 'Old Testament', and 'The Pathetic Fallacy' (1930), a 'study of Christianity'. The culmination of this period was 'Impassioned Clay' (1931), a philosophical meditation on the origin and purpose of the human condition, which Powys always regarded as one of his most important works. While Powys was brought up in the Christian faith he spent much of his life rejecting its tenets. He was a convinced agnostic and humanist who nevertheless believed in a cosmic 'mystery'. 
In 1931 Powys and Gregory travelled in the West Indies, but for much of the 1930s Powys was ill with recurring bouts of blood-spitting and digestive disorders. In 1931 he and his wife moved to Chydyok, a cottage on the Lulworth estate between East Chaldon and the sea, next door to Powys's sisters, Gertrude, a painter, and Philippa, a poet. In December 1936 they travelled to Clavadel, Switzerland, for a last bid to save his health. In these years Powys was a prolific writer of essays and articles for local and national papers, on country themes, literary by-ways, and rationalist thought. Some of these were collected in books such as 'Dorset Essays' (1935), 'Somerset Essays' (1937), and 'Rats in the Sacristy' (1937). In Switzerland he continued with this intensive output of work, composing lovingly recalled reminiscences of his Somerset childhood, in the collection 'A Baker's Dozen' (1939), and re-imagining his early life in a quasi-autobiographical novel, 'Love and Death' (1939), which drew on his affair with Woolsey. 
On 2 December 1939 Llewelyn Powys died in Clavadel of a burst duodenal ulcer, and was cremated in Davos. After the Second World War his ashes were brought back to Dorset and buried on the cliffs above the sea near Chydyok. In 1949 a stone was erected over the ashes, carved by the sculptor Elizabeth Muntz, with wording from 'Isaiah', 'The Living. The Living. He Shall Praise Thee'. 


@@@@@


doc= 56995


Hack, William (fl. 1671-1702), chart maker, was the son of Charles Hack, a Winchester innkeeper. He was apprenticed to Andrew Welch, a cartographer of the Thames, or Drapers' Company, school of chart makers in London for a term of nine years on 25 January 1671. There is no record that Hack was ever made free of the Drapers' Company. The school specialized in the composition of highly stylized manuscript portolan charts. Towards the end of his apprenticeship Hack introduced several innovations in charts prepared for Welch, the most striking of which was the replacement of rhumb lines 'by the rectangular grid of the projectionless plane chart with the quarter compass rose which is perhaps Hack's most individual feature' (Campbell, 94). After leaving Welch, Hack concentrated mainly on the production of paper charts, bound into atlases, offering sequential coverage of large areas of coastline. 
In 1682, under conditions of the utmost secrecy, Hack was commissioned by government ministers to copy the book of charts seized by Captain Bartholomew Sharpe off Cape Pasado (modern Ecuador) in June 1681. Hack capitalized on this opportunity by producing an unnecessarily lavish presentation copy for Charles II in what appears to have been a deft suit for royal patronage (BL, Maps K. Mar. VIII.15). Hack also obtained the journals of Sharpe and Basil Ringrose, which were copied and edited under his direction over the course of the next twenty years (copies of these two works are at BL, Sloane MS 46B and 48 respectively). The finished products were among items he presented to his royal patrons, Charles II and James II, and to a select coterie of other sponsors, notably Christopher Monk, second duke of Albemarle, and John, Lord Somers, chancellor of England. Hack is not known to have kept an apprentice, but he was assisted in producing copies of Sharpe's journal by the Jewish linguist Phillip Dassigny. 
Hack's prolific output of manuscript charts outstripped that of any other member of the Thames school. A conservative estimate of the total number of charts he personally produced between 1682 and 1702 exceeds 300, although this probably represents a fraction of the true figure. Many of these were multiple copies of the charts deriving from Sharpe's voyage, but he also produced atlases of coastlines in Africa and the Orient. His business premises were 'At the Signe of Great Britain and Ireland' by Wapping New Stairs, London, although from the evidence of several charts dated 1686 he seems to have had a temporary address at Gun Wharf. Towards the end of his career Hack prospered and his interests diversified. In December 1695 he was apparently resident in Mile End Green, having adopted the rank of captain in correspondence with Sir William Trumbull over a scheme to press foreigners into the naval service. In 1699, as 'Capt. William Hacke', he edited and published 'A Collection of Original Voyages' printed by James Knapton, printer to the Royal Society. The collection contained an abridged account of Sharpe's voyage and illustrations by Herman Moll. 
Hack's activities formed part of the thriving industry which surrounded England's general maritime expansion in the late seventeenth century. Although he was primarily a copyist, his shrewd manipulation of patronage enabled him to remain buoyant throughout the period when manuscript charts were displaced by printed ones, and the influence of his work may even have extended beyond his lifetime. Upon the formation of the South Sea Company in 1711, the directors obtained a copy of Hack's 'South Sea Waggoner' (a book of sea charts known as a waggoner after the first printed atlas of charts by Lucas Sanszoon Waghenaer), containing 131 charts (Hunt. L., HM 265). These charts may have informed the audacious plans for a south sea trade which the directors laid before Robert Harley. 
Hack's last map is dated 1702. Nothing is known of his subsequent life or his death. It is not known whether he married or had children. 


@@@@@


doc= 56996


Beck, Adolf (1841-1909), businessman and victim of two miscarriages of justice, was born in Christiansund, Norway, on 14 June 1841, the son of a trader and ship's captain. Leaving school at sixteen, he led a restless, wandering, and varied life. He was a clerk in merchants' offices, studied industrial chemistry privately, and went to sea, before reaching Britain in 1865 or 1866, where he worked in shipping offices in six ports between Cardiff and Aberdeen. Beck also attempted to become a professional singer. In 1868 he went to South America, where he stayed until 1884, spending time in almost every country of the subcontinent, and making enough money to buy an unprofitable Norwegian copper mine. He arrived in London in 1885, but did not prosper, falling into debt, borrowing money from, and courting -- but not marrying -- several women. In his later years he was often seen in the company of prostitutes (which may explain the number of women later claiming to identify him in court). 
In 1896, and again in 1904, Beck was convicted -- wrongly as it subsequently appeared -- at the Old Bailey of defrauding numerous women of doubtful character of their jewellery. Seventeen women -- eleven in 1896 and six in 1904 -- mistakenly identified him as the man who, masquerading as Lord Willoughby or Lord Wilton, had deceived them. This was, however, fewer than half the total number of complainants, none of whose property was traced to him. The swindler was in fact an Austrian or German Jew known at different times in England and Australia (where for several years he practised medicine successfully) by a variety of names, both German and English, who had first been convicted (as Thomas Smith) of seventeen very similar frauds in 1877, and sentenced to five years' penal servitude. 
The frauds resumed in 1895 and Beck was arrested, tried, convicted, and sentenced to seven years' penal servitude, after the women's identifications had been confirmed by the police constable, now retired, who had arrested 'Smith' in 1877. These mistakes were compounded by the judge, Sir Forrest Fulton, the common serjeant, wrongly refusing to admit the evidence of a handwriting expert, which would have established that the 1877 and the 1895 swindler was, as indeed the prosecution believed, the same person. This would have exonerated Beck, since he could have proved that in 1877 he was in Peru. In addition, the prison authorities soon became aware that Beck, being uncircumcised, and having blue, not brown eyes, was not 'Smith', and accordingly allotted him a new prison number. But the Home Office officials who reported this discovery to Fulton did not recognize its crucial significance, and nor did he. 
Released in 1901 after serving five years, Beck was re-arrested in 1904 on similar charges and was again convicted. As the law in 1896 stood, Beck could not himself have given evidence; in 1904 he could have given it but, with the 1896 conviction still standing, was advised not to. This time the judge, Sir William Grantham, doubted the jury's verdict, and while further inquiries were being made 'Smith' was arrested for trying to pawn a stolen ring and confessed to all the frauds. Beck was at once pardoned for the crimes he had not committed and received $2000 (later increased to $5000) compensation. The subsequent inquiry (chaired by Sir Richard Henn Collins, master of the rolls) placed, absurdly, all the blame on the absence of legally trained civil servants in the Home Office, and did not recommend the establishment of a criminal appeal court. But the case for it was overwhelming. Had it existed in 1896, Fulton's erroneous ruling at Beck's first trial might have been successfully challenged. 
The egregious injustice to Beck made irresistible the sixty-year long, and thirty-parliamentary bill, campaign for a court of criminal appeal empowered to quash convictions for errors of fact as of law, which the judiciary and successive home secretaries had persistently opposed. The 'Court of Criminal Appeal Act' of 1907 followed. The new court's judges adopted, however, an exceedingly narrow view of its powers, and devoted most of their attention to reducing scandalous disparities in sentencing. Responsibility for investigating and referring claimed miscarriages of justice to the court of appeal criminal division (as the court of criminal appeal became in 1968) was transferred from the Home Office to the Criminal Cases Review Commission in 1996. Not until then did England begin to have anything approaching a satisfactory system for remedying them. Beck, who soon spent the compensation money, died of pleurisy and bronchitis on 7 December 1909 in the Middlesex Hospital, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 56999


Aylmer, Sir Gerald (d. 1559), judge, was the younger son of Bartholomew Aylmer of Lyons, co. Kildare, and Margaret Cheevers. There is no record of his legal education, though it is likely that he attended the inns of court since most of his contemporaries on the bench had formal legal training. At an unknown date he married Alison, daughter of Gerald Fitzgerald of Athlone, and his sister married Sir Thomas Luttrell, chief justice of common pleas. 
Aylmer was regarded as loyal to the Geraldine lord deputy, the earl of Kildare, when he served as sheriff of Limerick in the earlier 1520s. As a partisan of Kildare, he was made second justice of the court of common pleas on 19 December 1528. He was confirmed in that role on 23 August 1532, yet he was apparently acting as agent for disaffected councillors when he presented a critique of the Geraldine administration at the English court in 1533, along with John Alen. Aylmer was appointed chief baron of the exchequer on 25 June 1534, just before the Kildare rebellion, and when Sir Bartholomew Dillon died unexpectedly after only one year on the bench, Aylmer was named chief justice of king's bench (12 August 1535). Thereafter he was a principal agent of Cromwell and worked closely with John Alen, master of the rolls, in the defeat of the Geraldine revolt. They travelled to England in 1536 to receive the bill for suppression of the Irish monasteries, bringing the legislation to the Reformation Parliament of 1536-7. The act of St Wolstan's, introduced in September 1536 as a special commission of dissolution, assured Aylmer and his fellow chief justice and brother-in-law Thomas Luttrell an annual rent of $4 during the life of Sir Richard Weston, the last prior. Aylmer joined with Alen and others in the comprehensive commission to dissolve Irish monastic houses, gaining profitable estates in Meath. He conducted an inquisition at Limerick of ecclesiastical shrines in 1541, and he obtained the Franciscan friary at Drogheda by patent of 16 February 1543 for the price of $54 17's'. 3died His loyal service to the crown did not, however, conclusively demonstrate his commitment to the protestant faith. 
The new lord deputy, Lord Leonard Grey, adopted a pro-Geraldine policy after the Kildare rebellion was quashed in 1536, and the wily Aylmer, along with John Alen, campaigned to undermine Grey's administration. Aylmer attended Sir Anthony St Leger to London in 1538, joining the commission of inquiry to bring charges against the viceroy. Yet he was knighted in 1539 and survived the downfall of both Grey and Cromwell in 1540 to serve under three sovereigns, being reappointed chief justice on 24 March 1547 and on 16 November 1553. In 1541 he was among the leading Irish lawyers who petitioned for a lease of Blackfriars monastery in Dublin to establish there an Irish inn of court. He was named lord justice along with Sir Thomas Cusake on 6 December 1552, an unusual honour for one of his position on the council. However, he was left off the council in 1556 when the new viceroy, Lord Fitzwalter, replaced the minions of his predecessor St Leger. Like most of his contemporaries, Aylmer was also an able military figure who was employed in the field against the Geraldines and the O'Neills, attending the lord deputy in expeditions against the O'Connors (1537) and the Kavanaghs (1538). He was knighted in the field after the battle of Bellahoe in 1539, and given a grant of Dollardstown, Meath. Near the end of his career the aged Aylmer came infrequently to the Irish council and Elizabeth wrote in 1559 that she wished to promote another Old English lawyer, John Plunkett, to the office of chief justice in his place. 
Aylmer died in office in 1559, a tenacious survivor from the Cromwellian administration whose support of Lord Deputy St Leger demonstrated the kind of eclectic fidelity required of mid-Tudor administrators. His kinsman and namesake Sir Gerald Aylmer of co. Kildare, perhaps a son, was a leader of opposition to the cess among the pale elite in the 1580s. 


@@@@@


doc= 57007


Walker, William (1840-1931), folklorist, was born in Aberdeen, the son of James Walker from Old Deer, Aberdeenshire, who was a Chartist and one of the last hand-loom weavers, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Dingwall, who was originally from Strath Kildonan in Sutherland. His education appears to have finished when he left Blackfriars Street dame-school, Aberdeen, at the age of eight, although later he studied at the mechanics' institute. He started work for the Equitable Loan Company, rising from lowly message boy to successful managing director; his profession at his death was given as retired pawnbroker. Writing and books were his main outside interests, culminating in the local classic 'The Bards of Bon-Accord' (1887), a thorough study of north-east poets from Barbour to the mid-nineteenth century. 
Walker's extensive interest in balladry, folk-song, and related literature led to his becoming one of Professor Francis James Child's principal informants for 'English and Scottish Popular Ballads' (1882-98). In addition he aided Gavin Greig and James Duncan in amassing their monumental north-east folk-song collection in the decade before the First World War. After their premature deaths, he oversaw the final editing by Alexander Keith of the classical balladry in the collection, which was published as 'Last Leaves of Traditional Ballads and Ballad Airs' (1925). In 1915 Walker had published 'Peter Buchan and other Papers', a celebration of an earlier local ballad collector whose working methods were regarded as suspect by many authorities. He persuaded Keith not only to give 'Last Leaves' its unjustifiably elegiac title (the local folk-song tradition was, and still is, thriving) but also to write an introduction which was largely a justification of Peter Buchan. Walker had examined the Greig-Duncan collection in 1919 and had been horrified by its catholicity (later regarded as an indicator of both comprehensiveness and authenticity). In his eyes it contained far too much that was not 'genuine' folk-song, such as chap-book and music-hall versions, for Greig and Duncan had been uniquely thorough and non-selective in collecting all that their informants could give, altering virtually nothing in the process. Walker therefore determined that only the classical story songs (as categorized by Child) should see the light of day, in order that Aberdeenshire's reputation for fine balladry (for which he was partly responsible) should not be sullied by the publication of what he regarded as inconsequential rubbish. His great influence and standing ensured that only the 'Last Leaves' ballad selection (including a statement -- against all the evidence -- that the great songs it contained had almost disappeared) ever saw the light of day and that any thought of publishing the collection in full was dismissed for almost half a century. 
Walker amassed one of the most comprehensive and valuable libraries in private hands, covering both general song and balladry (especially works concerning Burns), general English and north-east literature, and works on theology, philosophy, and economics, in all of which he was well versed. From this foundation he wrote and published extensively -- newspaper articles, pamphlets, and books. The last of these contained the delightful 'Letters on Scottish Ballads from Professor Francis J. Child to W. W. Aberdeen' (1930), which gave many insights into Child's mind, character, and working methods. Walker's Peter Buchan manuscripts, including the notorious 'Songs of Silence', were accepted by Harvard University after being refused by a shocked Aberdeen Public Library. 
As well as being an expert on fiddle music (and a good performer) Walker was an authoritative collector of coins and medals. His extensive knowledge, generous, sociable, and friendly nature, together with his fund of anecdotes, songs, and fiddle tunes made him a popular local citizen respected for making a successful way in life as a typical Scottish 'lad o' pairts'; his extensive and wide-ranging self-taught knowledge also made him an influential international authority, especially in the field of balladry. He was married for fifty-two years to Elsie, 'nee' Noble; they had no children. He died at his home, 65 Argyll Place, Aberdeen, on 26 December 1931 and was buried, on 29 December, at Allenvale cemetery, Aberdeen. 


@@@@@


doc= 57008


Greig, Gavin (1856-1914), folksong collector and teacher, was born on 10 February 1856 in the North Lodge, Parkhill estate, near Dyce in Aberdeenshire, the fourth of five children of Gavin Greig (1822-1881), forester and land steward, and his wife, Mary (1815-1893), daughter of Robert Moir, box maker, and his wife, Margaret Stiven. He was educated at Dyce parish school and Old Aberdeen grammar school, and then entered Aberdeen University in 1872 as fourth bursar in the fiercely contested bursary competition (having turned down the thirty-third bursary in 1871). He graduated MA in 1876, having studied English and logic under Alexander Bain and gained the second competition bursary to study divinity for four years at the Aberdeen Free Church College. On 2 September 1878 he married his childhood friend Isabella Burgess (1856-1918), and their first child was born seven days later (they had a family of two sons and seven daughters eventually). These circumstances no doubt influenced Greig's decision to abandon his studies in favour of teaching, despite an excellent class record. 
In 1879 Greig gained the position of schoolmaster at Whitehill School, New Deer, Aberdeenshire, against fierce competition (the Dick bequest had virtually doubled the salaries of regularly examined holders of Aberdeenshire posts, which were therefore sought by good-quality graduates). He set to and transformed a run-down school into one of the best in the region, and he introduced music and singing to the curriculum. Thereafter he threw himself into the musical life of the community, conducting choirs and brass bands, playing the piano and church organ, and writing and composing songs, hymns, plays, operettas, and musicals. In addition he wrote poetry, articles, and novels (serialized in the local newspapers); he lectured extensively on the glories of Scottish song as exemplified by the works of Burns, James Hogg, Lady Nairne, and others. 
In 1902 Greig was asked by the New Spalding Club (an Aberdeen historical publishing society whose patron was Edward VII) to examine the feasibility of rescuing whatever still remained of the traditional music and song of the north-east of Scotland -- vocal or instrumental, popular, secular, or religious -- in order, perhaps, to fill a small volume. Greig was initially doubtful (during his lifetime in the region he had only come across a couple of examples of traditional song), but nevertheless started out collecting with his usual thoroughness and enthusiasm in late 1903. A very tall, outgoing, and popular man who put local folk at ease by speaking their native Scots, he was both surprised and delighted to find within a matter of months a considerable body of songs, well beyond his expectations, within a few miles' radius of his house. 
Greig soon realized that he had hit upon a hitherto unsuspected treasure chest of traditional music and song -- and that the task of collecting it was more than one person could manage. Furthermore, in 1905 the Folk-Song Society in England (which Greig had joined in 1904) published in its 'Journal' a number of songs collected by Cecil Sharp, edited to the highest modern standards, together with a list of sources (costing more than Greig's annual salary), which were deemed essential for a modern collector. Greig applied to the Carnegie trust for the universities of Scotland, and gained the first of five large research grants; he also recruited his old friend the Revd James Bruce Duncan as collaborator. 


In the decade before the First World War, Greig and Duncan collaborated in collecting a large and unique body of traditional music and song, mainly from the north-east of Scotland. Personal fieldwork was supplemented by correspondence stimulated by lectures and concerts and by a weekly folk-song column written by Greig for the 'Buchan Observer' between 1907 and 1911, later published as 'Folk-Song of the North-East' (1914). As the years passed, the compilation of a 'small volume' rapidly transformed into an overwhelming task of editing some 3500 texts and 3100 tunes (later published in eight volumes as 'The Greig-Duncan Folk Song Collection', 1981-2002). Greig suggested they should initially bring out a 'popular' edition, but Duncan objected on the grounds that this would necessitate bowdlerization; they therefore made a start on a volume of the great 'classical' ballads (as categorized by Francis Child of Harvard in his 'English and Scottish Popular Ballads', 1882-98) that they had found, and for which the region was already noted. But even this was incomplete when Greig died of heart failure on 31 August 1914 at the schoolhouse in Whitehill, where he lived, and Duncan died, as the result of a stroke some months earlier, on 30 September 1917 at his home, the manse at Lynturk. Greig was buried in Culsh cemetery, New Deer, on 4 September 1914; Duncan was buried at Alford, Aberdeenshire, on 3 October 1917. 
Greig had drawn attention to their work by publishing and circulating widely 'Folk-Song in Buchan' in 1906 (a greatly expanded version of his presidential address to the Buchan Field Club in 1905), a ground-breaking survey and analysis that brought recognition from as far away as Berlin. It was not significantly altered by any of their later writings or addresses, but these were relatively few, and regrettably neither collector managed to publish any final analysis or conclusions. The collection is significant for its size, quality, and comprehensiveness; it was also a major compilation using modern techniques by collectors who were themselves native to the region, and thus familiar with the language and culture. They were surprised to find that their informants eschewed what was then (and still is) regarded as Scottish national song -- 'we may say that Scottish book-songs [of Burns, Hogg, etc.] have never been the songs of the mass of the Scottish people' (Greig, 'Folk-Song of the North-East', 1914, ix) -- but any hopes that they might rewrite Scottish song (as Sharp had done for England) were dashed when they realized that their songs belonged to a corpus that transcended regional, national (Scottish and British), and even international boundaries. 
Their deaths, the First World War, and the demise of the New Spalding Club in 1926, brought the project to an end and the papers were handed to Aberdeen University for safe keeping. In 1925 their attempted volume of Child ballads (some 13 per cent of the whole) was completed by Alexander Keith (1895-1978) under the direction of the elderly William Walker (1840-1931), who chose the unnecessarily elegiac title (the north-east song tradition was, and still is, thriving) of 'Last Leaves of Traditional Ballads and Ballad Airs', published by the Buchan [Field] Club. Although the editorial introduction was mainly devoted to employing the findings of Greig and Duncan to defend the disputed integrity of an earlier collector, Peter Buchan, and is unreliable in biographical and local details, the book was both widely circulated and influential. It was not until 1964 that Paul Duncan (a grandson) persuaded the English Folk Dance and Song Society to provide an editor for a joint publication of the entire collection by the University of Aberdeen and the School of Scottish Studies, Edinburgh; the first volume of this unique, important, and revolutionary eight-volume collection appeared in 1981. 


@@@@@


doc= 57009


James Bruce Duncan (1848-1917), folksong collector and minister of the United Free Church of Scotland, was born on 13 February 1848 in the croft of Weetingshill, Whitehill, New Deer, Aberdeenshire (near to Greig's school), the fifth of eleven children of William Duncan (1814-1895), a millwright and carpenter, and his wife, Elizabeth Birnie. He was educated at Whitehill School, and (from 1862) Aberdeen grammar school before entering Aberdeen University in 1865 as fourteenth bursar at the age of seventeen. Unusually for the time, he graduated MA with honours (second class: philosophy) in 1869, and thereafter studied divinity at the United Presbyterian Divinity Hall, Edinburgh, and Leipzig University. An academic high-flyer, he was assistant to Bain (and taught Greig) at Aberdeen University before being ordained to the United Presbyterian (later the United Free) Church at Lynturk, Alford, in 1876; for the rest of his life he remained there, a hard-working and devoted pastor. On 10 August 1876 he married Maggie Anderson (1845/6-1893). A dark, reserved man, with a good sense of humour, he was not only an excellent musicologist but also came from a noted singing family, and had a considerable store of folk-song available to him, especially from his brother George and sister Margaret (later Mrs Gillespie). 


@@@@@


doc= 57010


Rorie, David (1867-1946), poet and folklorist, was born on 17 March 1867 in Edinburgh, the second son of George Livingston Rorie, a manager with the Royal Bank of Scotland, and his wife, Elizabeth Paterson. He was educated at the collegiate school of Aberdeen and at the universities of Aberdeen and Edinburgh, graduating MB CM in 1890, and MD in 1908, with a thesis 'Scottish folk-medicine'. In 1894 he became medical officer at Bowhill colliery in Fife, where his research into the customs and beliefs of the local mining and fishing communities led to an influential series of articles in the pioneering field of medical folklore. On 2 August of that same year, he married Margaret Elizabeth, daughter of James William Miller MD. In 1905 he moved to Cults, on the outskirts of Aberdeen, where he practised for the rest of his career. He held a reserve commission in the Royal Army Medical Corps, and was mobilized with the 1st highland field ambulance on the outbreak of the First World War, rising to brevet-colonel. He was made a DSO and member of the Legion d'honneur, and received two mentions in dispatches. 
Rorie's fame is chiefly as a poet and songwriter. The dazzling energy, audacious rhyme, and extravagant surreal logic of pieces like 'The lum hat wantin' the croon' and 'The Pawky Duke' place him among the foremost exponents of Scottish comic song. His creative writing in poetry and prose has a similar pungency and wit, although not without a persistent tinge of melancholy and pessimism. There are two collected editions: 'The Lum Hat Wantin' the Croon, and other Poems' (1935) and 'David Rorie: Poems and Prose' (ed. William Donaldson, 1983). 
Rorie was a kenspeckle figure, a man of many committees: president of the Caledonian Medical Society and a leading light in the Aberdeen Medico-Chirurgical Society, as well as in quaintly-titled fraternities such as the 'Calm Soughers' and the 'Sit Siccars' where he met his friend the poet Charles Murray. Dapper, genial, and gregarious, he enjoyed enormous popularity as a public speaker and, from the later 1920s, as a broadcaster. 
He was a gifted exponent of the fiercely reductive humour of the Scottish communities in which he lived; his poem 'The Obituary Notice' captures with typical irony the folk's jaundiced view of earthly grandeur such as his: '
Ony wey, the cratur's awa 

An' here's a lang bittie aboot 'im i' the papers: 

'Much respeckit member o' the community.' 

Imph'm. 

' David Rorie died at his home, 17 Hazeldene, Road, Hazlehead, Aberdeen, on 18 February 1946, and was cremated at Craigiebuckler, Aberdeen, on 24 February 1946. He was survived by his wife, and a son and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 57011


Keith, Alexander (1895-1978), author and farmer, was born on 18 August 1895 in The Square, Kintore, Aberdeenshire, the son of Alfred George Keith, chemist, and his wife, Janet Greig, 'nee' Wishart. Janet Keith was the daughter of a local farmer and butcher, and brought up the family single-handed, running both the business and the local savings bank after her husband's early death. Alexander was educated at Kintore and Strichen parish schools, winning a bursary which enabled him to gain an honours MA in English from Aberdeen University in 1916. After brief experience of keeping the pedigree records of the Brucklay Castle herd of Aberdeen Angus, he joined the editorial staff of the 'Aberdeen Daily Journal' (later 'Press and Journal') in 1917, and was assistant editor from 1929 until 1944. In 1943 he bought the farm of Eigie, by Balmedie, north of Aberdeen, which he worked until 1971, when he retired to Stonehaven in Kincardineshire. He specialized in breeding Aberdeen Angus cattle, and was secretary of the Aberdeen-Angus Cattle Society from 1944 to 1955. He was also a member of the council of the Aberdeen chamber of commerce in 1954, becoming president in 1957, and he travelled all over the world to promote the interests of both bodies. In 1967 Aberdeen University awarded him an LLD 'honoris causa', describing him as 'the universal man of the North-East' ('Aberdeen University Review', 42). He married twice, first on 5 August 1922, Agnes Roberta MacDougall, and second on 16 January 1957, Lewella Agnes Mackay. 
Throughout his life Keith was a prolific writer, publishing eight books, well over seventy articles, countless editorials and reviews, and almost a hundred BBC scripts and talks. The diversity of his subject matter was also great, ranging from local histories of banking, cattle-breeding, distilling, printing, and business, to works on Burns, Shakespeare, and Byron, together with studies of men and women eminent in the history of the north-east of Scotland, from poets to professors, soldiers to singers. He was one of the first to broadcast from the new BBC station in Aberdeen (2BD), established in 1923. He broadcast throughout his life, especially on horticulture and gardening, and spoke on air in America in the 1940s on behalf of the war effort. 
In publishing, Keith's local fame derived from 'The North of Scotland Bank Limited, 1836-1936', 'The Aberdeen-Angus Breed: a History' (1958), 'Families of the Aberdeen-Angus Breed' (1959), and his final history, 'A Thousand Years of Aberdeen' (1972); it was increased by the posthumous publication of his collected essays from the 'Aberdeen Chamber of Commerce Journal', entitled 'Eminent Aberdonians' (1984). 'A. K.' became a legend in his own time, a member of clubs and associations with intriguing names such as the Sit Siccars, the Calm Soughers, the Club of Deer, and the Life Preserving Society, together with characters such as Charles Murray, David Rorie, J. B. Tocher, William Tawse, Lord Boyd Orr, and William Walker. He was highly popular as a man of charm and tact, common sense and worldly wisdom, of sheer readability and sense of fun (though he characteristically requested a private funeral). 
Keith's international fame stemmed from 'Last Leaves of Traditional Ballads and Ballad Airs Collected in Aberdeenshire by the Late Gavin Greig and Edited, with an Introductory Essay, Collations and Notes by Alexander Keith', published by the Buchan [Field] Club in 1925. The title was doubly misleading: the contents represented only about 13 per cent of the huge collection (some 3500 songs) made in the decade before the First World War from a rich living tradition (which continued to thrive); it was amassed not only by Gavin Greig, an Aberdeenshire parish schoolmaster, but also by the Revd James Bruce Duncan, a local minister. They were overwhelmed by the size of their collection, and it was not ready for publication before their deaths (Greig's in 1914; Duncan's in 1917). Their papers went to Aberdeen University Library where they were examined by the great ballad authority William Walker. Greig and Duncan had scrupulously taken down everything their informants had given, from music-hall songs to great ballads, mingling 'dross' with material of the highest quality. Walker did not recommend publication, but when friends in the Buchan Field Club later suggested publication of the songs of Bell Robertson (Greig's most prolific informant) Walker proposed that they print instead the annotated compilation of great 'traditional' ballads in the collection, which Greig and Duncan had almost completed. 
Too old at eighty-five for the task, Walker proposed the young Alexander Keith as editor, although other than publishing 'Burns and Folksong' in 1922 (six articles originally suggested by Walker, mostly from Keith's weekly newspaper column, 'From a Scottish study'), Keith had no experience in this field. He was guided and advised by Walker, who also chose the elegiac title and ensured that the introduction was used to rescue the battered reputation of his favourite, an earlier local collector, Peter Buchan. The sheer quality of Greig's and Duncan's material, both tunes and texts, brought international acclaim for 'Last Leaves', and lasting fame to Keith who, for the rest of his life, pursued an interest in folk-song, especially of the north-east. Keith died on 5 October 1978 in Woodcot Hospital, Stonehaven, Kincardineshire, and was buried in Stonehaven. 


@@@@@


doc= 57012


Murray, Charles (1864-1941), poet and civil engineer, was born on 28 September 1864 in the village of Alford, Strathdon, Aberdeenshire, the second of three children of Peter Murray (1833-1926), carpenter and land steward, and his wife, Margaret Robbie (1838-1868). Peter Murray had a passion for reading, a reputation for composing pointed rhymes in the vernacular, and a fine collection of geological specimens; his son -- surveyor, civil engineer, and poet -- combined his father's artistic and practical interests. Charles Murray completed his elementary education at the local Gallowhill School. Later he looked back with gratitude on his schooldays: 'I was raised upon Ramsay, Fergusson and Burns, and the old Scots, and all my life as a boy I was taught to look for quaint phrases, out of the way expressions and to study and delight in the original characters of the countryside. (Murray, 'Dinner')' In his teens he began to write Scots verse. Like Thomas Hardy, the young Murray was in touch with a rich folk music tradition, playing with a 'strong bow-han' for dancing in Alford (Murray, letter to Alexander Mackie). Just after the turn of the century he corresponded with Gavin Greig, supplying information and material for what was to become the great Greig-Duncan folk-song collection. 
After being apprenticed at Walker and Beattie, Aberdeen, surveyors and civil engineers, from 1881 to 1887, Murray left for South Africa in 1888, working first in an architecture and engineering practice. In 1895 he married Cape Town-born Edith Emma Rogers (1871-1946). After a period managing goldmines, Murray served in the South African War. Entry to public service followed, and his advancement was rapid: deputy inspector of mines for the Transvaal in 1901, by 1910 he was secretary for public works, Union of South Africa. 
Murray's poems began to appear in print only after his departure for South Africa; significantly he first published in W. E. Henley's 'Scots Observer', a periodical which reflected the progressive literary tastes, imperialist sympathies, and Scottish cultural interests of its editor and his associates. These included Stevenson and James Logie Robertson (Hugh Haliburton), important figures in the revival of the vernacular poetic tradition. Like Kipling, Henley's most celebrated contributor, the vernacularists reinvigorated a stale poetic diction by drawing on the energies of the colloquial and the demotic. Apart from the twelve copies of 'A Handful of Heather' printed for friends in 1893, Murray's poems first appeared in book form in the 1900 'Hamewith' (Wyllie, Aberdeen). Despite its success, Murray had difficulty finding a larger publisher willing to undertake a revised and enlarged edition. Ironically, the expanded 'Hamewith' (Constable & Co., Edinburgh and London, 1909) was an immediate success. It consisted of forty-five poems, all but two in a Scots based on the dialect of his native north-east. Murray was convinced that he had exhausted his creative powers, but the First World War provided fresh stimulus, and 'A Sough o' War' (1917) contains some of his best work. The only other collection published in his lifetime was 'In the Country Places' (1920). A collected edition, 'Hamewith and other Poems', followed in 1927; 'Hamewith: the Complete Poems' (1979) included the uncollected work published as 'Last Poems' (1969). Fresh impressions of 'Hamewith' appeared throughout the 1930s and 1940s. Murray was awarded an honorary LLD by the University of Aberdeen in 1920 for his services to the vernacular. 
For young writers between the wars the future seemed to lie with the experimental, the metropolitan, and with a radical new political order of left or right: Murray, a best-seller, an 'amateur', an imperialist, and a north-east Scot, came to symbolize all that was reactionary. The modernism of C. M. Grieve (Hugh MacDiarmid) and his allies now seems more a cul-de-sac than a high road to the future, and in a Europe of the regions, Murray's regional affiliations seem contemporary again -- for his poetry communicates above all a vivid sense of the distinctive life and character of north-east Scotland. His work is not merely descriptive, however, and its significance is by no means confined to his native region. Several poems, including 'The Whistle' -- long his best known -- show the impact of the forces of cultural standardization on local speech and traditional ways. Rural life is not depicted nostalgically, however: in 'The Antiquary' the past is associated with superstition and cruelty, while in 'The Packman' social change is celebrated in the pedlar's rise to prosperity. Despite their patriotic sentiments, several of Murray's war poems convey the traditional peasant sense that war is an irrelevance, while the bleakly poignant 'When will the war be by' offers none of the conventional consolations for a girl's loss of her soldier-lover. 'Gin i was God' is a powerfully succinct and sardonic expression of post-war disillusionment. 
Murray was created CMG in 1922 for services to the Union of South Africa, and retired in 1924. He spent his last years in the north-east at his home, The Lythe, Banchory, Kincardineshire, dying there on 12 April 1941. Three days later his remains were cremated in Aberdeen. He was survived by his wife, son, and two daughters. 
Murray's poetry demonstrated that the vernacular was still vigorous, and inspired other writers to explore the literary potentialities of contemporary spoken Scots. The continuing availability of Scots as a medium for serious poetry owes much to Murray's efforts. Despite attacks from the late 1920s onwards by Hugh MacDiarmid and his Scottish Renaissance allies, who identified Murray with the outdated tendencies he had helped to defeat, his work continued to be popular, especially in the north-east, until after the Second World War. Though closely related to the Doric of the north-east, Murray's Scots is an artful literary construct; and, far from being the naive amateur of letters depicted in some literary histories, Murray was a dedicated craftsman who constantly revised and polished his work. His 'Complete Poems', edited by Nan Shepherd, appeared in 1979. 


@@@@@


doc= 57013


MacLeod, Dame Flora Louisa Cecilia (1878-1976), chief of clan MacLeod, was born on 3 February 1878 at 12 Downing Street, Westminster, London, the elder of the two daughters of Sir Reginald MacLeod of MacLeod (1847-1935), twenty-seventh chief, and his wife, Agnes Mary Cecilia (died 1921), daughter of Sir Stafford Northcote, chancellor of the exchequer. Her younger sister was Olive Susan Miranda Temple (1880-1936). Flora was born at the chancellor's official residence, her mother having returned there for the birth. Her early years were spent in London before moving to Edinburgh when her father was under-secretary for Scotland. Agnes MacLeod was an invalid for thirty-two years, and partially blind, but as a child Flora led an active life, playing croquet and cricket and displaying a fondness for music: she played the viola and piano and performed with the Edinburgh Ladies' Orchestra. Her interest in politics and literary matters was stimulated by her father, who was accustomed to play intellectual games with his family and guests. In 1896 she was presented at Buckingham Palace. She spent the summer of 1904 in India with her aunt Alice Northcote, and learned some Hindustani as she could not bear not to be able to ask for what she wanted. 
Flora married on 5 June 1901 Hubert (1870-1933), the ninth son and tenth child of John Walter (1818-1894), chief proprietor of 'The Times', and his second wife, Flora MacNabb. They had two daughters: Alice (1902-1980) and Joan (1905-1977). In 1907 Flora accompanied her husband to Brussels when he was a correspondent for 'The Times'; her language skills enabled her to assist him (notably she sent the telegram stating that Belgium had taken the Congo, as Hubert was in the press gallery at Westminster at the time), and two years later they moved on a posting to Berlin. In 1914 she accompanied her father to Canada and the USA. He lived with Flora after her mother died, and she acted as his hostess on the four annual visits to Dunvegan. 
The family lived first in Devonshire Terrace, moving in 1916 to 19 Cheyne Place, Chelsea. The marriage was not particularly happy, as Flora was far more able and ambitious than Hubert, although he was known as a sparkling raconteur. During the First World War, Flora served as a Voluntary Aid Detachment nurse and in the infant welfare service. She was chairman of Chelsea welfare service, medical secretary of a school in Battersea, and secretary of Chelsea war savings committee. She also became involved in local politics, being asked by Sir Samuel Hoare MP to chair a women's auxiliary branch, and she was one of six women elected to Chelsea borough council. She was a founding member of Chelsea Housing Improvement Society and later chairman of the Chelsea branch of the League of Nations. From 1921 she spent more time on Skye and became aware of the harsh living conditions for the local people. She started an egg depot in Dunvegan and a tweed industry among settlers from the outer isles in Portnalong. In 1929 she was elected a district councillor for Skye, and was co-opted onto the education and public health committees of Inverness county council and of the county nursing association. By 1931 Flora had given up her work in Chelsea and was committed to Skye. She had been brought up as an episcopalian but now joined the Church of Scotland. In 1932 she was elected county councillor for Bracadale. 
In 1929 Flora resumed her maiden name, and on her father's death in 1935 she succeeded to the chiefship of clan MacLeod as well as to the estate of Dunvegan and Dunvegan Castle. This was in accordance with the terms of the entail stating that should the male line fail, the estate should pass to the eldest daughter of the last chief. The lord Lyon approved her change of name to MacLeod of MacLeod in 1935. She was accepted as chief by the Clan MacLeod Society in 1936 and in the following year met 200 clansmen in Edinburgh, welcoming some 300 overseas clansmen at the castle in 1937 as part of the coronation celebrations. A serious fire destroyed the south wing of the castle in 1938, but swift action by local people saved its treasures and the rebuilding programme, completed by Christmas 1940, incorporated some modernization. 
During the Second World War, Flora offered the castle for the rehabilitation of wounded servicemen but it was not accepted, as Skye was part of the exclusion zone. She was, however, able to entertain many MacLeod servicemen on leave, and wrote to many others held as prisoners of war. A branch of the Home Guard was formed, and Flora was responsible for an emergency store of food in the castle, to be distributed locally in the event of a German invasion. Flora's elder daughter, Alice, married to Archie MacNab, changed her name to MacLeod in 1943 as she was Flora's heir; however, it was discovered that the entail could easily be broken, and this was done in favour of Flora's second grandson, John, son of Joan and Robert Wolrige Gordon (whereupon the MacNabs reverted to their original name). 
After the war Flora laboured to boost tourism on Skye; she joined the Scottish Tourist Board in 1950 and worked with Major Iain Hilleary to set up Skye Week in late May to extend the tourist season. She made several high-profile visits to Canada and the USA, founding clan societies and generating publicity for tourism. These contacts proved useful when, shortly after her return from the USA in 1953, the roof of Dunvegan Castle was found to be in a very bad condition and an American Dunvegan foundation was set up to help raise money for repairs. Also in 1953 she became DBE. Flora then departed for Australia and New Zealand, where again she founded several clan societies, bringing all these together as a worldwide clan organization. This became the most important thing in her life -- and became her memorial. 
To celebrate the coming of age of her twin grandsons, John and Patrick, in August 1956 Flora laid on a generous hospitality programme, coinciding with the first clan parliament and a lunch for Elizabeth II and representatives of the distant clan societies. She featured in several television documentaries, and in 1967 portrayed her ancestor in a BBC film about Boswell and Johnson. She continued to travel abroad almost every year, and in the 1960s accompanied Peter Howard, leader of Moral Re-Armament. These tours were interrupted briefly by a spell in hospital following a car accident. In 1965 she made over the castle and estate to John, her heir, but the castle remained her home, where she was cared for by her daughter Joan. By 1972 this had become too difficult for her and she moved to Ythan Lodge in Aberdeenshire, although still living in London for much of the year. On 4 November 1976 she took her usual daily walk from Ythan, and having reached the far point she sat down on a bank and died. 


