@@@@@


doc= 57016


White, Benjamin (c.1725-1794), publisher, was the son of John White (1688-1758), barrister, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Holt (1693-1739). He was a younger brother of Gilbert White (1720-1793), author of the celebrated 'Natural History of Selborne' (1789). Ben, as he was known, introduced Gilbert to Thomas Pennant and Daines Barrington to whom the book's component letters were written, and he edited and published the book. During their lifetimes Ben was much better known than his brother. White was raised with his six brothers and four sisters at The Wakes, Selborne, the family house which Gilbert, who was the eldest brother, later took over. Their father was not rich. One brother and two sisters died young. With his brother Thomas Holt White (1724-1797) he attended school at Bishop's Waltham, Hampshire. Unlike their brothers the two pursued business careers in London, Thomas as an ironmonger, Ben as a publisher, and became the wealthiest of them; this enabled the family later to refurbish and extend The Wakes. By October 1745 White was working for John Whiston (1711-1780), a respected publisher and bookseller at Horace's Head, at the junction of Fleet Street and the Strand. Whiston was related to Thomas Barker, of Rutland, who was Gilbert White's brother-in-law. Ben White was made a partner in 1756, and in 1765 he took the firm over. His valuable assistant, Henry Payne, became linked with White's name: about 1773 'White and Payne' offered $100 for the 2000 volume library of the deceased theologian Dr Matthew Horbery. Soon after, however, Payne set up a rival firm in Pall Mall on borrowed credit, became bankrupt, and died. 
White produced a wide range of titles, some of great beauty. Horace's Head became a meeting place for naturalists, and, as was customary, was used as a poste restante, in 1775 by Gilbert White's correspondent Thomas Pennant, whose books White published, and by others. White's range of titles is indicated in his advertisement at the end of J. Ellis and D. C. Solander's 'Natural History of the Zoophytes' (1786), which he published. They included Mark Catesby's 'Natural History of Carolina' in two volumes, which perhaps inspired Audubon; an edition of Philip Miller's 'Gardener's Dictionary'; the Revd John Lightfoot's 'Flora Scotica' (2 vols.); and eight books by Pennant. White's brother John (1727-1781), named after their father, became chaplain to the forces in Gibraltar. His book on the local fauna was rejected by White, partly on Gilbert's advice, as not commercially viable, and most of the manuscript is lost. 
White married Ann Yaldeen, daughter of the vicar of Newton Valence, next to Selborne, and the couple had a home in South Lambeth, as did Thomas White. The family remained close and Gilbert stayed with one or both of the brothers in London most springs for a month or so: on 26 June 1791 fifteen Whites and several others dined at White's home. On 12 July that year White commenced razing and rebuilding Horace's Head, but the following year he retired permanently to Mareland House, near Bentley, in north-east Hampshire. 
By 1785 White's son, also Benjamin, was prominent in the business, and he handled the final stages of production of 'Selborne'. The firm was renamed Benjamin White & Son, and under that name published Ellis and Solander's 'Zoophytes'. By the time White finally retired in 1792 his other son, another John, had also joined the firm. The partnership continued to sell second-hand books and in 1813 the firm, by then White, Cochrane & Co., published with others probably the finest and most complete edition of 'Selborne': in 1993 a facsimile of it commemorated the bicentenary of Gilbert White's death. 
Ben White died a wealthy man on 9 March 1794 at Mareland; his name was passed to both his son and his grandson. White never knew the irony that, from about 1810, among all his firm's memorable titles the sparsely illustrated, much edited, rambling diary of his own brother would be its best-seller, and that it would remain in print throughout the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 57017


Jackson, John (1881-1952), classical scholar, was born at Great Asby in Westmorland on 17 October 1881, the first son of Robert Jackson, farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth Austin. He was educated at Appleby grammar school and in 1899 matriculated as a Hastings exhibitioner at Queen's College, Oxford, where the tutors included Albert Curtis Clark and Thomas William Allen. A first class in classical honour moderations (1901) was followed by a third in Greats (1903), but he won the Ireland scholarship in 1901 and was elected Craven fellow in 1903. His lack of success in finals did not prevent him from being elected to a fellowship at Magdalen College in 1903; the competition was stiff, as the other candidates included Alexander Dunlop Lindsay. However, his career did not develop as expected, since he vacated his fellowship at the end of his probationary year. From the notebooks of the president, Herbert Warren, it appears that Jackson's behaviour had caused unfavourable comment, leading to a complaint by the college staff to the president, who issued a warning to Jackson, evidently without achieving the desired effect. 
Jackson's fellowship was not confirmed and he went to live on the family farm at Caldbeck in Cumberland, where he spent almost all the rest of his life. Although most of his energy was devoted to the farm, and he lacked access to a library, his publications were substantial. They included expert translations of Latin and Greek authors -- the 'Annals' of Tacitus in the 'Loeb Classical Library' was particularly well received -- and articles in the learned journals on the textual criticism of a wide range of Greek authors. His most important work is a posthumous publication which saw the light of day largely thanks to the efforts of Eduard Fraenkel, 'Marginalia scaenica', issued by the Oxford Press in 1955. It contains numerous discussions of difficult passages in Greek tragedy and Aristophanes, and proves that Jackson was a textual critic of the highest order, who would certainly have made an even greater name for himself had he been able to follow a more normal career. He died at the Royal Infirmary, Sheffield, of peritonitis on 20 November 1952, and his ashes were interred at Caldbeck. 


@@@@@


doc= 57018


Sir Tatton Sykes, fifth baronet (1826-1913), may be attributed to his barbaric upbringing. He was born on 13 March 1826, and on his father's death inherited both the baronetcy and the largest estate (some 34,000 acres) in the East Riding of Yorkshire. His wealth increased as he raised rents during the prosperity of the 1870s, but when depression took hold in the agricultural sector, he became a hated figure among his tenant farmers and received death threats. He re-established the Sledmere stud, which had been dispersed on his father's death. He was a more successful breeder than his father, and produced two Derby winners, Doncaster (1873) and Spearmint (1906), and Mimi, winner of the One Thousand Guineas and the Oaks in 1891. 


@@@@@


doc= 57022


Adler, Henrietta (1868-1950), social worker and Jewish political activist, was born in London on 1 December 1868, the elder daughter of Rabbi Dr Hermann Adler (1839-1911) and his wife, Rachel Joseph (died 1912). Her father was the son of Dr Nathan Marcus Adler, chief rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregations of the British Empire. From 1879 Hermann was delegate chief rabbi, acting for his father in the many duties for which the office called, and in 1891, following Nathan's death the previous year, Hermann became chief rabbi in his own right. Nettie Adler thus grew up in an Orthodox Jewish milieu; she remained loyal to this upbringing throughout her life. However, her relationship with her father was rarely happy. Educated privately, Nettie rebelled against Hermann's attempts to dictate to her the terms on which her life was to be led. In 1894 she fell in love with Isaac Friedner, a synagogue official in Liverpool. Hermann considered Friedner to be unworthy of his daughter, forbade the match, and intercepted their correspondence. Nettie never married. In politics Hermann was a staunch tory. Nettie identified with the Liberal Party, a move which Hermann viewed as nothing less than an act of familial treachery. During the London county council (LCC) elections of March 1904, when Nettie (as a good Liberal) campaigned against state aid for denominational schools, Hermann let it be known publicly that she was working without his authority or consent. 
In common with many middle-class women in Victorian England, Nettie Adler was drawn into social and educational work among the poor, specifically, in her case, among the Jewish and non-Jewish slum-dwellers of London's East End. More or less automatically she joined the visiting committee of the Jewish Board of Guardians and the Jewish religious education board. But her belief that charity would not by itself alleviate the consequences of poverty drew her also to the world of local government in the capital. She joined the Progressive Party -- in effect the liberal party in London municipal politics -- and quickly rose in its ranks, becoming a school manager under the auspices of the London school board, and from 1905 until 1910 serving as a co-opted member of the LCC's education committee. 
At its inception (1889) women had not been expressly excluded from membership of the LCC; the prohibition came about as a result of subsequent legal action, which was reversed by the Liberal government in 1908. Nettie was at once adopted by the Progressives in the LCC's Central Hackney division. At the LCC elections of March 1910 she brought into the division a glittering array of Liberal personalities, including the Jews Herbert Samuel and Rufus Isaacs and the non-Jews Sidney Webb and Sir J. W. Benn, the leader of the Progressives at county hall. Nettie made no secret of her Jewish identity, refusing to campaign on the Saturday of the poll, the Jewish sabbath. She won a comfortable majority, thus becoming one of the first two women (the other was Susan Lawrence, a Municipal Reformer) to sit as of right on the LCC, of which she was deputy chairman in 1922-3. 
Nettie's tenure of the Central Hackney division provided the springboard for a remarkable career focused not merely on London government but also on the more general problems of poverty, especially among children and young people. As a justice of the peace attached to juvenile courts she became an internationally acknowledged authority on juvenile delinquency. She accepted membership of a number of important inquiries into aspects of child poverty in the inter-war period, and served on the committee on wage-earning children, of which she was joint honorary secretary from 1899 until 1946, the departmental committee on charity collections (1925-7), and the advisory committee of the Board of Trade on juvenile labour exchanges. The high regard in which she was held in Whitehall was reflected in her appointment as a commander in the Order of the British Empire in 1934. 
Nettie's political career was, however, blighted in three respects. As a Progressive she suffered as a result of the decline in Liberal fortunes after 1918. As a Jewess she was a victim of the resurgence of antisemitism in Britain after the First World War. She also suffered from poor health. In 1925, as a protest against the anti-Jewish prejudices of the Municipal Reformers (that is, the Conservatives) on the LCC, she declined to continue the arrangement by which she had 'shared' the Central Hackney division with a member of that party, and lost the seat. In 1928 she won it back in spite of a Municipal Reform campaign in which her Jewish identity was made into a major issue at the polls. In 1931 she announced that she would not fight the seat again. 
A member of the governing bodies of numerous Jewish and non-Jewish charities and educational institutions, Nettie Adler was also a prolific writer on social themes, publishing many articles and pamphlets on children as wage earners, working women, the treatment of young offenders, and the juvenile court system. She wrote for the 'Times Literary Supplement' and contributed the chapter entitled 'Jewish life and labour in east London' to the 'New Survey of London Life and Labour', edited by Hubert Llewellyn Smith and published in 1934. She died of heart failure at Glazbury Nursing Home, 20 Glazbury Road, London, on 15 April 1950. 


@@@@@


doc= 57023


Schechter, Solomon (1847x50-1915), Hebraist, was born in the small Romanian town of Focsani, the son of Isaac and Hayya (Chaia) Schechter, Jews of Russian origin. He was given the Hebrew name Shneur Zalman, after the founder of the Hasidic sect of Lubavitch or Habad, to which Isaac, the ritual slaughterer (German 'Schachter'), belonged and which stressed study and intellect as well as mystical communion with God. 
One of a family of five boys and one girl, young Shneur Zalman (or Solomon, as he styled himself when he moved westwards) was a physically powerful and intellectually brilliant red-head with blue eyes, who later claimed that he had inherited passion and energy from his mother while attributing his religious and scholarly tendencies to the influence of his father, who had been his first teacher. The other pervading influences were those of the eastern European 'shtetl' (small-town Jewry), the Hasidic 'shtiebel' (small and informal place of worship), and the 'yeshivah' (academy for rabbinic studies). In addition, he obtained access, apparently through a local 'maskil' (modernist intellectual), to books and articles that broadened his mind, at least within the sphere of Jewish scholarship, and led him to seek further education elsewhere. As a teenager he moved on to Lemberg (Lwow), the capital of the Austro-Hungarian province of eastern Galicia, and studied with the outstanding Talmudist and interpreter of Jewish religious law Rabbi Joseph Saul Nathanson. The master was critical of Hasidism, opposed 'progressive' Judaism but without encouraging communal separatism, and made lenient rulings when circumstances demanded them. Schechter, still religiously and educationally unsure of himself, returned to his native town for a while, continued his studies, and even contracted an unhappy marriage. 
The combination of a commitment to Judaism, a passion for broader learning, and an undoubtedly radical streak led Schechter to the institutions of Jewish learning in central Europe that were committed to a more historical and scientific approach. Having earlier divorced his wife (whose name is unknown) after only a year of marriage, he abandoned the 'shtetl' for ever (physically if never altogether spiritually) and entered the Vienna rabbinical seminary in 1875. The mission of its founder, Adolf (Aaron) Jellinek, was to spread scientific Jewish learning, a moderately liberal interpretation of Judaism, and a love of Jewish community and culture. As well as coming under Jellinek's influence, Schechter acquired a historical approach to the study of rabbinic literature from Isaac Hirsch Weiss, and the ability to subject 'midrash' to text criticism and modern exegesis from Meir Friedmann (Ish-Shalom), both teachers more sympathetic to Jewish tradition and the continuity of the Hebrew language than Jellinek himself. It was indeed perhaps because of their similar background, restlessness, and religious outlook that Friedmann was so dear to Schechter in his Vienna years. While in that city, Schechter improved his general education with some university courses, made a living as a Hebrew teacher, and obtained rabbinical ordination. 
By 1879 Schechter was ready to travel further along the road of Westernization, this time via the Hochschule fur die Wissenschaft des Judentums, founded in Berlin in 1872. Though not officially aligned, the 'Hochschule' was certainly associated more with progressive than with orthodox trends. Indeed, at this stage of his development Schechter was less enchanted with his background than he would later lead us to believe, and the only publications to have come from him by that time had been two vitriolic and pseudonymous satires on Hasidism, for which he later in life atoned with an essay that offered a more favourable assessment of that movement. Now available to him in Berlin, in addition to his own students, were personally orthodox teachers, such as the critical Talmudist Israel Lewy, at the 'Hochschule', and more clinical and sceptical scholars such as the renowned bibliographer Moritz Steinschneider. Lewy inspired Schechter with his text-critical and philological analysis of rabbinic literature and encouraged him to compare manuscript variants and alternative recensions. At the personal level, Schechter was closest to Pinkus Fritz Frankl. This centrist rabbi and scholar whom he had known in Vienna was now Abraham Geiger's successor in Berlin and a teacher at the 'Hochschule', and Schechter found lodgings in his home. Perhaps under Frankl's influence, he deepened his love of scientific Jewish studies, retained an attachment to traditional observance if not to orthodoxy, and nurtured a growing animosity to the kind of German intellectual antisemitism that he encountered when attending university lectures. He had still to find his ideal milieu, and his students in Berlin, Claude Montefiore from England and Richard Gottheil from the USA, both of them religiously liberal, beckoned to him to exchange the Germany that he was finding politically and socially uncomfortable for a potentially more attractive Anglo-Saxon environment. 
Schechter arrived in England in 1882 as Montefiore's private tutor, destined to spend twenty years there, but always subsidized by the generosity of his English pupil. Though he did not find in the Anglo-Jewish community the appreciation of Jewish culture that he was anxiously seeking, Schechter taught and inspired a group of leading Jewish intellectuals in London called the Wanderers, read widely in English, and began to master that language. Though unthreatened by the relaxed and inclusive orthodoxy championed by Chief Rabbi Nathan Marcus Adler and his son and successor Hermann Adler, Schechter never took to the centralized bureaucracy of the chief rabbinate and the United Synagogue, nor to the Anglo-Jewish cleric, whom he regarded as a mere flunkey or religious functionary with little scholarly achievement. But he did enjoy England's liberal environment, and the Anglo-Jewish establishment accepted him as one of its own despite his biting criticisms. The close company in which he best expressed himself, the Wanderers, was dominated by the writer Israel Zangwill, the critic Joseph Jacobs, and Schechter himself. Other participants were the journalist Asher Myers, the scholar Israel Abrahams, and the historian Lucien Wolf. He developed a close relationship with Herbert and Susie Bentwich, whose daughter, Margery, later recalled his learning, intensity, and warmth: 'Schechter was the ideal of an inspired scholar. The fastidious cavilled at his wildness. He would tramp the room like a caged lion, and roar at his own sallies. His wide mouth would almost eat you; on the other hand, his blue eyes had such a childlike expression, his hand and voice such a warmth, that every child loved him, and their acme of happiness was to run errands for him. (M. Bentwich, 'Lilian Ruth Friedlander: a Biography', 1957, 10)' While in England, Schechter established his scholarly credentials by the critical study of Hebrew manuscripts in the rich collections of that country, as well as in other parts of Europe; by his trail-blazing publication of first scientific editions of such works as 'Avot de Rabbi Nathan' and of more general articles in the newly founded 'Jewish Quarterly Review'; by teaching at Jews' College; and by contributing learned items to the 'Jewish Chronicle'. Given his character and opinions, he inevitably became involved in controversies with other scholars, and the press reverberated with the accusations that he and Solomon Marcus Schiller-Szinnesy, who taught Talmudic and rabbinic literature at Cambridge, unashamedly hurled at each other. His marriage in June 1887 to Mathilde Roth of Breslau (born in Guttentag, Silesia, in 1857; died in New York in 1924) brought him the kind of personal and domestic security, affection, and support that certainly smoothed some of the rougher edges of his personality and toned down at least the religious side of his radicalism. It also brought him a daughter, Ruth, and a son, Frank, both born in London, and a second daughter, Amy, born later in Cambridge. Mathilde was a cultured, literate woman who undoubtedly assisted her husband with his English, encouraged his ambitions, and built a hospitable home in which they could entertain colleagues, visitors, and students. But Schechter had still not found his professional ideal and his next venture, lasting from 1890 to 1902, was to be in the rarefied academic atmosphere of Cambridge. 
If an intensely scholastic environment in which to continue his textual studies was all that he was seeking, Schechter might well have remained in Cambridge for the rest of his life, since it was there that he made his most important contributions to Jewish learning. He prepared for the 'Jewish Quarterly Review' descriptions of those manuscripts that his predecessor, Schiller-Szinessy, had not included in his catalogue of the Hebraica at Cambridge University Library. Editions of 'Aggadat shir ha-shirim' (1896) and 'Midrash ha-Gadol' (1902) were published in Cambridge, and he also undertook the kind of Jewish theological summaries that Montefiore desperately wanted and that were ultimately included in his collections of essays. He also admired and sought to emulate the text-critical work done by Oxford and Cambridge classicists and to promote its adoption in the field of rabbinic scholarship. With the Anglo-Jewish cleric Simeon Singer he had in 1896 published some twelfth-century 'Talmud' fragments that he recognized as important for both their content and the new source of such early material to which they had pointed. His greatest and most original coup was his expedition to Cairo in 1896-7 in search of the origin of precisely such medieval Hebrew fragments and his return to Cambridge with what turned out to be 140,000 items of inestimable significance for rewriting the Jewish social, literary, and religious history of the medieval Mediterranean. 
Schechter himself has little to say about what precisely inspired him to travel to Cairo in the winter of 1896-7 in search of manuscripts, and to arrange for the costs to be privately met by Charles Taylor, master of St John's College, Cambridge. The undertaking was clearly important enough for him to cancel his projected participation in Herbert Bentwich's Zionist pilgrimage to the land of Israel with the Maccabeans. Undoubtedly, the kind of medieval Hebrew, Aramaic, and Arabic fragments that S. A. Wertheimer and G. Chester had sent to Oxford and Cambridge, and that had appeared in other centres of learning in the previous few years, and the fact that some of them had been written in Cairo had made him consider the possibility of further discoveries. It is equally likely that the success of the Anglo-Jewish lawyer Elkan Nathan Adler in bringing home a sack of palaeographical treasures from the Egyptian capital a year before, during his second visit there, had not gone unnoticed. Surely, however, Schechter's excitement about a Ben Sira ('Ecclesiasticus') fragment brought to him by his Scottish Presbyterian friends Agnes Lewis and Margaret Gibson, and his determination to find more such early medieval manuscripts of the Hebrew text preserved by the Jews, were major factors in his decision to travel east. He had resolved to steal a march on Oxford in this connection and to refute D. S. Margoliouth's theory that the authentic voice of Ben Sira was to be found in the Greek and Syriac texts and not among the Jews. 
As a result of Schechter's imagination and enthusiasm, as well as of his erudition, the recovery of the 'hoard of Hebrew manuscripts' from the genizah (repository) of the Ben-Ezra Synagogue in medieval Cairo became a reality. His energy and single-mindedness ensured that the major areas represented in that collection began to be carefully investigated before he left Cambridge in 1902. Not only did a number of original studies result from his genizah discoveries; the example he set inspired the composition of hundreds of books and thousands of articles in the century following his Cairo expedition. He ushered in a new age of learning about Jews and Judaism as they existed in the medieval Orient, his discoveries making an impact no less than the Dead Sea scrolls fifty years later. What has become famous as the Cairo genizah shed light not only on what Jewish scholars wrote in the biblical and rabbinic fields but also on the daily lives and relations of Jews, Christians, and Muslims in the early centuries of the second millennium. He was promoted from lecturer to reader in 1892 and made a DLitt in 1898. 
But to imagine that Schechter ever felt fully at home in the Cambridge courts, cloisters, and combination rooms is to underestimate the gap that still existed between such an exotic personality and his conventional surroundings. It is true that the 'Bible' scholar William Robertson Smith had supported his appointment as university lecturer and his acceptance as a member of Christ's College. In addition, many leading members of the university, such as Charles Taylor, master of St John's College, and Francis Jenkinson, Robertson Smith's successor as university librarian, enjoyed his wit, valued his remarkable mind, and admired his prodigious learning. Nevertheless, his main friendships were with those outside the established academic society, such as Margaret Gibson and Agnes Lewis, and the literary raconteur and librarian Erik Magnusson. His warmest friendship was undoubtedly the one he enjoyed with the pioneering anthropologist James Frazer, a fellow of Trinity for most of his professional life who never obtained a tenured teaching appointment at Cambridge. On their many afternoon walks, Frazer and Schechter apparently exchanged complaints about the Cambridge establishment and its conventionality, but it would not be accurate to lay the entire blame on the university for the further failure of Schechter to settle down fully. Having gradually abandoned intensely religious institutions for enthusiastically academic ones, he had somewhere lost the close Jewish connection and needed to return to a milieu in which he could combine the best of both traditions, train a future generation of intellectual rabbis, and bring religious advantage to his three children. They were having to be brought up in a tiny Jewish community where synagogue services were held only during term time, where sabbath could be a lonely affair except when visitors came from London, where observing the Jewish dietary laws was not easy, and where apostate Jews were more common than observant ones. 
So it was that Schechter's final move was to America, to the Jewish community that had for a number of years signalled to him that it required his ideas, industry, and fire. There he re-established the Jewish Theological Seminary as a scholarly and educational institution with a commitment to traditional Judaism, provided an intellectual powerhouse that propelled the conservative movement and its United Synagogue of America for about three-quarters of a century, and disseminated popular presentations of Jewish learning that were, by the time of his death in 1915, having a broad impact. He located a galaxy of scholarly stars for his new faculty and passed on to them some of his genizah finds for research and publication. After much thought about their interpretation, he published some remarkable religious tracts from the genizah in his 'Documents of Jewish Sectaries' (1910), including the first text of what was later identified among the Dead Sea scrolls as the Damascus document. He also published collections of lively, thoughtful, and sound essays on Jewish topics and supported the expanding Zionist movement and the growing use of Hebrew, while remaining uncomfortable about their secular aspects. It was not, however, easy for such a maverick personality to become a figure of authority and to weigh himself down with administrative burdens. He resented the failure of the Jewish Theological Seminary's supporters to create an adequate financial endowment and regretted that scientific Jewish scholarship was under-valued. His relations with colleagues, inside and outside that institution, were sometimes strained, and he eventually had to acknowledge the need to create not an umbrella Judaism to cover left and right -- one that truly represented the achievements and ideals of what he admiringly called 'Catholic Israel' -- but another denomination that was neither Orthodox nor Reform but conservative. It was not uncommon for Schechter in his American years to express frustration and a sense of failure; as Mel Scult has recently put it, 'the Seminary succeeded, but unfortunately Schechter did not know it' (Scult, 'Schechter's seminary', 89). 
For Schechter, learning meant application, depth, and accuracy, and he could not easily tolerate superficiality, ignorance, or philistinism. His family links were close and demanded love and loyalty, and he was generous and considerate to those in need. He made adjustments to his inherited religious commitment, perhaps in the light of his personal brilliance and independence of mind, without betraying its most central values. He had a respect for piety, an admiration for integrity, and a suspicion of the bureaucratic and clerical aspects of organized religion. He found it difficult to be anything but the magnetic personality he was, and it was perhaps for this reason that children warmed to him so easily. It has even been suggested that the many friendships he made with women, particularly unattached women, may be attributed to their intuitive feminine capacity for distinguishing the genuine from the pretentious. 
But Schechter was never the Cambridge gentleman. He made a noisy impact on company, was sloppy and unkempt in appearance, and was cruelly dismissive of the professional rabbinate. He quickly made and unmade friendships, and fellow scholars often attracted his outspoken derision. He regarded certain scholarly topics as his own and sometimes resented, or even prevented, encroachment on them by academic competitors, preferring to share them with a chosen few almost as an act of patronage. Absent-minded and volatile, radical and unpredictable (characteristics that undoubtedly left their impact on his children), Schechter was nevertheless desperately ambitious, and anxiously searched during most of his life for a milieu in which he could win total acceptance and on which he could exercise an authoritative influence. The paradox is that when he located it, he felt disappointed that it did not measure up to his standards of learning on the one hand and of radicalism on the other. 
Schechter died on 20 November 1915 in New York, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 57024


Abrahams, Sir Lionel Barnett (1869-1919), economist and civil servant, was born in London on 9 December 1869, the only son of Mordecai Abrahams, secretary to the Initiation Society. Educated at the City of London School and Balliol College, Oxford, where he was an exhibitioner between 1892 and 1896 and won the Arnold historical essay prize in 1894, he headed the civil service list in 1893, electing to join the India Office. Marriage to Lucy, daughter of N. S. Joseph, followed in 1896. They had one son. In 1898 Abrahams became secretary to the Indian currency committee, an appointment which brought him into close contact with Indian currency affairs during an eventful period of their history and with which he remained closely associated during the next two decades as assistant financial secretary at the India Office (1901), financial secretary (1902-11), and assistant under-secretary of state for India (1911-17). He also served on departmental committees on Indian railway administration and finance (1907-8) and west African finance (1912), and was a member of the Indian wheat committee (1915). 
Known to have been John Maynard Keynes's mentor on Indian finance, Abrahams is rarely spoken of outside the context of the economist's early career. Even the recognition accorded to him by the editor of Keynes's 'Collected Writings' as the 'moulder and manipulator of India's involved but efficient financial system' (p. 38) does inadequate justice to the wider significance of his contribution. Although the idea derived from David Ricardo, Abrahams was among the first consciously to implement the gold exchange standard, which enabled countries to settle their external accounts in major currencies, helping thereby to reduce their dependence on gold and expand world trade. India became a pioneer of this new system when the rupee was placed on it at the turn of the century, and during the next few years Abrahams perfected the type of management and intervention the gold exchange standard required to make its working mimic the gold standard. According to R. S. Sayers his contributions were also of 'high importance in the development of ideas on central banking', of which he was an early, if somewhat unconventional, exponent. Nor was he loath to advance unorthodox policies such as floating the rupee exchange rate to mitigate the impact of an unstable global environment on the Indian economy. Floating exchange rates too had few supporters when he proposed them in 1919. But both this idea and the gold exchange standard were adopted widely in later years. 
Sayers recalls Keynes going 'out of his way', while lecturing in Cambridge in 1928, 'to pay tribute to the perception and originality' of Lionel Abrahams. Others, including officials of the government he served with rare ability and imagination during a quarter-century spent at the India Office, and posterity, have however been less generous. His relative anonymity among historians of India too is a puzzle. An answer to this may lie partly in the somewhat technical nature of his achievements and the erroneous view that by the time of his death a few days before his fiftieth birthday they had been undone by the economic shocks of the First World War. 
Abrahams was created Companion of the Bath in 1908 and made Knight Commander of the Bath in 1915. The history and social and religious life of his community also engaged his interest. A member at one time of the Jewish Board of Guardians, he contributed to the 'Jewish Quarterly Review' and was the author of 'The Expulsion of the Jews from England in 1290'. He also wrote articles entitled 'The economic position and influence of Jews in England' and 'The exchequer of the Jews' for the 'Palgrave Dictionary of Political Economy'. He died at his home, 18 Porchester Terrace, Hyde Park, London, on 30 November 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 57027


Barraud, Herbert Rose (1844/5-1896), photographer, was born in London, the second of nine children and the eldest son of the artist Henry Barraud (bap. 1811, d. 1874) ['see under 'Barraud, William] and his wife, Anna Maria (died 1892), daughter of James Rose of St Clement Danes, London. He was educated at the Jesuit-run Stonyhurst College, his father having converted to Roman Catholicism. In 1871 he was working as a clerk, but little else is known of his early life. On 29 August 1876, at St Mary's Roman Catholic church, Clapham, he married Lucy Mary ('b'. 1844/5), daughter of Frederick Capes, solicitor. They had seven children. 
Barraud established his first photographic studio, Barraud and Jerrard, in mews near the family home at 96 Gloucester Place, London, in 1874. It is likely that he gained knowledge of the mechanics and potential of portrait photography from his father, who made extensive use of the medium in his work. An early publication by the Barraud and Jerrard Studio was 'The Medical Profession in All Countries' (1874), which for some time was mistakenly attributed to Henry Barraud. The names associated with the studio have also been confused (sometimes erroneously given as William Barraud). There is a further question surrounding the association of Herbert's studio in London with Barraud studios in Liverpool and Dublin: the Bold Street, Liverpool, and Dublin branches were operated separately by Herbert's brothers Francis and Philip. 
Herbert Barraud continued with his work in the medical field to create the ambitious 'Members of the International Medical Congress, London, 1881', a composite photograph of the 684 members of the seventh congress arranged in an impressive neo-Gothic tiered hall which, it has been suggested, is the interior of St James's Hall, Piccadilly. The photograph was published with a key by Bailliere, Tindall, and Cox and was available in two sizes -- 47 inches by 30 or 29 inches by 20. Ten years later he constructed and published another large-scale composite of members of the Seventh International Congress of Hygiene and Demography. 
Barraud hit his professional stride with the establishment of a studio at 263 Oxford Street in 1882. Warm, well decorated, spacious, and practical, the environment was created with the convenience of his sitters and the spectacle of the portrait sitting in mind. According to a contemporary account the view from the studio 'reminds you of that from Van Bosch's studio in Paris' ('Photographic News', Feb 1882). A lift alleviated the need to climb stairs, giving easy access to the purpose-built glass house constructed on the top floor to maximize natural light. Barraud charged half a guinea for a sitting, two proofs, and six carte-de-visite copies. For a guinea the sitter could have twenty-four copies in carte size. Most novel of the studio's equipment was a large sketch of a 'humorous countenance' positioned on a stand known as the 'laughing cure'. Shown to the sitter without warning at the time of making the exposure, it was used both to steady the gaze and to 'unlock the features' -- even of 'sulky and morose' children ('Photographic News', 16 Feb 1883, 100-01). 
Barraud is best-known for his series 'Men and Women of the Day' -- a chronicle, in both photographs and text, of eminent men and women across a range of fields of endeavour published annually between 1888 and 1891. These were often shot simply in front of a mottled or plain backdrop, most commonly head and shoulders or three-quarter length and sometimes employing simple props or furniture. Several of his female subjects, including the actress Mary Moore (Lady Wyndham; 'c'.1889), Ellen Terry (1888), Marion Bessie Terry ('c'.1891), and Lady Randolph Churchill ('c'.1889), appear with striking effect in front of the same oriental screen. The American singer Agnes Huntington ('c'.1890) appears in a sequined black dress and rests against what looks to be a frontier-style farm gate. Each has a concentrated intensity not uncommon in studio portraits of the day, but also a less frequently achieved immediacy of pose particularly evident in the hands. 
Other famous portraits by Barraud include that of Alfred, Lord Tennyson seated with a copy of Homer's 'Odyssey' in his lap ('c'.1888) and the remarkable portrait of Cardinal Newman ('c'.1888), which in gesture and crop resembles an example of twentieth-century portrait photography. Newman however wrote of his dislike of the image, particularly the focus on his threadbare coat. John Ruskin sat for Barraud twice, in 1882 at Herne Hill and in 1885 at his Oxford Street premises, and wrote praising his efforts. Barraud later used Ruskin's comments as a testimonial: 'they are the first photographs ever done of me that expressed what good or character there is in me for my own work; and as pure photography they seem to me to go as far as the art can at this day (and I do not believe it can ever do much better). (Ruskin to Barraud, 30 April 1882, 'The Works of John Ruskin', ed. E. T. Cook and A. Wedderburn, 1908, 34.562)' The London session shows Ruskin in various poses, one against a backdrop of outdoor scenery. This may have been a response to the sitter's earlier request that he be photographed 'in open light, for the sake of fair play to the Day' (ibid.), but it amused Ruskin, reminding him of the pose of 'young ladies and professional beauties' (ibid., 38.212). 
Barraud's Oxford Street studio went into rapid decline for reasons which have not been fully established. The firm became a limited company in 1892, the year in which financial difficulties forced Barraud to take employment as manager of the studios of Mayall & Co., at 164 New Bond Street. Family tradition suggests that though generous, his means fell somewhat short of his extravagant lifestyle. By 1887, despite running a prestigious and well-known London studio, he struggled to repay $400 originally raised to help the widow of his brother, the scenic artist Mark Barraud (1848-1887). Having occupied a large house at 12 Dorset Square, Marylebone, London, and spending his summers at Guildford in Surrey, he was latterly resident at Derry Downs, St Mary Cray, Kent. He died there on 24 November 1896, of gallstones and perforation of the bowel, aged fifty-one. 


@@@@@


doc= 57028


Equiano, Olaudah (c.1745-1797), author and slavery abolitionist, was in the words of his own 'Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano' born 'in a charming vale, named Essaka', most likely in present-day Nigeria. However, at his baptism in 1759 he was described as a native of Carolina, refined to South Carolina on the muster roll of the ship 'Racehorse' on 31 May 1773. 
In his 'Narrative', Equiano described his father as a local Igbo eminence and slave owner. Kidnapped about the age of eight, along with his sister, by slave raiders, Equiano was sold and resold on the journey to the coast, travelling for months before finally being sold onto an Atlantic slave ship. Whether his account of enslavement and of the Atlantic crossing, written more than thirty years later, was a record of his own experiences or was composed from the recollections of enslaved Africans whom he met in America, Europe, or at sea, it forms perhaps the classic account of the experience that was the fate of millions of Africans in the era of Atlantic slavery. Equiano describes how he made landfall in Barbados, but was quickly moved on to Virginia, before being sold again to an English naval officer, Michael Pascal. Renamed Gustavus Vassa (the name he used throughout most of his life), Equiano travelled to England in 1754. For seven years he served on British ships as Pascal's slave, participating in or witnessing several battles of the Seven Years' War. Fellow sailors taught him to read and write and to understand mathematics. He was also converted to Christianity, reading the 'Bible' regularly on board ship. Baptized at St Margaret's Church, Westminster, on 9 February 1759, he struggled with his faith until finally opting for Methodism. 
By the end of the conflict Equiano had attained the rank of able seaman. Despite thinking he had been freed by Pascal, Equiano found himself re-enslaved in London in 1762 and shipped to the West Indies. For four years he worked for a Montserrat-based Quaker, sailing between the islands and North America, but also trading to his own advantage as he did so. Ever alert to commercial openings, Equiano accumulated cash and in 1766 bought his own freedom. He returned to London as a free man, working as a hairdresser before returning to sea on voyages to the Mediterranean, Turkey, and, in 1772, on Constantine Phipps's expedition to the Arctic (along with the young Horatio Nelson). In 1776-7 he was employed in an abortive plantation settlement on the Mosquito Coast. His account of those adventures and other maritime experiences (shipwrecked in the Bahamas in 1767, for example) became part picaresque travel account. Tired of the sea and wary of the dangers posed to Africans in an Atlantic world dominated by slavery, Equiano again settled in London between 1777 and 1784, working as a servant. He considered returning to Africa as a missionary but was rebuffed by the Church of England. In 1784 he went back to sea, when his visits to Philadelphia proved a turning point. There he visited recently established 'African' schools and churches, and made contact with local Quakers. He was now known to Quakers on both sides of the Atlantic. When, in the mid-1780s, the problems of London's black poor became acute (they were mainly free black people who had retreated from North America with the defeated British in 1783), Equiano was ideally placed to act as go-between. Appointed commissary to the ill-fated Sierra Leone scheme (to encourage resettlement there), Equiano proved an unrepentant defender of black interests among settlers on the ships. He was dismissed from his post (a move which almost certainly saved his life), and the expedition sailed to a disastrous fate. Arguments in the press about Equiano's role in the Sierra Leone scheme brought his name to the public's attention. 
Equiano was naturally attracted to the parallel campaign against the slave trade. On 21 March 1788 he took the remarkable step of sending a petition, or personal letter, 'on behalf of my African brethren' to Queen Charlotte (Walvin, 156). In the following year he added to a rising level of abolitionist propaganda with the publication of his autobiography, 'The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano'. It proved a remarkable success and went through numerous editions during his lifetime. Thanks to Equiano's energetic promotional efforts the 'Narrative' sold well, helping to provide the author with a modest estate. This was also helped by his marriage on 7 April 1792 to Susanna Cullen (1761/2-1796) of Soham, Cambridgeshire, where the couple made their home, though Equiano maintained an address in London. They had two daughters, Ann Mary (Maria) and Joanna, but by 1797 Joanna was the sole survivor of the family. She inherited her father's estate, valued at almost $1000, on her majority in 1816. 
In the early 1790s Equiano moved in popular radical circles. But reaction against revolutionary excess in France and the slave uprising in Haiti undermined popular politics. Equiano continued to promote his book via friends and sympathizers, travelling extensively within Great Britain. It was a fitting example of his lifelong industry and money-making interests. 
Equiano died at his home in Paddington Street, Marylebone, London on 31 March 1797; his place of burial is unknown. After his death his book was anthologized by abolitionists (especially before the American Civil War). Thereafter, however, Equiano was virtually forgotten for a century. In the 1960s his autobiography was rediscovered and reissued by Africanist scholars; various editions of his 'Narrative' have since sold in large numbers in Britain, North America, and Africa. 
Equiano's autobiography remains a classic text of an African's experiences in the era of Atlantic slavery. It is a book which operates on a number of levels: it is the diary of a soul, the story of an autodidact, and a personal attack on slavery and the slave trade. It is also the foundation-stone of the subsequent genre of black writing; a personal testimony which, however mediated by his transformation into an educated Christian, remains the classic statement of African remembrance in the years of Atlantic slavery. 


@@@@@


doc= 57029


Davidson, William (1786-1820), conspirator, was born in Jamaica, the second son of the attorney-general of Jamaica and an unnamed black woman. Educated there until age fourteen, William was sent to England, despite his mother's protests, to complete his education. Arriving in a country seething with revolutionary fervour, William gave up his studies of mathematics to go to sea. He was impressed into the Royal Navy from his merchant vessel. Once returned to England he was apprenticed, through the agency of his father, to a Liverpool lawyer and probably attended the University of Edinburgh for a while. However, he abandoned this to become apprenticed to a cabinet-maker. After an unhappy love affair in Lichfield, he moved to Birmingham where, with his mother's financial help, he set up his own business. This failed, however, probably due to the dire economic circumstances. 
In London, where he must have taken up residence some time before 1816 (when his first son was born), Davidson married a widow, Sarah Leigh (possibly Lane), who had four children. The couple probably lived in Walworth, where Davidson taught at a Wesleyan Sunday school. He worked as a journeyman with a cabinet-maker named Cox, who found him an excellent workman. It was probably after he had been accused of molesting a young woman at the Sunday school -- an accusation against which his wife defended him -- that the couple moved to Marylebone and Davidson attempted again to set up his own business. 
Times were hard and Davidson was soon penniless -- and in the thick of the London radical movements. He read the works of Thomas Paine and joined the Marylebone Union Reading Society. Meetings were held at his home and he formed a shoemaker's society. (Such societies were formed in the hopes of mobilizing the metropolis to overthrow the government; a provisional government would then introduce parliamentary and other reforms.) 
One of the main speakers at a radical meeting in Finsbury Square, Davidson a few weeks later helped to guard the banner at the Smithfield meeting in November 1819. The flag, of a death's head, was emblazoned with the words 'Let us die like Men and not be sold like Slaves'. Informers reported that Davidson and his colleagues guarding the flag were well armed. 
It is possible that Davidson met George Edwards, a government spy and agent provocateur, at the procession of some 200,000 people and dinner given to honour 'Orator' Hunt (of Peterloo fame) when he arrived in London in September 1819. Edwards apparently introduced him to Arthur Thistlewood, a prison-hardened radical who had witnessed the revolution in France. Davidson joined the group around Thistlewood, which, most likely at Edwards's instigation, decided that the quickest route to reform was to blow up the cabinet in what became known as the Cato Street conspiracy ['see 'Cato street conspirators (act. 1820)]. When a (false) date for a cabinet dinner was publicized, the men collected arms and ammunition. Raided by the police and the military in their Cato Street loft, the street entrance to which was guarded by Davidson, all but three of the conspirators were arrested. One policeman was killed upstairs in the loft. Thistlewood escaped, but Edwards 'found' him the next day, and claimed the $1000 reward for his capture. 
Eleven men were tried in April 1820. Despite quoting 'Magna Carta' (and Alexander Pope) in his defence, Davidson was among the five who were hanged, decapitated, and then buried in quicklime under a prison passage. After the hanging, which took place outside Newgate Prison on 1 May 1820 and was witnessed by one of the largest crowds ever assembled in London, there was a public subscription for the dead men's wives and children, and to bring Edwards to court for high treason. Despite the intervention of Alderman Wood, this was unsuccessful: Edwards (one of many spies and provocateurs employed by the government) had been spirited out of the country by his masters. 


@@@@@


doc= 57031


MacEwan, (Alfred) Sydney Marley (1908-1991), singer and Roman Catholic priest, was born on 19 October 1908 at 130 Keppockhill Road, Glasgow, the younger of the two sons of John Smith MacEwan, commercial traveller, and his wife, Jane ('nee' Marley). His father left the family when Sydney was very young, and when he was five, although the family lived in Springburn, he was given permission to attend St Saviour's School, Govan, where his Irish mother taught. Aged twelve (his brother having put his name forward), he won the sum of 5's'. singing in a talent competition in Dunoon. In 1920 he entered St Aloysius's (Jesuit) College in Garnethill, where he was unhappy, partly because Latin was not taught. He attended evening classes for violin and singing, as well as Latin, before making a happy move to Hillhead High, a protestant school where he and his brother were the only two Catholic pupils. His 'intense affection' for the church led him to study for the priesthood, and in 1925 he entered the Jesuit noviciate at Manresa House, Roehampton, London, where conversation was in Latin except at recreation. After finding himself unsuited to his calling, he left after six months and was admitted to Glasgow University in October 1926. At about this time he sang for the first time as a tenor and was taught by Mr Reid at The Athenaeum, the city of Glasgow's school of music. He was afterwards to describe Reid as 'the finest teacher in all my experience' (MacEwan, 90). He graduated MA and spent one year in teacher training at Jordanhill College, with music as his special subject. Aged twenty-two he entered the Royal Academy of Music in London, where he was taught by Sir Henry Wood, John Barbirolli, and Harry Plunkett-Greene. An unknown benefactor (widely thought to have been Compton McKenzie) paid his fees. 
In 1932 MacEwan signed a recording contract with Parlophone which lasted more than thirty years. Compton McKenzie, whom he had met in Glasgow, arranged for the celebrated tenor John McCormack to hear him; McCormack later asked MacEwan to sing for him in Dublin just before he died, and bequeathed him the black notebook in which he recorded the words of his songs, and his prayer book. On 17 March 1936 MacEwan sailed on the 'Tamaroa' with Duncan Morison (1902/3-1998), his accompanist, for a tour of New Zealand sponsored by the New Zealand Broadcasting Corporation; this was so successful it was extended to Australia. Tours followed to Canada and the USA, with a repertory of mainly Scottish and Irish folk-songs, including 'Bonnie earl of Moray', 'Believe me if all those endearing young charms', and 'Ho-ro my nut-brown maiden'. Following a hurricane on a ship from Honolulu to Canada, MacEwan made a decision to become a priest. This decision was kept secret while the remainder of his concert obligations were discharged. In 1938 MacEwan entered the Scots College, Rome, which he later described as 'a gay, jolly eventful place' (MacEwan, 192). His three-year course was cut to two, and he was able to travel home each summer. 
When the Second World War broke out, MacEwan was in South Uist and was not able to return to Rome, attending instead a seminary at Bearsden, Glasgow. He was ordained on 24 June 1944 in St Andrew's Cathedral, Glasgow, and the following day, before a packed attendance, celebrated his first mass in St Aloysius's, Garnethill, remembered by many for years afterwards. An ailing John McCormack sent a telegram to mark the occasion. MacEwan's appointment as curate at St Andrew's prompted radio news all over the world, and an hour of Sydney MacEwan records was played on Australian radio. In carrying out his duties as a priest he was surprised to find 40 per cent of parishioners not practising their faith, and described himself as 'daily face to face with abject poverty' (MacEwan, 209). Processions of fans had to be turned away, and he received visitors only on parish business. In 1948 he flew to Melbourne to represent the bishops at the centenary of the Melbourne archdiocese, where he met both Cardinal Spellman and Eamon de Valera, celebrated many masses, and gave a series of concerts (extended from a planned three to fifteen). On his return he asked to be released from the cathedral and be sent to Lochgilphead on Loch Fyne, Argyll, where he remained for the next seventeen years, commuting regularly to London to sing for the BBC and to attend recording sessions. During a tour of Australia (accompanied by his mother) he suffered from nervous exhaustion and was admitted to hospital in Perth. He continued to America and as a result donated a cheque for 'thousands of pounds' to the church. In 1954, 1955, and 1956, he toured America where he attended many society dinner parties and on one occasion met the young John F. Kennedy. 
MacEwan was anxious to promote 'real' folk music, rather than synthetic 'popular' tunes, and always refused to sing 'When Irish eyes are smiling', although often requested to do so, especially in the United States. His versions of 'She moved through the fair' and 'The lark in the clear air' were particularly well received. He recorded a mass in Rome (at 3 a.m. because of street noise) but the result was never issued in the UK. He was unhappy with an edition of 'This is your Life' which he described as a 'trivial little cameo' (MacEwan, 306). His mother died at the age of eighty-nine but, as the death occurred in Holy Week, she was denied the requiem mass he had promised her. 
Earlier in his life MacEwan had suffered from Meniere's disease, and when this worsened he spent several months in the kinder climate of Malaga. After recovering somewhat, he returned to become the parish priest in Kingussie in Speyside. He died of renal failure and acute pancreatitis in the Southern General Hospital, Glasgow, on 25 September 1991. In his introduction to MacEwan's autobiography, 'On the High C's (a Light-Hearted Journey)', published in 1973, Compton Mackenzie wrote 'At this time [the 1950s], he was the greatest living interpreter of Celtic music', and indeed his reception at the docks on his various tours to America was more akin to that usually accorded to film or pop stars. 


@@@@@


doc= 57032


Dawson, Peter Smith (1882-1961), singer, was born on 31 January 1882 in Adelaide, South Australia, the youngest son and the eighth of the ten children of Thomas Dawson (1842-1919) and Alison, 'nee' Miller (1841-1916). Both his parents were Scottish; his father, originally from Kirkcaldy and later a seaman, had settled in Adelaide in 1863 and established a plumbing business. Peter was educated at East Adelaide primary school and Pulteney Street grammar school. His mother ensured that all the children had musical training and Peter made his debut as a boy soprano at St Peter's town hall, Adelaide, at the age of seven. A keen sportsman, he won medals for running and swimming but music remained an abiding interest and at sixteen he joined the choir of St Andrew's Presbyterian Church, Wakefield Street, Adelaide, studied singing with C. J. Stevens, founder and conductor of the Adelaide Choral Society, and began appearing in singing competitions and concerts. When Dawson left school he joined the family firm as an apprentice plumber but Stevens, convinced that the young man had a future as a singer, persuaded his reluctant father to send him to England to study. 
Dawson sailed for England in 1902 and was taken on by the eminent British singer Sir Charles Santley, with whom he studied for three years. Subsequently a Russian singing specialist, Professor Kantorez, extended his range from one of E[flat] to D to one of E[flat] to A, converting him from a bass to a bass-baritone. Santley persuaded Madame Emma Albani to include Dawson in her touring concert party in 1904 and launched him on his professional career. In 1909 he appeared in 'The Mastersingers' at Covent Garden but he disliked opera, considering it 'too much work for too little pay' (Dawson, 22). On the other hand, he enjoyed singing in oratorio, 'Messiah' being a particular favourite. He concentrated on his concert career and by the 1920s had established himself as the leading ballad singer in Britain. While the majority of his appearances were in concert halls, he also appeared with success in the music-halls and variety theatres, topping the bill at the London Palladium. 
Although he toured the British Isles and the British empire extensively, Dawson himself recognized that he became a household name as a result of his recording career. He made his first recordings for the Edison Bell Company in 1904, the earliest a song called 'Navajo' attributed to Leonard Dawson -- the beginning of a continuous recording career stretching from 1904 to 1958. Initially he sang for a wide range of labels and under a variety of names; he recorded most often under his own name but he also sang comic songs as Will Strong, light popular songs as Frank Danby, and Scottish songs as Hector Grant. He participated in six full-length Gilbert and Sullivan opera recordings. He signed with HMV in 1906 and sang exclusively for that label from 1912 to 1953. In his autobiography he estimated that he had recorded 3500 songs and sold some 13 million copies, and subsequent estimates suggest sales of 25 million copies during his career. Not only was he performing on stage and gramophone records, but he broadcast regularly on the wireless after making his BBC debut on Australia day, 26 January 1923. He also appeared in two films, 'Chips' (directed by Edward Godal, 1938), for which he also composed the music, and 'Okay for Sound' (directed by Marcel Varnel, 1938). 
Dawson was married twice, first on 20 May 1905 to Annie Mortimer (Nan) Noble (1881-1953), who sang professionally as Annette George. She was the daughter of theatre manager Thomas John Noble. She retired after being badly injured in a car accident in 1925. Following Nan's death in 1953, Dawson married her sister, Constance Bedford Noble ('b'. 1897), on 29 April 1954. There were no children of either marriage. 
Dawson's forte was the ballad and his singing was always characterized by a clarity of diction, a sincere and robust delivery, and a consistently appropriate and never overstated emotional colouring. His popularity demonstrates the persistence of an essentially Victorian musical sensibility in the British public well into the twentieth century, a sensibility which was sentimental, nostalgic, patriotic, romantic, and religiose. There was no one to equal Dawson in singing 'Glorious Devon', 'The fishermen of England', 'The Cornish Floral Dance', 'The Holy City', or Stanford's setting of Newbolt's 'Songs of the Sea' and the various settings of Kipling's 'Barrack Room Ballads' (notably his rendering of 'Boots'), all perennial parts of his repertoire. Dawson himself wrote some fifty songs under a variety of pseudonyms, notably J. P. McCall. 
Dawson was in Australia in 1914 when war broke out and he returned at once to England to undertake concert work for war charities and the troops. Seeking a more direct involvement he returned to Australia and enlisted as a private in the army, but before he could see active service the armistice was declared. He was in Australia again when the Second World War broke out. Too old for active service, he remained there for the duration, resuming directorial duties at the family firm Thomas Dawson & Sons, then producing tins for military use, but also broadcasting, recording, and touring army camps. He returned to England in 1947 and gave fifty-seven concerts, claiming that he was broke because of tax demands from both England and Australia and poor management of his finances. In 1951 he published his autobiography, 'Fifty Years of Song'. In 1954 he made a farewell tour of England and the next year his final English recordings, and in 1955 settled in Australia for good, making his final public appearances and recordings there in 1958. He died of heart failure in Sydney on 27 September 1961 and was buried in Rookwood cemetery, Sydney. 
Peter Dawson was 5 feet 6 inches tall, sturdily built, with ruddy complexion, grey eyes, and tattoos on his arms and chest. Personally he was jovial and forthright, an enthusiastic smoker and practical joker, and showed extraordinary generosity to his fellow performers, actively promoting the careers not only of other Australians in England but also of up-and-coming young British singers. His repertoire testified to a deep love of Australia, and his devotion to the Scotland of his forebears and the England where he spent much of his career. His was a true imperial patriotism. As Cunningham Thom, rector of St David's Presbyterian Church, Haberfield, said in his funeral address: 'He belonged to the generation of Kipling and Henley, and of those strong, robust British poets and writers who were the voices of the then invincible British Empire and the then invincible British Army' (Vose, 103). 


@@@@@


doc= 57033


Watts, Isaac (1797-1876), naval architect, was born in Plymouth. Details are uncertain but it is likely that he was baptized on 31 July 1797, the only son of William and Elizabeth Watts, and had two younger sisters, Ester and Marie. He was apprenticed to a shipwright and passed the competitive entry examination for the School of Naval Architecture at Portsmouth, which he entered in 1814. The seven-year course was divided between theory and practice and was both advanced -- it was among the first schools of higher education to teach calculus -- and demanding. He graduated in 1821 but, owing partly to post-war reductions in staff and partly to resentment of the new graduates by the older dockyard officers, promotion was slow. He was eventually promoted foreman at Portsmouth, a fairly senior post, in 1833 and remained there for some years. During this time he married Emmeline Anne (maiden name unknown; died 1861); they had three daughters and two sons. In May 1847 he became master shipwright (or general manager) of Sheerness Dockyard at the age of fifty. 
Only a year later Watts became an assistant surveyor, responsible jointly with John Edye until the latter's retirement, for the design of all ships. In 1851 he visited French naval establishments with the surveyor, Baldwin Walker, and the chief engineer, Thomas Lloyd. Their report on progress with the screw battleship 'Napoleon' led to work being hastened on Edye's 'Agamemnon', the first British screw battleship to be designed as such. It was an exciting time: the screw propeller had been proved and there was a big programme of wooden screw battleships and frigates, both new construction and conversions. 
During the war with Russia, Watts was responsible for the building of numerous novel ships, some with armour. After the war the building race with France resumed. In this period he designed some of the biggest wooden ships ever constructed, though with an increasing use of iron stiffeners and brackets, amounting to some 130 tons in a 120 gun ship. His big screw frigates were among the longest wooden ships ever built, for example 'Orlando', of 5416 tons, had a length of 366 feet overall. There were signs of weakness in these frigates, showing that wooden construction had reached its limit. 
In 1859 news was received of the French ship 'Gloire', which was armoured but still with a wooden hull, and Watts was asked to design the counter. The board had asked for a wooden ship but Watts decided that a ship which would be long enough to carry the specified armament would only be satisfactory with an iron hull. There were many problems to be solved, particularly in the support and fastenings of the 41/2 inch armour, and a large full-scale section was built and fired on by heavy guns. Watts's design was sent to the Board of Admiralty in January 1859 and, by their direction, was passed to the royal dockyards and to experienced commercial builders of iron ships to see if they could offer a better design. Fifteen submissions were received and, in his report, Watts gave detailed explanations of why they were all inferior to his own design. 
A reorganization in 1860 gave Watts the title of chief constructor with much the same duties and with a salary of $900. When 'Warrior' was completed in 1861 she was second in size only to the enormous 'Great Eastern' and was much faster and more heavily armed than 'Gloire', while her iron hull made her more durable; she may still be seen at Portsmouth. Watts designed some variants on 'Warrior' and was then involved in the conversion of the prototype turret ship 'Trusty' before designing the first operational turret ships 'Royal Sovereign' and 'Prince Albert', all before the better-known USS 'Monitor'. 
Like many great designers, Watts was an autocrat who had little use for discussion except with the surveyor, the chief engineer (Lloyd), and his own deputy, Joseph Large, who played an important part in the design of 'Warrior'. 'Warrior' initiated a revolution in warship design even though she was evolutionary in most technical aspects, such as iron hull, machinery, guns, and even armour. It was the combination of all these features which made her novel. Watts, Large, and Lloyd were all graduates of the School of Naval Architecture. Watts saw the navy through two technical revolutions -- screw propellers and armour -- and was created CB for his services. He retired in 1863 and died at 32 Albion Street, Broadstairs, Kent, on 11 August 1876. 


@@@@@


doc= 57034


Menzies, Sir Robert Gordon (1894-1978), prime minister of Australia, was born on 20 December 1894 at Jeparit, in the Wimmera district of Victoria, the fourth of the five children of James Menzies and his wife, Kate Sampson. The forebears were Scots on the paternal side and Cornish on the maternal. James was Jeparit's general storekeeper and local community leader, a lay preacher and prominent in activities ranging from sporting clubs to the district shire council. 
Though themselves not formally well educated, Menzies' parents were well read and anxious that their children should have the best instruction that could be arranged. They were accordingly sent to school in the nearby city of Ballarat. Bob did best, topping the state scholarship examination in 1907, studying subsequently at Wesley College, Melbourne, and on an exhibition at the University of Melbourne. In an outstanding undergraduate career he won a galaxy of prizes and the award in 1918 of the degree of master of laws. 
Admitted to the bar, Menzies read with Owen Dixon, the leading Victorian junior and later chief justice of Australia. In 1920, as advocate for the Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Menzies won in the high court a case which proved a landmark in the augmentation of commonwealth powers over those of the states. The court's verdict brought Menzies 'sudden fame' professionally: more important personally, it gave him, as a young man of twenty-five, the means to marry. His bride was Pattie Maie (Pat) Leckie (1899-1995) ['see below'], daughter of J. W. Leckie, a manufacturer who had served in the Victorian parliament. They were married on 27 September 1920 at the Kew Presbyterian Church. 
This was a period of political ferment in Melbourne, principally among young and respectable men. They wanted to bring a new sense of public responsibility to state politics, then notoriously moribund, even corrupt, and in organizations such as the Constitutional Club promoted speaking classes, a library, and a model parliament. Menzies imbibed the atmosphere of the time and, as a successful young professional, felt obliged to undertake 'a certain amount of public work'. He drifted into the service of the Nationalist Party, the conservative political formation spawned when Labor split over conscription during the late war. As a member of this party he entered the Victorian upper house, the legislative council, in 1928 at a by-election, and then, in the lower house, captured the Nunawading seat at the general election of the following year. He was soon a founder and leader of the 'Young Nationals', a ginger group dedicated to revitalizing the Nationalist Party, and as such had won by 1931 the presidency of the national federation, the governing body of the party apparatus. After the defeat of the ruling state Labor government in 1932 he was the first 'young nat.' to receive full cabinet rank when he became attorney-general and minister for railways in the Nationalist ministry headed by Sir Stanley Argyle. 
Menzies was meanwhile being progressively drawn into federal politics by the crisis of the great depression. In the early 1930s the depression brought suffering to split James Scullin's ruling Labor government between those who thought salvation lay in balanced budgets and those for whom unusual troubles required unusual remedies, most particularly the expansion of credit. 'Honest Joe' Lyons, by late 1930 Scullin's acting treasurer, took the former attitude, as did Menzies and a 'Group of Six' prominent non-Labor men, who took the lead in virtually establishing a new political party to replace the existing Nationalists. The new organization, the United Australia Party (UAP), which altered the whole structure of Australian politics, was in fact largely the product of a powerful coalition of forces triggered by a mushrooming of citizens' leagues through which responsible elements from many levels of society gave expression to their fears of civil dislocation as depression conditions bit. Menzies and his compatriots persuaded Lyons to leave the Labor Party and become leader of the non-Labor federal opposition. The existing opposition leader, J. G. Latham, resigned and Lyons, at the head of the new party of redemption, became opposition leader. A federal election late in 1931 installed him as prime minister of Australia, after a sweeping victory in which eight Labor ministers lost their seats. In 1934 Menzies was persuaded to stand for the federal seat of Kooyong, which became vacant when its incumbent, Latham, left politics altogether. Elected with ease, Menzies took Latham's place, as attorney-general, in Lyons's cabinet. He was to hold the Kooyong seat until his voluntary retirement from parliament in 1966. 
In 1935, at the age of forty-one, and accompanied by his wife, Menzies made his first trip to England, one of a small party of Australian ministers visiting London to take part in the silver jubilee celebration of George V's reign. As attorney-general he was also involved in official trade talks. He found these tedious but nothing could dim his joy in experiencing, as he put it in his diary, the reflections which 'can so strangely move the souls of those who go 'home' to a land they have never seen' (Martin and Hardy, 1.148). For weeks he revelled in the actuality -- in stones and architecture, countryside and ceremony -- of the Britain that his education had taught him was also his. He met political notables, travelled widely, was entertained at Buckingham Palace, and won plaudits as a public speaker. Subsequent official visits, again largely for trade talks, enhanced his reputation and confirmed his affection for British culture, but evoked further aversion at what he saw as the ruthlessness of British businessmen. 
On Lyons's death in 1939 the UAP elected Menzies to party leadership. Page, leader of the Country Party, announced that his party would no longer work in coalition with the UAP, and launched on Menzies an attack described by the 'Sydney Morning Herald' as 'a violation of the decencies of debate without parallel in the annals of the Federal Parliament' (Martin and Hardy, 1.274). Page asserted that, with war threatening, Menzies was incapable of leading the nation, because he had been disloyal to Lyons and because he had failed to enlist in the First World War. Though the full reasons for this animus are not altogether clear, Page -- a simple if pompous soul -- was well known as a butt for Menzies' often cutting wit and uncanny gifts as a mimic. Menzies perforce formed a new, all-UAP cabinet, which in September 1939 became a war cabinet when Menzies and his ministers assumed, without dissent, that since Britain had declared war on Germany after the latter's invasion of Poland, Australia would do so too. 
The government took steps at once to put Australia on a war footing. 'War Precautions Acts' gave new powers over industry and civil life, and recruitment of a second Australian Imperial Force began. Menzies resisted as long as he could 'minds... heavily indoctrinated by the 'old soldiers' point of view'' (Martin and Hardy, 1.289) which pressed for rapid deployment of an expeditionary force to come to Britain's aid. Equally, he was worried about the Japanese threat. Late in 1940 he decided to visit London to remonstrate at Britain's failure to strengthen Singapore, which was then seen as the key bastion in Australia's Pacific defence. But even before he left, a general election had reduced his majority in the federal parliament to two (and independents at that), and already Labor was refusing to take part in a national government. When he arrived in England the first, 'phoney', stage of the European war was over: Britain was facing aerial blitz and daily fear of invasion from the continent. Assisting Australia, as Menzies asked, was out of the question. Invited by courtesy to sit while in London in the British cabinet, Menzies developed a curious love-hate relationship with Churchill whom he privately blamed for many of the disasters of this stage of the war, including the heavy losses Australian and New Zealand expeditionary troops suffered in the abortive Greek and Cretan campaigns. 
It was an open secret that during Menzies' absence plotting took place against his leadership. He was not universally popular, not being good -- as his political opponent but personal friend John Curtin once put it -- 'at handling his men' (Martin and Hardy, 1.385), and having alienated sections of the electorate through his social position, intelligence, and sometimes arrogant ways. Though welcomed on his return to Australia by great public meetings, to which he gave rousing patriotic addresses, Menzies soon came to feel that under his leadership the UAP could not prosper and the war effort might suffer. He offered Labor more proposals for a national government. When these were rejected, he called an emergency cabinet meeting at which a majority of his ministers agreed that a new leader was needed. Menzies forthwith resigned, to offer what he called 'real prospects of unity in the ranks of the Government parties' (ibid., 1.383). For him it was a deep personal blow; for the government parties it proved an ineffectual move. Before 1941 was out Labor, under John Curtin, was in office and Menzies on the opposition benches. 
Menzies showed remarkable resilience after the first shock of resignation. The aged W. M. Hughes was elected party leader but proved ineffectual when Labor swept the polls in 1943, and Menzies was re-elected. With the passing of the crisis which had given it birth, the UAP was evidently in decline, and a series of 'post-mortems' on the 1943 defeat counselled a new start. Thus in 1944-5 was formed the Liberal Party, in whose gestation Menzies' influence was prominent. 
Though elected leader of the new party, Menzies' position remained for some time uncertain. He was still not universally trusted and when defeated badly in the 1946 election toyed with the idea of leaving politics altogether. What saved him was the decision of Curtin's successor, Ben Chifley, to nationalize the Australian banks in 1947. Menzies took the lead in fighting this move, using it as symbolic of what he saw as the key issue of post-war politics: a struggle between socialism and planning for social justice on the one hand and the growth of freedom and prosperity through spontaneous, especially economic, development on the other. 
In 1948 Menzies' party, after long argument, decided to dissolve the Communist Party of Australia if it came to office. The early cold war was taking shape. The Australian Liberal Party had been deeply moved by the communist coup in Prague and the death of Jan Masaryk. Menzies himself was in London in 1948, when the first Berlin blockade so stirred fears, only three years from the end of the Second World War, that another conflagration was about to break out. 
The 1949 election fanned the flames of anti-communism and told against a Labor government which stood on a record of austerity whose virtues were not cherished on every side. The Liberals won and so began that period of ascendancy known as the 'Menzies era'. It lasted a record sixteen years and involved his winning seven general elections in a row. Not all were unequivocal victories: close calls were registered in 1954 and 1961 and, particularly after the formation of the Democratic Labor Party, the Liberals sometimes benefited fortuitously from their opponents' disarray. For all that, Menzies enjoyed formidable support in his own right. Occasional complaints about his leadership style notwithstanding, experience brought mellowness, and none could gainsay the extraordinary skill he developed over years of experience in handling the arts and mechanisms of politics. There was also the comfortable assumption he and some of his supporters cultivated that he was the 'natural' leader of the respectable, middle-of-the-road elements of the post-war community. His own early 'fireside talk' broadcasts, his concern, from the beginning, that women -- most particularly the country's sound matrons -- should be well represented in the new Liberal organization, and the relative permanence and autonomy of that organization itself were further factors in the development of this atmosphere. 
The period of Menzies' ascendancy was marked by extraordinary economic growth. This 'long boom' was experienced in most advanced economies, but the Menzies governments' stability, their declared policies of 'development', and their continuance of the ambitious immigration programme initiated by Labor helped to transform Australian material life, as indicated by markers as various as growth in population and home ownership, the ubiquity of white goods, and a great jump in motor-vehicle ownership. 
Predictably, communism and cold war fears dominated in the first years of Menzies' ascendancy. After one false start, the government carried legislation to dissolve the Communist Party, but this was declared invalid by the high court. Having successfully engineered a dissolution of both houses of parliament, the government won a second election and asked at referendum for constitutional powers to deal with communism in the same terms as had the nullified act. The opposition, under H. V. Evatt, narrowly defeated the referendum, depicted by its detractors as an attack on civil liberties. Menzies travelled extensively in his first year or so of office, consulted many politicians and men of affairs, and decided as early as 1951 that Australia faced the danger of war in three years' time. Legislation established a National Security Resources Board to advise on the stockpiling of strategic materials, compulsory military training for eighteen-year-olds was instituted, and new equipment was planned for the army and navy. These measures were meant to accompany and strengthen the new anti-communist powers asked for at referendum. But, together with loans contracted abroad to give extensive stimulation to economic development (the other declared objective of the Liberals), they involved sometimes crippling expenditure which countered efforts to hold a lid on inflation. 
Menzies benefited vicariously from the extraordinarily popular Australian tour of the young Queen Elizabeth in 1954, but sourness supervened when, on the eve of the election in that year, Vladimir Petrov and his wife defected from the Soviet embassy with alleged evidence of Russian spying activities. Some pundits, watching electoral trends, had thought Evatt a likely winner of the coming contest, but he behaved erratically before a royal commission appointed to inquire into the affair and soon gave evidence of a decaying mind, alleging that the Petrovs were not genuine witnesses and that the episode was a plot hatched by Menzies and the head of the secret service, Brigadier Spry, to keep him out of office. Though the allegation passed into Labor mythology, it has frequently been disproven. 
In 1950 Menzies had believed that the chief communist threat was to Europe, and that in the event of world war Australia would provide forces to guard the Middle East. His first two ministers for external affairs, Percy Spender and Richard Casey, however, saw south-east Asia as the crucial area for Australian defence, and were chiefly responsible for the Australia-New Zealand-United States treaty (1951) and the formation of the South-East Asia Treaty Organization (1954). Menzies accepted the aim of such agreements: to sustain the commitment of the United States to the region and to look for security through 'great and powerful friends'. He also formally agreed in 1955 to Australian participation in the British-organized Far East Strategic Reserve; in consequence Australia was involved in conflicts arising from the Malayan emergency and Indonesia's policy of confrontation. Henceforth the Menzies administrations were committed to the concept of 'forward defence', a notion which, combined with increasing dependence on the United States, led almost inexorably to involvement, near the end of Menzies' prime ministership, in the Vietnam War. 
In the years after 1958, when the minister for trade and industry, John McEwen, was leader of the Country Party, the fear of communism was a less important political imperative, and promotion of Australian exports through protection, tariff manipulation, and aggressive trade negotiations became characteristics of the Menzies era. McEwen's department was sometimes at odds with the treasury, occasionally to Menzies' displeasure. Nevertheless, though temperamentally different Menzies and McEwen saw eye to eye on most matters. On the eve of one federal election in the 1960s Menzies could write to McEwen: 'There never has been such a partnership as this in the political history of Australia.' 
Preservation of the Liberal-Country Party coalition was in fact one of the three achievements on which, near the end of his parliamentary career, Menzies looked back with most pride. Given the natural tension that had always existed between the two parties, this accomplishment reflected the great political acumen and prestige of the mature Menzies. The other two feats he thought memorable were the extension of federal involvement in education and the physical development of Canberra as the national capital. The highlight of the first was the appointment in 1956 of Sir Keith Murray's committee to inquire into the then financial plight of Australia's universities, and Menzies' insistence that the committee's recommendations be fully implemented. The highlight of the second was his insistence in 1960 that funds be appropriated for the construction of the long-delayed lake that Walter Burley Griffin had originally made the centrepiece of his design for Canberra. 
Menzies belonged to the generation for whom to be Australian was automatically to be British. It was an outlook that involved veneration for inherited institutions such as parliament and the courts because they were the creation of time and history, and respect for the crown as the focus of loyalty which held a family of disparate British societies together. In the 1950s and 1960s Menzies became something of the 'grand old man' at Commonwealth prime ministers' conferences, but he was privately unhappy at a scenario in which hitherto subject peoples increasingly became equals of the old 'white' self-governing dominions. His good friend Harold Macmillan tried gently to get him to accept 'the winds of change', but personally Menzies never quite did so. His almost sentimental old-fashioned Britishness led him into a few stances that had regrettable overtones, the prime example, perhaps, being his support of the Eden government's policies in the Suez crisis of 1956. 
Menzies retired from politics at the peak of his power, in January 1966. He subsequently delivered by invitation at the University of Virginia a series of lectures later published as 'Central Power in the Australian Commonwealth' (1967). In 1965 Harold Wilson had nominated him to succeed Winston Churchill as warden of the Cinque Ports, and on his annual trips to fulfil consequent honorific duties he was able to keep up with old friends in England. Among Menzies' many honorary degrees were those from Melbourne, Oxford, and Cambridge universities. His other honours included CH (1951) and FRS (1965). He was sworn of the privy council in 1937, and became a knight of the Thistle (1963) and a knight of the Order of Australia (1976). 
Menzies wrote two volumes of reminiscences, 'Afternoon Light' (1967) and 'The Measure of the Years' (1970). In 1971 he suffered a severe stroke which incapacitated him physically and put limits on his public appearances. He died on 15 May 1978 at his home, 2 Hayerbrack Avenue, Malvern, Victoria, and was accorded a state funeral. He was privately cremated, and in June 1996 his ashes were interred, with those of his wife, in a newly established prime ministers' memorial garden in Melbourne general cemetery. 
Large-framed and handsome, Menzies had a ready wit and superb command of language. His outward mien suggested a tendency towards imperiousness but it also covered a certain shyness. Intimates knew a man of great good humour and kindness. Life for him was a gift to be enjoyed with gusto; he took pleasure in food and drink, revelled in letting his hair down at his favourite Savage and West Brighton clubs in Melbourne, and enjoyed watching sports, being a connoisseur of the art of cricket. After Alfred Deakin and before Gough Whitlam, Menzies was probably the most well-read prime minister Australia has had, though he was not given to parading his erudition. He enjoyed nineteenth-century classical novels, could quote hundreds of lines of Shakespeare and of the 'Bible', and on boring train and aeroplane trips was given to probing 'who-dunnits'. An intensely private man, he strictly separated personal matters, such as his family life, from public affairs. Paul Hasluck, who knew Menzies well, wrote of him: 'I think the sort of tribute he would have appreciated most would not have been praise of his great talents or a recital of what he had accomplished but rather a statement that he was a man of character, honourable in conduct and decent in behaviour. He was that and I offer the tribute' (Martin, 'Menzies, Sir Robert Gordon', 15.361). 

Dame Pattie Maie Menzies (1899-1995) was born on 2 March 1899 at Alexandria in Victoria. Her father, John William Leckie, of Scottish descent, was Australian-born. Her mother, May Beatrix, died when Pattie was eleven, and as a growing girl she was close to and shared politics with her father, for a time a member of the Victorian parliament. She married Robert Menzies in 1920, and after he entered federal politics took part in most of his electioneering campaigns. In 1954 she was appointed by Queen Elizabeth II dame grand cross in the Order of the British Empire for her public work in hospitals and her representation of Australia on a number of occasions overseas. She died at Canberra on 30 August 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 57037


Chipman, Ward (1754-1824), lawyer and local politician, was born on 30 July 1754 in Marblehead, Massachusetts, the sixth of the twelve children of John Chipman (1722-1768), a lawyer, and Elizabeth Brown. Chipman entered Harvard College in 1766 and, upon graduation in 1770, delivered the commencement address. After studying law under Jonathan Sewall, the attorney-general of Massachusetts, he practised in the vice-admiralty court and secured a position in the Boston custom house. The American War of Independence dealt a crushing blow to Chipman's prospects. He was the eldest surviving son of a distinguished but not wealthy family and, after his father's death in 1768, he looked to Sewall for advancement. Since Sewall was a devoted loyalist, so perforce was Chipman. In 1774 he retreated with Sewall to Boston and helped prepare a series of anti-revolutionary tracts. In 1775 he joined Sewall in London, but in the following year eagerly accepted a minor post in New York as deputy to the muster-master-general of the loyalist forces. Admitted to the New York bar, he earned considerable fees in the vice-admiralty court and served as paymaster for several loyalist regiments. 
Like most loyalists, Chipman was devastated by the treaty of Paris. He hoped to remain in New York until he learned that loyalists would be prohibited from practising law. He was given a small pension and returned to England, unsuccessfully seeking further compensation. In 1784 those loyalists settled north of the Bay of Fundy in Nova Scotia petitioned the British government for the partition of the colony and Chipman lobbied on their behalf. He hoped to become attorney-general of the new colony of New Brunswick but had to be satisfied with the more lowly (and unpaid) position of solicitor-general. In 1784 he travelled to New Brunswick with the first governor, Thomas Carleton. 
For the next few years Chipman acted as Carleton's legal adviser. He drafted the charter for Saint John and became first recorder of the city and a justice of the peace. He assisted in drafting the New Brunswick legal code and the rules of procedure for grand juries and the inferior courts, becoming clerk of the crown on circuits and advocate-general of the vice-admiralty court. None of his multiple offices carried a salary but they generated fees and Chipman, one of nine lawyers who formed the New Brunswick bar in 1785, established a prestigious law office in Saint John, which became a training ground for lawyers. For half a century the bench and the bar of New Brunswick were dominated by his students. His approach to the law was extremely conservative. He upheld the complicated and antiquated system of common-law pleading and the use of the death penalty for a wide range of offences. He also insisted on an excessively high scale of fees. 
Chipman found slavery morally repugnant and in 1800 defended without fee a runaway slave. He convinced two of the four supreme court judges of the illegality of slavery, creating a degree of legal uncertainty which contributed to the withering away of slavery in New Brunswick. In 1816 he persuaded the government to give land to black refugees from the American south, although he recommended 50 acres rather than the 200 acres normally given white settlers. In 1786 he prosecuted a case which established that crimes against native peoples would not go unpunished. Nevertheless, as a commissioner of the New England Company (and after 1806 as secretary-treasurer), he supported its policy of segregating Indian children from their parents and turning a blind eye to the incompetence and rapacity of the Anglican minister who ran the company's school. A member of the Church of England, Chipman prepared the bill incorporating Trinity Church in Saint John and was for many years a vestryman. He also served on the board of directors of the public grammar school in Saint John and as one of the board of trustees of the Madras Schools, and helped to draft the original, restrictive charter for the College (later the University) of New Brunswick. 
Although conservative in politics, Chipman was more moderate on religious issues than most of the loyalist elite, partly because on 24 October 1786 he married Elizabeth Hazen, the daughter of a wealthy, non-Anglican merchant family. The Chipmans' impressive home became the social centre of Saint John and when Prince Edward (fourth son of George III) visited the city in 1794 he stayed there. An enthusiastic advocate of the commercial interests of Saint John, Chipman invested in a flour mill and assisted in organizing the Bank of New Brunswick. Yet he was not popular among the ordinary citizens. He was elected to the first assembly in 1785 only after many of the votes for his opponent were disallowed. He consistently supported the governor, even in the decision to transfer the capital from Saint John to Fredericton, and in 1793 he was soundly beaten in Saint John, though returned for Northumberland county. In 1795 he was again defeated in Saint John and left without a seat in the assembly, which consistently refused to pay him a salary as solicitor-general. 
During the 1790s Chipman's legal practice languished, but after 1796 he received a substantial salary as the British agent before the commission to decide which river should define the boundary between Maine (then part of Massachusetts) and New Brunswick. For nearly three years he worked at preparing the British case, which convinced the commissioners that the boundary should be the Sainte Croix River. During this period he renewed contacts with two of his sisters who had married Salem merchants and wisely invested his salary in ships owned by his brothers-in-law. By 1798 he was on the road to solvency but he found the return to an inactive life in New Brunswick disheartening. His legal practice occupied little time and in 1802 he again stood unsuccessfully for the assembly. He lived extravagantly and fell deeply into debt. In 1807 he became a member of the provincial council but played only a minor part in its deliberations. In 1809 he became a puisne judge, earning a reputation for severity and rigidity in his decisions. After 1815 he also served as the British agent in the dispute over the northern boundary between Maine and New Brunswick. He successfully disguised the weakness of the British case and the dispute was eventually referred for arbitration to the king of the Netherlands. Afflicted by gout, he increasingly delegated his work as agent to his only child, Ward Chipman jun. ['see below']. In April 1823 Chipman became president of the council, but on 9 February 1824 he died, in Fredericton. 
One of the most influential of the loyalist founders of New Brunswick, Chipman helped to convince the imperial government to create New Brunswick and played an important role in establishing the municipal, judicial, and educational institutions of the colony. He critically influenced the evolution of the legal profession and his work on various commissions helped to establish the colony's boundaries. But his commitment to New Brunswick was always ambivalent. Having tied his career to the loyalist cause, he had no choice but to go into exile in 1783. Yet he frequently visited the land of his birth, renewed his ties with his relatives in Massachusetts, and sent his son to Harvard. Disillusioned by the 1783 treaty and by the imperial government's policy of benign neglect, Chipman was frustrated at having to pass his life in a colonial backwater, perpetually struggling against insolvency. Yet he passed on his loyalist ideology to his son, 


@@@@@


doc= 57039


Allen, Hannah (fl. 1632-1664), bookseller, was probably the daughter of Robert Howes, bookseller and bookbinder, and his wife, Anne, who baptized a daughter, Anne, on 26 December 1619 in St Botolph, Aldgate, London. She married the bookseller Benjamin Allen (died 1646) on 2 April 1632 at St Katharine by the Tower and a son, Benjamin, was baptized on 9 August 1635 at St Olave, Hart Street. A daughter, mentioned in Benjamin's will, has not been traced. 
After her first marriage Hannah lived and worked in London at The Crown in Pope's Head Alley, an area known for its radical bookshops. Her brother may have been the bookbinder Samuel Howes, who was apprenticed to the Allens' neighbour Henry Overton and who used a Pope's Head Alley address. It is not until after Benjamin's death in May 1646 that Hannah's role in the business becomes prominent. Left $150 in Benjamin's will, and with two children to support, she inherited a business already established as sympathetic to Baptist, Independent, and millenarian publishing. She kept on Benjamin's apprentice of three years, Livewell Chapman (fl. 1643-1665), bound John Allen in 1646, and took a third apprentice, John Garfield, in 1647. Chapman was freed as a stationer in November 1650 and by 12 September of the following year he and Hannah were married. A son, Livewell, was baptized on 2 June 1652 and a daughter, Patience, on 6 December 1653, both at St Mary Abchurch. 
Between August 1646 and January 1651 Hannah issued about sixty books and pamphlets. Many of her imprints show her working with other stationers, notably Matthew Simmons, Henry Overton, and John Rothwell. Her publications with the printer Simmons suggest some kind of partnership in the early phase of her career, but from the beginning of 1649 her use of a great variety of printers suggests increasing financial independence and confidence. Leona Rostenberg's presentation of her is thoroughly misleading in ignoring her development of the business. While some of the works published by Hannah Allen were by authors previously published by Benjamin (such as Jeremiah Burroughes, Nicholas Lockyer, William Greenhill, Samuel Richardson, Samuel Chidley, John Cotton, and Richard Mather), her total output suggests that Hannah moved the business in a more millenarian, radical, and eventually Fifth Monarchist direction. She was the first publisher of William Cradock, Henry Jessey, and Vavasour Powell, and brought out books by, among others, Thomas Manton, Thomas Brookes, Richard Kentish, and John Robotham. She published several topical pamphlets relating to the army, reports of Indian conversions in New England and Taiwan, and Mannasseh ben Israel's plea for readmission of the Jews, 'The Hope of Israel' (1650). In Jessey's 'The Exceeding Riches of Grace' (1647) she is reported as visiting Sarah Wight's bedside in the company of other local tradeswomen; Wight's other visitors included the prophet Anna Trapnel, the religious leaders Thomas Goodwin, John Simpson, Nicholas Lockyer, and Walter Cradock, and Captain Harrison and Praisegod Barbon. 
After her second marriage Hannah's name disappears from imprints and from Stationers' Company records, except for the freeing of apprentices in 1654 and 1655, but it is likely that she still played an important role. She was perhaps ten years older and certainly much more experienced in bookselling than Livewell Chapman. Chapman was often absent in the late 1650s and early 1660s, imprisoned in Ludgate or the Gatehouse and, in 1662, fleeing abroad. At such times she was no doubt in sole charge of the business. In 1663 she was suspected of managing the printing of 'The Face of the Times' by Sir Henry Vane, and when Chapman was released from prison in May 1664 it was on security that 'neither he nor his wife' publish or disperse illegal books (TNA: PRO, SP 29/98/25). Imprisonments and fines ruined Chapman's business, his last publication appearing in 1664. If Hannah can be identified as the 'widow Hannah Chapman' listed in the Stationers' Company poor book from 1678 to 1705, then she lived in poverty to a great age. 


@@@@@


doc= 57040


Fairbank family (per. c.1725-1848), surveyors, were of a family settled in Sheffield since the second half of the sixteenth century. The family surveying tradition began with 


@@@@@


doc= 57046


Chitty, Lily Frances (1893-1979), archaeologist and antiquary, was born on 20 March 1893 at Lewdown, Devon, the first of three children of the Revd James Charles Martin Chitty (1865-1938) and his wife, Gwen Ethlin Georgiana (1861-1933), daughter of Henry Jones of Binnum Binnum, South Australia. The family moved to Shropshire in 1899 when James Chitty became rector of Hanwood, near Shrewsbury. She was educated at home with the children of local gentry families but she also learned eagerly from her two younger Wykehamist brothers. She attended Shrewsbury School of Art from 1910 to 1915 but was disappointed when she was denied instruction in technical drawing as the school valued her artistic work more highly. Though she had intended to continue her art training, she chose to take a secretarial course in London in order to make a contribution to the war effort. She was employed briefly by the General Post Office in London, but became ill and returned to Shropshire where she worked for the Women's Land Army. 
In 1920 Lily Chitty's father became rector of Yockleton in Shropshire, where she was free to develop her interest in archaeology; she was particularly interested in prehistoric artefacts. In 1927, through Harold Peake, she was given the work of drawing bronze implements for the British Association. She became the Ordnance Survey's honorary correspondent for archaeology in Shropshire in 1924. From 1926 she was the local contact for the Ancient Monuments Board when monuments and sites were scheduled. At this time she began work on analytical card indexes to national and local archaeological periodicals and other literature. This unique database was soon consulted by many leading professional archaeologists but she generously shared it with students; it continued to be valued until the end of her life. She also prepared artefact distribution maps, some of which form an important part of Sir Cyril Fox's seminal 'The Personality of Britain', first published in 1932, though they were not acknowledged as her work until the third edition of 1938. 
In 1938 her father died and Lily Chitty moved to Upton, Berkshire, where her brother, Derwas Chitty, was rector. After his marriage at the end of the war, she returned to a family property in Pontesbury, Shropshire, where she lived until her death. Here she resumed her position as the county's archaeological expert. It was to her that new discoveries were reported. She drew artefacts, researched and mapped find sites, published reports, and helped to improve local museum collections. Most of the 146 articles she published are reports on specific objects, but some result from investigations of Bronze Age hoards where previous records were lacking or misleading. She was commissioned by the Cambrian Archaeological Association to index 'Archaeologia Cambrensis', 1846-1900, but she regretted that her scholarly, exhaustive index was edited for publication; the University of Wales awarded her an honorary MA for this work in 1957. In 1956 she was made an OBE. These honours formally recognized her life's work, but she took particular pleasure and pride in the Festschrift presented to her by colleagues in 1972 in grateful recognition of her unique role in British archaeology. 
Lal Chitty, as she was known, retained her enthusiastic curiosity about her numerous interests until the end of her life. She was a keen botanist, read widely, and was a popular figure at the excursions and lectures provided by the learned societies to which she belonged. Her hardy constitution finally succumbed to hypothermia in January 1979 and she died at the Hillside Rest Home, near Church Stretton, Shropshire, on 8 February 1979. She was buried at Pontesbury cemetery on 15 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 57048


Austin, Robert Sargent (1895-1973), engraver and watercolour painter, was born on 23 June 1895 at 14 Magazine Square, Leicester, the eldest of the three children of Robert Austin, a cabinet-maker, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Smith. Encouraged by his father, after leaving Lansdowne Road school he attended Leicester Municipal School of Art. From there in 1914 he went to the Royal College of Art, but his studies were interrupted by war service. He returned to the college in 1919, under Sir Frank Short, and won the Rome scholarship for engraving in 1922. For three years he lived in Italy, where he met the writer Ada May Harrison (died 1958). They were married in 1924 and collaborated on various illustrated books. They had three children: Robert ('b'. 1927), Clare ('b'. 1929), and Rachel ('b'. 1931). After settling in Chiswick, Middlesex, Austin held his first exhibition of prints and took up a teaching post at the Royal College of Art, where his principled approach was an influence on many. He became professor of engraving in 1946. Austin was a quiet, good-looking man. When attending the Royal College he wore a semi-stiff white collar, a silk tie (always Italian), and a trilby hat, its angle carefully adjusted. His personal reserve was balanced by a marvellous sense of humour. When he retired in 1955 the college had changed, and his perfect technique and remarkable draughtsmanship had become unfashionable. In the 1960s he was president of the Royal Watercolour Society and the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers, where his influence continued. 
The state of the art market needs to be borne in mind when assessing Austin's work, which until 1930 consisted mainly of prints; in the 1920s print-making was popular and it made sense to specialize. In 1927 his drawings sold for between 10 and 20 guineas and his engravings for 3 to 8 guineas each. Following the collapse of the print market in 1929 he made fewer engravings, and after 1940 his important works were drawings and watercolours, which he exhibited annually at the Royal Academy or the Royal Watercolour Society. With the exception of those in the Imperial War Museum, London, Austin's drawings are less well known than the engravings, which museums collected more consistently. Many landscapes resulted from visits to Norfolk, where he had a holiday cottage. He also produced flower and figure pieces and strong, perceptive portraits in chalks, for example that of F. R. Leavis (National Portrait Gallery, London). 
The inflated 1920s print market favoured the spontaneous and mobile line of etching, but Austin soon developed an austere, linear style that called for the clear incised line of the engraver's burin, a tool demanding exceptional skill. He made his reputation with figure and animal subjects in the manner of the early masters of engraving, for example, the monumental 'Puppet Master' (1926). He styled his monogram, 'R.S.A', on that of the early German engraver Schongauer. Other influences include the Pre-Raphaelites (his 'Summer Night', 1935, was inspired by a Millais illustration to Tennyson), and his strong design sense is partly a response to the cropped compositions of William Nicholson's woodcuts. The engravings of the 1930s are the finest of all his works, their subjects isolated on the plate and fixed in space by a perfection of design. 'Mask' (1933) is a restrained and telling self-portrait, juxtaposing the life mask of Austin made by the sculptor James Woodford with a sprig of laurel, and recalling his days in Rome. Austin died on 18 September 1973 in Burnham Overy, Staithe, Norfolk, and was buried in Chiswick churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 57050


Williams, Francis (c.1690-1762), writer in Jamaica, was born in Jamaica, the son of John Williams (died 1723), slave, and his wife, Dorothy (died 1731). The earliest reference to him is what appears to be the record of his baptism and that of his elder brother Thomas in the parish of St Catherine's, Jamaica, on 26 December 1697. His father was freed by the will of his former master, Colonel John Bourden, a prominent local figure who died in 1697. Within about ten years John Williams had acquired significant property, and in February 1708 he was able to get the local legislature to pass a special act in his favour that prevented slaves giving evidence against him and gave him the right to a jury trial. This was an important and highly unusual (though not unique) privilege in a racially stratified society in which non-white people, even if free, had very little protection under the law. John and Dorothy Williams were perhaps not formally married until after this date; what may have been their marriage was recorded in St Catherine's, on 18 July 1708. 
In October 1716 John Williams persuaded the Jamaican legislature to pass another act, extending the privileges granted to him in the former act to his wife, Dorothy, and to his sons, John, Thomas, and Francis. The act noted that the elder John Williams had 'Educated his said sons in the Protestant Religion according to the Doctrine of the Church of England as by Law Established and hath given them other suitable Education according to their Degree'. John and Dorothy Williams also had a daughter, Lucretia (sometimes called Lucretia Greenwich), but she was not included in the act. 
The details of Francis Williams's education are obscure. He himself later said 'Insula me genuit, celebres aluere 'Britanni'', by which he appears to have meant that he was born in the island (Jamaica) but educated in Britain. The account of Williams given by Edward Long (published in his 'History of Jamaica' in 1774, a dozen years after Williams's death) claimed that he was the subject of 'an experiment, which, it is said, the Duke of Montagu was curious to make, in order to discover, whether, by proper cultivation, and a regular course of tuition at school and the university, a Negroe might not be found as capable of literature as a white person. (Long, 2.476)' Long added that Williams 'was sent to England, where he underwent a regular discipline of classic instruction at a grammar school, after which he was fixed at the university of Cambridge, where he studied under the ablest preceptors, and made some progress in the mathematics. (ibid.)' However, Williams does not appear in the university's records, and the family's wealth was such as to make it seem unlikely that he would have needed noble patronage in order to secure an education. What can be said with certainty is that Williams was admitted as a member of Lincoln's Inn on 8 August 1721. 
Williams was living in England at the time of his father's death, in July 1723. By that time the elder John Williams was described as a factor, or merchant, living in Spanish Town, St Catherine's. He had accumulated a substantial fortune; the inventory of his property made soon after his death lists 'Goods and Chattles Rights and Credits' of various kinds (including slaves and a long list of moneys owed to him by some of the most prominent people in Jamaica) valued at a total of $16,319 11's'. Jamaica currency, or more than $12,000 sterling. This did not include the house property and other real estate mentioned in his will. John Williams had exported sugar and other tropical produce (at least some of it raised on his own land) from Jamaica to England, and in exchange imported clothing for slaves, plantation supplies, and general goods, as well as lending money on an extensive scale. His will suggests that he may have owned his own shipping, and that while he remained in Jamaica, Francis managed the English end of the business. 
Williams returned to Jamaica soon after his father's death, and appears to have spent the rest of his life in the island. Long claimed that the duke of Montagu tried to get him a seat on the governor's council, although this was prevented by the governor's objections, and that for several years Williams kept a school in Spanish Town, where apparently he taught reading, writing, Latin, and mathematics. This account is partly substantiated by the Revd John Lindsay (rector of St Catherine's, Jamaica, 1773-8), who wrote of Williams, 'I knew him in his latter days, when reduced to keeping of a Negroe School' (Lindsay, fol. 196). 
Williams had inherited a large share of his father's estate, and the deaths of his brother John in 1726 and of his mother in 1731 allowed him to consolidate much of the rest into his own hands (his brother Thomas appears to have died between 1726 and 1731). However, he seems to have lived off his inheritance rather than continuing to augment it; surviving records show him selling pieces of land and the occasional slave from time to time, but not making new purchases. Whatever his abilities as a businessman he appears to have been capable of making a vigorous defence of what he saw as his rights. In 1730, following the outbreak of the first maroon war (an armed conflict with escaped slaves and their descendants that lasted eight years before it was finally settled by a treaty with the maroons) the Jamaican legislature passed an act 'for the better regulating slaves', which also imposed a number of restrictions on free coloureds. Williams protested to the authorities in England that this was an infringement of the rights conferred on his family by previous acts. The council of trade and plantations agreed, and the act was eventually disallowed by the king in council. 
However, it was as a writer that Williams 'made a conspicuous figure' in Jamaica 'and even attracted the notice of many in England' (Long, 2.475). He appears to be the earliest black writer known in the British empire, his career predating that of figures such as Olaudah Equiano, Ignatius Sancho, or Phillis Wheatley. The only surviving literary work that can definitely be ascribed to him is a poem of forty-six lines addressed to George Haldane on his assuming the governorship of Jamaica in 1759, and preserved in Long's 'History of Jamaica'. Long suggests that Williams may also have written the words of the song 'Welcome, welcome, brother debtor', which was popular in the eighteenth century, but there are other claimants. The poem to Haldane was in Latin; Long said that Williams 'was fond of this species of composition in Latin, and usually addressed one to every new governor' (ibid., 478). 
The ability to write Latin verses was a gentlemanly accomplishment highly regarded at the time, and Williams's poem to Haldane is a specimen of conventional flattery of great personages of a type found in many Latin poems written in Britain during the eighteenth century (including some by authors from the Caribbean). However, it is good of its kind, and it is noteworthy for passages that can be interpreted as asserting both a specifically Jamaican identity and the poet's sense of his own worth as a black man and a black writer. In particular, says Williams: '
Ipsa coloris egens virtus, prudentia; honesto 

Nullus inest animo, nullus in arte color. 

(Worth itself and understanding have no colour; 

there is no colour in an honest mind, or in art.) 

' In other words, Williams claims, there is no distinction of race in artistic capacity. 
Williams was living in a leased house in Spanish Town when he died in 1762, aged about seventy, according to Long. He was buried in St Catherine's on 13 July, probably in the churchyard of what is now Spanish Town Cathedral, though there is no surviving monument or tombstone. The inventory of his goods, which consisted mainly of sixteen slaves, totalled $694 19's'. Jamaica currency (about $500 sterling) and suggests that his fortunes had declined. He does not appear to have married, and though Long stated that he had children none are mentioned in his will. Apart from a legacy of $200 sterling to one of his executors, Williams left his property to Charles Bowles, an Englishman who owned several plantations in Jamaica. 
Contemporaries as different as the Scottish-American writer Alexander Hamilton of Annapolis and the philosopher David Hume had heard of Williams, though Hume suggested his talents were 'like a parrot who speaks a few words plainly' (Long, 2.477). It was Long's history, however, that made Williams widely known. Long was a staunch defender of the Jamaican plantocracy; Williams was something of an embarrassment to Long's theories of white racial superiority, and he preserved Williams's poem only in order to ridicule it. Others found it easy to see the bias in Long's account. By 1789 the anti-slavery writer William Dickson could refer to 'the celebrated Francis Williams' and the fact that Long had published the poem 'cum notis hypercriticis'. Others, of whom Henri Gregoire in his 'De la litterature des negres' (1808) was perhaps the most influential, referred to Williams's literary abilities as demonstrating the humanity and equality of all black people, and thus as an argument against slavery. The most forceful expression of this view was given by Robert Boucher Nickolls, the Barbadian-born dean of Middleham in Yorkshire. In the 1788 edition of his 'Letter to the treasurer of the society instituted for the purpose of effecting the abolition of the slave trade' (first published in the previous year) Nickolls, clearly alluding to Long, referred to 'the friends of slavery' who 'represent the negroes as little removed above the monkey, or the oran-outang, with regard to intellects' (p. 46). Nickolls went on to mention Phillis Wheatley and Francis Williams by name, and commented: 'I never heard of poems by a monkey, or of Latin odes by an oran-outang' (ibid.). 
While the modern reader may see some irony in the posthumous role thus given to Williams, who was himself a slave-owner, it is clear that in his own lifetime his very existence as a rich, free black man who wrote Latin verses was a challenge to the theories of white supremacy on which plantation societies in the Americas were based. 


@@@@@


doc= 57052


Ceolwulf (d. 611?), king of the Gewisse, was the son of Cutha (probably Cuthwulf), son of Cynric. He ruled in succession to his brother Ceol. The annals of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' allot him a reign of fourteen years, but the West Saxon genealogical regnal list preserves a separate tradition of a reign of seventeen years, which may simply have resulted from a confusion between the Roman numerals XIIII and XVII. In the chronicle Ceolwulf was remembered as a powerful ruler who 'continually fought and contended either against the English, or the Britons, or the Picts, or the Scots' ('ASC', s.a. 597). It is unlikely that Ceolwulf was involved with either of the last two northern peoples and it is tempting to see this as a misplaced entry for one of the Northumbrian kings. Nevertheless, some of the foundations must have been laid in his reign for Gewissan expansion against British and Saxon peoples to their south and west. The chronicle records only a battle in 607 against the South Saxons, perhaps part of the competition between these two peoples for control of the Jutes of Wight and the south of what is now Hampshire. Ceolwulf was succeeded in 611 by Cynegils, apparently his nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 57053


Richardson, Marion Elaine (1892-1946), art teacher, was born on 9 October 1892 at 10 Wellesley Villas, Ashford, Kent, the second daughter of six children of Walter Marshall Richardson (1859- 'c'.1907), a master brewer, and his wife, Ellen, 'nee' Dyer ('b'. 1860). She was educated at Winchester high school, Uplands School, and Milham Ford School in Oxford. Talented at art, she was encouraged to sit for a teacher-training scholarship at Birmingham Municipal School of Arts and Crafts; her father's death meant that the award of a scholarship could not be ignored, despite her reluctance. She studied at Birmingham from 1908 to 1912, obtaining an art class teacher's certificate and participating in the experiments of its principal, Robert Catterson-Smith, in memory drawing. 
In 1912 Richardson was appointed art mistress at Dudley Girls' High School, in the Black Country, where she worked full-time until 1923. She developed methods of teaching art that were far removed from the traditional emphasis on copying and technical skill. Instead she aimed to arouse children's visual awareness, to encourage self-expression, and enable pupils to evaluate their own work. Her pupils would sit with closed eyes, perhaps listening to a description, and waited for images to appear in 'the mind's eye'. This resulted in vibrant, colourful, and expressive paintings, contrasting starkly with more traditional pencil drawings. 
In 1917 Richardson met Roger Fry at his exhibition 'Children's art' (Omega Workshops, London) and showed him a portfolio of works by her Dudley pupils. Impressed, Fry included some of them in the exhibition and began to promote her work, bringing her to critical and public attention. Fry thought her 'remarkable -- she really has found out how to 'educate' and not to teach, which I thought was impossible' (letter to Margery Fry, 2-3 May 1917, 'Letters of Roger Fry', 2, 410), and arranged an interview with the minister of education, H. A. L. Fisher. Through Roger Fry, she also renewed her acquaintance with his sister Margery Fry, and the two remained close friends throughout her life. It was Margery who suggested the then innovative idea of teaching art in prisons and from 1921 to 1923 Richardson voluntarily taught embroidery and crafts at Winson Green prison in Birmingham. 
Looking for new challenges, Richardson moved to London in 1923, initially staying with Margery and Roger Fry. She took private pupils and taught voluntarily at Holloway prison. During the winter of 1923-4 she organized an exhibition of her Dudley high school pupils' work at the Independent Gallery in London, which attracted considerable press interest, and in January 1924 the magazine 'Vogue' nominated her for its hall of fame. Such publicity created an increasing demand for her pupils' work to be exhibited across the country and for her to give lectures to organizations and societies. In the spring of 1924 she travelled to Russia through Sweden and Finland, visiting schools and prisons to study their artwork. In September 1924 she returned to teaching at Dudley Girls' High School part-time and also took up a post with the London Day Training College as lecturer in art on the new course for trainee art teachers. She continued her private teaching and taught part-time at Benenden and Hayes Court schools in Kent. 
From 1930 Richardson was inspector of art to the London county council; she also held surgeries for teachers, ran courses for them, visited schools, and gave lectures. Her courses were extremely popular: applications for the forty places on the 1934-5 course 'Art in infant schools' were closed when the number exceeded a thousand. In 1934 she toured Canada at the invitation of the Carnegie Trust and also visited the United States, giving lectures for the public, teachers, and university audiences. In 1935 she published 'Writing and Writing Patterns', a set of hinged cards and booklets (developed from her 'Dudley Writing Cards', 1928) for teaching handwriting based on patterns and natural movements, enabling each child to make a gradual transition to a personal style. In 1938 she organized a large and successful exhibition of children's art at County Hall in London. With works by over 500 children from schools across London it was opened by Kenneth Clark and visited by over 24,000 people including Queen Elizabeth and her two daughters, the princesses Elizabeth and Margaret. 
During the Second World War Marion Richardson supervised children evacuated to Oxfordshire. Unfortunately her health was deteriorating; in 1938 she had suffered a nervous breakdown and developed rheumatoid arthritis. She retired due to ill health in 1942. In September 1945 she returned to Dudley, where she completed the manuscript for her long-planned book 'Art and the Child'. On 12 November 1946, the day after writing the book's dedication, she died of a heart attack, rheumatoid arthritis, and anaemia at 27 Highfield Road, Dudley, Worcestershire, the home of a friend. She was buried in Dudley. She had never married. Her illness was attributed to 'her utter devotion to her work' ('Dudley Herald', 16 Nov 1946). 
Published posthumously in 1948, Marion Richardson's 'Art and the Child' contained a foreword by Kenneth Clark who discerned saintly qualities in the author. Her achievement, Clark wrote, was to recognize that the power of vivid imaginative expression 'could be developed in almost every child as part of his education' (Richardson, 7). Although written during her terminal illness, and often sentimental and inaccurate, the book was a great success, being reprinted in 1951, 1954, 1957, and 1964, and translated into Japanese in 1958. 'Writing and Writing Patterns' remained in print and in use in schools in the United Kingdom until the 1980s. Her pupils' work was included in the British Council's 'Art of British children' exhibitions which toured North and South America, Australia and New Zealand, and southern Africa in the 1940s. 
Marion Richardson had pioneered a child-centred approach to the teaching of art in schools and her methods changed both the atmosphere and environment of school art rooms. Her ideas influenced other critics and educational theorists and her publications achieved international acclaim. After her death Herbert Read wrote, 'as she moved from school to school, she left oases of happiness and enlightenment, and an enduring influence which has literally transformed the lives of thousand of children' ('Athene', 1947, 2). In the 1980s the Department of Education and Science funded a series of fellowships enabling teachers to experiment with her ideas in the classroom once again, proving their continuing relevance. 


@@@@@


doc= 57054


Enthoven, (Augusta) Gabrielle Eden (1868-1950), theatre archivist and playwright, was born at 21 New Street, Spring Gardens, Westminster, London, on 12 January 1868, the daughter of William Govett Romaine (1815-1893), secretary to the Admiralty, and his wife, Frances Phoebe, 'nee' Tennant (1822/3-1909). Her father, a barrister and public administrator, went on to serve in India and Egypt, where his family accompanied him on his postings until his retirement in 1879, when they returned to Britain and settled near Windsor. There Gabrielle Romaine attended garden parties, regattas, dinner parties, and balls. She also took part in theatricals and was a member of several amateur societies including the Windsor Strollers and the Old Stagers. From an early age she wrote plays, stories, and scenarios. In later life she reminisced about being invited to Windsor Castle to play with Princess Mary of Teck and of once having slapped the young princess (Enthoven biographical file, V&A). A friend of Oscar Wilde, she recorded the stories which he told her between 1890 and 1893, and had a limited edition of the stories privately printed under the title 'Echoes'. These versions of the stories, and variations on them, subsequently appeared in 'The Mask', the magazine published by her friend Edward Gordon Craig, and were later reprinted in Vyvyan Holland's 'Son of Oscar Wilde' (1954). 
She married on 28 December 1893 Charles Henfrey Enthoven (1866-1910), a captain in the Royal Engineers; he was the son of James Henry Enthoven, metal merchant. They moved to Cadogan Gardens, London, where she entertained with style. Soon after her marriage she: 'began pasting up in scrapbooks various press cuttings dealing with the theatre. The idea of starting a collection of playbills came into my head when I purchased a quantity of them, two hundred I think, from a naval officer which was the foundation of my collection. (Enthoven biographical file, V&A)' Her husband, who served as a general staff officer at the War Office, retired with the rank of major early in 1910, and was appointed chief officer of the London county council parks department, but died shortly afterwards. There were no children of the marriage. 
After her husband's death Enthoven's collecting and theatrical endeavours gathered pace. She appeared as a graduate in 'A Pageant of Great Women' produced by the Actresses' Franchise League. In 1911 she became a founding member and president of the Pioneer Players, a feminist theatre company that aimed to present plays of 'interest and ideas' that dealt with current social, political, and moral issues. That year she launched a campaign to establish a national collection for the performing arts. Writing to 'The Observer', she outlined a scheme for: 'a comprehensive theatrical section in an existing museum to comprise specimens of all the different branches necessary to the workings of a play from the construction of the theatre, the designing of the scenery and costumes, to the smallest workings necessary in the house. (Rogers, xii)' In 1912 Enthoven had her first play, 'Montmartre', produced at the Alhambra. In 1916, 'Ellen Young', which she wrote with Edmund Goulding, was produced by the Pioneer Players at the Savoy to good reviews. 
At the outbreak of the First World War, Enthoven undertook war work in addition to her theatre activities. From August 1914 to December 1915 she was chief of records for the War Refugees Committee, a voluntary body which organized the reception of mainly Belgian refugees fleeing mainland Europe. From the end of 1915 she was with the Red Cross, and became chief of the records department of its Central Prisoners of War and Missing Persons Committee, dealing with British prisoners of war held by the central powers. She left the Red Cross in August 1920 because of ill health and was awarded an OBE in recognition of her services. 
By 1921 Enthoven was in America, where she lived in Manhattan with Cecile Sartoris, co-adapter and translator of Gabriele d'Annunzio's 'The Honeysuckle', produced at the Lyceum Theatre, New York, in that year. The couple had a studio in Washington Square and offered a free room to Noel Coward, who was trying to make his name in America. Coward recalled that the three of them were very poor and often 'dined quietly in pyjamas' (Coward, 122). By 1923 she was back in London, and executed one of her proudest achievements, bringing over the great Italian actress Eleonora Duse to England for her last engagement. 
In 1924 Enthoven crowned this by finally persuading the Victoria and Albert Museum to accept her collection of more than 50,000 playbills, prints, books, and engravings in order to establish a national collection of the performing arts. With characteristic determination and generosity she established herself in an office in the V&A with the collection and continued to pay for acquisitions and staff from her own funds. Her connections with theatrical society in London and New York proved invaluable in providing material and spreading word of the collection's permanent home. 
Enthoven was at the centre of a smart London lesbian set, and was associated particularly with Edith Craig, Mercedes de Acosta, and Radclyffe Hall, though the latter apparently ended her friendship with Enthoven for 'repudiating her own kind when it is opportune to do so' (Souhami, 167). The abject failure of an adaptation of Colette's 'Cheri' (1930) by Hall's partner Una Vincent Troubridge, in which Enthoven played the leading role, also contributed to the end of the friendship. 
Despite being repudiated by Hall and Troubridge, Enthoven was generally regarded as kind and generous. George Nash, who succeeded her as the theatre curator at the V&A, noted her bluff kindness to staff of all grades within the museum, except those she considered inattentive or lazy. After the depression she thought herself too poor to take a taxi to the museum and so walked in all weathers, but continued to lavish gifts on staff and friends. On the outbreak of the Second World War she returned to the War Office to head the records department of the Central Prisoners of War. She died at her home, 99 Cadogan Gardens, Chelsea, London, on 18 August 1950. Her will, in which she bequeathed artworks and money to a long list of friends and staff, stipulated 'that my body shall be cremated without the celebration of any funeral service in the cheapest possible manner as my Trustees shall decide', to maximize the amount to be left to the V&A to continue cataloguing and acquiring material for the theatre collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 57056


Kingston, Gertrude (1862-1937), actress, was born at Durham House, Highbury New Park, Islington, London, on 24 September 1862, the daughter of Heiman Kohnstamm, merchant, and his wife, Teresina, 'nee' Friedmann. Edwin Max Kohnstamm 
(later Konstam; 1870-1956)
, a county court judge, was her brother. She was educated at home for the first years of her life, and travelled widely with her mother and governess. When her artistic talents became obvious, she was sent abroad to study painting in Berlin and Paris, under Carolus-Duran, Henner, and Goussot, afterwards publishing three illustrated books. She began her stage career as an amateur while still a child, imitating popular actors such as Irving and Berhardt. At the age of fifteen she was chosen by W. S. Gilbert to play the lead in an amateur production of his 'Broken Hearts'. However, painting remained her first love, and it was not until her marriage that she considered pursuing a career as an actress. 
On 31 July 1889, in the parish of St George, Hanover Square, she married George Silver (1858/9-1899), a captain in the East Surrey regiment and the son of James Silver of the Madras civil service. She decided to take to the stage as a means of supporting them both, Silver's income being insufficient. At the recommendation of Ellen Terry she became a pupil of Miss Sarah Thorne at Margate, adopting the name Kingston for stage purposes, and appearing in a number of roles including Ophelia in 'Hamlet' and Emilia in 'Othello'. Shortly afterwards she was invited by Beerbohm Tree to appear as Mrs Harkaway in 'Partners', although she later regretted accepting the role, feeling that she was unable to return to tragic acting, having become typecast as 'clever' at comedy. Yet after this first appearance she achieved considerable success on the London stage. She became well known and in demand for a variety of roles, including that of Clara Dexter in 'The Woodbarrow', which she also produced, and that of Mrs Graves in 'A Matchmaker', which she co-wrote with Clotilde Graves and which was criticized for its equation of marriage with prostitution. 
In 1899 Kingston was widowed, her husband dying of heart failure just as war broke out in South Africa. By then she was sufficiently influential to raise subscriptions for the actors' and actresses' hospital hut to be set up in Cape Town for soldiers fighting in the South African War. In her autobiography she wrote of her regret that she was dissuaded from volunteering to nurse there herself, feeling that this would have been a valuable opportunity to gain medical training to be put to use in the First World War. However, several accounts of her life suggest that she did serve there, and was mentioned in dispatches. For the next ten years she remained active on the stage, most notably appearing in Euripides' 'The Trojan Women' as Helen, at the suggestion of George Bernard Shaw. Many felt that this was her finest performance. 
In 1910 Kingston became the lessee of the Little Theatre in the Adelphi, London, which was built largely to her specification and was the first British theatre to adopt certain lighting techniques, including 'dimmer' lights, which had been invented in the United States. Her season at the Little was inspired by the Royal Court's introduction of highbrow and classical drama to a commercial audience, and thus opened with Aristophanes' 'Lysistrata', in which she played the title role. Lillah Macarthy took over the management of the Little Theatre in 1911, yet in 1912 Kingston returned to play Madame Arcadina in 'The Seagull'. Later that year she appeared as Lady Cecily Waynflete in 'Captain Brassbound's Conversion'. She then took the leading role in the opening run of 'Queen Catherine'; this part was written for her by George Bernard Shaw, who regarded her as 'the only Queen who could do justice to our combined talents' (Shaw, 901). 
Throughout much of the First World War Kingston was in the United States, speaking about the war effort in Britain and appearing in Boston in a triple bill consisting of 'Queen Catherine' and two other Shaw plays. She also appeared, in 1916, as Ermyntrude in 'The Inca of Perusalem' with the Pioneer Players, the suffragist theatre company. Kingston had long been active as a speaker within the suffrage movement, having realized the injustice of her own position as a voteless taxpayer. During the war she also experienced the recurrence of an interest in spiritualism which she had acquired after an experiment in 1905. She felt that she was able to communicate with those who had been killed, and to receive messages from them for their loved ones. Later in life, she also gained comfort from spiritualist communication with her late sister, and through the same means received messages from Oscar Wilde. 
After the war Kingston continued to act, and was also much in demand as a public speaker for the Conservative Party, even considering standing for parliament herself in 1924. She also taught public speaking, and wrote numerous articles on a wide range of subjects. In 1927 an exhibition of her work in lacquer was staged in New York, her technique becoming known as Kingston lacquer, and the same year she produced and appeared in 'Nevertheless' in London. Her final performance was as Queen Elizabeth in 'When Essex Died' in 1932. She died at the Empire Nursing Home, Vincent Square, Westminster, London, on 7 November 1937. Her own assessment of her career, that it was 'a tale of high endeavour and of short results; of big beginnings and little ends; of vital movements railroaded by signals of 'blocked line'' (Kingston, 9) seems modest when set against the record of her achievements in acting, producing, art, politics, and journalism. 


@@@@@


doc= 57057


St John, Christopher Marie (1871-1960), writer, was born on 24 October 1871 at 38 High Street, Exeter, the youngest of the nine children of Emma Marshall, nee Martin (1828-1899), novelist, and Hugh Graham Marshall ('c'.1825-1899), manager of the West of England Bank. She changed her name on her conversion to Catholicism in adulthood, which may have contributed to a rift with her mother, whose protestant commitment and aversion to Roman Catholicism were evident in her writings. For whatever reasons, St John later claimed to have been illegitimate, and attempted (with some success) to conceal her origins. Educated from 1894 at Somerville College, Oxford, she developed skills as a historian and translator, before moving to London where she worked as temporary secretary to Lady Randolph Churchill and Winston Churchill. 
After a relationship with the musician Violet Gwynne (later Gordon Woodhouse) in 1895, St John met Ellen Terry's daughter Edith Ailsa Geraldine Craig (1869-1947), with whom she was to set up house at 7 Smith Square, Westminster. After moving to Adelphi Terrace House, they settled in the third-floor flat at 31 Bedford Street, Covent Garden, and when Ellen Terry bought the former port officer's house, at Smallhythe Place, Tenterden, Kent, they acquired a second home at nearby Priest's House. Their relationship became temporarily strained when Craig received a marriage proposal from the musician Martin Shaw and St John attempted suicide. 
St John's first published book, 'The Crimson Weed' (1900), an exploration of passion and revenge, was a novel concerning the illegitimate son of an opera singer. She had been attracted to the stage since childhood, giving her first performance at a drawing-room entertainment, where, in a man's dress suit, she sang the comic song 'The Frenchman'. She was a member of the Stage Society as Christabel Marshall, acting in Gilbert Murray's translation of 'Andromache' at the Garrick Theatre in 1904. Her translation of 'The Good Hope' performed by the Stage Society was published under her assumed name, Christopher St John. Through her association with Craig and Terry, she acted at the Imperial Theatre, first appearing in 'The Vikings' in 1903; her first speaking part, under the stage name of Joanna Willett, was in Clo Graves's play 'The Mistress of the Robes'. 
St John had continued with her literary efforts, publishing several pieces in Pamela Colman Smith's magazine, the 'Green Sheaf', including an elegiac monograph, 'Henry Irving', on the actor's death in 1905. She also wrote the first of several biographies of Ellen Terry in 1907, during Terry's American tour. 
Both St John and Craig were active in the women's suffrage movement. St John wrote plays and articles in support of the movement, and was arrested in 1909 for setting fire to a pillar box. Involved in the Women's Social and Political Union, she was a committee member of the Catholic Women's Suffrage Society and the Women Writers' Suffrage League. For the latter organization she was photographed holding a banner with Craig and Cicely Hamilton in a street procession of 1910. All three women acted in 'A Pageant of Great Women' (1909), a play devised by Hamilton and Craig, which was performed nationwide. 
An understanding of the economic determinants of social inequalities was apparent in the plays St John translated and co-wrote. She translated from the Dutch plays by Herman Heijermans and co-wrote with Cicely Hamilton 'How the Vote was Won' and 'The Pot and the Kettle', and with Charles Thursby, 'The Coronation'. Her historical skills were also evident in her plays, especially 'The First Actress', 'The Pageant of the Stage', and 'Macrena'. 
When the Pioneer Players society was founded in 1911, with Edith Craig as director and Ellen Terry as president, Christopher St John contributed as dramatist, translator, and actor. She was also honorary secretary from 1915 to 1920, and a member of the advisory and casting committees. The Pioneer Players performed both St John's own plays and a number of her translations of works by Herman Heijermans, Isi Collin, and Jose Echegeray, including her most significant translation of a play by the first female dramatist, Hrotsvit. 'Paphnutius' was given a world premiere by Craig for the Pioneer Players in January 1914. 
During the First World War, St John continued to act and write plays. She wrote about her relationship with Craig in her journal, 'The Golden Book' (1911), and in her anonymously published second novel, 'Hungerheart: the Story of a Soul' (1915). In a hybrid form of 'Bildungsroman' and 'roman a clef', this narrative represents the development of a lesbian or 'invert' whose sexuality is mediated through the self-abnegation of Roman Catholicism. In 1916 the artist Clare (Tony) Atwood (1866-1962) joined Edith Craig and Christopher St John in their flat at 31 Bedford Street, Covent Garden. St John recalled Bernard Shaw's suggestion that she write about this 'menage a trois', which was to be lifelong, disrupted only by Craig's death in 1947. To 'Edy: Recollections of Edith Craig' (1949), edited by Eleanor Adlard, St John contributed an essay, 'Close-up', in which she noted that they achieved independence within their intimate relationships: Craig, Atwood, and St John, working respectively in the theatre, art, and literature, drew creative inspiration and support from each other. 
After Terry's death in 1928, St John and Craig revised and edited 'Ellen Terry's Memoirs' (1933). St John edited Ellen Terry's 'Four Lectures on Shakespeare' (1932) and the 'Shaw-Terry Correspondence' (1931). Craig raised funds to establish her mother's house as a memorial and on its grounds, the Barn Theatre, in which an annual memorial performance was given. St John acted there in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' in 1929 and subsequently in several other pieces. The Barn Theatre and Priest's House became the focus of a busy social and cultural life in Kent for women and actors in particular. Craig, St John, and Atwood, known as 'Edy and the boys', were close friends with Radclyffe Hall and Una Troubridge after the adverse publicity of the trial for obscenity in 1928 of Hall's novel 'The Well of Loneliness'. The five spent Christmas together in 1931 and 1932. St John and Craig attended the Stage Society's production in 1930 of Colette's 'Cheri', organized by Gabrielle Enthoven and Una Troubridge. St John's journal documented her short-lived relationship with Vita Sackville-West in 1932; her difficulties in coming to terms with this rejection met with sympathy from Ethel Smyth but irritation from Virginia Woolf. 
As music critic, St John wrote for 'The Lady' under the initials C. M., and for 'Time and Tide' from 1920 to 1931. She published her translations of Hrotsvit's plays (1923) and biographies of Christine Murrell MD (1935) and Ethel Smyth (1958); the latter, completed in spite of considerable ill health, was distinguished by the Book Society as book of the month. Some of her writings were apparently unpublished, such as the plays 'What a Plague is Love' and 'The White Room'. 
St John died at West View, Tenterden, Kent, England, on 20 October 1960 after suffering pneumonia and heart disease. In response to the obituary in 'The Times', Vita Sackville-West wrote that 'she was in the grand tradition of English eccentrics' remembered as 'a Shakespeare character... roaringly rumbustious', while Dame Sybil Thorndike recalled her as 'vivid... too much an individual in her life and work to be one of the most popular'. 


@@@@@


doc= 57058


Levi Ames (bap. 1739, d. 1820), banker and merchant, whose life and career closely mirrored those of his father. He lived next door at 15 Lower Maudlin Lane and was a partner in the bank of Ames, Cave & Co. between 1786 and 1820. He was elected sheriff of Bristol in 1771 and became mayor in 1788. Ames was twice married: first, in 1770, to Anna Maria Poole, and later to a woman whose name was probably Elizabeth Wraxhall. He died on 16 December 1820. 


@@@@@


doc= 57059


Simmons, John Richardson Mainwaring (1902-1985), office systems pioneer and company director, was born on 18 March 1902 at 52 Ward Place, Cinnamon Gardens, Colombo, Ceylon, the third child of Sydney Mainwaring Simmons (1870-1955), clerk in holy orders, and his first wife, Beatrice Margaret Reynolds (1869-1907). He had an elder sister, Agatha, and brother, Reynolds, known as Rennie. His mother died on 22 December 1907; in December 1909 his father married Helene Elsie Marion Walker and they had a daughter, Margaret Theodora. His father, mother, and stepmother were all members of the Church Missionary Society; his father was himself born in India of missionary parents. Like Sir Nevill Mott, who was his maternal first cousin, John Simmons was the great-grandson of the Arctic explorer and naturalist Sir John Richardson, after whom he was named. 
Simmons was sent home to England to a private preparatory school, entering Windlesham House in Sussex in 1910. In 1916 he obtained a scholarship to Brighton College, as had his brother previously, where he captained the second eleven at cricket. In 1920 he went up to St John's College, Cambridge, to read mathematics, supported by a Bell scholarship. He graduated as a wrangler (first class honours) in 1923. On graduation Simmons immediately accepted the post of statistician and management trainee at J. Lyons & Co. He remained with Lyons for forty-five years, rising to the position of director and chief comptroller, in which post he was head of administration for the company. During that time he pioneered scientific methods of office management, and his drive for efficiency led to the development of the first computer in the world to run a program for business rather than scientific use. 
J. Lyons & Co. was best known for its chain of 250 high street teashops and its flagship London restaurants, the Lyons Corner Houses. Managing the paperwork for the hundreds of thousands of small transactions on which the company depended required an administrative establishment of several hundred clerks. Simmons's task was to increase the efficiency of the company's office procedures. Within a few years he had introduced to Lyons the concept of scientific management, based on the principle that there was 'one best way' of doing any task, and that offices should be designed and managed accordingly. To find the 'one best way', Simmons established a systems research office at Lyons (later called the organization and methods department), and some of his lieutenants published books on office management that were influential well beyond Lyons. 
In 1925 Simmons became engaged to Muriel Hare (died 'c'.1992), the daughter of Herbert Sydney Hare, a jeweller from Devon; she had come to London to study Margaret Morris movement, the dance and exercise system named after its founder. They were married by Simmons's father on 10 June 1926 at St George's, Wilton, Somerset. Simmons adored his wife, whom he nicknamed Ariel; there were no children. 
A national organization, the Office Management Association (from 1934 the Institute of Administrative Management), had been founded after the First World War. Simmons joined it in 1933, was on its governing council a year later, and in 1938 became its chairman, a post he held until 1950. He was simultaneously its president from 1944 until 1950, and held the title of honorary vice-president until his death. Through this organization he was in regular touch with other influential management figures such as Sir James Pitman. He was an early advocate of decimalization. Among his achievements at the Office Management Association was the introduction of a job grading scheme for office workers based on the system he had introduced at Lyons, which in turn led to the publication from 1942 of a biennial survey, the 'Clerical Salaries Analysis'. 
Soon after the Second World War Simmons sent two of his staff, Oliver Standingford and Raymond Thompson, on a lengthy visit to the USA to study developments in office practice. At their request, the visit included meetings with those who had been involved in the development of ENIAC, the so-called 'electronic brain' based on almost 18,000 thermionic valves that had been developed by the US army during the war to calculate firing tables for heavy artillery. By the time they returned, Thompson and Standingford had sketched out a realistic proposal for the development and use of an electronic calculator for routine office work such as invoicing, payroll, and form letters. They had also discovered that Maurice Wilkes at Cambridge University was already building such a machine: EDSAC, the electronic delay storage automatic calculator. 
Simmons enthusiastically endorsed their report -- he had long dreamed of mechanizing the drudgery of much clerical work. On his recommendation Lyons invested $3000 in EDSAC in return for the right to build its own copy of the machine if it worked. EDSAC, a 3000-valve machine, ran its first programs in 1949. By that time Lyons had already recruited a team of engineers led by John Pinkerton to build its computer, and had created a cadre of systems designers and programmers under David Caminer, then manager of systems research, to develop the first office applications. Simmons himself came up with the name: Lyons Electronic Office, or LEO. LEO I ran its first program, known as bakery valuations, in November 1951, becoming the first electronic computer in the world to run a routine office job. LEO subsequently took on many other jobs, including the Lyons payroll and teashops distribution. The latter, an innovative suite of programs that greatly streamlined the ordering and delivery of goods for the teashops, began to come into use in November 1954. 
By this time Lyons was also selling time on the computer to other organizations, from the Ford Motor Company to the Ministry of Defence. Simmons urged the company to spread the computer development costs by making additional units for sale, and Leo Computers Ltd was founded in 1954. The company built eleven of its improved (but still valve-based) LEO II models, before introducing the highly advanced LEO III, with transistor electronics, in 1962. But the level of investment was never sufficient to compete with American manufacturers, particularly IBM. Despite the successful sales of around 60 LEO IIIs, Lyons sold Leo Computers Ltd to English Electric in 1964. 
For Simmons the computer was always a means to an end, not an end in itself. In 1962 he published 'LEO and the Managers', which set out his vision of the computer as a management tool at the heart of a business. In it he wrote: 'LEO is to the thinking of a manager as a grammar book is to the words of a speaker... The use of LEO brings a new freedom and power to managerial thinking and decision making and... a means of unambiguous communication.' He had drawn up a 'master plan' for Lyons, neatly encapsulated in a flow chart that showed how information would stream between autonomous divisions and the board via the computer. But it was never fully implemented: Simmons never succeeded in persuading board members to make full use of LEO's powers of analysis. By the time he retired from Lyons in 1968, minicomputers were becoming available and divisional managers were acquiring their own. After retirement he wrote 'The Management of Change' (1970). 
While unfailingly courteous, Simmons was perceived by his juniors as austere and exacting, demanding precision in speech and writing and a clear sense of purpose. He dressed formally in double-breasted suits until his retirement, after which he rather surprisingly grew a beard and favoured bow ties and velvet jackets. Throughout their marriage he and Muriel moved between addresses in west London, finally settling in Hyde Park Gardens. Between 1965 and 1974 they also owned a flat in Ospedaletti on the Italian riviera. Simmons was not a regular churchgoer but retained a deep personal belief. He died in St Mary's Hospital, Praed Street, London on 14 January 1985, following a stroke, and was cremated at Mortlake. His wife survived him for a further seven years. Since 1968 an annual lecture has been given in his honour under the auspices of the Institute of Administrative Management. 


@@@@@


doc= 57277


John King (b. 1648, d. in or after 1686), the eldest son of John King, was born in London on 5 June 1648 and was educated at the Merchant Taylors' School. He was admitted a pensioner at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, on 21 June 1666. From 1667 to 1671 he was a scholar at Caius. He received an MB from the university on 26 November 1670, and was admitted to Leiden, probably on 20 May 1671. Through the influence of Sir Andrew King he became university professor at Gresham College, London, on 2 October 1676. In the following month, on 30 November 1676, he also became a fellow of the Royal Society, proposed by Abraham Hill, a founding member of that society. King remained professor at Gresham until his resignation on 20 August 1686. 


@@@@@


doc= 57398


Mary Ann Sainsbury (1849-1927) was born on 30 June 1849 at Little Charles Street, St Pancras, the eldest child and only daughter of Benjamin Staples and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Cant ('c'.1827-1909). Benjamin Staples was originally a woodcarver, but by 1864 he had become a dairyman and Mary Ann may have assisted him at his shop at 87 Chalton Street, Euston, before working for Tom Haile, another dairyman, in Strutton Ground. Tradition has it that John James and Mary Ann founded Sainsbury's on their wedding day, 20 April 1869. Their first shop was a dairy at 173 Drury Lane, Holborn, London, run by Mary Ann while John James worked out his notice; poverty obliged them to share the cramped accommodation over the shop with three other families. Mary Ann continued to play an active role in the business until the mid-1870s. Thereafter she devoted herself to the needs of her rapidly expanding family, which, by December 1890, comprised six sons and five daughters. In 1873 the couple moved their young family away from the tenements of Drury Lane to 159 Queen's Crescent, Kentish Town. About 1888 they moved to Bishopsfield, Broadlands Road, Highgate, Middlesex, where they lived thereafter. 
The early success of the business was assured by offering in hygienic surroundings high-quality dairy products and fresh provisions at prices which even London's poor could afford. The slogan 'Quality perfect, prices lower', which appeared on early shop fascias, encapsulated this policy. John James was quick to exploit the expanding market for fresh foodstuffs in the railway suburb of Kentish Town and soon opened two further branches in the locality. By the early 1880s he had also taken over several shops from his wife's family and associates in established London market streets in Islington and Stepney. His most significant venture was to acquire in 1882 a shop at 6 (later 11) London Road, Croydon. This was Sainsbury's first branch outside London. It catered for a middle-class clientele by offering a wide range of provisions including foreign cheeses, poultry and game, and 'table delicacies' (cooked meats). This shop, which was more elaborately decorated than its predecessors, established the distinctive Sainsbury's house style. 
John James Sainsbury's success lay in his ability to match the competitive pricing of the multiples while also offering higher standards of quality, service, and hygiene. This distinguished his shops from Lipton and Home and Colonial, which expanded more rapidly but offered a more limited product range. The slower rate of expansion of Sainsbury's suited John James's management style of closely supervised centralized control. His involvement in the detail of day-to-day business ensured that Sainsbury's retained its family character. 
All the sons of John James and Mary Ann were appointed to senior positions in the firm. 


@@@@@


doc= 57469


Henrietta Liston, Lady Liston (1751-1828)], botanist, daughter of Nathaniel (died 1761) and Sarah Marchant of Antigua, at the episcopal chapel, Glasgow; they had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 57507


Peter Hately Waddell (1854-1922), was born at Girvan on 15 June 1854 and was educated at the high school and university in Glasgow, matriculating in 1870 and graduating MA in 1877. He was tutor to the family of Dr Fergus, an oculist in Glasgow, and was licensed by the presbytery of Glasgow in 1878. In 1879 he was called to be minister of Whitekirk and Tyninghame. He married, on 4 July 1882, Elizabeth (died 1924), daughter of John Watson Laidlay, of Seacliff near Whitekirk, and his wife, Ellen. He was a well-known preacher and something of a humorist. Unusually among the Scottish clergy he was a keen Wagnerian, and in 1894 published 'The Parsifal of Richard Wagner at Bayreuth'. He also published several works of theology. He died on 22 November 1922 at Whitekirk. 


@@@@@


doc= 57508


William Henry Forman (1794-1869). The brothers presided over the Forman financial empire at a time of great expansion within the Welsh iron trade. In 1830 the south Wales ironworks produced no less than 40 per cent of all the iron manufactured in Britain. Furthermore, all the Forman ironworks were to be successful producers of wrought-iron rails during the boom period from 1840 to 1860. Thomas Seaton Forman's business career encouraged him to become involved in politics, and he sat as MP for Bridgwater in Somerset from 1841 until 1847. His wealth also allowed him to purchase Pippbrook House, Dorking, in 1849, and then to indulge fully in his hobby of collecting antiques and 'objets d'art'. He died in 1850 at Pisa, while on a collecting trip to Italy. He left a widow, Elizabeth, 'nee' Moore (died 1889); they had no children and the majority of the family's wealth became concentrated in the hands of his unmarried brother, William Henry Forman, who wisely withdrew from the ownership of the Penydarren ironworks in 1859 and sold the mineral property to the Dowlais ironworks. At this time his fortune was assessed at several million pounds, some of which he contributed to church restoration. In 1853 a fire had destroyed St George's Church, Doncaster, and because of his family's connections with the town Forman offered to rebuild the south chapel at his own expense. George Gilbert Scott was employed as the architect and the rebuilt chapel became known as the Forman Chapel. Forman also engaged the Scott office to rebuild and extend Pippbrook House. He was a great collector of antiques and a private museum was built within the house. During the 1860s Forman also paid for the rebuilding of the chancel of St Martin's Church, Dorking. He died at his home, Fonthill House in Tunbridge Wells, on 28 August 1869, after three and a half years' suffering from paraplegia. 
Throughout the 1860s the Forman family continued to operate their iron merchant's business in London and to hold a major share in the Tredegar ironworks. However, the family's long-standing connection with the south Wales iron trade came to an end soon after the death of William Henry Forman in 1869. An indication of the important position that the family held in the south Wales iron industry is that his will was later proved at just over $1 million. The family had been actively involved in the iron trade of south Wales for nearly ninety years, and members of the Forman family had been founding partners in three of the largest ironworks in the area. 


@@@@@


doc= 57540


Henry Monteith (1765-1848) and Christina Cameron (1768-1818). Henry Monteith was a merchant landowner, twice lord provost of Glasgow (1814-16 and 1818-20), and an MP; he owned huge textile mills at Barrowfield, Glasgow, and at Blantyre, and made his fortune with the Turkey-red dye process. His home, Carstairs House (built in 1818), was one of the first neo-Gothic buildings in Scotland. In 1820 he defeated Robert Owen for the Lanark burghs parliamentary seat. Briefly MP for Saltash in 1826, he was returned again for Lanark burghs in 1830, holding the seat until 1832. 


@@@@@


doc= 57716


Eadberht I (d. 748) in 725 after the long reign of their father, Wihtred (d. 725), who had re-established the kingdom's independence after the foreign invasions of the late 680s. Their half-brother Alric is said by Bede to have been coheir, but there is no trace of him after 725 and it is possible that he was denied power. Understanding of this period has been obscured by the incorrect chronological framework proposed by the twelfth-century chronicler William of Malmesbury, who gave the three brothers consecutive reigns: Eadberht from 725 to 748; AEthelberht from 748 until 762; and Alric from 762 until 796. The issue was further confused by radical emendation in the later middle ages of the muniments of St Augustine's Abbey and of Christ Church, Canterbury, intended to bring them into line with Malmesbury's chronology. In fact, AEthelberht and Eadberht seem to have ruled jointly from 725. The kingdom may have been divided between them, with AEthelberht based in the east and Eadberht in the west; AEthelberht was apparently regarded as the senior ruler. Eadberht died in 748 and was buried in Reculver Minster; his position in west Kent was inherited by his son 


@@@@@


doc= 57717


Eardwulf (d. in or before 762). AEthelberht survived until 762, and chose to be buried in the monastery of St Peter and St Paul (later St Augustine's Abbey) in Canterbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 57718


Eadberht II (fl. 762-763), probably his son; but within two years Eadberht had been replaced by a certain 


@@@@@


doc= 57719


Eanmund (fl. 763-764), who was in turn supplanted by 


@@@@@


doc= 57720


Heahberht (fl. 764). In west Kent Eardwulf does not seem to have survived 762; in his place there appeared a King 


@@@@@


doc= 57721


Ecgberht II (fl. 765-779), who was destined to cling to power for very much longer than his immediate predecessors. 


@@@@@


doc= 57722


Ealhmund (fl. 784) in 784 which make no reference at all to Offa. There is now general agreement that the men of Kent, probably led by King Ecgberht, rebelled against Mercian rule in 776 and succeeded in winning independence from Offa for almost a decade. Ecgberht seems to have become king of the whole of Kent (the fate of Heahberht is uncertain); there survive about a dozen coins in his name, probably struck at Canterbury, which are some of the earliest examples of a new silver coinage based on Carolingian weights (the dating of these coins is uncertain and they may belong to the period before the battle of Otford; there is a single example in the name of Heahberht). Ealhmund was probably Ecgberht's successor (and apparently the father of the future King Ecgberht who was to rule Wessex from 802 until his death in 839). But Offa's power could not be withstood for much longer, and by 785 he had reimposed his control on the kingdom. In that year he issued the first of a series of charters making direct grants of land in Kent, without reference to any native ruler; it is to be assumed that Ealhmund had been killed or driven out. From 785 until the 820s Kent was treated as a province of the Mercian kingdom; only in 796-8 was there a brief resurgence of Kentish independence, when Eadberht Praen (perhaps a descendant of the ancient Kentish dynasty) ruled for a short time as king of Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 57730


Saeward (d. in or after 617). The sons had not been converted to Christianity, and expelled Mellitus when, according to Bede, he would not allow them to have some of his communion bread. Mellitus was obliged to return to Kent. The brothers were killed not long after in battle with the Gewisse, which Bede saw as just punishment for their rejection of the true faith. Little is known of their successor 


@@@@@


doc= 57731


Swithhelm (d. 663) was the son of Seaxbald, who is otherwise unknown. He too came to the throne a pagan, but was baptized by Cedd in the East Anglian royal palace at Rendlesham with King AEthelwold of the East Angles as his sponsor. 
On Swithhelm's death in 663, two kings succeeded jointly to the throne -- 


@@@@@


doc= 57734


Swaefbert (d. 738); 


@@@@@


doc= 57735


Swithred (fl. c.746), grandson of King Sigeheard; and 


@@@@@


doc= 57736


Sigeric (d. in or after 798), son of Selered, who abdicated in 798. Mercian overlordship continued, and AEthelbald and Offa detached London and the surrounding Middle Saxon province from East Saxon control. However, the East Saxon rulers seem to have retained their regalian rights in Essex and issued their own 'sceatta' coinage. The last independent East Saxon ruler was probably 


@@@@@


doc= 57746


William [iii] Fairbank (c.1771-1846), and his second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 57750


Eormenric (fl. 550x600) who was the father of AEthelberht, the first king of Kent whom Bede discusses in any detail. Gregory of Tours, writing of the marriage of the Frankish princess Bertha, daughter of King Charibert, to AEthelberht, describes him as 'the son of a certain king in Kent' and that is the only reference which definitely implies that Eormenric ruled as king (Gregory of Tours, 4.26). The marriage is not the only evidence for strong Frankish influence in Kent during the sixth century. Grave-goods from Kentish cemeteries show not only the acquisition of luxury goods made or acquired through Francia, but also the adoption of Frankish fashions of dress and other ways of displaying status. The first element of Eormenric's name is uncommon among Anglo-Saxon personal names, but relatively common in Francia, and so may be further evidence for Frankish influence in the time of his parents. Such influence may have gone beyond that of trade. Various Frankish sources and some of the correspondence connected with the mission sent by Pope Gregory to Kent in 596 may imply a degree of Frankish overlordship of Kent in the second half of the sixth century, perhaps aided by the fact that people from Kent seem to have settled within Francia in the vicinity of Boulogne. 
Eormenric's reign cannot be dated precisely. Bede believed that AEthelberht succeeded to the throne in 560, which by implication would be the date of Eormenric's death. But Gregory of Tours's statement that AEthelberht was not yet king of Kent when he married Bertha implies that the 560 date cannot be correct, for Bertha was not born until some time between 561 and 568 and Gregory seems to have believed that AEthelberht was still a 'filius regis' ('son of the king') at the time he was writing in 589. Even if it is allowed that Gregory may not have been fully informed on the Kentish succession, Eormenric's reign must be placed in the second half of the sixth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 57784


(Elizabeth) Isis Pogson (1852-1945), astronomer and meteorologist, was born on 28 September 1852 at Observatory Street, Oxford, the eldest daughter of Pogson and his first wife, and named after the nearby river. After helping to look after her siblings, in 1873 Isis, 'a delicate invalid, [became an] invaluable aid upon a salary of Rupees 150 [$15] per month; equal... to a coachman or cook' (Pogson to Stewart, 30 June 1877, CUL, RGO 6.152, 192). She supervised work on astronomical reductions. In 1881, as Pogson was neglecting the meteorology which the local government considered important, Isis became meteorological reporter to the Madras government, a salaried position, but not pensionable. In 1886 Pogson nominated her for fellowship of the RAS, but, faced with constitutional objection, she withdrew her name. After 1891 a Royal Society committee considered the future of the observatory. It was decided to enable her to complete twenty-five years' meritorious service in 1898 so that she could be retired on a pension of Rs 250 when the observatory closed and the solar physics observatory at Kodaikanal was opened. She then married Herbert C. Kent, a captain in the merchant navy. They retired first to Bournemouth, and then to London. Beyond reports to the Bombay presidency, Isis published no scientific papers, but Professor H. H. Turner successfully proposed her for election as a fellow of the RAS in 1920. A widow, she died at 14 Duppas Hill Road, Croydon, Surrey, on 14 May 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 57824


Henry Binns (1810-1880), born in Sunderland on 19 June 1810, was a deeply committed Quaker and an active member of the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society, and he advertised his refusal to sell 'any goods manufactured from cotton not warranted to be free labour grown', giving his customers the opportunity to strike an 'effectual blow to the traffic so opposed to the services of religion and humanity' (advertisement, Binns MSS). Nevertheless, the business prospered and moved to larger premises on the other side of Bishopwearmouth's high street in 1844. Binns's opposition to slavery was a reflection not just of his religious principles but also of his political views, which embraced further constitutional reform and the repeal of the corn laws. Through Quaker circles in Newcastle upon Tyne he knew John Bright before the Anti-Corn Law Association was founded in 1839, and he and his brother George were involved in the growing protest movement, helping to form the Durham Charter Association in 1838. George and James Taylor, his partner in a local bookshop, were the most active, printing tracts, handbills, and posters and speaking throughout the north-east. Both were arrested in 1839 along with other Chartist leaders, but they continued their activities until their trial in summer 1840. George Binns was imprisoned for six months, and Henry himself was briefly detained with Bright but was not put on trial. After his release George was elected to the executive of the National Charter Association in June 1841, coming fifth in the poll. 
George Binns's health had suffered during his time in prison and he left Sunderland for Port Nelson, New Zealand, in August 1842; he died there of tuberculosis on 5 April 1847. His obituary in the 'Northern Star' on 5 February 1848 described him as 'a handsome, high spirited talented true-hearted man -- every inch a democrat'. Henry Binns was involved in Bright's attempt to stand against Lord Dungannon for the Durham parliamentary seat in March 1843, his bid to be nominated for the Sunderland seat, and his eventual election for Durham in July. Unlike some Quakers, Binns did not break with Bright over his opposition to the Anti-Slavery Society's call for tariffs on goods produced by slave labour. 
Henry Binns married Elizabeth Bowron, probably in 1836. They had ten children, the eldest of whom, Sir Henry Binns (1837-1899), emigrated to Natal in 1858. Elizabeth died in childbirth in 1855 and Henry retired in 1865 to Croydon, Surrey, where the following year he married Emma Andrews, the widow of John Grimshaw. She died in 1868; Henry died at his home, 62 Lansdowne Road, Croydon, on 17 January 1880. 
The shop was left to Henry's second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 57844


Anne Lister (1671-1695x1704), who worked with her, were the first and second of the eight children of Martin Lister (bap. 1639, d. 1712), physician and naturalist, and his wife, Hannah (1645-1695), daughter of Thomas Parkinson (1607-1671) of Carleton in Craven and his wife, Anne. Susanna was born at Carleton Hall and baptized on 9 June 1670, while Anne (Nancy to her family) was born on 13 October 1671 at her father's house 'without Micklegate Bar' at York. The sisters began to draw and paint as children. On his way to France in July 1681, Lister wrote to his wife: 'I did send home a box of colour in oil for Susan and Nancy to paint with. As for the pencils sent with them, and the colours in shells, which are for limning, I would have thee lock them carefully up, till I return, for they know not yet the use of them. (Goulding, 342)' Susan and Nancy were then eleven and nine years old. Before long, they were drawing and painting pictures of their father's growing shell collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 57859


William [i] Cadell (1668-1728), who appeared in Haddington as a journeyman glazier in 1701, and became a burgess there in 1704 by right of his father-in-law. 
Although his origins are unknown, Cadell was an able man, and by the time of his death was a well-to-do merchant. In 1701 he married Anna (1681-1743), daughter of James Hogg, a burgess of Haddington. They had three sons and one daughter, including 


@@@@@


doc= 57860


Henry Cadell (bap. 1812, d. 1888), a distinguished mining engineer. He was baptized on 21 May 1812 at Grange, Bo'ness, the son of James John Cadell and his wife, Isabella, daughter of Henry Moubray of Calderbank. He was one of the earliest to study and exploit the silting propensities of the Firth of Forth, and his purchase in 1868 of 86 acres of foreshore, which he started to reclaim by a process of silting and the use of pit waste, added considerably to the industrial possibilities of the area. A notable inventor, he also exhibited weighing equipment at the Great Exhibition of 1851. Henry Cadell married Martha (died 1854), daughter of Robert Hislop, in 1841, and they had two sons and three daughters. He married again in 1859, his second wife being Jessie Gray (died 1895), daughter of the Revd John McFarlane. There were a further four sons and three daughters from this marriage. Henry Cadell died at Grange on 8 January 1888. 
Henry's son 


@@@@@


doc= 57861


Henry Moubray Cadell (1860-1934), a geologist, was one of the earliest members of the geological survey of Scotland under Professor Archibald Geikie. Born on 30 May 1860 at Crawhill, Torphichen, West Lothian, he was the eldest child of Henry Cadell and his second wife, Jessie. He studied at Edinburgh University from 1876 to 1882, and then at the renowned mining school at Clausthal in Germany from 1882 to 1883. His discovery of the great thrust planes of Sutherland, his work on the shale fields of West Lothian, and his two major books, 'The Story of the Forth' (1913) and 'The Rocks of West Lothian' (1918), were pioneering studies. Henry Moubray Cadell married Elinor (1868-1945), daughter of David Simson of Bonaly, in 1889; they had one son and seven daughters. He died at Edinburgh on 10 April 1934. 
Through their ironworks and collieries the Cadell family played a key role in inaugurating the industrial revolution in Scotland. During the later nineteenth and early twentieth centuries they continued to contribute to Scottish industrial and technological development, and, although no longer directly involved in manufacturing, members of the family still occupied the land first acquired for industrial purposes in the eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 57862


Sir (Clement) Anderson Montague-Barlow, baronet (1868-1951), was educated at Repton School and King's College, Cambridge (where he obtained a first class in law), and became a barrister. He was on London county council, 1907-10, and was Conservative MP for South Salford, 1910-23. He raised the Salford brigade of Lancashire Fusiliers in 1914 and was knighted in 1918. He was a delegate at the international labour conferences, 1920-21, and, after being parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Labour, 1920-22, was its minister, 1922-4, being sworn of the privy council in 1922. He chaired the royal commission on location of industry, 1937-40. Throughout his life he was an active Anglican layman and chaired the house of laity of the church assembly in 1945-6. He was created a baronet in 1924 and adopted the name of Montague in 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 57865


William Ayerst (1802-1883), Church of England clergyman and missionary, attended St John's College, Cambridge, and became a fervent evangelical under the influence of Charles Simeon, who encouraged him to devote himself especially to the conversion of the Jews. He worked with the Revd R. S. Alexander in Danzig, Breslau, and Berlin between 1827 and 1837. In Berlin the mission became something of a focus for court interest; however, C. J. Blomfield's intervention brought the mission to an end. Ayerst then served in London as foreign secretary to the Jews' Society from 1841 to 1853, and from 1853 to his death was vicar of Egerton, Kent. His son was educated at King's College School, London (1847-9), and in 1849 became scholar and Lyon exhibitioner of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, graduating BA with a third class in the classical tripos and junior optime in 1853, and MA in 1856. Ordained deacon in 1853 and priest in 1854, he served the curacies successively of All Saints', Gordon Square (1853-5), St Paul's, Lisson Grove (1855-7), and St Giles-in-the-Fields (1857-9). While working as a curate he won the Hulsean prize at Cambridge in 1855 and the Norrisian prize in 1858. He also published 'The Influence of Christianity on the Language of Modern Europe' (1856) and 'The Pentateuch, its Own Witness' (1858). 


@@@@@


doc= 57866


William Ayerst (1860-1934), army officer, was born in Calcutta and educated at Tonbridge School and Ayerst Hostel, Cambridge. He joined the army in England, and in 1885 returned to India, serving on the Burma commission in 1886-91. He retired as lieutenant-colonel in 1910. Like his father and grandfather he was an energetic evangelical, being especially notable for his work in promoting the introduction of the 'Bible' in Braille to India and Burma. His work subsequently developed into the Braille Missionary Union. 


@@@@@


doc= 57867


Nehemiah [ii] Champion (1649-1722), son of Nehemiah [i] Champion ('b'. 1614). As a merchant dealing countrywide in iron goods, and a Quaker from about 1670, Nehemiah [ii] became Bristol agent and largest customer of Abraham Darby (1678-1717) of Coalbrookdale. He appears also to have represented Bristol interests in Newcomen's new atmospheric pump for mining. His sons included Nehemiah [iii] and Richard (1680-1764). He died on 1 May 1722 at Bristol. 



@@@@@


doc= 57877


Henry Platt (1793-1842), born on 20 March 1793 in the Pennine village of Dobcross, the son of John Platt (1767-1830). On 20 March 1815 Henry married Sarah Whitehead (1792-1860) and they raised four sons and six daughters. He took over the business of his father, a prosperous machine maker, and carried on the manufacture of wool-processing machinery. In 1821 he moved from Dobcross to the rapidly expanding cotton town of Oldham and there he began to manufacture cotton machinery, especially carding engines, in order to meet the rising demand for preparing the cotton. In 1822 he formed a partnership with the wealthy Elijah Hibbert (1801-1846), under the name of Hibbert and Platt. The business prospered and they opened Hartford works at Greenacres Moor in 1829-30. 
Henry's son 


@@@@@


doc= 57971


Henry Frederic Tiarks (1900-1995), merchant banker, was born on 8 September 1900 at Foxbury and educated at Eton College (1913-18), where he acquired his lifelong interest in astronomy. He served briefly as a midshipman in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve in 1918, then gained banking experience overseas, represented Schroders in Chile and Bolivia, and in 1926 joined the partnership. On 28 April 1930 he married Lady Millicent Olivia Mary (died 1975), only daughter of Geoffrey Thomas Taylour, fourth marquess of Headfort; they had one son. The marriage was dissolved in 1936, and on 3 October 1936 Tiarks married Joan (1903-1989), daughter of Francis Marshman-Bell and, until her marriage, a popular West End and film actress under the name Joan Barry; they had one son and one daughter. In the Second World War, Tiarks served as an RAF officer and had charge of London barrage balloons, but was invalided out by tuberculosis and returned to Schroders as a senior partner. Used to a different lifestyle, he disliked the modern professional City and adopted an ambassadorial role, cultivating new clients and government contacts. He was a director of companies linked with Schroders (including Pressed Steel and Joseph Lucas) and led overseas delegations for the board of trade. He resigned as an executive of Schroders a few months after it merged with Helbert Wagg in 1962, but remained on the board until 1965. Tiarks was tall, dark, and slim, and among his interests (besides astronomy) were nature conservation, polo, and golf. He retired for health and tax reasons to Marbella, Spain, and died there on 2 July 1995. He was survived by his daughter, Henrietta, who in 1961 married the marquess of Tavistock; his two sons predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 58059


Jessica Stewart Dismorr (1885-1939) was born on 2 March 1885 at Hillcrest Lodge, West Hill, Gravesend, Kent, the daughter of John Stewart Dismorr, a colonial merchant, and his wife, Mary Ann Rebecca, 'nee' Clowes. She attended the Slade School of Fine Art in 1902-3 before studying painting under Jean Metzinger, J. D. Fergusson, A. Dunoyer de Segonzac, and J.-E. Blanche at the Atelier La Palette, Paris, from 1910 to 1913. There she became a fauviste, and contributed to several issues of 'Rhythm' magazine. Dismorr exhibited with S. J. Peploe and Fergusson at the Stafford Gallery, London, in 1912, and at the Salon d'Automne the following year. At about this time she met Wyndham Lewis and by 1914 had become an ardent member of the Rebel Art Centre. By the time she signed the vorticist manifesto Dismorr was working in a strongly abstract style. Her work was illustrated in the second issue of 'Blast' (1915), where her writings were also published. The girder-like forms of her 'Abstract Composition' (1914-15; Tate collection) are suggestive of '
the new machinery that wields the chain of muscles fitted beneath 

my close coat of skin. 
(Dismorr, 'Monologue', 'Blast', 2, 1915)' She showed in the vorticist exhibition in London in 1915, after which she left to carry out war work in France. Her work was included at the vorticist exhibition in New York in 1917, and her first solo exhibition was held at the Mayor Gallery, London, in 1925; the following year she was elected to the London Group and the Seven & Five Society. Her involvement with the avant-garde continued throughout her life: during the 1930s she exhibited with the Association Abstraction-Creation, and in 1937 contributed to 'Axis' magazine. At the end of her life Dismorr was living at 17 Willoughby Road, London. She committed suicide by hanging herself at 21 St Edmund's Terrace, St Marylebone, London, on 29 August 1939. 
Dismorr's friend 


@@@@@


doc= 58122


Egerton Webbe (1810?-1840), named after his uncle the Liverpool publisher Egerton Smith, was a composer, a man of letters, and a friend of Charles Cowden Clarke, Leigh Hunt, and Holmes. He wrote on music, literature, and ballet for the 'London Journal', 'Bentley's Miscellany', 'Atlas', 'The Spectator', and 'Musical World', which he also co-edited with Holmes between October 1838 and April 1839. Egerton Webbe died of tuberculosis at Park Terrace, Wellington Road, Toxteth Park, Liverpool, on 24 June 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 58180


Moore, William (fl. c.1806-1823), mathematician and rocket theorist, is a person of whom little is now known. His publications showed his mathematical competence, but he was not an Oxford or Cambridge graduate and was probably self-taught and thus near the end of a long line of similar men typified by Benjamin Robins (1707-1751) or Charles Hutton (1737-1823). He is shown among the preliminary appointments in the records of the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, for 1741-1892, as becoming the sixth mathematical assistant in 1806 and as remaining on the mathematical staff until he was either retired or discharged when staff cuts were made in 1822 or 1823. The examining board that appointed him consisted of Charles Hutton and two others. According to a transcript dated October 1806, Moore and Peter Barlow (1776-1862), also then appointed, were thought 'capable of becoming very useful Masters'. 
There is no published recognition by Charles Hutton of Moore, despite their teaching and researching in the same academy, supposedly side by side for several years. In Hutton's article 'Rockets' in volume 2 of his 'Philosophical and Mathematical Dictionary' (1815) there is no mention of Moore or of his publications. Woolwich was then the centre of British rocket research and development, and Moore probably personally knew Sir William Congreve, inventor and rocket pioneer, and was presumably influenced by his work on rockets. 
In 1811 Moore published 'A Treatise on the Doctrine of Fluxations'. His 'Treatise on the Motion of Rockets [and] an Essay on Naval Gunnery' (1813) is acknowledged as the first publication on rocket mechanics which correctly proceeds from Newton's principles, calculating on the basis of equations following from Newton's third law of motion, that 'action and reaction are equal and opposite'. The second topic in the title, the penetration of wood by round shot, was then already well researched. The aim was to predict gunpowder charges which would cause solid iron round shot, projected at speeds of about 1500-2000 feet per second, to penetrate the 'wooden walls' of ships in action at sea. 
In September 1807 Copenhagen was successfully bombarded by British Congreve rockets. In 1810 the academy of Copenhagen proposed a prize essay on the related topics of rocket trajectories when projected in an oblique direction, the effects of perturbations on them, and certain matters pertaining to Congreve rocket combustion. Moore did not submit a competition essay but wrote four short incomplete papers, published in the 'Journal of Natural Philosophy' (1810-12). The questions set in the competition were so wide-ranging as to deter all but two entrants. This led Moore to write his 'Treatise', essentially an extension and refinement of his papers, but also including naval gunnery theory. He did not himself experiment, and admitted that his results were theoretical and needed to be tested by experiment. 
Moore's date and place of death are now unknown. German bombing in the Second World War destroyed invaluable documents with data on men, presumably including Moore, who had worked at Woolwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 58182


Kellgren, Jonas Henrik (1911-2002), rheumatologist, was born on 11 September 1911 in Hindhead, Frensham, Surrey, the fourth child and only son of Jonas Henrik (Harry) Kellgren (1874-1918), medical practitioner, and his wife, Vera Feodrovna, 'nee' Dumelunksen (1872-1964), whose father had been governor of Viatkov province in Russia. His father was of Swedish descent, but had been born in Gotha, Germany. 
As a boy, Kellgren (always known as Jonky to distinguish him from his father and grandfather, all of the same names) grew up in a medical tradition. His grandfather ran a successful medical institute in Sweden patronized by the wealthy from Britain. It was to that institute that his mother Vera fled seeking sanctuary as a penniless refugee from Russia: she had secretly taught factory workers to read and write, a criminally subversive activity under the tsarist regime. In due course she married the eldest son, Kellgren's father, and the couple moved to Eaton Square, London, to set up a branch of the institute for the convenience of UK clients. The business collapsed after Kellgren's father died in the 1918-19 influenza pandemic. The family was left impoverished, but a grateful patient paid for the young Kellgren's education at Bedales School and University College medical school, where his intellectual potential was soon apparent. He graduated MB BS in 1934, was admitted MRCP in 1935, FRCS in 1936, and FRCP in 1951, and graduated MSc (Manchester) in 1957. On 3 January 1934 he married a fellow medical student, Ruth Alice Rushton ('b'. 1905), daughter of William Rushton, dental surgeon. They had a daughter, Judith. The marriage was dissolved in 1940. 
In 1938, after gaining postgraduate degrees in both medicine and surgery (he was later to regard the latter achievement as unfortunate), he won a scholarship to study physical medicine in Scandinavia, returning to University College to investigate the physiology of pain, under the direction of Sir Thomas Lewis. Lewis was interested in pain arising in the cardiovascular system, particularly angina pectoris and the pain in the legs associated with restricted blood flow. He did not accept that 'neuritis' explained the pain of angina pectoris which, when severe, spread down the inner side of the left arm to the fingers. Lewis had used injections of a 6 per cent salt solution as a harmless but pain-evoking substance when injected under the skin. Kellgren expanded this work in a meticulous and comprehensive study of how pain arising in structures deep inside the body is felt at a distance from its cause. His research, published as three papers in 'Clinical Science', laid the foundation of understanding the mechanisms of deep pain. In 1937 he described the effects of the salt solution on ligaments, bones, tendons, and muscles. Injecting the muscle in the front of the thigh, for example, caused diffuse pain around the knee. Kellgren painstakingly (literally, since he was one of his experimental subjects) mapped the referral areas of pain from all the main muscles and fibrous structures of the body. The work explained how pain arising in the low back could be felt in the leg as sciatica or pain from the neck could radiate down the arm. In his third paper he described how such pains could mimic pain from one of the abdominal organs. He showed that there were no qualitative differences between somatic (bone and muscle) pain and visceral pain. Pain was, he found, 'all the same colour'. 
In 1939 Kellgren gained a Beit memorial fellowship to continue his studies but these were suspended when the Second World War was declared. He had planned his future as a physician but his dean, noting his surgical qualification, put him in charge of a surgical unit at the Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital, which had been evacuated to Hemel Hempstead. With little practical surgical experience he had to learn his skills on the job. Later, at Leavesden Hospital, he received proper training and undertook surgery for prolapsed intervertebral discs, interrupted by surgery for survivors of the Dunkirk evacuation. In 1941 he joined the Royal Army Medical Corps as a major and took part in the landings in Algiers and the campaign in Tunisia. He followed the army through Sicily and Italy. On 6 June 1942 he married an American army nurse, Thelma Marian Reynolds ('b'. 1914). She was the daughter of Lester Leroy Reynolds, building contractor's foreman. They had four daughters, Joanna, Nina, Ingrid, and Lee. 
Kellgren returned to Britain in 1946 after five years of surgery and worked at the Wingfield Morris Orthopaedic Hospital, Oxford, studying the consequences of peripheral nerve injuries and the effect of cooling on pain perception. In 1948 a grant of $120,000 a year for ten years from the Nuffield Foundation funded the University of Manchester Centre for Research into Chronic Rheumatism, with Kellgren as director. In 1953 he became Britain's first professor of rheumatology. He established an epidemiological unit that uncovered the causes of rheumatic complaints in coalminers. The unit undertook a sample survey of the inhabitants of the town of Leigh in Lancashire, indicating the population frequency and national burden of different rheumatic complaints. Kellgren described nodal osteoarthritis occurring in elderly women and often running in families, characterized by knobs on the last joints of the fingers and involvement of the small joints in the back and neck. He established radiological criteria for the severity of osteoarthritis. With his colleague James Sharp he documented one of the few causes of sudden death in inflammatory arthritis: destruction of the top two joints in the neck. Studies were done on ankylosing spondylitis, the 'poker back' disease mainly affecting young men, and he taught that, unlike patients with rheumatoid arthritis, they were better when exercised and worse if rested. 
Kellgren was appointed expert adviser to the World Health Organization in 1961. He was pro-vice-chancellor of Manchester University (1967-72) and dean of the medical school (1968-73), coping with student riots and appointing new professors. He helped to develop postgraduate centres in every main hospital in the Manchester region, and to plan two additional teaching complexes at Salford and south Manchester. After retirement in 1976 he sat on the Flowers working party, which reviewed the twelve London teaching hospitals and fourteen postgraduate institutes in 1984. In 1996 new research facilities for the Manchester Institute of Musculo-Skeletal Medicine were named the J. H. Kellgren laboratories in his honour. 
Kellgren's hobbies included landscape painting, mountain climbing, and gardening at his weekend cottage in the Lake District, to which he moved on retirement and which contained several important pieces made by his brother-in-law, the furniture maker Edward Barnsley. He died at his home, Beckside Cottage, Rusland, near Ulverston, Cumbria, on 22 February 2002, of heart failure; he had also been suffering from prostate cancer. He was buried at Rusland church on 28 February. He was survived by his second wife, Thelma, and his five daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 58183


Stops, Gervase Frank Ashworth Jackson- (1947-1995), architectural historian, was born on 26 April 1947 at Barratt maternity home, Northampton, the second of four children of Anthony Ashworth Briggs (1914-1986) of Durngate, Northampton, solicitor and afterwards estate agent, and his wife, Jean ('b'. 1914), an architect, the daughter of Herbert Jackson-Stops of Towcester. His parents were both English and his father changed his name by deed poll to Jackson-Stops in 1948. He was educated at Bilton Grange preparatory school, Warwickshire, then at Harrow School, and in 1965 he won an exhibition to Christ Church, Oxford, where he read modern history, gaining a second in 1968. He was immensely popular and his college tutor described him as 'an ornament to the House'. 
Jackson-Stops became one of the most brilliant architectural historians of his generation. His fascination for architecture began at an early age. A few miles from his childhood home near Towcester was Easton Neston, Hawksmoor's masterpiece -- where as a child Gervase played. A first sighting of that house set him off, and before long he knew all the architectural glories of Northamptonshire. In 1969 he won a Museums Association studentship and worked for three years in different departments of the Victoria and Albert Museum. From there he went, in 1972, to do part-time research for the National Trust. He was paid at first in books, but in no time he was employed full-time as research assistant. The inner core of the National Trust was then still very much a nest of gentlemen and Jackson-Stops was always amused by the term 'a modest increment', which meant he was to have an increase in his salary. 
Among Jackson-Stops's earliest duties was revising or rewriting guidebooks. He set new standards of scholarship, and the guidebooks through his inspiration became more complete -- seamlessly integrating architecture, family history, and gardening. His writing was always easy on the eye, and the guidebooks are a pleasure to read, being constructed as small detective stories of discovery. He wrote over thirty National Trust guidebooks besides several guides to privately owned properties. Most notable among these is his guide (1978) to Drayton House in Northamptonshire. His thirst for knowledge was insatiable and few things excited him more than a revealing discovery or finding fresh archival evidence. Coupled to this was an effervescent humour, laughter being as much a part of his character as his delight in buildings. He had a rare aptitude for imparting knowledge in an unpedantic manner, and this partly because he took the eighteenth-century approach to enlightenment as his ideal. 
Jackson-Stops was short in build with an innocent, querying face that never seemed to have left childhood. The innocence belied a formidable determination. As, too, did his highly idiosyncratic stammer: to get a stuck word out he would click his fingers with increasing rapidity, while any skirting board, chair leg, or commode in striking distance was likely to receive repeated kicks. (Once when in Spain and trying to say 'mesa' to the restaurant owner, he had got no further than the click of his fingers when the restaurateur, thinking he had grasped it, said, 'Aah, I know, you want the flamenco -- I fix.') The combination of appearance and stammer brought out an immediate sympathy in all but the hardest-hearted. 
As well as his guidebooks for the National Trust, Jackson-Stops became one of 'Country Life's' regular architectural writers. He also made time to produce several books, and memorable among them are: 'The English Country House: a Grand Tour' (1985) and 'The Country House Garden' (1987). (A complete bibliography of his writing was published in 'Architectural History', 39, 1996.) He was tireless. He would race across the countryside in a car, usually bearing the evidence of his frightening speed, determined to visit as many houses, churches, or monuments in one day as was possible. He saw the past as an intricate and living tapestry where all could be related, and rescued houses that otherwise would almost certainly have been lost: Canons Ashby, Calke Abbey, Chastleton, Kedleston, and at Stowe, the landscaped gardens, to name a few. The National Trust respected his unusual abilities, making him architectural adviser in 1975, and always permitting him complete freedom. Thus he lived and worked by his own itinerary. 
Ability and great personal charm made Jackson-Stops the perfect choice to mastermind, as guest curator, the Treasures of Britain exhibition for the National Gallery of Art in Washington, DC, in 1985. To him fell the delicate task of choosing, and persuading owners to part with, their objects so that the exhibition could explain Britain's wealth of belongings, many still in private hands. The exhibition was a great success and for it he was made OBE in 1986. Accompanying the exhibition was a magnificent catalogue which he edited. 
Jackson-Stops's other passion was for the ruin he resurrected and made his home. He bought The Menagerie -- a spectacular eighteenth-century eyecatcher in Horton Park, near Northampton -- for a trifle in the early 1970s. For the next twenty years he restored and embellished it. A superb craftsman, Christopher Hobbs, repaired the severely damaged rococo saloon, quite possibly one of the finest in Britain. And, as The Menagerie went through a succession of improvements -- from the house to the garden to an elaborate grotto -- so Jackson-Stops gave parties, often with an opera included, wanting friends to enjoy his own inspired adoration of the civilizing amusements. 
Jackson-Stops shared The Menagerie with two great friends. First the writer Simon Blow, who found his ready laughter and high spirits infectious, and latterly with a much younger friend, Ian Kirby, who had recently gained a horticultural diploma from Kew and went on to design the Menagerie garden for him in a style both traditional and inventive. Only the week before he died, frail and wasted but as determined as ever, Jackson-Stops, attired as an admiral, held a maritime party to celebrate the opening of the grotto. He could dress up -- or down -- in an instant. He once emerged from a naked bathe smothered in seaweed to resemble a sea monster and, on another occasion, he appeared at a fancy-dress ball rouged and bewigged as Dame Barbara Cartland, a stuffed Pekinese called Twee Twee under his arm. 'I have arrived,' he announced as he descended the staircase. 
It was Jackson-Stops's sheer enthusiasm that made for much of the originality with which he interpreted a house, and he brought new life to historical research. To his last hours architecture delighted him. Dying of an AIDS-related illness in St Bartholomew's Hospital, Smithfield, London, on 2 July 1995, he could see from his bedroom window the stone figure of Justice with her gilded scales that crowns the dome of the Old Bailey. 'Look -- isn't it wonderful! Quite wonderful!' he would exclaim. From his bed he arranged the music for his memorial service, which was held at All Saints' Church, Northampton, where he had been baptized. A full orchestra with singers performed Haydn's Nelson mass. It was attended by more than 700 people, a testimony to how dearly he was loved and missed. He was buried on private land on 8 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 58186


Jarrett, Sir Clifford George (1909-1995), civil servant, was born in Dover on 10 December 1909, the older child and only son of George Henry Jarrett (1881-1974), a photographer, and his wife, Kate Ellen, 'nee' Elgar (1883-1963). His childhood was disrupted by the First World War. In 1917, while his father was in the army, a German air raid on Dover made the family home uninhabitable. He moved with his mother and sister to Canterbury, where he entered the Payne Smith elementary school. In 1919, after his father was demobilized, the family returned to Dover. There, he later acknowledged, a superb deputy head and good teaching at St Mary's elementary school helped him to win a scholarship in 1920 to Dover County School for Boys, where he became captain of his house and company quartermaster-sergeant in the cadet corps. In 1927 he won an open scholarship to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge. 
Before starting at Cambridge Jarrett taught himself German; he wished to read modern languages, and the county school had taught only French. He went up to Sidney Sussex College in October 1928, graduating in 1931 with a double first in the modern languages tripos. The college extended his scholarship for another year to enable him to read for the history tripos and prepare for the civil service examination. He came first in the administrative class examination of 1932, and joined the Home Office. He soon found it, in his own words, 'rather stuffy', and in 1934 he successfully responded to an Admiralty appeal for experienced assistant principals. It was the start of a departmental career culminating in his appointment twenty-seven years later as the last secretary of the Admiralty. 
Jarrett's ability was quickly recognized. Between 1936 and 1938 he was private secretary to two parliamentary secretaries, followed by two years as head of the political section, in which, as the Second World War began, his main task was to monitor breaches of international law by the Germans. When A. V. Alexander succeeded Churchill as first lord in May 1940 Jarrett was appointed his principal private secretary -- the most important post in the department for a junior civil servant. It was a tribute to his intellect, character, and stamina that he held it for four years of war, living in the Admiralty building and frequently working a fifteen-hour day. In May 1944 he was promoted to a less demanding post; but he was shortly moved twice to gain experience in other departmental areas, followed by a brief assignment in Ottawa and Washington. In 1946, at the early age of thirty-seven, he was promoted again, to be the under-secretary in charge of all civilian personnel. Four years later he was promoted once more, becoming the sole deputy secretary under Sir John Lang, the secretary of the Admiralty since 1947. It was not, in Jarrett's view, an entirely satisfactory post since important issues had to be considered by the secretary while lesser matters could usually be handled by the under-secretaries. But special tasks fell to him, notably the negotiation in 1955 of the Simonstown naval agreement; and, in a period marked by constant reorganization and retrenchment, and also by such emergencies as the Korean War and the Suez crisis, Jarrett's acute mind and steady hand were invaluable. After eleven years as heir apparent he succeeded Lang as secretary in 1961. It was not to be for long. In 1964 the prime minister, Harold Macmillan, created the unified Ministry of Defence, abolishing separate service departments and redeploying their permanent secretaries to other departments. It was the end of the Admiralty, and its last secretary became permanent secretary of the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance. 
Jarrett took the transition in his stride. His colleagues were impressed by his friendly approach and by his speed in absorbing the intricacies of a fresh field of administration. The newly elected Labour government introduced a succession of departmental changes which he handled with quiet authority: a merger with the Supplementary Benefits Commission, then in 1968 a further merger with the Ministry of Health, thus establishing the Department of Health and Social Security with Jarrett as its first permanent secretary. His secretary of state, Richard Crossman, described him in his 'Diaries' as 'that big, bluff fellow with his blue eyes, his uncomplicated exterior, and his extraordinary competence' (Crossman, 732); but some other references were disparaging. Jarrett was not alone, however, in finding working relations difficult, and official colleagues took the view that his calm and wise leadership carried the department skilfully through difficult years in the National Health Service and a major attempt to reform the pensions system. The end of Jarrett's career was marred by a personal rift with Crossman, when the latter's strong objection led to the refusal of his request to accept, after retirement, a directorship in the pensions industry. Although pressed to stay longer by Sir Keith Joseph, after a government change in May, he retired as planned in July 1970. 
Hard-working as ever, Jarrett remained busy in the subsequent decade. A lifelong pipe smoker, he chaired the Tobacco Research Council, and also a review of the medical services of the armed forces; and he served as a trustee of the National Maritime Museum. He particularly valued his chairmanship of the Dover Harbour Board from 1971 to 1980, during which he saw through a $50 million port expansion programme -- a satisfying conclusion to a life which began in Dover more than seventy years earlier. 
Jarrett was appointed CBE in 1945 and CB in 1949, being advanced to KBE in 1956. He was twice married: in 1933 to Hilda Alice (1909-1975), daughter of Reginald Goodchild, and in 1978 to Mary Evelyn, a medical librarian ('b'. 1929), daughter of Charles Beacock. There were one son and two daughters of the first marriage. In 1976 he moved from Chislehurst to 1 the Coach House, Derry Hill, Menston, near Ilkley, Yorkshire, where he died on 9 July 1995; he was cremated on 13 July at Rawdon, Leeds, and his ashes were committed to the waters of Dover harbour three days later. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 58193


Hordern, Sir Michael Murray (1911-1995), actor, was born on 4 October 1911 at The Poplars, High Street, Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, the youngest of the three sons (he had a younger stepsister) of Captain Edward Joseph Calverley Hordern, officer in the Royal Indian Marines, and his wife, Margaret Emily, 'nee' Murray, whose family had invented Milk of Magnesia. He was educated at Windlesham House preparatory school and Brighton College, where he made his first stage appearances in Gilbert and Sullivan operettas. For much of his childhood he felt very much in the shadow of his immediately elder brother, Peter, who won a rugby blue at Oxford and went on to play for England. By the time Hordern himself was of college age family funds had run low, and he went into prep-school teaching before becoming a commercial traveller for the Educational Supply Association, selling chalk and blackboards by day and working at night in amateur theatricals at the St Pancras People's Theatre. 
Hordern was twenty-five before he felt secure enough to abandon life as a chalk salesman and start out as an assistant stage manager at the Savoy Theatre; in the late 1930s he also found work with an East End theatre company and at the Little Theatre in Bristol. In 1940 he played PC James Hawkins, and then the Stranger, in 'Without the Prince' at the Whitehall Theatre. He made his first, brief, screen appearance in 1940 with Emlyn Williams and Margaret Lockwood in the Carol Reed thriller 'The Girl in the News'. 
In 1940 Hordern joined the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, initially as a gunner. His first ship was a merchant ship carrying 10,000 tons of munitions. He later recalled: 'the second night out the convoy in which we were sailing was attacked by U-boats. We were going with the guns all night and when the sun came up the sea was completely empty. Four of the other ships around us had gone down and the others had scattered. My second night out and almost my last. I was frightened that night. That was when I grew up. ('The Times', 25 Nov 1989)' He subsequently served on the aircraft-carrier 'Illustrious' where, with another actor, Robert Eddison, he was responsible among much else for shipboard entertainments. On 27 April 1943 he married Grace Eveline Mortimer (1914/15-1986), daughter of Dudley Mortimer, schoolmaster. They had met before the war, at the Little Theatre, Bristol. They had one daughter. Hordern ended the war as a lieutenant-commander. 
In 1946 Hordern returned to the stage as Torvald Helmer in 'A Doll's House' at the Intimate Theatre, Palmer's Green. He continued to carve out an impressive classical stage career as a riotously comic Bottom in Purcell's 'Fairy Queen' at Covent Garden (1946). He then played Richard Fenton in the long-running 'Dear Murderer' at the Aldwych (1946), and Captain Hoyle in 'Noose' at the Saville (1947). He spent two Christmases (1948 and 1949) at Stratford upon Avon as Mr Toad in 'Toad of Toad Hall', and made a celebrated appearance in the film 'Passport to Pimlico' (1949), as the police inspector trying unsuccessfully to restore British authority in the inner-London republic. In 1950 he joined the Alec Clunes Company at the Arts for Chekhov's 'Ivanov' (1950) and John Whiting's 'Saint's Day' (1951), in which he first made his name. That in turn led him back to Stratford for a 1952 'As You Like It', in which his Jacques was reviewed by Kenneth Tynan: 'a great performance, rooted in self-disgust, but with a tattered plume of merriment capering always over his head' ('The Times', 4 May 1995). As so often, Tynan there caught not just a performance, but the essence of an entire career. 
Hordern now became established on screen as a fine if sinister character actor, with parts in 'Alexander the Great' (1956), 'Cleopatra' (1963), and 'The Spy who Came in from the Cold' (1965), but on stage his work was always more varied, even quirky; he played in the John Mortimer comedy 'The Dock Brief' (1958) as well as the premiere of Harold Pinter's 'The Collection' (1962) and in equally early work by Tom Stoppard ('Enter a Free Man', 1968), David Mercer ('Flint', 1970), and Alan Ayckbourn ('Relatively Speaking', 1967). His first 'King Lear' was for Jonathan Miller at the Nottingham Playhouse in 1969, and then in 1972 he achieved true greatness in Tom Stoppard's complex 'Jumpers' as George Moore, the philosophy don forever debating with himself and occasionally with a tortoise. He was still playing the role seven years later, but in starry 1980s revivals of 'You Never can Tell' (1987) and 'The Rivals' (1983) he was to prove equally impressive in period comedy. His last stage appearance was in a revival of 'Trelawny of the Wells' in 1992, and on television he was seen a few months before his own death as the dying Featherstone in the BBC's acclaimed 'Middlemarch' (1994). 
Hordern's marriage was not improved by a long love affair with the actress Coral Edith Browne (1913-1991), and he shared his later life with the actress Patricia England. His other true passion was fly-fishing, which he once expounded in a lengthy television series; he lived near the river in Bagnor, near Newbury, Berkshire, where he was for many years president of the Friends of the Watermill Theatre. He was appointed CBE in 1972 and knighted in 1983. He died at the Churchill Hospital, Oxford, on 2 May 1995, and was survived by his only child, Joanna, and by the memories of millions of stage and screen audiences around the world who cherished his anarchic brilliance in both comedy and tragedy, specializing as he did in morose clergymen, bizarre diplomats, dotty generals, and tetchy fathers. A memorial service was held at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 3 October 1995. 
Hordern was offstage the least theatrical of leading men, yet established on stage and screen a career of considerable versatility and integrity in a golden age for British classical players. Once described, not entirely flatteringly, as 'the Austin Princess among British actors' ('The Times', 4 May 1995), implying reliability but a faint lack of charisma, he in fact grew in later years into one of the great eccentrics of his profession, perched perilously somewhere half way between Alistair Sim and Alec Guinness. He played many of the great classical roles (Lear, Macbeth, Chekhov's Ivanov), but was equally loved by younger audiences for his Paddington Bear and Toad of Toad Hall. 


@@@@@


doc= 58197


Isaacs, Bernard (1924-1995), geriatrician, was born on 20 July 1924 at 4 Glencairn Drive, Glasgow, the son of Louis Isaacs, shopkeeper, and his wife, Rosine Naomi, 'nee' Lion, schoolteacher, and daughter of Jacob Lion, leather merchant of London. Both parents were of Jewish descent. His paternal grandfather, Barnet Galinsky, acquired the name Isaacs on his arrival in Britain from Lithuania. Bernard (whose parents had married in London) had two older brothers and a younger sister. His eldest brother was Alick Isaacs (1921-1967), virologist. 
From Kilmarnock Academy Isaacs went to Glasgow University where he studied medicine, graduating MB ChB in 1947, and MD with high commendation in 1957. In his early years he came under the influence of Glasgow physicians Noah Morris and Stanley Alstead, and later of Ferguson Anderson, all of whom stimulated his interest in the care of the aged and in long-stay care. After national service in Hong Kong and training in general medicine, he entered the still new speciality of geriatrics, in which he held consultant posts in Glasgow, first, from 1961, in Foresthall Hospital, a local former workhouse, and later in the Royal Infirmary. In 1975 he was appointed to the new Charles Hayward chair of geriatric medicine at Birmingham University, a position he held until his retirement in 1989. He married, at Langside Synagogue, Pollok, Glasgow, on 27 August 1957, Dorothy Beulah Berman, a schoolteacher three years his junior, and daughter of Abe Berman, leather merchant. They had four sons. 
Isaacs published widely throughout his career. His first book, 'An Introduction to Geriatrics', was published in 1965. In 'Survival of the Unfittest' (1972), a work that attracted much attention, he reported with his colleagues a study of old people in the East End of Glasgow. This, like all his writings, was characterized by vivid 'phrase making' (his own words for the writing and teaching of others whom he admired), and by illustration of 'hard' numerical data with case histories of individuals. The first chapter in this report of his research was entitled 'The fall of Mrs McGoldrick': it was a parable that illustrated the likely risks of a 'mere' fall to health, independence, and quality of life, and showed what could be done to avoid or minimize such risks. He later edited the series 'Recent Advances in Geriatric Medicine'. 
Isaacs's Birmingham department was noted for its teaching and research, and for the high standard of effective and respectful care of old people. Among a broad range of interests there was special concern with three topics: falls (he established a gait laboratory); measurement of need for care; and design. He was an ardent advocate of universal design that would minimize or avoid the limitations caused by disability. He argued that, from practical household items to the general physical environment, anything that was satisfactory for old or disabled people was also satisfactory for fit younger people -- but not vice versa. Through his Centre for Applied Gerontology he assembled a panel of 'a thousand elders', available to 'pre-test' goods before they were released. 
Conscious of the interdependence of mental and physical disorders in old age, Isaacs ran with the help of psychiatrist friends a regular course on the psychiatry of old age, and in 1979 he published 'Care of the Elderly Mentally Infirm'. The last of his many books (written in retirement) was 'The Challenge of Geriatric Medicine' (1992), which opened with a chapter entitled 'The giants of geriatrics' (immobility, instability, incontinence, and intellectual impairment), a phrase he had made famous. This book contained a collection of aphorisms in which he combined wisdom, compassion, and humour. 
One of the world's leading figures in geriatrics, and one of its most admired teachers, in private Isaacs was a genial and amusing companion, with a sharp but gentle wit. He cultivated a degree of self-mortification: his cousin Sir Jeremy Isaacs rightly wrote of him that he was 'game always for freezing cold sea or river bathing, abstemious in his habits... he was a good doctor in exactly the same way as he was a good man, a good Jew, a good husband and father' ('The Guardian', 20 April 1995). In 1989 he was appointed CBE. After retirement he moved with his family to Israel, where he remained active in matters concerned with old people. He died of cancer on 24 March 1995, and was buried in the Har Menuchot cemetery in Jerusalem. His wife and four sons survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 58198


Wight, James Alfred (1916-1995), writer and veterinarian, was born on 3 October 1916 at 111 Brandling Street, Sunderland, the only child of James Henry Wight (died 1960), a ship plater and accomplished musician, and Hannah, 'nee' Bell (died 1981), a talented contralto who sang at local concerts. Alf was born in the house owned by his maternal grandfather, Robert Bell, a printer. Immediately after their marriage, James Henry and Hannah moved to Glasgow, where there was much work for a ship plater in the First World War, but Hannah came back to her parents' home to have the baby. Three weeks later, the family moved permanently to Glasgow. 
The first Wight home in Glasgow was a ground-floor flat of a tenement in the suburb of Yoker. Although working-class, the family was far from the bottom rung of the economic ladder and its relatively spacious accommodation was in no way a slum dwelling. An advantage of living in Yoker was that fields and farmlands were within walking distance. James Henry supplemented his income by leading a cinema orchestra, but with the end of the war, shipbuilding slumped and he lost his job at the yard. He went to work as a joiner and later, when Alf was in his teens, opened a fish and chip shop. Hannah, meanwhile, turned a room of the family home into a dressmaker's and remained in the business for thirty years. 
Alf Wight attended Yoker primary school, where he loved history, did well in English, but had trouble with arithmetic. Wight entered Hillhead high school, Glasgow, in September 1928. He was an avid reader and an outstanding student, but he also excelled at sports, especially tennis. As a reward for his excellent schoolwork, Wight was given an Irish setter in 1928, the first of a long line of dogs. The following year he read an article in 'Meccano Magazine' describing the career of a veterinarian. As a dog-lover and as a bright young man considering a possible career, he quickly decided to become an animal doctor. A visit to Glasgow Veterinary College, then under the principalship of Dr A. W. Whitehouse, confirmed Wight in his vocation. 
On 29 June 1933, in the midst of the great depression, Wight left high school with a higher education leaving certificate and was qualified for admission to veterinary college when four months short of his seventeenth birthday. College life was a surprise, however. The extracurricular part -- gambling, partying, drinking, and playing practical jokes -- amazed a young man whose parents seldom drank alcohol and who were very circumspect in their use of language. But Wight was a hard-working student and he was well aware that the cost of tuition and his keep was a burden on his family. Although instruction at Glasgow Veterinary College was out of date and the school was not the premier institution in its field, Wight benefited from hands-on experience. 
On 14 December 1939 Wight qualified as a member of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons. He took up his first job in January 1940, serving as assistant to a veterinarian named J. J. McDowall in Sunderland. As it was a temporary position, he continued to look for a more permanent appointment. In June a position with the practice of Donald V. Sinclair became available 50 miles away in Thirsk. Wight was offered a junior partnership with a salary and he arrived in Thirsk on 18 July, and lived above the surgery at 23 Kirkgate. Almost immediately, Sinclair joined the Royal Air Force and departed, leaving Wight to run a practice that primarily treated large animals -- horses, cattle, sheep -- in an unfamiliar area. Under McDowall, Wight had mainly treated cats and dogs, and indeed his interest was in caring for small animals. Yet he worked hard and learned fast. Sinclair was dismissed from the RAF in November 1940 for having lied about his age. He was nearly thirty and too old for pilot training. However, his expertise with large animals was more valuable for the war effort in helping maintain the precious food supply. Brian Sinclair, Donald Sinclair's younger brother and frequent antagonist, came to live with the bachelors during his summers off from veterinary school. Donald and Brian Sinclair became the models for Siegfried and Tristan Farnon in the Herriot saga and Thirsk was transformed into Darrowby. 
At a dance in March 1941 Wight met Joan Catherine Anderson Danbury (1918/19-1999), a secretary. Although he had signed up to join the RAF and knew that eventually he would be called for flight training, Wight proposed in July and was accepted. He and Joan married on 5 November 1941 at St Mary Magdalene Church in Thirsk. The couple's first home was on the top floor of the building that housed the surgery. On 3 October 1942 Wight was finally called for active duty. The long delay reflected the fact that veterinary medicine was a reserved occupation, and Britain had a large number of volunteers for the Royal Air Force. Although Wight trained hard and wanted to fly for Britain, he was absent without leave on more than one occasion so he could visit Joan, who was pregnant with their first child; luckily, he was never caught. On 13 February 1943 he was in Thirsk for the birth of James Alexander Wight. 
Wight finally learned to fly and took his first solo flight on 7 June 1943. Shortly afterwards, a medical condition from which he had suffered since youth flared up. After surgery and convalescence, followed by dental problems, he decided to apply for a discharge, and on 10 November 1943 he was sent home. Back in Thirsk, Wight found that the business had grown since his departure. He now wanted a full partnership in the practice, but did not receive it until 1949. The Wights' second and last child, Rosemary Beatrice, was born on 9 May 1949. They finally moved to a house of their own in 1953. Wight had bought a plot of land on Topcliffe Road and had a house built to Joan's specifications. 
The death of Wight's father on 8 April 1960 was a great psychological blow. The two had always been close, as much friends as father and son. At the time Wight was working extremely hard in the practice and worried about money for the children's higher education. He suffered a nervous breakdown, underwent psychiatric treatment, and eventually recovered from his depression with the help of his wife, colleagues, and friends. In 1961 he accepted an assignment as a Ministry of Agriculture veterinarian on a trip to the Soviet Union. He fulfilled the same role in Spain in 1962 and in Istanbul in 1963. As more and more the idea of writing a book about his life as a country vet possessed Wight, he began to write seriously. It seems to have helped him to deal with his depression and even to order, soften, and perhaps idealize his memories. He frequently talked to Joan about it, and finally she scornfully informed him that men nearly fifty did not write books. Stung, Wight set out with determination in 1965 to put on paper the book in his head. After a year and a half he had finished a novel, which was rejected. He was, however, encouraged to recast his material in the form of a memoir. He rewrote the novel as a first-person narrative, a fictionalized autobiography called 'If Only they could Talk'. After some rejections the book was placed by an agent with Michael Joseph. 
Wight was reluctant to use his own name as the author because the Royal Academy of Veterinary Surgeons forbade advertising, and the book could be perceived as such. Watching Birmingham City and Manchester United play football one February evening, Wight hit on the idea of using the name of the Birmingham goalkeeper, James Herriot, as his pen-name. 'If Only they could Talk' was published in April 1970. It was modestly successful. A sequel, 'It shouldn't Happen to a Vet', followed in 1972. Newspaper serialization made the character of James Herriot a familiar figure in Britain. 'Let Sleeping Vets Lie' appeared in April 1973 and 'Vet in Harness' the next year. Reviews were good, and paperback sales were enormous. 
In summer 1970 Tom McCormack, the enterprising head of St Martin's Press in New York, was in London looking for books that could rack up significant sales in the US. He was given a copy of 'If Only they could Talk' and considered publishing it, but it was too short. When he learned that 'It shouldn't Happen to a Vet' had also been published, he was even more interested. The two books together would make a more marketable book in the States. He got Wight to add chapters about Herriot's wedding and they hit on the perfect title for the American publication -- a line from the hymn 'All things bright and beautiful' -- 'All Creatures Great and Small'. The book was published in November 1972 and with McCormack's marketing campaign, the reviews were outstanding. In February 1973 Wight was brought to America twice for successful book tours. 
Alf Wight, as James Herriot, had become the most famous veterinarian in the world. His gentle, humorous, compassionate stories set in a somewhat remote place and a distant time had captured the imagination of an enormous number of readers. Mainly through reworking episodes from the memoirs, a Herriot industry was constructed with books about cats and dogs; delightful children's books; 'James Herriot's Yorkshire' (1979), a photo-travel book; and 'The Best of James Herriot' (1982). But the Herriot saga's greatest success was in film and television. First came a motion picture shot in 1974, 'All Creatures Great and Small', with Simon Ward as Herriot and Anthony Hopkins as Siegfried. 'It shouldn't Happen to a Vet' with John Alderton and Colin Blakely was filmed in 1975. In 1977 Wight bought the house in Thirlby that was to be his last home. In that year the BBC began filming the television series 'All Creatures Great and Small', starring Christopher Timothy and Robert Hardy. Four series and forty-one episodes appeared over thirteen years. 
Although the stories are part fiction, the life of James Herriot was not so different from that of his creator. Both were healers of animals and both had gentle, self-deprecating senses of humour. Of medium height and weight, Wight had a ruddy complexion, high forehead, and light brown, somewhat wavy hair that turned a silvery white as he aged. In 1979 he was appointed OBE and in that same year received an honorary DLitt from Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh. Wight was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons in 1982 and was awarded an honorary DVSc from Liverpool University in 1983. In 1992 he was the British Veterinary Association's first recipient of the Chiron award, designed to acknowledge exceptional achievement in the field. 
James Alfred Wight died of cancer at Mire Beck, Thirlby, on 23 February 1995. In 1999 Jim Wight published the authorized biography of his father, 'The Real James Herriot'. Thirsk, the town known to millions of viewers worldwide as Darrowby, remains a tourist destination. 'Skeldale House' at number 23 Kirkgate, restored to how it was in the 1940s, has become a museum of veterinary science, while the region of north Yorkshire in which it lies is still known as Herriot Country. 


@@@@@


doc= 58200


Heren, Louis Philip (1919-1995), journalist, was born on 6 February 1919 in Shadwell, in the docklands of Wapping, London, the second son and third and youngest child of William Heren (died 1923/4), a machine minder on 'The Times', and his wife, Beatrice, 'nee' Keller. His life was a true 'Times' romance of the messenger boy who almost became editor. His paternal grandfather was a French Basque; his maternal grandfather a German Jew; and he also had Irish blood. He grew up in the East End during the depression. His father died when Heren was four, and his mother supported the family by running a greasy-spoon cafe near the gates of London Docks. She was offended when Heren called his autobiography 'Growing up Poor in London'. She said that 'Growing up among the poor in London' would have been accurate. 
Heren was educated at St George's, the local grammar school, where his English teacher introduced him to Dickens, G. A. Henty, and Conrad, and kindled his lifelong interest in gripping narrative and rattling good yarns. He became an autodidact and avid borrower of books from the public library. In those days 'The Times' was a paternalist club that looked after ''Times' men'. So in 1933 it hired Heren, when he left school aged fourteen, as a messenger in the publicity department. 'The Times' proved a substitute for secondary and university education. An assistant editor spotted the messenger boy reading Conrad's 'Nostromo' in a corner, and mentioned the prodigy to his colleagues. Stanley Morison, the 'eminence grise' of 'The Times', took an interest in the boy and helped him to become a reporter. Heren's first assignment for 'The Times' in 1937 was to report the East End parties celebrating the coronation of George VI. As a junior reporter he would volunteer for weekend duty in Printing House Square, which he described as 'a very cushy job'. He loved having the old house to himself, sleeping in a bed with crisp linen sheets after a dinner served by 'a manservant from the chief proprietor's house', being called on Sunday morning with a cup of tea, and then having a breakfast of bacon and eggs in the editorial sitting room while reading the Sunday papers and marking stories worth following up (Heren, 'Growing up Poor in London', 136). 
In 1939 Heren volunteered for the Royal Artillery, and served as a gunner non-commissioned officer in France, Iceland, and Greenland. He was then commissioned into the Royal Tank regiment, serving in India, Burma, the Yunnan province of China, and south-east Asia. War service gave him a taste for travel. So 'The Times' transferred him to the foreign department, and in 1947 he was appointed the 'Times' correspondent to India, where he described the massacres of partition with the sensitivity and courage of a front-line reporter. On 16 June 1948 he married Patricia Cecilia Regan (1924/5-1975), daughter of Thomas Francis Regan, a civil servant in the Air Ministry. They had one son and three daughters. 
Heren was next posted to Palestine, which had become a shambles of terrorism and bloodshed, culminating in the birth of Israel in 1948, when Britain withdrew from its mandate. When Ian Morrison, the staff correspondent covering the Korean War, was killed by a landmine, Heren was sent to replace him. For the next quarter of a century Heren flew towards the sound of the guns and the political drums as brilliantly as his predecessor on 'The Times', William Howard Russell, the first professional war correspondent, a century before. While he was in Korea, Heren compared the relief of having filed a story under gunfire and deadline to 'having a good shit'. He was subsequently based in Singapore (1951-3), Delhi (1953-5), and Bonn (1955-60). While he was covering the communist uprising in Malaya he had serious brushes with the Templar administration. The reputation of 'The Times' being what it then was, the good and the great regarded its staff as just another arm of the establishment. Neither Heren's working-class background nor his bolshie temperament responded to this old boy network. He said: 'Always ask yourself why these lying bastards are lying to you' (Heren, 'Growing up on 'The Times'', 26). From every country where he reported his office was bombarded with complaints from those in authority, whose feathers he had ruffled. 
In 1960 Heren was appointed head of the Washington bureau. He arrived there in time for the inauguration of President Kennedy, but the succeeding Johnson era was more suited to Heren's skills than the glitter of Camelot. He reported the upsurge and climax of racial tension and civil rights disturbances, and the rise in opposition to American involvement in Vietnam, recording the anguish and divisions that split the American nation as it became bogged down in a war that could not be won. His decade in Washington was the pinnacle of Heren's career. By 1970 he was ready to come home out of the cold, mainly because his wife was ill (in fact dying). He returned as deputy editor (foreign). But he found life in London anticlimactic and frustrating. Like many foreign correspondents he was something of a lone wolf and a prima donna. He would not write leaders because they were unsigned. He was not a team player in the court of office politics, for he was still at heart a reporter from the front lines. He caused outrage in some quarters when he invited Menachem Begin to lunch at 'The Times'. At the time Begin was leader of the Israeli opposition, and still 'persona non grata' with the British government because of his terrorist activities during the British mandate in Palestine. In 1979 he provoked similar outrage when he invited Anthony Blunt to a 'Times' lunch immediately after Blunt's traitorous activities had been exposed. Both lunches brought the paper front-page scoops. 
Heren was reckoned a favourite to succeed William Rees-Mogg as editor when Kenneth Thomson sold 'The Times' to Rupert Murdoch in 1981. He applied for the post, and wrote a long memorandum to the new proprietor about changes that he believed were necessary to make the paper profitable and to restore its former glories. That appointment would have made Heren a legend in his own 'Times', worthy of a Samuel Smiles or Horatio Alger penny novel about the virtuous apprentice. But Heren's bid was unsuccessful, and he suffered a second disappointment when he was deprived of the deputy editorship. His final year at 'The Times' became embittered, and in 1981 he left the paper to which he had devoted his life to concentrate on writing more books about himself, the press, and America. 
Heren was a stocky, pugnacious, chippy man, with a dangerous look in his eye. He enjoyed good company and good food in fine surroundings, especially his beloved Garrick Club. He would recommend his favourite restaurant in any city in the world. He was the best war correspondent of his generation, and a proper ''Times' man'. He died of a heart attack at his home, Fleet House, Vale of Health, Hampstead, London, on 26 January 1995. After a funeral at St Mary's Roman Catholic Church, Hampstead, he was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 2 February. He was survived by his son and three daughters. A memorial service was held at St Bride's, Fleet Street, London, on 28 March 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 58203


Heal, Sir Ambrose (1872-1959), shopkeeper and furniture designer, was born on 3 September 1872 at Crouch End, London, the eldest child of Ambrose Heal (1847-1913), bedding manufacturer and furnisher, and Emily Maria (1849-1938), daughter of Thomas Stephenson of Finchley. Thus he was born into the family firm of Heal & Son. His great-grandfather, John Harris Heal, started the business in London in 1810. His grandfather, also called John Harris Heal, made the Heals shop in Tottenham Court Road, London, famous for its beds and mattresses in the 1850s and 1860s; they began to sell general and bedroom furniture at this time. His father, a devout Anglican and a pillar of the local community, was a partner in the firm, and chairman from 1906 until his death in 1913. Ambrose Heal himself was educated at Marlborough College and, at some stage, at the Slade School of Fine Art, London. In 1890 he was apprenticed for two years to a cabinet-maker in Warwick with a view to entering the family firm, and he then worked for six months for Graham and Biddle, furnishers, of Oxford Street, London. He joined Heal & Son in 1893 and was put to work in the bedding factory. But he had ideas beyond the technical excellence of mattresses. In the mid-1890s he began designing simple, sturdy pieces of furniture, often in plain oak. They looked out of place among the more conventional designs in Heals shop, and it is said the staff called them 'prison furniture' (Carrington, 36). They were more at home in the exhibitions of the arts and crafts movement, the progressive design movement of the day. But among arts and crafts people Tottenham Court Road was a byword for bad taste. Ambrose Heal, for his part, did not see why there should be a conflict between shopkeeping and good taste. 
On 26 February 1895 Heal married Alice Rose Rippingille (1859-1901), daughter of a Birmingham manufacturer. They settled in Pinner, Middlesex, where his father lived, and their only son, Cecil, was born in 1896. In 1900 Ambrose Heal senior built a house for his son and daughter-in-law next-door to his own. It was a modest, white-plastered family house designed by the arts and crafts architect Cecil Brewer, a cousin of the Heals. Named the Fives Court because Ambrose Heal junior enjoyed such active sports, it had a court incorporated in the plan. They moved into the house in March 1901, but Alice Heal was already ill with cancer and died two months later. Three years later, on 20 August 1904, Ambrose Heal married Edith Florence Digby Todhunter (1880-1946), daughter of John Todhunter, the Irish playwright. 
Heal was a founding member of the Design and Industries Association (DIA), set up in 1914-15 by a group of architects, designers, shopkeepers, and manufacturers who wanted to bring some of the values of the arts and crafts movement to bear on industrial production, as the Germans had done in the pre-war years. The arts and crafts had been more or less anti-industrial. The DIA wanted a practical campaign for quality in the world of machine production: sound workmanship, the value of everyday things, fitness for purpose. Here was a philosophy for the progressive shopkeeper. The catch-all phrase was 'good design'. 
Heal was by this date in control of Heal & Son. On the death of his father in 1913 he became chairman of the firm, a position which he held until 1953. He was a skilful furniture designer, and a collector, but his reputation rests mainly on forty years of discriminating shopkeeping, on his particular mixture of DIA convictions, personal tastes, and opportunism. Beds and mattresses remained the staple of the shop, as in his father's and grandfather's time. (It was Ambrose Heal who designed the shop's well-known four-poster trade mark.) But now Heals began to sell ceramics, glass, and textiles; he shopped in Germany for pots, peasant rugs, and wooden toys. A new shop was built in 1913-16 to Cecil Brewer's designs: an island of architectural quality in Tottenham Court Road. There was an art gallery at the top of this building, showing works by Picasso, Wyndham Lewis, and Modigliani: modern art in a furniture store. Most Heals furniture was simplified, late arts and crafts, but when the shifts of fashion required, the firm could turn to tubular steel or versions of art deco. Such artists as Edward McKnight Kauffer and Claud Lovat Fraser designed Heals posters, and Noel Carrington and John Gloag (both critics and DIA members) wrote persuasive, understated essays in Heals catalogues. The effect was cumulative: looking back on the 1930s, Sir Hugh Casson wrote that 'Heal's was a symbol rather than a shop' (Goodden, 1). In 1933, aged sixty-one, Ambrose Heal was knighted for raising standards of design. Six years later he was appointed a royal designer for industry. 
It is not clear how much at Heals was Ambrose Heal's own work and how much that of his senior staff -- of Prudence Maufe who ran the Mansard Gallery; of his right-hand man Hamilton Smith, another DIA stalwart; or of the two designers J. F. Johnson and Arthur Greenwood. It was probably largely his, for he kept a tight control over all departments. With his fluffy red-gold hair and high, slightly condescending voice, he could be seen and heard everywhere on the premises, inspiring respect and fear. Heal had, in effect, made a marketable commodity out of his own tastes and convictions, as did Terence Conran later at Habitat. 
In 1917 the Heal family moved to Beaconsfield in Buckinghamshire. The eldest boy, Cecil, had been killed in the war, and Ambrose's and Edith's first child had died in infancy. But there were now three children, Anthony (1907-1995) ['see below'], Pamela ('b'. 1908), and Christopher ('b'. 1911). In 1919 they moved into Baylin's Farm just outside Beaconsfield, a rambling, part-medieval brick farmhouse enlarged for them by Forbes and Tate. Like the Fives Court, this was a domestic haven and a rural retreat -- Edith Heal was a keen gardener -- but Ambrose Heal was there only at weekends. During the week he stayed in a flat in Fitzroy Square, an arrangement that made his love affairs simpler. Prudence Maufe was his mistress in the early 1920s, and in the late 1920s, oddly seductive with her bobbed hair, Dodie Smith, who bought prints for Heals and later wrote '101 Dalmatians'. His affairs did not, he told her, threaten his family life. 
There was a scholarly, acquisitive side to Heal. He made an important collection of eighteenth-century London tradesmen's cards which he bequeathed to the British Museum, and in his later years he compiled long lists of the names, addresses, and visual records of tradesmen, mainly from seventeenth- and eighteenth-century London. These were published as 'London Tradesmen's Cards of the Eighteenth Century' (1925), 'The English Writing Masters and their Copy Books, 1570-1800' (1931), 'The London Goldsmiths, 1200-1800' (1935), 'The Signboards of Old London Shops' (1947), and 'The London Furniture Makers from the Restoration to the Victorian Era, 1660-1840' (1953). These books are invaluable for researchers. For Heal they perhaps expressed an ambivalence about the past. On the one hand, they created a tradition in which his own work could be seen and valued. On the other, they registered a loss -- for, during his lifetime or before, many of these trades had ceased to be important in London's economy. 
In the late 1930s Heal began to relax his hold on the firm. His elder surviving son became managing director in 1936. In 1937 he thought of retiring to Bath. But the war came before this move could be made, and he stayed on as chairman. Edith Heal died in 1946, and Ambrose Heal resigned as chairman in 1953. He had worked at Heal & Son for sixty years, and in his last few years at Baylin's Farm he seemed lost. He died at Beaconsfield on 15 November 1959, and was buried on 19 November in Holy Trinity churchyard at Penn near by, next to his wife. His obituary in 'The Times' (17 Nov 1959) described him as 'one of the great artists and craftsmen of his time'. This was very wide of the mark, but it showed what a powerful image he had created for his shop, and thus for himself. Most writing about him since his death has had the reverent tone of company hagiography, and he remains, like his friend and fellow furniture designer Gordon Russell, wrapped in the mythology of 'good design'. He deserves an independent study. 
Heal's elder surviving son by his second marriage, Anthony Standerwick Heal (1907-1995), shopkeeper and businessman, was born on 23 February 1907 and educated at the Quaker School, Leighton Park, Reading (1919-25), Grenoble University (1925-6), and the Munchener Lehrwerkstatten, Munich (1926-7). He then served an apprenticeship at the Gordon Russell furniture workshops in Broadway, Worcestershire (1927-9). In 1929 he joined the family firm and in 1936 became managing director. In 1941 he married Theodora Caldwell, 'nee' Griffin (died 1992); they had two sons. During the war he served in the Home Guard. As chairman of Heals from 1953, he counted among his particular responsibilities advertising and promotions. His interests in china, glass, and fabrics helped to diversify the stock, and he introduced 'his-and-hers' four-poster beds. He was much concerned with technical education in the furniture industry, and he served as master of the Furniture Makers' Guild (1959-60), president of the Design and Industries Association (1965), and chairman of the Independent Stores Association (1970-72), and was on the council of the City and Guilds of London Institute (1969-81). However, the firm suffered from fashion and market changes, and in 1983 it was bought by Terence Conran's Habitat-Mothercare group. Heal continued his association for another year, working on the company archives, which were given to the Victoria and Albert Museum. He was an enthusiastic owner and racer of veteran and vintage sports cars, especially Sunbeams -- on which he published a definitive book in 1989 -- and was a founder in 1934 and became captain in 1947 of the Vintage Sports Car Club. Also keen on traction engines, he bought a huge 1916 artillery tractor which he drove to rallies. A quiet, reserved man, Heal died on 25 March 1995. He was survived by his two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 58204


Hayter, Sir William Goodenough (1906-1995), diplomatist and college head, was born on 1 August 1906 in Oxford, the only son and eldest of the three children of Sir William Goodenough Hayter (1869-1924), a judge in the Anglo-Egyptian service, and his wife, Alethea, daughter of the Revd John Henry Slessor, rector of Headbourne Worthy, Hampshire. His younger sister was the author Alethea Catherine Hayter. Like his father, he was educated at Winchester College where -- also like his father -- he was a scholar and became prefect of hall (head boy). His notable school contemporaries included John Sparrow, William Empson, and Richard Crossman. From Winchester he again followed his father as the senior classical scholar to New College, Oxford. After such a promising early academic career his failure to get the expected firsts in both moderations and Greats caused much surprise and disappointment. However he won a travelling fellowship at Queen's College, Oxford, and spent the following nine months improving his French and more particularly his German as a prelude to taking the diplomatic service entrance examination in October 1930. 
Having passed in third place into the diplomatic service, Hayter was posted for his first year to the League of Nations and the Western department of the Foreign Office. He was then posted to Vienna in October 1931 where he enjoyed cultivating the aristocratic 'erste Gesellschaft'. By way of contrast he was posted from April 1934 to January 1937 to Moscow, where Stalin's purges were beginning and where the diplomatic corps was thrown back on its own social resources. He managed none the less to travel widely in the Soviet Union, visiting Ukraine, the Crimea, and the Caucasus -- the last in the company of the German ambassador, Count Schulenburg, who was later executed for his part in the plot against Hitler. After another brief spell in the League of Nations department, during which he played a minor part in the preparations for the coronation of King George VI and made a duty visit to Spain during the civil war, he was posted in October 1938 to the embassy in China, then accredited to the Kuomintang government of Chiang Kai-shek at Chungking (Chongqing), which was at war with Japan. Hayter was left in charge for some months in Chungking while his ambassador was based at Shanghai, but he also eventually returned to Shanghai. The prospect for the British mission in China looked precarious in the extreme (they were later interned by the Japanese) and Hayter was relieved to be posted to Washington as first secretary in December 1940. Arriving shortly before the attack on Pearl Harbor (the news of which he personally passed to London), he subsequently worked closely with both the state department and the American military authorities. On his return to the Foreign Office in May 1944 he worked first in a number of political departments before being promoted in February 1948 to be an assistant under-secretary of state; during this period in London he attended the Potsdam conference as secretary to the British delegation, which was headed successively by Churchill and Attlee, and for three years he held the key post of chairman of the joint intelligence committee of the chiefs of staff. His appointment as minister at the embassy in Paris in December 1949 reintroduced him to the glittering social world he had first known in pre-war Vienna. In his work he tended to be sceptical about the prospect of Britain's requiring or wishing to apply for entry to the European Coal and Steel Community, but he put forward the view that continental European collaboration was in British interests. From Paris in October 1953, at the early age of forty-six, he was appointed ambassador in Moscow. He was appointed KCMG in July 1953, having been made CMG in January 1948. 
Hayter's mission to Moscow, which lasted until February 1957, was the high point of his diplomatic career. He arrived shortly after the death of Stalin, when the leadership of the Soviet Union was first in the hands of Malenkov and later of Khrushchov and (to a diminishing extent) Bulganin. The Soviet leadership was accessible for the first time for several decades, and Hayter took full advantage of this to consolidate personal links. He proposed to Eden that Bulganin and Khrushchov should be invited to Britain (the first such post-war visit) and he accompanied them on their tour. Although he had much dialogue with Khrushchov, he never claimed to have influenced fundamentally the latter's policies. One shadow over his mission was subsequently cast by the exposure of the spy Vassal in the naval attache's office, but Hayter was exonerated from any negligence over this by the subsequent inquiry. His final months in Moscow were dominated by the Soviet intervention in Hungary and by the Anglo-French intervention in Suez. Hayter felt frustrated by being kept in the dark about British intentions over Suez and was privately very critical of the enterprise, which he felt had lessened the chances of any Soviet withdrawal from Hungary; however, when the Soviet government sent a threatening note about Suez to the UK, hinting at the use of rockets, Hayter drafted a robust reply that was accepted by the prime minister. When, shortly after his return to London as deputy under-secretary (political) in the Foreign Office, Hayter was offered the wardenship of New College, Oxford, his acceptance was influenced by his disillusionment over Suez and his failure to see the way clear to any of those top jobs in the diplomatic service to which he aspired. He resigned from the diplomatic service in October 1958. 
At New College, where he remained until his retirement in 1976, Hayter was an affable warden who took a keen interest in the undergraduates of the college and assumed the duties of admissions tutor. But he was conscious that being involved in neither teaching nor research limited his role at Oxford, and he did not play much part in university affairs outside his own college. He advocated the admission of women to the college more than a decade before it happened. His other activities included being a fellow of Winchester College (1958-76) and a trustee of the British Museum (1960-70). During his years at Oxford he wrote a number of books mostly about diplomacy and Russia, of which the best known were 'The Kremlin and the Embassy' (1966) and an autobiography, 'A Double Life' (1974). When eventually he retired to Bassetts House, in the village of Stanton St John, outside Oxford, he continued to write and to entertain his many friends. 
Hayter had married on 19 October 1938 Iris Marie ('b'. 1911), the only child of Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Hervey Hoare (who assumed the surname Grey in 1927) and his first wife, Marie Elizabeth, daughter of Ludwig Leupold of Geneva, and widow of Sir Lepel Griffin. Hayter's wife played an exceptionally active and supportive role as a hostees throughout his diplomatic career and at New College, and it was she who provided the warmth for which their official residences were remembered. Their daughter, Teresa, was born in Shanghai in 1940. Hayter was considered by many of his contemporaries to be a quintessential Wykehamist: able, polished, and with an academic turn of mind. It was not coincidence but merit that accounted for his being in so many crucial places at crucial times. To his more astringent colleagues, however, both in the diplomatic service and at Oxford, he sometimes seemed to lack the industry and energy to follow up on detailed and mundane tasks. Only his closest friends broke through the canopy of charm to discover real warmth in his personality. He admitted to having lost his belief in Christianity while at school, but to retaining 'a kind of affectionate loyalty to the Church of England'. He died at Stanton St John, Oxfordshire, on 28 March 1995; he was survived by his wife and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 58206


Harris, Sir Ronald Montague Joseph (1913-1995), civil servant, was born on 6 May 1913 at 41 Cornwall Gardens, Kensington, London, the only son and the youngest of the three children of the Revd (Joseph) Montague Harris (1864-1964), a Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Edith Annesley, 'nee' Malcolmson (1874-1957), the fourth daughter of George Forbes Malcolmson, merchant and banker. Through his maternal grandmother he was descended from King Edward I. His father was rector of St Nicholas's Church, Colchester, from 1913 to 1928. 
After his education at West Downs School, Winchester (1922-6), at Harrow School (1926-32), and at Trinity College, Oxford (1933-6), to which he won a scholarship and from which he graduated with first-class honours in modern history, Harris passed into the administrative class of the civil service in 1936. His first appointment, at the India Office, was in the department dealing with the affairs of Burma, and when in 1937 the office of secretary of state for Burma (held in plurality with that of secretary of state for India) was created, he was one of the six staff serving that office. On 14 January 1939 he married (Margaret) Julia Wharton (1914/15-1955), the daughter of John Robert Wharton, an engineer, of Haffield, Ledbury, Herefordshire; they had three daughters and a son. 
Also in January 1939 Harris moved to the Cabinet Office as private secretary to the secretary of the cabinet, Sir Edward Bridges, where he served until July 1943. Harris described it as a unique apprenticeship: a period of sustained hard work for long hours under intense pressure, working directly for a master whom he served with devotion, admiration, and affection. Bridges was always for him one of the two outstanding men whom he served. Harris (who was made MVO in 1943) remained in the War Cabinet Office for a further year, first organizing administrative arrangements for the British delegation to the first Quebec Conference, then working as civilian staff officer in London for Lord Mountbatten, the newly appointed supreme allied commander in south-east Asia, and also serving Sir Archibald Rowlands, the adviser to the viceroy of India on war administration. He returned to the India Office in October 1944 to serve as principal private secretary to the secretary of state for India (Lord Pethick-Lawrence from September 1945, the earl of Listowel from April 1947). 
After spending 1948 at the Royal College of Defence Studies, Harris moved to the Treasury as an assistant secretary, in charge for two and a half years of an establishments division and then for eight months of the 'supply' division dealing with the departments concerned with overseas affairs. Then in May 1952 he was summoned back to the Cabinet Office to serve as one of the two deputies to the secretary of the cabinet, Sir Norman Brook. In July 1955 he was appointed permanent commissioner of crown lands in succession to Christopher Eastwood (who had been transferred to other duties following the Crichel Down affair), to manage the reorganization of the crown lands commission as the crown estate commission, with a part-time first commissioner, Sir Malcolm Trustram Eve, and a full-time executive second commissioner, which Harris became. Eve was the second of those whom Harris regarded as the two outstanding men with whom he served. The reorganization was successful, and Harris enjoyed supervising the management of the crown estate, and in particular the rural parts of the estate. He was made CB in 1956. On 3 October 1957 (his first wife having died two years previously), he married Marjorie Tryon (1913-1986), the widow of Captain Julian Guy Tryon (with whom she had a son and a daughter) and the eldest of the eight children of Sir Harry Calvert Williams Verney, fourth baronet, who had been Liberal MP for North Buckinghamshire from 1910 to 1918. 
In 1960, newly made a KCVO, Harris returned to the Treasury to supervise the divisions responsible for overseas expenditure, pay, and conditions of the armed services, the 'law and order departments', and -- especially congenial to him -- arts and sciences. There was then no department for the arts; the Treasury was directly responsible for grants to the Arts Council, to the national museums and galleries, to the Royal College and the Royal Academy of Music, to the Royal College of Art, and to the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden. Harris much enjoyed dealing with these institutions, and for them he was an understanding and well-disposed 'friend at court'. In this capacity Harris was responsible for advising the government on the decision to establish a national theatre. 
Although Harris had elected not to follow his father and grandfather into the priesthood, he was sustained throughout his life by a strong Christian faith and an abiding commitment to the Church of England. When therefore in spring 1964 the archbishop of Canterbury asked him to be secretary of the church commissioners, he welcomed the opportunity. The appointment was the more welcome to him because it meant once again working with Lord Silsoe (the former Sir Malcolm Trustram Eve), the first church estates commissioner, until he himself succeeded Lord Silsoe in that office in May 1969. Harris sought both to increase the commissioners' income, which provides a substantial part of the stipends and pensions of the clergy, and to encourage larger contributions from dioceses, with the result that over his thirteen years as first commissioner the average clergy stipend rose, in line with inflation, by some 350 per cent, and the average pension rose fivefold (an increase of some 50 per cent in real terms), together with greatly improved provision for the housing of retired clergy. He also set himself to improve the commissioners' relations with the general synod and with the central administration of the church in Church House -- so much so, that in 1978 he was appointed chairman of the central board of finance, while continuing as first commissioner until his retirement in November 1982. 
Harris was a man of wide intellectual and artistic interests, but music was of special importance. He sang for some years in the Bach Choir. His home in later years was in Stoke D'Abernon, near Cobham, Surrey, close to the Yehudi Menuhin School, in whose affairs he became closely involved. The school was his chief outside interest after his retirement: he had chaired the friends of the school from 1972, and served on its board of governors from 1976 to 1990 (as vice-chairman from 1984 to 1989 and as chairman for a year thereafter). He converted an Elizabethan barn on his property for it to use as a concert hall. 
Harris was relatively tall, with an open and friendly countenance. He had a lively, engaging, and enthusiastic personality, and was notable particularly for his urbanity and his bow-ties. His volume of personal recollections, 'Memory -- Soft the Air' (1987), described both his professional and his personal life, and articulated the basis of his Christian faith. He died of myelomatosis on 22 January 1995 at his home, Slyfield Farm House, Stoke D'Abernon, survived by the four children of his first marriage and by the stepdaughter of his second marriage. A memorial service was held in Southwark Cathedral on 24 May 1995, at which his stepson-in-law, the Very Revd Colin Slee, provost of Southwark, officiated, and at which the Right Revd Lord Runcie gave an address. 


@@@@@


doc= 58208


Hargreaves, Alison Jane (1962-1995), mountaineer, was born on 17 February 1962 at 67 Brisbane Road, Mickleover, Derbyshire, the younger daughter and second of three children of John Edward Hargreaves, a senior scientific officer at British Rail, and his wife, Joyce Winifred, 'nee' Carlile, a teacher. Her family moved to Belper, Derbyshire, in 1971, and often went hillwalking. She began rock climbing with school groups in 1975, and soon led 'very severe' climbs. She broke her leg when another climber knocked her off a cliff in 1977, and the following year she began part-time work at an outdoors shop in Matlock Bath. On her eighteenth birthday she left home and moved to Meerbrook Lea, Whatstandwell, outside Matlock Bath, to live with James Herbert Ballard, son of Albert Ballard, a naval ordnance inspector. Jim Ballard, an extroverted Yorkshireman sixteen years her senior, had recently separated from his wife, Jean, and owned the outdoors store where Hargreaves worked. Hargreaves had previously applied to study geography at universities near climbing centres, but then scored too low on her A-levels to gain admission. She began producing climbing equipment for her own label and making rock climbs of increasing difficulty, both of which led to a modest reputation among the climbing 'cognoscenti'. 
After attending a 'meet' for women climbers in 1982 Hargreaves began to consider herself a professional mountaineer. In 1986 she went to the Himalayas with Bill O'Connor to attempt Ama Dablam, and appeared in 'Games Climbers Play', a film. She joined an American expedition led by Jeff Lowe in 1987, when she and Mark Twight ascended a new route on the north-west face of Kantega (22,240 ft). Spending most of her time at home, however, she was isolated from the mainstream climbing community and suffered from low self-esteem. She also lacked the distinctive profile of other contemporary women climbers, such as the feminism of Jill Lawrence or the 'savoir-faire' of Catherine Destivelle. She first attracted public attention by combining mountaineering and motherhood. After deciding to have children, she married Ballard at the register office in Belper on 23 April 1988. His divorce had been made final only months previously. Hargreaves (who retained her maiden name) then climbed the north face of the Eiger while five-and-a-half months pregnant. Although her ascent was the first by a British woman, it was her pregnancy that made it newsworthy. She told the ITV television programme 'Women of Today' (27 July 1989) that her 'bump' made it difficult to tie her boots at a bivouac; she confided to her diary that she felt the foetus kicking before and during the climb. She gave birth to a son, Tom, in October 1988, and a daughter, Kate, in March 1991. During this period she spent less time climbing in order to concentrate on raising the children. 
Ballard's outdoors business had been struggling financially for years, and when it went bankrupt in 1993 their home was repossessed. They fled creditors and moved to the Alps to pursue a multi-year plan for Hargreaves to make solo climbs of north faces in the Alps and a solo ascent of Everest. Their only income was Hargreaves's $600 a month sponsorship from an outdoor clothing manufacturer. Ballard and the children camped at the foot of each peak while Hargreaves became the first person to climb solo, in a single season, six classic north faces: Grandes Jorasses, Matterhorn, Eiger, Piz Badile, Petit Dru, and Cima Grande di Lavaredo. In her book, 'A Hard Day's Summer' (1994), she claimed that the elapsed time climbing these faces was just twenty-four hours. Climbing snobs sneered that her achievements were exaggerated by taking easy routes on the Eiger and the Grandes Jorasses. To answer her critics, she became the first woman to climb solo the formidable Croz Spur of the Grandes Jorasses, in November 1993. 
In the autumn of 1994 Hargreaves attempted to climb Everest 'alone' in affiliation with a British medical expedition while her family stayed at base camp in Nepal. She turned back at 27,600 ft to prevent frostbite. In 1993 Rebecca Stephens, a journalist, had become the first British woman to climb Everest, receiving the lucrative endorsements that still eluded Hargreaves. Hargreaves replaced Ballard as her agent with Richard Allen, a retired executive, and developed an ambitious new plan to climb the world's three highest peaks -- Everest, K2, and Kanchenjunga -- all in one year. In 1995 she returned to Everest without her family to attempt the north-eastern ridge from Tibet unsupported by porters and without supplemental oxygen. On 13 May she reached the summit and radioed a message to her children: 'To Tom and Kate, I am on the highest point in the world and I love you dearly' (BBC, 9 Feb 1996). After Everest she spent two weeks at home in the media spotlight, escaping only for a few days with the children, and bought a new home in the Great Glen beneath Ben Nevis in Scotland. A book contract paid off her debts and covered the cost of her next expedition, to K2. 
After several unsuccessful attempts on K2 in July 1995 Hargreaves was minutes away from returning home when she resolved to try again. During a brief period of calm weather she reached the summit of K2 on 13 August; on the descent, a savage storm killed her and six other climbers, among them Americans, Spaniards, and a New Zealander. When their deaths were reported several days later, Ballard suggested to their children, then aged six and four, that they visit 'mum's last mountain'. Their arduous trip to K2 in the autumn of 1995 resulted in a BBC television programme, 'Inside Story: Alison's Last Mountain' (9 Feb 1996), and Ballard's book, 'One and Two Halves to K2' (1996). Commentators debated whether the voyeuristic scenes of her grief-stricken children in bereavement counselling on the K2 trek were ghoulish or moving. A wider debate in the press centred on whether a mother should climb. Some considered Hargreaves self-centred or foolhardy for leaving her children for Everest and K2, while others noted that male climbers who died and were fathers were not subject to the same criticism. Her personal motives were at least as complex as the commentary. A biography by David Rose and Ed Douglas, based on extensive interviews and diaries she started in 1973, reported that her relationship with Ballard had been tempestuous and at times violent. She often considered leaving him, but was frequently indecisive: she even died intestate. She told friends and relatives that she planned to divorce Ballard but feared that courts would not give her custody of her children if she continued to climb. Since climbing was her only means of support, she could not stop until she attained financial security. She believed the ascent of Everest and K2 would provide this, and her diaries record the anguished conflict between her desire to be with the children and her obsession with climbing K2. 
Hargreaves was petite, standing 5 feet 4 inches tall, with a wide, round face, wavy, dark blonde hair, and a warm smile. Friends admired her terpsichorean grace on rock, her stamina and organizational skill at high altitudes, and her devotion to her children. Tom and Kate built small memorial cairns in sight of K2, and the government of Pakistan erected a plaque in her honour in the Skardu valley. A memorial service was held at Belper in November 1995. She was posthumously awarded a doctorate by the University of Derby in 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 58209


Greenwood, (Peter) Humphry (1927-1995), ichthyologist, was born on 21 April 1927 in Redruth, Cornwall, the only child of Percy Ashworth Greenwood (1896-1963), mining engineer, and his wife, Joyce May, 'nee' Wilton (1893-1957). His father (a Lancastrian, who had met his Cornish wife while studying at the Camborne School of Mines) was at that time working in South Africa, but his mother returned to Cornwall for his birth. Greenwood attended Passmore Edwards School in Redruth (1934) but most of his early years were spent in South Africa, where he attended St John's College, Johannesburg (1934-9), and Michaelhouse, Balgowan, Natal (1939-41). He spent six months at the 'General Botha' Training School of the South African naval forces (1942), and attended Krugersdorp high school, Krugersdorp from 1942 to 1944. He enlisted in the South African navy in August 1944 and served in the Indian Ocean in HMS 'Ceylon'. Having been demobilized in February 1946, he entered the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, in March, and obtained an honours degree in zoology in 1950. In January that year he married Marjorie George, a demonstrator in the zoology department at 'Wits'. They had four daughters. 
On graduating Greenwood obtained a colonial fisheries research studentship, the first seven months of which were to be under the supervision of Dr Ethelwynn Trewavas at the British Museum (natural history), London. There he began work on the haplochromine cichlid fishes of Lake Victoria that were to remain a dominant interest throughout his career. Between 500 and 1000 species of these remarkable fishes have evolved in that lake, to which all are unique. Field studies began early in 1951 at the East African Fisheries Research Organization, Jinja, Uganda, where he remained until July 1957. He returned to the museum in London on a civil service commission fellowship before becoming a member of staff, and remained there until his retirement in 1989 with the rank of deputy chief scientific officer; subsequently he became a visiting research fellow. 
When Greenwood began to study the haplochromine cichlids of Lake Victoria, some sixty species were already known, but the real wealth of species was unsuspected. One objective was to discover, describe, and name the entire fauna. This proved to be a major undertaking, beyond the capabilities of a single individual. Nevertheless Greenwood made substantial progress and set new standards in the descriptions of the fifty or so new species that he discovered. This, and the painstaking re-description of previously described species, laid the foundations for an understanding of the relationships of these fishes one with another, and of how they might have evolved. His descriptions, republished as a collected volume in 1981, 'The Haplochromine Fishes of the East African Lakes', stand as a monument to his skill, industry, and patience. 
Of wider interest was Greenwood's attempt in 1974 to explain the biology and evolution of this remarkable species flock. He concluded that it was monophyletic: that is, its constituents were derived from a single ancestral species. However, as a result of applying rigorous aspects of that method of classification and the recognition of affinities known as cladistics, he later became dissatisfied with this conclusion, and in 1980 he repudiated it. For technical reasons this was a mistake, and when the development of molecular methods enabled an independent approach to be made, this showed that his original conclusion was correct. Although it has been said that the problems he 'was unable to settle after thirty years of morphology are now more likely to be resolved in a few months by a graduate student and a sequencer' (Patterson, 207) this overlooks the fact that, without his groundwork, such an approach would be impossible as the species involved could not even be identified. Furthermore such investigations tell one nothing about the structure and habits of these fishes, an understanding of these being necessary before meaningful evolutionary changes can be deduced. Here Greenwood's morphological work was of permanent value. However, the discovery of further species led to taxonomic problems that proved contentious, and the extermination of many of these fishes by the introduced Nile perch and other destructive human interference with the lake inevitably caused these studies to end on a note of disappointment. 
Greenwood's other published African work embraced descriptions of new fishes, the breeding habits of a catfish and a lungfish, various matters relating to both living and fossil fishes, and a semi-popular book on the fishes of Uganda. For several years in the 1960s and 1970s he was chairman of a team that studied the productivity of Lake George, Uganda. He also made substantial contributions to the higher level systematics of teleost (modern bony) fishes. Particularly significant was a paper with D. E. Rosen, S. H. Weitzman, and G. S. Myers, published in the 'Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History' in 1966, that proposed a classification fundamentally different from its predecessors in certain respects. Other work included studies on the Weberian apparatus, skulls, swim bladder, hyoid and gill-arch musculature, and on the interrelationships of various groups. He also took an interest in marine coelacanths. 
Greenwood had an impish sense of humour, reflected in his physiognomy; he was an excellent mimic, and always an entertaining companion. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1985, and received the scientific medal of the Zoological Society of London (1963), the Linnaeus medal of the Linnean Society of Sweden (1978), and the Linnean medal of the Linnean Society of London (1982), having been president of the last-named society from 1976 to 1979. He became a foreign member (class VII) of the Swedish Royal Academy of Science in 1984. 
Following his retirement from the British Museum in 1989, Greenwood returned to South Africa, where he had been an honorary research associate at the J. L. B. Smith Institute of Ichthyology, Rhodes University, since 1977, and lived in Grahamstown. On a brief stopover in London, 'en route' for the University of Bergen, Norway, to teach a course in fish anatomy, he collapsed from a stroke in the museum in which he formerly worked. He died two days later, on 3 March 1995, at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, and he was cremated at Putney Vale. He was survived by his wife, from whom he separated about 1989, and four daughters. A celebration of his life was held at the Linnean Society of London on 21 April 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 58213


Hallowes, Odette Marie Celine (1912-1995), special operations officer and member of the FANY, was born on 28 April 1912 in Amiens, northern France, the only daughter in the family of three children of Gaston Brailly ('c'.1880-1918), banker, and his wife, Yvonne, 'nee' Quennchen ('c'.1880-1960). Her father, a sergeant in the French 52nd infantry, was killed at Verdun in October 1918. Her paternal grandfather would regularly take her to visit her father's grave and say 'In twenty years there will be another war... and you will have to do your duty as your father did' (private information). Odette was educated at the Convent of Ste Therese in Amiens and privately. In 1931 she married an Englishman engaged in the hotel trade, Roy Patrick Sansom ('c'.1911-1957). A daughter, Francoise, was born in 1932. In 1933 they moved to Britain, where Lili ('b'. 1934) and Marianne ('b'. 1936) were born. At the outbreak of war Roy Sansom was called up and Odette moved with her daughters to Somerset. In the early spring of 1942 she responded to a radio appeal for photographs of France. She was invited for interview at the War Office, where Selwyn Jepson, impressed by her strength of character, invited her to join the Special Operations Executive (SOE), set up in 1940 in response to Winston Churchill's directive to 'set Europe ablaze' by the training and supplying of local resistance groups in all zones of war. 
Odette joined the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry (FANY), as did most female SOE agents, and was trained in self-defence, Morse code, map reading, shooting, and how to resist interrogation. In November 1942, leaving her daughters in school, carefully dressed in French clothes, with new French fillings in her teeth, and carrying forged French papers, she was landed by small boat near Cassis. Codenamed Lise, she was to cross to occupied France to join a resistance circuit in Auxerre. She was met by Peter Morland Churchill (died 1972), codenamed Raoul. On 11 November, in response to the allied invasion of north Africa, the Nazis invaded Vichy France. Churchill persuaded SOE in London to allow Odette to stay as his courier, first in Cannes, before moving to St Jorioz, near Annecy, in February 1943, together with Adolphe Rabinovitch ('Arnaud'), their radio operator. On 16 April, betrayed by a double agent, Odette and Churchill were arrested, Rabinovitch escaped. He was captured on another mission and was executed at Rawicz in 1944. Odette, silent in the face of very harsh treatment by the Gestapo, including months of solitary confinement, protected Rabinovitch, her French colleagues, and Francis Cammaerts ('Roger'), newly arrived in France, who was to run one of the most successful circuits of the war. She also protected Churchill by persuading the Germans that he was related to Winston Churchill. 
Odette was condemned to death on two counts, as a Frenchwoman guilty of crimes under German law and as a British spy. 'You must take your pick, gentlemen. I can only die once.' In May 1944 she was sent to Germany, where she ended up in Ravensbruck camp, north of Berlin. There she was again kept in solitary confinement for some months, close to the punishment block, where she was an unseen witness to the brutality of the prison regime: the beatings, the executions, the rumble of carts taking the previous night's dead to the nearby crematorium. Suffering from tuberculosis, she was eventually moved to the camp hospital, and survived execution orders issued by Berlin in early 1945. Fellow SOE agents Violette Szabo and Denise Bloch of FANY, and Lilian Rolfe and Cecily LeFort of the Women's Auxiliary Air Force (WAAF), were murdered. In April the camp commander, Fritz Suhren, still believing Odette to be a Churchill, tried to save his own skin by driving her to the American lines. On arrival she denounced him. She gave evidence against him and several of the camp staff at the Nuremberg trials. Suhren was hanged. Odette was made MBE in 1945, and in August 1946 she was the first woman to be awarded the George Cross. In 1949 a book by Jerrad Tickell, 'Odette', appeared, followed by a film of the same name. Odette co-operated with both projects, not for her own glory but from a sense of responsibility to her murdered colleagues: 'My comrades, who did far more and suffered more profoundly, are not here to speak. Because of this I speak for them' ('The Independent', 17 March 1995). 
Odette was divorced from Roy Sansom in 1946 and on 15 February 1947 she married Peter Churchill. Churchill, the son of William Algernon Churchill, consular official, was by then a captain in the intelligence corps. He was later a writer and estate agent. They divorced in 1955 and on 6 January the following year Odette married Geoffrey Macleod Hallowes ('b'. 1918), wine and spirit shipper, son of Edward Price Hallowes, wine and spirit shipper. Geoffrey Hallowes had served with SOE in France as a Jedburgh. 
Odette was a petite, light-haired woman, vividly attractive and always immaculately dressed, whose air of fragility belied her great inner strength. It is a measure of the fame she achieved that she was known simply as 'Odette GC'. She became a vice-president of the FANY in 1967. She was a prominent member of the Victoria Cross and George Cross Association, a founder vice-president of the Woman of the Year luncheon, vice-president of the Military Medallist League, an honorary member of St Dunstan's Ex-Prisoner-of-War Association, and president of 282 air cadet squadron. She died on 13 March 1995 at her home, Rosedale, 8 Eriswell Road, Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, of cardiac arrest following broncho-pneumonia, and was buried at Burvale cemetery, Walton-on-Thames. She was survived by her husband, Geoffrey Hallowes, and the three daughters of her first marriage. She is commemorated on the FANY war memorial at St Paul's Church, Knightsbridge, London, where the names of the dead SOE women agents are listed and where she laid a wreath on remembrance Sunday every year. On her plaque is written: 'Here she laid violets, transforming into service the pain of her survival'. Her medals are in the Imperial War Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 58215


Halas, John (1912-1995), film animator, was born in Budapest, Hungary, on 16 April 1912, the son of Gyozo Halasz (also known as Victor Halasz), journalist, and his wife, Bertha. He was educated in Budapest. At the age of eighteen he moved to Paris, where he studied at the Academie des Beaux-Arts and contributed freelance drawings to various illustrated magazines. He returned home in 1932 and joined the animation studio formed by George Pal. There he did his first animation, making advertising shorts with paper cut-outs. Pal would later develop the different idea of animated puppets, creating 'Puppetoons' at first for Horlicks malted milk advertisements, and eventually moving to Hollywood to produce such award winning features as 'Destination Moon', which would blend live action with puppets. Halas left Pal in 1933 to study modern art at The Studio, a private school of graphic design run by Laszlo Moholy-Nagy and Alexander Bortnyik as a split-off from the famous German group, the Bauhaus. In 1935 he established his own animation studio in Hungary but could not expand beyond making cinema advertisements for cigarettes and alcohol. However, one of his colour cartoons was seen in London, leading to an invitation to come to England to work for British Animated Films, a small company run by photographers Trigg and Denes and financier Weisbach. There, working on the Technicolor cartoon 'Music Man', released in 1938 and directed by Henry Elwis, Halas met his future wife, Joy Batchelor, for the first time. 


The first film that Halas and Batchelor made together, 'Music Man', was based on the life of the composer Liszt. 'The design was good, the colour was nice, the script terrible!' Batchelor remembered (BECTU tape). The company went out of business, and Halas and Batchelor went to Hungary together. Prospects were not much better and with war in the offing they returned to England, where Halas drew a few cartoons for the pocket magazine 'Lilliput'. On 27 April 1940 they married at the register office in Paddington, London. 
In 1940, with the wartime shortage of newsprint, the large advertising agency J. Walter Thompson decided to enter the cinema commercial field. Halas and Batchelor joined the film unit, but also formed their own company, Halas and Batchelor, and in 1941 produced 'Carnival in the Clothes Cupboard' for Lux Soap. They also made their first entertainment short, 'Pocket Cartoon'. In 1942 the wartime Ministry of Information films division, headed by Jack Beddington, contracted them to make a series of propaganda shorts for cinema release. Produced under the aegis of the documentary makers Realist Films, 'Filling the Gap', sponsored by the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, exhorted cinema-goers to cultivate allotments, while 'Dustbin Parade' concluded with the then urgent message 'Mobilize your scrap!' The little company now supported a staff of animators that included Vera Linnecar, Kathleen Murphy, and Wally Crook, with their original music composed by Ernst Meyer and Matyas Seiber. The first British feature-length cartoon film was made by the team in 1945, the sixty-five-minute 'Handling Ships', sponsored by the Admiralty. Using animated drawings and models, this specialized semi-documentary directed by Bob Privett was never seen by the general public. The same applied to their second feature, 'Water for Fire Fighting' (1949), sponsored by the fire brigade. Their first successful series starring a regular character, Charley (voiced by comedian Harold Berens), was a run of six sponsored by the peacetime equivalent of the old Ministry of Information, the central office of information. The first was 'Charley's New Town' (1947). Finally in 1949 they broke free from governmental sponsorship with 'Heave Away my Johnny', a sing-song short for children's cinema clubs. Advertising films came back with 'The Flu-ing Squad' (1951) for Aspro tablets. 
Halas's personal devotion to modern art at last found its way onto the animated screen when he produced four shorts known as the 'Poet and Painter' series for the Festival of Britain in 1951. With the combined talents of artists Mervyn Peake and Henry Moore, actors Michael Redgrave and Eric Portman, the series lacked only colour. A year later they made the first British cartoon in three dimensions, Edward Lear's 'The Owl and the Pussycat'. In 1954 came the first British feature cartoon proper, produced by the American entrepreneur Louis de Rochemont. This was 'Animal Farm', from the fantastic novel by George Orwell. Although the styling was truly too Disneyesque for most purists, the film was also a 'tour de force' for actor Maurice Denham, who supplied all the voices. 
Halas and Batchelor entered the new world of television with excitement. First came a series with the ungainly name 'Habatales' (1959), then a series about 'Foo-foo' (1960), designed without dialogue for the international market. Paper sculpture was employed for the series 'Snip and Snap' (1961), but easily their finest hour came with 'Tales of Hoffnung' (1965), a colour series animating the extremely amusing musical cartoons of Gerard Hoffnung, the best of which was 'The Hoffnung Symphony Orchestra'. In 1966 Batchelor directed the feature-length adaptation of Gilbert and Sullivan's operetta 'Ruddigore', but frankly without great acclaim. Meanwhile their company had been sold to a television consortium, and although their name appeared on countless television series from 'The Lone Ranger' to 'Popeye', these had nothing to do with either partner. Halas's final feature was made for German television, animating the strip-cartoon pioneer Wilhelm Busch and his famous characters 'Max und Moritz' (1977). 
Continuing to pioneer every advance in animation including computerization, Halas was also the founder and president of the International Animated Film Association and he was appointed OBE in 1972. He was the author of numerous books and articles on animation, including 'How to Cartoon' (1959), 'Computer Animation' (1974), 'Visual Scripting' (1977), and 'The Contemporary Animator' (1991). Joy Batchelor died at their home, 6 Holford Road, Hampstead, London, on 14 May 1991, after a long illness. John Halas died, also in London, on 20 January 1995. They were survived by their son and daughter. 
As animators and later producers of animated cartoon films, Halas and Batchelor held the record for UK production, having overseen some 2000 films in the genre during half a century in partnership. Together they made every kind of animated film, from official shorts during wartime to cinema and television commercials, three-dimensional experiments, 'art films', series for television, and the first British feature-length cartoons. They were sometimes hailed as the British equivalent of America's Walt Disney. Nevertheless it has rightly been said that 'they remained curiously European in their styling, design, colouring and humour' ('The Independent', 25 Jan 1995). 


@@@@@


doc= 58221


Sassoon family (per. c.1830-1961), merchants, came to commercial prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 58222


Carbutt, Louisa (1832-1907), schoolmistress and educational pioneer, was born on 25 September 1832 at Altona, near Hamburg, Germany, the daughter of Francis Carbutt (1792-1874) and his wife, Louise Petronella, daughter of George Henry Penecke of Copenhagen. Sir Edward Hamer Carbutt, first baronet (1838-1905), an engineer, twice mayor of Leeds, and Liberal MP for Monmouth from 1880 to 1886, was her younger brother. Her father was a merchant who supported the Anti-Corn Law League and became mayor of Leeds in 1847. Originally a Quaker, he withdrew from the Society of Friends to become one of the Unitarian congregation of the Mill Hill Chapel, Leeds. On his death his property was distributed equally among his seven surviving sons and daughters. 
Louisa Carbutt's parents believed in giving their daughters as good an education as they could afford for their sons, and she attended a boarding-school at Hamburg until 1847, acquiring a fluency in four languages. A trip to the USA at the age of twenty-five inspired her to seek an independent, unmarried vocation, earning her own living, and she left the parental home in Leeds in 1859 to become a teacher of German in the large boarding-school for girls, Rawdon House, Hertfordshire, run by Sarah Stickney Ellis. There she was disappointed at the limited intellectual horizons opened to the daughters of the middle classes; she herself studied astronomy and botany. Her reading of Friedrich Froebel's works inspired an interest in new educational methods, which was encouraged by W. B. Hodgson, professor of education at St Andrews University, who introduced her to the works of Herbert Spencer. 
In 1860 Carbutt went to Knutsford, Cheshire, where two Unitarian families were seeking a governess for their daughters. She proposed, instead, to establish a school, taking both day-girls and boarders. Brook House opened in August 1860, taking girls aged between nine and fourteen. Although never a large school, Brook House was notable for its pioneering methods, principally the development of girls' intellectual, moral, and spiritual faculties without recourse to rewards or punishments. There was close companionship between teachers and pupils, who were allowed more freedom than was usual at that time. Much emphasis was laid on hygiene, fresh air, exercise, and wholesome diet. The curriculum, which was enlightened, included science teaching. Ill health caused Carbutt to give up the school in 1870 and she returned to Leeds where she was one of the first women to be elected a poor-law guardian. She was particularly concerned to promote the integration of pauper children, ensuring that they were educated with other children in ordinary board schools rather than segregated in workhouse schools. In 1884 she married William Henry Herford (1820-1908), who had taught at Brook House and shared her educational ideals. In 1886 they settled at Paignton, Devon, where their Unitarian beliefs shocked some of the more genteel residents. She died there, at Torbay Lodge, on 4 May 1907. 


@@@@@


doc= 58225


Cromek, Thomas Hartley (1809-1873), painter, was born at 64 Newman Street, London, in late July 1809, the only son of the engraver and book illustrator Robert Hartley Cromek (1770-1812) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Hartley (1779-1848). Following his father's death in London, his mother took him to live with his grandfather at Bridge House, Wakefield; he attended the Moravian school at Fulneck, near Leeds, from 1820 and Wakefield grammar school from 1821. His early interest in drawing was greatly encouraged by James Hunter, a local portrait painter, and Joseph Rhodes of Leeds who accompanied him on sketching tours. In 1827 Thomas Teale, a Leeds surgeon, commissioned Cromek to make some detailed anatomical drawings, for each of which he was paid 5's'.: Cromek observed later that 'to the very minute attention which these drawings required I attribute careful and accurate drawings' which became his 'principal merit as an artist' (Cromek, 'Reminiscences', fol. 5). 
For the sake of his mother's health Cromek set out in June 1830 for Florence and Rome, armed with letters of introduction from the duchess of Leeds. Before leaving he met John Constable who lectured him about 'young men going to Italy to study', supposing that 'England was not large enough for an artist now a days' (Cromek, 'Reminiscences', fol. 13). After a short stay in Florence he quickly moved on to Rome and there met Edward Cheney and later Henry Cheney: these two brothers figured among Cromek's most important patrons, giving him many introductions and becoming his lifelong friends. In the spring of 1831 he sketched fragments in the Vatican Museum and in the forum and the ruins of the colosseum, Caesar's palace, and the Farnese Gardens, subjects which proved to be significant and regular sources for his commissions. He visited the Roman campagna and many towns and villages such as Frascati, Assisi, Tivoli, and Ariccia, and was shown the excavations at Pompeii by the archaeologist Sir William Gell. By the winter of 1832 he was admitted to a private Russian sketching society which concentrated on sketching figures in costume; the influence of this group can be seen in many of his watercolours. While in Rome he also met many British artists, including the sculptors John Gibson, M. C. Wyatt, and Joseph Gott, and the painters Joseph Severn, Penry Williams, and Thomas Uwins. In 1834 Cromek journeyed to Greece; he had intended to go to Palestine but upon reaching Syria he was forced back by the plague then raging in the Levant and returned to Greece. He spent time in Mycenae and Argos, and then stayed for two months in Corfu before returning to Venice to join Edward Cheney for a sketching tour. Arguably this journey to Greece prompted some of his finest drawings, many of which were sketched 'en plein air'; they reveal a freshness of colour and an originality of method somewhat lacking in his later, more finished, drawings. 
Cromek returned to England in 1835 and in January 1836 was received into the Roman Catholic church. Soon afterwards, in July 1836, he married Anastasia Priestman; they had three daughters. In September 1836 he made another visit to Florence, where, in the following year, he continued to sketch all the prominent views and buildings of the city. Cromek's memorialist, James Fowler, recorded that by now his reputation was fully established, and that he gave lessons to Edward Lear at about this time. On 5 July 1837 he was invited to the Palazzo Pitti to present his work to the grand duke and duchess of Tuscany; they selected seven views of Greece. He wrote: 'In consequence of this patronage I am much talked about and I expect it will lead to an increase in my connections and commissions' (Cromek, 'Reminiscences', fol. 41). These expectations were indeed fulfilled, as his career flourished between 1840 and 1849: in both Florence and Rome he received a constant flow of commissions and gave lessons to many of the distinguished visitors then flocking to Italy. By 1845 he was able to undertake a second visit to Greece. As Fowler proclaimed, 'these were prosperous days', and Cromek 'moved in the most intellectual society in Rome'. Back in London in the summer of 1843 he was summoned to Buckingham Palace to show his drawings to the queen and Prince Albert. Victoria bought two drawings: when the artist Peter DeWint heard of this he jealously remarked that 'the Queen has no taste'. Appalled, Cromek wrote that he 'was so disgusted with de Wint's illiberality and apparent friendship that I never saw him more' (Cromek, 'Reminiscences', fol. 96). 
The outbreak of the civil war in Italy in 1849 compelled all English residents to leave Rome, and thus Cromek returned to England. In 1850 he exhibited four major drawings at the Royal Academy and he was elected an associate of the New Society of Painters in Water Colours. Despite sympathy and help from many of his friends, especially Clarkson Stanfield, he never maintained in England the level of success he had achieved in Rome. By 1861 his health had so deteriorated that he had lost the use of his hands and no paintings are recorded after this date. He died in Hatfield Street, Wakefield, Yorkshire, somewhat impoverished, on 10 April 1873. 


@@@@@


doc= 58226


Warrington, William (1796-1869), stained-glass artist, was born at New Romney, Kent, the son of William and Sarah Warrington. He was baptized in St Nicholas's Church, New Romney, on 4 March 1796. Little is known of his family background. 'The Journal of the British Society of Master Glass-Painters' (1961-2, 521) suggests that a William Warrington, described in the 'Universal British Directory' of 1797 as a glazier, in business in Deptford Green, could be his father. The United Kingdom census returns for 1861 reveal that Warrington's wife was two years his junior, that her name was Elizabeth, and that she was born at Tottenham, Middlesex. 
Footnotes in Warrington's 'The history of stained glass from the earliest period of the art to the present time illustrated by coloured examples of entire windows in the various styles' (1848) record that at one time, Warrington worked for the heraldic artist Thomas Willement, and that in 1833 he restored a medieval window for Mr Pratt in Bond Street -- perhaps Samuel Pratt of Samuel Pratt & Son, trunk makers and upholsterers, 47 New Bond Street (Warrington, 33, 37). The first reference to Warrington in the 'Post Office London Directory' (1839), was as an 'Artist in Stained Glass, Heraldic and Decorative Painter, Plumber, Glazier and Paperhanger' (Harrison, 84). His first major work was, however, earlier. In 1837, he made the apse window for St Mary's College chapel, Oscott, near Birmingham, working under the direction of A. W. N. Pugin, who was then starting to revive the medieval principles of stained-glass design. The window exhibits these principles to a high degree, although, unusually for Pugin, it was in the sixteenth-century style, with pictorial elements. It was very well received. A contemporary noted that it was 'scarcely surpassed by any modern production of the kind' ('GM', Aug 1838, 171), and another anticipated that it would establish, 'the little known Warrington', high in the public esteem ('Birmingham Journal', 16 Jan 1838, cited in 'London and Dublin Weekly Orthodox Journal', 1838, 90-91). He was then working from premises at 42 Upper Berkeley Street, Marylebone, which he carried on using until 1856, when he moved to 35 Connaught Terrace, Hyde Park (from 1863 onwards his work address was given as Polygon Mews, west London). Warrington may have met Pugin through Willement, who had worked (possibly with Warrington) in the early 1830s, at Alton Towers in Staffordshire, for Pugin's later patron the earl of Shrewsbury. Warrington and Pugin continued to work together until about 1841, during which time windows were made for Pugin's first church, St Mary's, Derby, in 1839, and for his Roman Catholic cathedral -- the first in Britain since the Reformation -- St Chad's, Birmingham, 'c'.1841. At this time it appears that Warrington became financially embarrassed: a letter from Pugin to Lord Shrewsbury mentioned Warrington being on the point of arrest, with Pugin, seemingly, alleviating the situation by paying on account for glass for St Chad's (cited in P. Stanton, 'Welby Pugin and the Gothic Revival', PhD diss., University of London, 1950, 202). Warrington's manner and his prices led to a break with Pugin, the latter writing to Lord Shrewsbury on 25 August 1841: 'The reason I did not give Warrington the window at the hospital [of St John, Alton] is that he has become lately so conceited, got nearly as expensive as Willement' (Parl. Arch., historical collection no. 339, letter 71). 
Warrington's combative nature was demonstrated publicly in his letters to 'The Builder' over the window for St James, Piccadilly, for which, in 1845, he had been considered among others, but passed over in favour of William Wailes (1808-1881). On 25 August 1845 he lambasted the selection committee for acting 'ignorantly and unjustly' ('The Builder', 3, 1845, 415), and on 15 July 1846 severely criticized the completed work, remarking: 'For I fearlessly state, that there is not a single artistic feeling in the whole window' ('The Builder', 4, 1846, 353). The letters engendered strong rebuke from Charles Mayhew, the honorary secretary of the committee, on 26 July 1846, who accused Warrington of behaving unprofessionally, while 'The Ecclesiologist' expressed surprise at his advocacy of pictorial windows: 'in our ignorance we had fancied Mr Warrington a plodding and over-minutely careful copyist of the glass of Romanesque and First pointed days; he speaks for himself, and turns out a reformer, a Rubens-worshipper, an uncompromising developer' ('The Ecclesiologist', 6, 1846, 104-5). Undaunted, Warrington replied in the January 1847 issue, accepting as a compliment the reference to being a careful copyist -- overlooking the fact that it pointed to his tendency to 'antiquate' or exaggerate the contorted poses and features, drawn by some of the ancient artists -- and claiming propriety as the basis for his choice of style. 
In 1848 Warrington courted further controversy when he published his 'The History of Stained Glass'. Curiously, and inadvisably, he had used illustrations of his own work, rather than those of ancient examples, to demonstrate the styles. The reviewer of 'The Ecclesiologist', was merciless: 'Our literary glazier proves what twelfth century glass is by depicting choice specimens from 'Bromley S. Leonard, Stepney S. Peter and Brompton Holy Trinity, designed and executed by W. Warrington Esq. in the year of grace 1841. And if we seek to know how Tudor artists painted glass, Mr Warrington courteously points to his own rejected 'design for some of the windows of the House of Lords [1844]' we ask for medieval facts; and we are put off with nineteenth century competition-sketches. We think this hardly fair. If Mr Warrington wished to put forth the largest and most expensive advertisement upon record, there is no need to dub it a 'History' of the past. ('The Ecclesiologist', 10, 1849-50, 81-2)' Warrington's text was also heavily criticized for inaccuracy in its literary references, interpretation of medieval arrangement of subject matter and use of sacred forms. The book, however, remains a useful indicator of the 1840s work of Warrington and is a source of information regarding some early nineteenth-century glass-painters. 
Writers in 'The Ecclesiologist' continued to criticize Warrington's work. His window in Ely Cathedral was regarded, in the October 1850 issue, as the worst of all the new windows there, while, later, one in St Mary's, Ottery St Mary, Devon, was described as being: 'deficient in beauty, refinement and dignity' ('The Ecclesiologist', 13, 1852, 85). Again Warrington responded spiritedly, replying in the journal to the Ely criticisms in a letter dated 4 October 1850 that included a letter of defence by the dean of Ely, against the 'very unfair and offensive criticism' ('The Ecclesiologist', 11, 1850, 266-7). Indeed, it is clear that however much Warrington inspired hostility from within stained-glass circles he could still attract country-wide patronage. Much of his work is recorded, by county, in his manuscript 'A list of some of the principal works in stained glass' (V&A). His importance resides in his being among the first of the English Gothic revival stained-glass artists. His early work with Pugin was perhaps his most notable and might be seen as potential unrealized, but he continued to make windows until 1866. He died on 4 June 1869 at Martello Cottages, Folkestone, Kent, aged seventy-three, and was buried six days later at SS Mary and Eanswythe Church in Folkestone. His son, James Perry Warrington, carried on the business for about another ten years. 


@@@@@


doc= 58228


McLaren, Laura Elizabeth, Lady Aberconway (1854-1933), campaigner for women's rights and horticulturist, was born at Camp Street, Broughton, Lancashire, on 14 May 1854, the only surviving daughter of Henry Davis Pochin (1824-1895), industrial chemist and MP, and his wife, Agnes Pochin, nee Heap (1825-1908), an activist for women's rights. Her parents were radical Liberals, and on 6 March 1877 at the old Westminster meeting-house, with John Bright as a witness, Laura Pochin married Charles Benjamin Bright McLaren (1850-1934), elder son of Priscilla Bright McLaren and Duncan McLaren, members of the same political and social network. Charles McLaren was a barrister at the time of their marriage, became Liberal MP for Bosworth in 1892, and was later actively involved in running steel, iron, and colliery undertakings, many linked with the Pochin inheritance. Although her husband was a Quaker, there is no evidence that Laura, whose parents were Unitarians, adopted his faith. They had four children who survived infancy: two sons, the younger of whom was killed in action in 1917, and two daughters. 
Although no details are known of Laura Pochin's education, it is certain that considerable attention would have been paid to it. She was brought up by parents who thought that women had the right to equal treatment with men, both politically and legally. Her mother had specifically written that women should receive an education to fit them for a career. Laura McLaren's obituarist in 'The Times' was to write that she was 'a capable woman of business, with the ready grasp and the courageous power of decision that enabled her to weigh big problems with the brain of a man', and it would appear that this was the view taken by her father, because, her surviving brother proving unsatisfactory, she was made her father's heir. 
Laura McLaren was proud of the fact that, as a child, she had attended the country's first public women's suffrage meeting, at which her mother had spoken. Immediately after her marriage she became a member of the executive committee of the London National Society of Women's Suffrage; she became a member of the finance committee, and was treasurer in 1885. Later she served on the executive committee of the Central National Society for Women's Suffrage and was president of the South Kensington Women's Liberal Association: about 1890 she prepared a summary of the evidence presented to the House of Lords on the sweating system of labour, on behalf of the Women's Liberal Federation. In 1908 Fisher Unwin published her pamphlet ''Better and happier': an answer from the Ladies' Gallery to the speeches in opposition to the Women's Suffrage Bill, February 28, 1908'. In it she puts cogently the well-rehearsed arguments that she and her fellow suffragists had broadcast for the previous forty years. Responding to Herbert Gladstone's suggestion that women must get out to convert the electorate to their viewpoint, she writes 'men who suggest this spade-work do not know at what cost to women it is done. In the first place women are miserably poor; the wives of rich men have often nothing but their dress allowance;... half the women of this country work for a wage which a Royal Commission declared to average not more than 1s a day; married women are busily occupied with their homes and with their children... to do spadework -- to carry on political agitation -- needs a lifetime of leisure.... How often have we tramped along the muddy lanes, how often have we gone round from door to door, often receiving rebuffs and unkindness. Well do we remember dreary railway stations at midnight, the last train gone, and snow upon the ground. (L. E. McLaren, ''Better and Happier'', 1908, 17)' She was the author of a very practical document, 'The Woman's Charter of Rights and Liberties -- Preliminary Draft' (1909), which was undertaken as the result of a decision made at the fifth congress of the International Woman Suffrage Alliance to present simultaneously in 1910 to all the parliaments of the world a comprehensive statement or charter detailing the legal injustices and legislative needs of women. By 1913 she was a vice-president of the non-party National Political League for Men and Women. During the First World War she ran a nursing home for officers in her London home, 43 Belgrave Square, for which she was appointed CBE and was made lady of grace of the order of St John of Jerusalem. After the war, the suffrage issue having been settled, she carried on her interest in feminist issues as a member of the Open Door Council. 
Laura McLaren inherited the Bodnant estate above the River Conwy from her father in 1895; her husband was ennobled as Baron Aberconway in 1911. She was a very keen gardener, both in Wales and at her much-loved villa in the south of France. She fostered a love of plants in her son, Henry Duncan McLaren, to whom in 1901 she entrusted the day-to-day care of the Bodnant garden. She was especially interested in spring and summer herbaceous plants, roses, peonies, and the native flora, and was particularly involved in developing the semi-formal borders around the house. She was continuously consulted over the long process of creating the magnificent series of terraces to the west of the house, and it was as an active partner with her son that she was long remembered at Bodnant. 'The Times' obituarist described her as one of the foremost horticulturists in Europe and a painter of merit. Lady Aberconway died on 4 January 1933 at the Chateau de la Garoupe, her villa near Antibes, leaving an estate valued at $0.75 million, and was buried at the Bodnant mausoleum, The Poem. 


@@@@@


doc= 58236


Benn, Sir John Williams, first baronet (1850-1922), publisher and politician, was born at Hyde, Cheshire, on 13 November 1850, the eldest child of the Revd Julius Benn (1826-1883), Congregational minister, and his wife, Ann Taylor (died 1890). The family settled in Stepney in the East End of London when Benn was nine and he attended a small private school there before beginning work, at the age of eleven, as an office boy. At seventeen he moved to a wholesale furniture house. He was attending an art school at night, and in 1868 became a junior draughtsman for the firm, and then quickly chief designer. He was made a junior partner in 1873. On 1 July 1874 he married Elizabeth 
(Lily; died 1928)
, the youngest daughter of John Pickstone, of Silver Hill, Hyde. They had two daughters and four sons. 
In 1880 Benn resigned his partnership and launched his own furniture design journal, the 'Cabinet Maker'. Although forming the foundation of what was to become a thriving publishing firm, the journal struggled early on, and to support it Benn, a natural performer, began a successful part-time career providing illustrated lecture entertainments at various clubs and halls. 
In 1889, in the first London county council (LCC) election, Benn stood for East Finsbury. In his election address he called for municipal control of gas and water supply, of liquor licences, and of markets; he supported council housing, the abolition of the privileges of the city corporation, and a fairer local taxation system. He assured his electorate that 'if elected, I shall be found among the party of progress' (East Finchley election address, 1889, National Liberal Club Collection, Bristol University Library). He was easily elected, and remained on the council until his death. Benn has been described as a 'classic radical' (Thane, 246). By 1893 Beatrice Webb could identify him as one of the inner group of Progressives 'who direct the parliamentary and political policy of the County Council' ('The Diary of Beatrice Webb, 2: 1892-1905', ed. N. Mackenzie and J. Mackenzie, 1983, 34). His major target was elitism and corruption in local government, particularly within the City of London. He fought for the reform and public ownership of London's tramways and other utilities through much of his long period of LCC membership. He concerned himself above all with the tramways, successfully advocating the electrification of the system, and less successfully the large-scale construction of subways at busy junctions (the underpass which carries road traffic from Waterloo Bridge to Kingsway survives as a memorial to Benn's ambitions). 
Benn was adopted as the Liberal parliamentary candidate for the St George-in-the-East and Wapping constituency at the 1892 general election. He campaigned for social reform, often recalling the work of his father as a missionary in the area. He said that he aspired 'to the honour of being the member for the back streets' (Higgins, 27), and was elected with a comfortable majority but lost the seat in the 1895 election by just four votes. The 1895 campaign became extremely bitter, after personal attacks were made on Benn and, as 'restraint and calculation were never strong points in his vivacious character' (Gardiner, 190), he responded in kind. In counter-suits of electoral malpractice following the election, he lost, and was banned from being a candidate in St George's for seven years. He stood unsuccessfully for Deptford in 1897 and Bermondsey in 1900. At a by-election in 1904 he won the seat of Devonport, which he held until January 1910. That December he unsuccessfully contested Clapham. 
Benn was chairman of the LCC in 1904-5 and leader of the Progressives on the council from 1907 to 1918. In his last years, as the only remaining original member, Benn was widely known as the 'Father' of the council ('The Times', 11 April 1922). He was knighted in 1906 and made a baronet in 1914. Benn was tall and distinguished in his looks and was said to have a 'breathless interest in life' (Gardiner, 473). He was a man of great passion and enormous vitality, often extremely impulsive. He died on 10 April 1922 at his home, Stone Wall, Limpsfield, Surrey. He was buried at Limpsfield church on 13 April. His eldest son, Ernest John Pickstone Benn (1875-1954), politician, succeeded to the baronetcy. Another of his sons, William Wedgwood Benn (1877-1960), was created Viscount Stansgate and was the father of Anthony Wedgwood Benn ('b'. 1925), politician. 


@@@@@


doc= 58240


Cooke, Charles Wallwyn Radcliffe (1840-1911), politician and promoter of cider making, was born at Hellens manor house, Much Marcle, Herefordshire, on 16 January 1840, the son and only surviving child of Robert Duffield Cooke (1795/6-1882), landowner and farmer, and his wife, Mary Anne (1797/8-1871), daughter of Edward Wallwyn, through whose family the Hellens property had descended. Educated privately, he matriculated in 1860 from Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he was elected a scholar and gained a second class in the moral sciences tripos in 1863, graduating BA in 1864. At Cambridge he won the university's Le Bas (1864) and Burney (1865) prizes for English essays. He had a reputation as a parodist, publishing a spoof undergraduate diary, purportedly of Samuel Pepys (1866), and a collection, 'Thoughts on Men and Things' (1871), under the pseudonym Angelina Gushington. Admitted at Lincoln's Inn in 1869, he was called to the bar in 1872 and practised on the Oxford circuit. On 20 September 1876 he married Frances Parnther Broome (1850-1891), daughter of J. H. Broome, vicar of Houghton, Norfolk. They had a son and three daughters. 
Radcliffe Cooke, as he was generally known in public life, retired from legal practice on his father's death in 1882, when he inherited the family property at Hellens, Much Marcle, where he farmed and pursued his political interests. An active campaigner for the Conservative party at the general election of 1880, he was concerned at the party's lack of both organization and platform speakers to counter the Liberals. In an attempt to reinvigorate the party he founded the Constitutional Union, which aimed to bring together a younger generation of Conservatives. The party leadership encouraged him to seek a parliamentary seat, and he was elected for Newington West, in south London, at the general election of 1885 on a programme favouring imperial federation. He retained the seat until retiring in 1892, following his wife's death. On 15 April 1893 he married Katherine (1862/3-1931), youngest daughter of George Coles, landowner, of Ventnor; they had one son. Early in August 1893 a vacancy in the Hereford city parliamentary seat arose when the sitting Gladstonian Liberal member W. H. Grenfell decided that he could no longer support his party's policy of Irish home rule. Standing as a Conservative, Cooke won the seat at the ensuing by-election, and sat as member for the city until his retirement in 1900. 
Radcliffe Cooke recorded his impressions as a new MP in 'Four Years in Parliament with Hard Labour' (1890). Its amusing account of the peculiarities of parliamentary life, and the unexpected demands on MPs -- arranging schoolchildren's visits to parliament and presiding over sporting clubs -- brought it reprintings. His maiden speech, in February 1886, opposing William Woodall's bill to extend the parliamentary suffrage to women, set the tone for his Commons career, his intervention being punctuated by laughter. In February 1897 he moved the rejection of the second reading of the women's suffrage bill introduced by Faithfull Begg when, for the first time, the House of Commons voted in favour of extending the franchise to women. He emphasized the small membership of the suffrage societies, and offered an extreme statement of the 'separate spheres' argument for withholding the vote from women, contending that as men made the material framework upon which the state, empire, and even civilization were based, they should govern. Opponents relished drawing attention to his own reliance on women Primrose League canvassers during his election campaigns in Hereford. In a subsequent published exchange, the suffragist leader Millicent Fawcett, who reproved his jocular attitude to the subject, gave his arguments short shrift. Even sympathetic observers considered that his tendency to levity limited his success in parliament. 
If Radcliffe Cooke lent little weight to the anti-suffrage cause, his energetic advocacy of the cider industry, which earned him the title the 'Member for Cider', had more tangible results. As a Herefordshire landowner and farmer active in local affairs -- he was chairman of the Herefordshire chamber of agriculture, founder of the Herefordshire Cattle Breeders' Association, a county councillor, and a promoter of friendly societies in the county -- he was keenly aware of the problems facing agriculture during the depression years of the late nineteenth century. There were signs, however, of the potential for reviving the cider industry, which had been in a long decline. Through articles in 'The Field', to which he was a longstanding contributor, and letters to 'The Times' and Hereford newspapers, he publicized to farmers and landowners the economic potential of orchard cultivation and cider and perry making. 
Radcliffe Cooke was a prime mover, in 1894, in the foundation of the National Association of English Cider Makers to promote cider and fruit growing, and to assist producers by, for example, negotiating reductions in what farmers regarded as the excessive freight charges levied by railway companies. In his evidence to the royal commission on agriculture in April 1895 he made the case for state assistance in the form of experimental fruit farms, grants to assist the planting of orchards, and encouragements to smallholders. One outcome was the foundation in 1903 of the National Fruit and Cider Institute at Long Ashton, near Bristol, which received grants from the board of agriculture and county councils to undertake research into the best systems of cultivation and manufacturing, and disseminate specialist knowledge, so that cider making could be placed on the same scientific basis as brewing. He was a member of the departmental committee appointed by the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries to investigate the British fruit industry, whose report in 1905 noted the impetus which the revival of cider making had given to fruit growing. 
These initiatives were a response to the political reality, which Radcliffe Cooke noted in his 'Book about Cider and Perry' (1898), that parliament was unlikely to restore tariff protection to farmers. Agriculturists needed to respond by increasing the saleable products of the soil, and stimulating demand for them. He believed that cider provided such an opportunity, especially to small farmers for whom an orchard might yield a valuable crop and a cider-press a marketable product. But he insisted on the importance of quality, deploring the existing practice of using inferior varieties and damaged fruit, and haphazard, unhygienic methods of fruit storage and fermentation, which, together with adulteration, had harmed the reputation of the drink among consumers. He particularly urged the cultivation of those 'vintage' varieties of apples and pears that were especially suitable for cider and perry production, and advocated rigorous cleanliness throughout the manufacturing process. 
Radcliffe Cooke promoted cider and perry as potentially the regional wines of England (and Ireland) and saw an opportunity for small producers to supply niche markets, urging the country gentry to serve the local vintages at their tables; he ensured that Herefordshire cider was stocked in the bars at the Houses of Parliament. He also envisaged large-scale production of a more standardized product, of reliable quality, which could supply a mass market. He emphasized cider's health-enhancing qualities, pointing out that Herefordshire had experienced no recorded cases of Asiatic cholera. In his survey of English agriculture Rider Haggard visited Radcliffe Cooke's own cider mill at Hellens and admired the owner's tireless advocacy of the beverage, though baulked at his -- possibly flippant -- dietary recommendation that six unpeeled apples and a pint of cider should be consumed nightly before retiring to bed. Radcliffe Cooke's final contribution was the entry on cider (1910) in the eleventh edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', where he noted with satisfaction a doubling in production of cider and perry in the space of fifteen years. 
Radcliffe Cooke could claim some credit for the boom in cider consumption at the turn of the twentieth century. His altruism on behalf of the industry was briefly called into question in 1898, when he advertised his own cider business; existing producers, rallied by Fred Bulmer (a radical, and opponent, in Hereford politics), accused him of using his privileged position to enter into competition with them, claims that subsided when the small scale of his operations became apparent. Rather, his entry into the trade reflected the financial problems that dogged his later years, which he claimed were brought about by his preoccupation with politics to the neglect of his personal interests. Although he continued to campaign as a Unionist free trader, and was latterly active in the National Service League, he was disappointed that the Conservative leadership had overlooked his services to the party and had failed to promote him to any official position. Following the party's defeat in the 1906 general election he attacked the aristocratic dominance of ministerial positions in the governments of Lord Salisbury and Balfour, and argued for the payment of MPs by the state ('National Review', March 1907). 
By 1909, when a public testimonial of $175 was presented to him on behalf of the county of Hereford for his services to cider and fruit growing, Radcliffe Cooke could no longer afford to remain at Hellens manor house. Hellens was let to tenants, and he moved his household to Westbury, St Andrew's Road, Great Malvern, Worcestershire, where he died on 26 May 1911, having suffered from heart disease. He was buried at Much Marcle where a memorial inscription in the parish church records that he 'restored a principal industry of his native county'. Among those who paid tribute to him was his friend and neighbour Henry Weston (1850-1917) of Bounds Farm, Much Marcle, whose own successful diversification into commercial cider making exemplified Radcliffe Cooke's vision for the industry. 


@@@@@


doc= 58245


Esmonde, Sir Thomas Henry Grattan, eleventh baronet (1862-1935), landowner and politician, was born on 21 September 1862 in Pau, France, the eldest of seven children of Sir John Esmonde, tenth baronet (1826-1876), Liberal and Home Rule MP for Waterford County from 1852 to 1876, and his wife, Louisa (died 1880), daughter of Henry Grattan the younger, Liberal and Repeal MP for Dublin City, 1826-30, and Meath, 1831-52. His paternal grandfather, Sir Thomas Esmonde, ninth baronet (1786-1868), was active in the Catholic Association and was Liberal MP for Wexford County, 1841-7. Esmonde physically resembled his maternal great-grandfather, Henry Grattan. He was also descended from John Esmonde (son of the seventh baronet), a United Irishman hanged in 1798, a fact that was frequently cited during Esmonde's participation in the centenary of the 1798 rising. A Catholic gentry family of Norman descent, the Esmondes lived at Ballynastragh House near Gorey, co. Wexford. In 1876 they owned over 8000 acres in Wexford, Wicklow, Offaly, Tipperary, Longford, Kilkenny, and Waterford. Esmonde later celebrated his family's military traditions in a brief family history, 'Gentlemen! the Queen!', published in 1926 under the pseudonym A. Norman. 
Esmonde was educated by tutors in France and at Oscott College, Birmingham, where he was still a pupil when he succeeded his father in the baronetcy. His nationalist views were influenced by one of his guardians, Canon O'Neill, parish priest of Killanerin. From 1880 to 1886 he was a lieutenant in the 6th brigade of the south Irish division, Royal Artillery militia (Waterford). In the early 1880s Esmonde antagonized his fellow landlords by announcing his support for Charles Stewart Parnell, the leader of the Irish National Land League. In 1885 he was elected as Home Rule MP for Dublin County South, becoming the youngest member of the House of Commons. At this time he resigned from the Kildare Street Club, which he rejoined in 1922. In 1887 he was deposed as high sheriff of Waterford for nominating a sub-sheriff whom the Unionist government found unacceptable. He then participated in resistance to evictions at Coolgreany, co. Wexford (1887), and went on fund-raising tours to America (1888) and South Africa, Australasia, and California (1890). He described the latter trip in 'Around the World with the Irish Delegates' (1892). On 21 July 1891 Esmonde married Alice Barbara (died 1922), daughter of Patrick Donovan of Frogmore, Tralee, co. Kerry. They had two sons and three daughters. 
Following the split in the Home Rule Party, in 1891, Esmonde became an anti-Parnellite. In the 1892 general election he was defeated in Dublin South but returned for West Kerry. In the factional rivalries of the 1890s he generally sided with T. M. Healy against John Dillon, but was regarded as a waverer. During the 1900 general election, as William O'Brien's United Irish League purged Healyite MPs, Esmonde unseated Healy's brother Thomas as MP for North Wexford. (He was also returned for West Kerry but vacated the seat.) He strengthened his Wexford political base by participation in local government and by using his National Bank and Dublin and South-Eastern Railway directorships to employ constituents' sons. He prided himself on having given all the local employment he could in the Gorey area by tilling his land rather than setting it to pasture; he built fifty houses and planted over one million trees. In 1899 he became the first chairman of Wexford county council (1899-1909) and established the general council of county councils under his chairmanship to co-ordinate matters of common concern. 
In 1900 Esmonde became chief whip of the reunited Nationalist Party under the leadership of John Redmond. He was a raconteur of considerable charm, well-liked even by political opponents, and an accomplished parliamentary speaker and tactician: the journalist Sir John Foster Fraser spoke of his 'Christ-like character' and a Conservative MP called him 'straight as a string' ('Irish Independent', 16 Sept 1935, 7). Some of his party colleagues, however, distrusted his perceived ambitions and powerbase in the general council. On account of his social standing, financial independence, and descent from Grattan, Esmonde was sometimes seen as a potential leader. Arthur Griffith's radical nationalist Sinn Fein party viewed the general council as an embryonic Irish parliament, and Esmonde invested in a pro-Sinn Fein newspaper, the 'Enniscorthy Echo'. In 1907 Esmonde endorsed Sinn Fein in protest against alleged subservience of the Irish Parliamentary Party to the Liberal government. The Irish Parliamentary Party deposed Esmonde from the general council and mounted a campaign in his constituency spearheaded by his fellow Wexfordman John Redmond. Faced with possible defeat, Esmonde returned to the Irish Party in 1908; he remained MP for North Wexford until defeated by Sinn Fein in 1918. 
In 1920 Esmonde resigned as JP and DL for co. Wexford in protest against the detention of Terence MacSwiney. From 1922 to 1934 he was an Irish Free State senator, and he was chairman of the Irish board of the National Bank until 1933. In March 1923, during the Irish civil war, Ballynastragh House was burnt by republicans, destroying historical relics and a valuable archive (the art collection was saved). Esmonde, already saddened by the loss of his wife in December 1922 and his younger son, John (who had joined the Royal Navy and died at the battle of Jutland in 1916), experienced this as a major personal trauma. This was compounded by a long and painful legal process after which Esmonde received 60 per cent of what he had originally claimed and felt he had been treated 'as a criminal during his trial' (Dooley, 204). Most of his landed property had meanwhile been sold under the 'Land Purchase Acts'. 
On 22 September 1924 Esmonde married the portrait painter Anna Frances Levins, (died 1941), daughter of Peter Levins, architect, of Mount Hope (New York) and Drogheda. She accompanied him on annual Canadian hunting expeditions and art-collecting forays and published his books under a private imprint, the Levins Press. In the 'golden age' of aristocratic shooting, Esmonde was an enthusiastic traveller, fisherman, and big-game hunter, recording his activities in 'Hunting Memories of Many Lands' (1920, rev. 1925) and 'More Hunting Memories' (1930). 
Esmonde was appointed a chamberlain of the Vatican household in 1898, later becoming senior privy chamberlain of the Sword and Cape. He headed the Irish 'langue' of the papal order of the Holy Sepulchre, from its establishment in 1908, as a knight grand cross; he was prominent in Irish-linked Vatican ceremonies (such as the 1920 beatification of Oliver Plunkett) and the 1932 Dublin eucharistic congress. He died at his home, 84 St Stephen's Green, Dublin, on 15 September 1935, after a prolonged illness and was buried on 17 September at the Lymbrick graveyard, Kilcavan, near Gorey, co. Wexford. He was considerably more competent as politician and businessman than his published writings suggest, but his abilities none the less fell short of his aspirations. 
Esmonde's final will, made in July 1928, leaving his property to his second wife, was unsuccessfully challenged in the Dublin high court by the eldest son from his first marriage and his successor in the baronetcy, 


@@@@@


doc= 58246


Gordon, Sir William Eden Evans- (1857-1913), politician, was born on 8 August 1857 in Chatham, Kent, the youngest son of Major-General Charles Spalding Evans-Gordon and his wife, Catherine Rose, daughter of Dr Rose of Inverness. He was educated at Cheltenham College and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He entered the army in July 1876 and after joining the 67th foot regiment in January 1877 was posted to India. After being made a captain in the Madras staff corps in July 1878, he was promoted major in July 1896. During his service, he acted as aide-de-camp to the governor of Madras, as a boundary settlement officer, and accompanied the viceroy, the marquess of Dufferin, as an interpreter on several tours. He undertook various roles within the foreign department of the government of India, and from 1888 to 1892 was assistant secretary. On 2 February 1892 Evans-Gordon married Julia Charlotte Sophia, marchioness of Tweeddale (1846-1937), widow of Arthur Hay, the ninth marquess, and widow of Sir John Rose, first baronet. She was the daughter of Keith William Stewart-Mackenzie of Seaforth and his first wife, Hannah Charlotte Hope-Vere. She and Evans-Gordon had no children. He retired from the army in May 1897. 
In March 1898 Evans-Gordon unsuccessfully contested for the Conservatives one of the London county council seats for Stepney in the East End of London. During the council campaign the sitting Conservative MP for Stepney died and Evans-Gordon was selected as the candidate to replace him in parliament. He was narrowly defeated in the by-election, but won the seat in the October 1900 general election Conservative landslide. Evans-Gordon rose to greatest prominence after his election for his persistent and forthright call for restrictions to be placed upon immigration into Britain. Large numbers of Jewish immigrants had continued to settle in the East End of London from the 1880s, and the 'alien question' was an issue gaining widespread attention in Stepney and surrounding seats. Evans-Gordon took up these local concerns with a passion and became one of the leading proponents of restrictive legislation. 
Soon after his election Evans-Gordon was instrumental in the establishment of the British Brothers' League (BBL), a purportedly working-class anti-immigration body. The BBL attracted large crowds to a series of public meetings across the East End; the first of these was held in Stepney in May 1901. By 1902 the BBL's membership stood at 12,000 and it had collected 45,000 signatures in support of its stand. Evans-Gordon toured eastern Europe to study the Jewish immigration question, and wrote of his journey in his book 'The Alien Immigrant', published in 1903. He concluded that 'it is a fact that the settlement of large aggregations of Hebrews in a Christian land has never been successful' ('The Alien Immigrant', 248). 
Evans-Gordon's role at the head of a popular anti-immigration movement gave him a great deal of influence in setting the agenda of the government on the issue. He formed a committee of MPs pledged to vote for restriction -- the parliamentary pauper immigration committee -- and this played an important part in forcing the government to establish a royal commission on alien immigration in 1902. As a member of the commission, Evans-Gordon was 'the individual who dominated the whole investigation' (Kushner, 37). Many of the witnesses called by the commission were organized by the BBL. The commission's report was presented in August 1903 and recommended a range of measures to restrict immigration. These were largely incorporated into the 'Aliens Act' of 1905 which, according to David Feldman, Evans-Gordon 'played a major role in drafting' (Feldman, 75). With a great deal of justification, he was regarded by Chaim Weizmann, later the first president of Israel, as the 'father of the 'Aliens Act'' (Gainer, 182). 
Evans-Gordon held his seat in general election in January 1906, against the trend of the Liberal landslide. His victory has often been attributed to support for his stand on immigration, though this is open to question for he also stood on a programme of social reform, including cheaper working-class housing, poor-law reform, and old-age pensions. After 1906 Evans-Gordon continued to campaign on immigration, frequently attacking the new government for failing to enforce the 'Aliens Act'. He told one large public meeting in Shoreditch that 'War has been declared on you by the Liberal Government, the friends of every country but their own' ('East London Advertiser', 7 April 1906, 5). He announced his resignation from parliament in April 1907, largely as a result of his own ill health and that of his wife. After his retirement he continued periodically to write on the immigration question. 
Evans-Gordon, who was knighted in 1905, was described as a tall and handsome man with an engaging manner ('East London Advertiser', 8 Nov 1913, 5), and he was undoubtedly a popular member of parliament, although it is difficult to assess the extent to which his constituents supported his views on immigration restriction. He died suddenly on 31 October 1913 at his residence at 4 Chelsea Embankment, London. He was buried at Ightham church, Kent, on 4 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 58247


Sir Richard Durning Holt, baronet (1868-1941), was born at 29 Edge Lane, West Derby, Liverpool on 13 November 1868, one of the five sons of Robert Durning Holt (1832-1908), Alfred's brother and a cotton broker in the family business as well as a leader of the Liberal Party on the Liverpool city council. His mother was Lawrencina (Lally), daughter of Richard Potter of Manchester and sister of the Fabian socialist Beatrice Webb ['see 'Webb, (Martha) Beatrice]. Richard attended Winchester College and New College, Oxford, and in 1889 entered his uncle's firm. He served in various departments to learn the business, and in 1892 undertook an extensive tour of the Far East, becoming familiar with the work done in Singapore, Hong Kong, and Shanghai. In 1895 he was promoted to manager. His career was regarded as a model. Described as 'a great financier' ('Journal of Commerce'), he showed almost instinctive commercial acumen, coupled with a strength of personality that enabled him to hold together 'a powerful management team of varied and often warring individuals who gave their complete loyalty to the company' (Falkus, 21). 


@@@@@


doc= 58252


Gower, Sir George Granville Leveson- (1858-1951), autobiographer, politician, and private secretary, was born in London on 19 May 1858, the only child of (Edward) Frederick Leveson-Gower (1819-1907) and his wife, Lady Margaret Mary Frances Elizabeth, 'nee' Compton. Granville George Leveson-Gower, second Earl Granville, the foreign secretary and colleague of W. E. Gladstone, was his uncle, and an important influence on his life. His mother died three days after his birth, and he was brought up by his father and uncle. He was educated at Eton College and Balliol College, Oxford, matriculating in 1876. There he made many lifelong friends, including G. N. Curzon. He achieved a second class in moderations (1878) and in Greats (1880), the year of his uncle's return to office with Gladstone. He immediately became one of Gladstone's private secretaries and found himself on the inside of Liberal politics during an especially problematic government. 
Mr Leveson, as Gladstone usually called Leveson-Gower, proved a much employed mediator between Gladstone and the many whigs with whom the prime minister was in disagreement. He worked for Gladstone throughout his second government, and in 1881 accompanied a mission to Spain. From 1885 to 1886 he was MP for North-West Staffordshire, a county in which the Granville interest was strong, and was a junior whip; he lost his post and his seat with the home rule defeat in 1886. He persisted in his attempt to pursue a political career, unsuccessfully contesting East Marylebone in 1889, and being elected at a by-election for Stoke-on-Trent in 1890 (a constituency his father had earlier represented). He held the seat in the election of 1892, but lost it in that of 1895. From 1892 to 1895 he was comptroller of the royal household and a church estates commissioner (often the only commissioner taking the Liberal line during the important discussion on Welsh disestablishment). He did not contest another seat. In the long Liberal opposition from 1895 until 1905 he was active in trying to retain whiggish support for the party, and to show his fellow Liberals that whigs could be useful. He served on the London school board 1897-9, representing the City of London ward for the Progressive Party. On 9 June 1898 he married, at St Peter's, Eaton Square, London, (Adelaide Violet) Cicely Monson (died 1955), daughter of Captain Debonnaire John Monson (1830-1900), also of the royal household, and his wife, Augusta (died 1936); they had two daughters. 
Leveson-Gower had what he recalled as 'a very moderate income' (Leveson-Gower, 'Years of Endeavour', 196) and his political expenses came out of his own pocket, a fact which led him after his marriage to abandon his attempt at a political career. He wrote regularly for the periodicals and in 1899 became European editor of the 'North American Review'. His 'Poems' were published in 1902. He received no post in the Liberal government formed in 1905, though he became chairman of the Home Counties Liberal Federation. In 1908 he resigned from the 'Review' to become commissioner of woods and forests, a post he held until 1924. He was later a director of two railway companies and of the Lillieshall Company. He was knighted in 1921. 
Though his political career never matched its initial potential -- and, despite his loyalty, he came to be seen as something of a lightweight -- Leveson-Gower in old age became an amiable memorialist, publishing 'Years of Content' (1940), 'Years of Endeavour' (1942), and 'Mixed Grill' (1947, enlarged edn 1948). These remain lively volumes, with many entertaining stories, mostly of a political and social sort. Leveson-Gower died on 18 July 1951. 


@@@@@


doc= 58254


Massie, John (1842-1925), biblical scholar and politician, was born on 3 December 1842 at Newton-le-Willows, Lancashire, the son of Robert Massie, a Congregational minister, and his wife, May Soutter. In 1848 the father moved to Atherstone, Warwickshire. Massie was educated at Atherstone grammar school and subsequently at St John's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted as a sizar in 1862 and became a scholar in 1864. He obtained a second class in the classical tripos in 1866. During his first few years as a graduate he lived at Highgate, Middlesex, and prepared pupils for university entrance. In 1869 he became classical tutor at the Congregational theological college at Spring Hill, Birmingham. Two years later he was appointed professor of 'New Testament' exegesis at that college, and was known as an accurate and congenial teacher. He held this post at Birmingham, together with his classical tutorship, until 1886, when the college moved to Oxford. On 19 July 1876 he married Edith Mary (1848-1933), daughter of Alexander Ogilvie, civil engineer, of Sizewell House, Suffolk, and the couple settled at Leamington Spa. Massie became involved in local politics, and in 1878 he was elected to the town council at Leamington Spa, later becoming an alderman. He remained a member of the council until 1887. 
In 1886 Spring Hill College was closed, its endowments being transferred to Mansfield College, the new Congregational theological institution at Oxford which replaced it. Mansfield began its work at 90 High Street, Oxford, in October 1886. Three years later its new premises, built in spacious gothic style, were opened. 
Massie moved to Oxford, took up residence at Headington, and from 1886 to 1903 continued his scholarly occupation as Yates professor of 'New Testament' exegesis at Mansfield. He became associated with the university as an incorporated MA at Corpus Christi College. At Mansfield he was initially the only member of staff apart from the principal, the Revd Andrew Martin Fairbairn. In the college Massie commanded respect for his teaching ability, his friendliness towards the students, and his performances on the cricket field. His scholarly writing was equally sound, though small in quantity -- appearing as commentaries on the first and second epistles to the 'Corinthians' (published in the 'Century Bible', 1901) and as articles in biblical dictionaries and religious magazines. In 1901, when he attended the tercentenary celebrations at Yale University as Mansfield College representative, he was awarded an honorary DD of that university. 
Massie was devoted to educational work outside Mansfield as well as within it, and to political work for the Liberal Party. From 1890 he was vice-chairman of the council of Leamington High School for Girls. In 1894 he became an assistant commissioner to the royal commission on secondary education, in which capacity he wrote an official report on secondary schools in Warwickshire. On the political side, he was on the executive of the National Liberal Federation from 1894 to 1906, and again from 1910, and was treasurer of the federation from 1903 to 1906. He published political pamphlets in the 1890s against dogmatic teaching in schools and on university education for Catholics in Ireland. His political nonconformity was indicated by his spells as president of the Liberation Society (or Society for the Liberation of Religion from State Patronage and Control), and as president of the Oxford and District Free Church Council for twenty-five years (1896-1921). He also had a period as president of the Body of Protestant Dissenting Deputies. He served the Congregational Union of England and Wales as chairman of its council and of its committees for education and general purposes, as well as being a benefactor of, and loyal attender at, its churches. Massie's many roles were liable to draw him into conflict with others, but he was genial by nature and upheld his opinions without bitterness, so managing to maintain friendships with persons whose views were far removed from his own. 
Massie took part in the nonconformist opposition to the 'Education Bill' of 1902, and after the bill had gone through he passively resisted paying the local education rate. In 1903 he relinquished his professorship in order to give more time to public and political work. He was given a fairly promising parliamentary seat to fight (the Cricklade division of Wiltshire), and entered parliament in the Liberal landslide of January 1906, holding the seat for the Liberals by a substantial majority of 1578 (7294 votes to 5716) over a Liberal Unionist. He lost the seat to a Unionist by 635 votes in January 1910. In the Commons he spoke frequently, if usually briefly, in support of the Liberal government's unsuccessful education bills, and on ritualism, disestablishment, and the 'Irish University Bill' of 1908. He also spoke against women's suffrage -- a subject on which he joined Asquith and others in a minority of the Liberal MPs -- and he became treasurer of the Women's National Anti-Suffrage League. 'Massie is tiresome and loses himself in petty detail', Cromer told Curzon in September 1910, 'but one must bear with him'; by listening 'to all the paltry tittle-tattle' Massie causes 'a great deal more friction than he allays' (Cromer to Curzon, 14 and 29 Sept 1910, Curzon MSS, BL OIOC, MS Eur. F/112/33). 
Massie did not sit again in parliament after January 1910, but he remained active in public life for many years. As well as the denominational and wider free church activities already mentioned, and work for the National Liberal Federation, he was a diligent JP for Oxfordshire. From 1916 to 1921 he chaired the Oxfordshire committee established under the 'War Pensions Act'. He died at 84 Harley Street, London, on 11 November 1925, as the result of double pneumonia accelerated by the shock of being knocked down by a taxi-cab. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 58258


Pease, Sir Alfred Edward, second baronet (1857-1939), politician and sportsman, was born at Woodlands, Darlington, on 29 June 1857, the second of the eight children, and the eldest son, of Sir Joseph Whitwell Pease, first baronet (1828-1903), businessman and Liberal MP for Barnard Castle, co. Durham (1885-1903), and his wife, Mary Fox (died 1892). He was born into an established Darlington Quaker family which figured prominently in the politics and economy of the region. His father, uncle, and grandfather were all Liberal members of parliament, and both he and his younger brother Joseph Albert (Jack) Pease, who became Baron Gainford (1917), followed in this tradition. Pease was educated at Grove House, Tottenham, and entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1876, graduating BA in 1880 (MA, 1883). On 10 February 1880 he married Helen Ann (Nellie) Fowler (1858-1910), third daughter of Sir Robert Nicholas Fowler, first baronet, banker, and Conservative politician; they had two sons and a daughter. Pease entered business and became a director of the family firm, Pease & Partners Ltd, and of the National Provident Institution. He was an alderman of the North Riding from 1889 to 1937, and a deputy lieutenant for both the North Riding and London. 
In 1885 Pease was elected Liberal MP for York, which he represented until his defeat at the 1892 general election; he was defeated there again in 1895. In January 1897, while travelling in Somaliland, he was elected for the Cleveland division of the North Riding and sat until 1902, when he accepted the Chiltern Hundreds. Though designated a Liberal, Pease preferred the appellation 'whig', and defended with gusto the principle of a ruling class whose members were born and bred in the traditions of government. At the same time he admired Gladstone and steadfastly supported Irish home rule, free trade, and temperance. Much happier in the Victorian political world than in the Edwardian, Pease opposed the 'people's budget' of 1909 as a 'socialist' measure. Believing that Asquith was 'out for the 'Labour' vote' and had taken 'Lloyd George and Limehouse to his bosom', he severed links with the party of 'neo-Liberalism' (Pease, 'Elections', 301). 
By this date, however, Pease's political career was over. During the 1890s the family textile business had gone into decline; when its failure became public in 1902 Pease resigned his seat. It was a humbling turn of fortune for one whose coming of age in 1878 had been celebrated with a party for 800 at his father's mansion, Hutton Hall, in Yorkshire. Although Pease avoided bankruptcy, only desperate measures enabled him to save Pinchinthorpe House, his Yorkshire home, from the creditors. In straitened circumstances he sought employment abroad and he was wryly amused when help eventually came from a political opponent and not from a political friend. 
In 1903, the year that Pease succeeded to his father's baronetcy, Lord Milner, of whom he had been highly critical during the South African War, appointed him resident magistrate in the Barberton district of the Transvaal. After a period of service there in 1903-5, he pursued several speculative business ventures, including an ostrich farm in Africa, before settling again in England. Although none of his money-making schemes took off, Pease was able to live the remainder of his life as a gentleman of means. After the death of his first wife he married on 28 September 1912 Laure Marianne (1868-1922), daughter of Louis Philippe Sugnet de Montmagny. There were no children. During the 1914-18 war he served with the remount service and in September 1918, after his younger son had been killed in action, he joined the Church of England. His second wife died in January 1922 and on 1 August of that year, to the mild scandal of his friends and family, he married his nurse, Emily Elizabeth Smith (1897-1979), forty years his junior; they had three surviving children, two sons and a daughter. 
In his memoir 'Elections and Recollections' (1932) Pease has left a candid record of political life at the end of the nineteenth century. He had scant regard for the reputations of some famous contemporaries and wrote of John Morley: 'With all his historical and literary attainments, I never knew a distinguished man so destitute of any understanding of our race, or indeed any other' (Pease, 'Elections', 97). The book reveals Pease as an unflinching advocate of condign punishment: he was convinced of the deterrent value of heavy sentences -- what he termed 'the mercy of severity' -- and supported flogging. 
A fine horseman and an ardent fox-hunter Pease wrote an entertaining history of the hunt to which he most commonly rode: 'The Cleveland Hounds as a Trencher-Fed Pack' (1887). Hunting inspired some of his best writing, and his 'Half a Century of Sport' (1932) recounts diverse exploits abroad, including the pursuit of lion in Africa, ibex in the Pyrenees, and Barbary sheep in Algeria -- Pease rated the latter as one of the most difficult game to hunt. In England he found time to shoot, stalk, and follow otterhounds, and his 'Hunting Reminiscences' (1898) has detailed chapters on hare, fox, cub, and badger hunting. Although Pease had no qualms about digging for badger, he denounced badger-baiting as 'a cruel and brutalizing sport'. He believed that 'all genuine sportsmen have something of the naturalist in their composition', and in parliament advocated an extension of the legislation to protect wild birds (Pease, 'Hunting Reminiscences', 236). Pease's attachment to the countryside of the North Riding is conveyed strongly in his 'Dictionary of the Dialect of the North Riding of Yorkshire' (1928), an authoritative account on the subject. Pease died at his home at Pinchinthorpe in Guisborough, Yorkshire, on 27 April 1939. 


@@@@@


doc= 58263


Tennant, Harold John (1865-1935), politician, was born at The Glen, Innerleithen, Peeblesshire, on 18 November 1865, the youngest child in the family of six sons and six daughters of the industrialist Sir Charles Tennant, first baronet (1823-1906), and his first wife, Emma, 'nee' Winsloe (1821-1895). He was educated at Eton College (1879-85) and Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1888. On 1 October 1889 he married Helen Elizabeth, daughter of Major Lachlan Gordon Duff of Drummuir, Banffshire (whose son was married to Tennant's eldest sister); they had a son, who died in childhood. His wife died on 9 May 1892. 
In September 1892 Tennant was appointed by H. H. Asquith, home secretary in Gladstone's last administration, as an unpaid assistant secretary at the Home Office. He was secretary to a departmental committee to investigate the health of workers exposed to toxic hazards in the smelting and working of lead. In March 1894, standing as a Liberal, he entered parliament at a by-election for Berwickshire brought about by the political changes following Gladstone's resignation, and he remained an MP until 1918. In May 1894 his sister Margot ['see 'Asquith, Margaret Emma Alice] married Asquith, reinforcing his ties to the rising Liberal politician. From 1895 he chaired a departmental committee to investigate working conditions in dangerous trades. On 8 July 1896 he married a fellow member of that committee, May Abraham (1869-1946) ['see 'Tennant, Margery Mary Edith Josephine Pia], the first female factory inspector, and a treasurer of the Women's Trade Union League, which sought protection for women workers using lead in the pottery industry. They had four sons (the eldest of whom was killed in action on the western front in May 1917) and one daughter. 
Tennant shared the political identification of his father and brother-in-law with Lord Rosebery's imperialist wing of the Liberal Party and was among the Liberal League MPs returned in the landslide of 1906. Overlooked for ministerial office by Campbell-Bannerman, he nevertheless left his mark as a private member by moving an amendment in July 1906 to the government's 'Education Bill' to make it compulsory for local authorities to undertake the medical inspection of children attending public elementary schools. Promotion followed his brother-in-law's accession to the premiership, and in December 1908 he was made under-secretary to Winston Churchill at the Board of Trade. In 1909 he carried through the House of Commons a major piece of social legislation establishing trade boards to fix minimum wages in low-paid 'sweated trades', a cause which May Tennant, an executive member of the National Anti-Sweating League, promoted. Although the statute was initially confined to four industries, it revived the long-dormant principle that the state should be involved in regulating wages. 
In 1911 Tennant became financial secretary at the War Office, and in 1912 under-secretary. During the First World War he had an especially prominent and demanding position in parliament as his departmental head, Kitchener, was in the House of Lords. Tennant dealt with the great volume of House of Commons questions about manpower matters, holding the line until April 1916 in defence of voluntary enlistment in the face of demands for conscription. He also had to respond to the criticisms of Sir Arthur Markham that the voluntary system led to the enlistment of under-age boys. In July 1916, during the ministerial reshuffle following Kitchener's death, Asquith appointed him Secretary for Scotland, with a seat in the coalition cabinet. His period of responsibility for Scottish matters was brief and undistinguished, and his ministerial career ended when Asquith was supplanted by Lloyd George and the Unionist-dominated coalition in December 1916. 
Having voted with other Liberal ex-ministers against the coalition government in 1918, Tennant was denied the coalition's 'coupon' in the general election of that year, and was heavily defeated by a coalition candidate at Berwick and Haddington (as his constituency had been renamed). That year he published 'Letters of a Lowland Keeper', the shooting correspondence of his gamekeeper, reflecting his interest in the management of his Scottish sporting estate. In her indiscreet autobiography (1920) his sister Margot remarked that he had been 'petted and mismanaged in his youth' and advanced the opinion that his physical growth had been curtailed as a result of being allowed to walk several miles a day with shooters as a child, compounded by staying up late at night to play billiards with adults (Asquith, 3-4). The loss of his deposit when he stood for Glasgow Central in the general election of 1923, during the brief period of Liberal reunion, terminated a political career whose direction was largely determined by his family connections and whose extent was precisely framed by the fortunes of the post-Gladstonian Liberal Party. He died on 9 November 1935 at Great Maytham, Rolvenden, Kent, and was buried at Edinglassie, Strathdon, Aberdeenshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 58269


Dudley, Mary (1750-1823), Quaker minister, was born on 8 June or 8 August 1750 at Bristol, the daughter of Joseph (died 1773) and Mary Stokes. It has been claimed that there were thirty children and that on one occasion half were in Temple Church, Bristol, to hear a brother preach. Mary had a strict Church of England upbringing, and also enjoyed 'most of the vain amusements of the world' (Dudley, 'Life', 2) but, becoming increasingly serious in her later teens, she attended Methodist meetings. By the time she was twenty-one, however, she started to go to Quaker meetings, causing John Wesley (who had much esteemed her) to write in strong terms of disapprobation -- to which she made a spirited reply. By 1773 she was a decided Friend and soon afterwards sometimes spoke in meeting for worship. Her mother's chance presence on one such occasion helped to reconcile the outraged relatives to her Quakerism. She later moved from Bristol to Frenchay and was married there on 9 July 1777 to Robert Dudley (1732?-1807) of Prior Park, Clonmel, co. Tipperary. She was his third wife and had the care of five stepsons; the couple also had four sons, the eldest being Charles Stokes Dudley ['see below'], and four daughters. By 1806 all her stepsons had died, the longest-lived being forty-two. Clonmel, her home until 1810, had a substantial and cultured Quaker population. 
By the time of her marriage Dudley's vocation for the ministry was formally acknowledged, and in 1786 she first travelled in the ministry. In 1788, when her seventh child was but ten weeks old, she was away for six months as a member of a small group of Friends travelling in Holland, Germany, and France, visiting Moravians, Inspirants, and the groups near Nimes who came to form a Quaker meeting at Congenies. She was away from home for much of the rest of her life, visiting Quaker meetings throughout Britain and Ireland, and appointing special meetings to which townspeople or villagers would flock in large numbers. 
Dudley's travels in the ministry in Ireland throughout the 1790s were considerable, as were those of more than half a dozen Irish, English, and American ministering Friends. Apart from the political events of the decade, it is almost as though they recognized the theological tensions which were also brewing and which would decimate Irish Quakerism between 1798 and 1801. The paths of these ministering Friends crossed and recrossed and -- as they stayed at Prior Park or were companions with Mary Dudley on journeys, or simply met her in out-of-the-way places -- their affection as well as their regard is in no doubt. Her vocal ministry was 'tender and winning' ('Memoirs', 328), her sympathies broad, and her pastoral gifts sensitive. Her significance in the history of Irish Quakerism during this decade may be greater than has hitherto been recognized. 
Dudley suffered a persistent affliction of the lungs, which cannot have been helped by constant travelling in all weathers, by a succession of different houses or inns to sleep in, and by the strain of almost daily meetings. She often had to take to her bed when travelling in the ministry and in 1795, seriously ill, finally journeyed to her native Bristol to take the waters. Within six weeks her health had markedly improved. She returned to Ireland and was once again on the move. However, she was soon affected by ill health and in 1798 her life was in danger. Reluctantly, she accepted medical advice stipulating 'a sea voyage and short residence at Bristol Hotwells' (Dudley, 'Life', 228). Her son Charles, who accompanied her and her four daughters, later claimed that they had left Ireland because of the rising. Robert Dudley may well have been grateful for the medical advice: that it was genuine seems equally certain. 
The family returned to Ireland in 1800, and the succession of travels in the ministry resumed. In 1807 Dudley's husband and a son died, and in March 1810 a daughter. Later that year she and her three surviving daughters moved to London, settling in Southwark. Apart from a visit to Yorkshire, Dudley's ministerial labours were now confined to London and the home counties. In winter 1818-19 (she had just returned from a 400 mile journey) she was confined to the house for a considerable time, 'her body and mind suffering under a combination of afflicting circumstances' (Dudley, 'Life', 301). One affliction was the bankruptcy of the business run by two of her sons, bringing serious loss to their creditors. She continued her Quaker activities until 18 April 1823 when palpitations of the heart and faintness confined her to bed. Despite a slight remission in July, when she was able to be taken for drives, she never regained strength and died on 24 September 1823, at her home in George Street, Peckham, Surrey. She was buried on 2 October at the Bunhill Fields Friends' burial-ground in London. 
Dudley's eldest son, 
In 1810 Charles Dudley joined his mother and sisters following their move to Southwark. His brother George ('b'. 1789) had already moved to London and entered his provision business. Charles, who now began to use his mother's maiden name as a second forename, became involved in the British and Foreign Bible Society's Southwark auxiliary. His organization was so successful that he was asked to visit other auxiliaries and demonstrate his system. From 1812 he gave a substantial part of his time to this work and from 1815 (partly also on account of ill health) was virtually a sleeping partner in the business. 
In December 1818 Dudley was recalled from Bible Society business in Plymouth to find that his brother, who had assured him that the firm was lucrative, had suspended payment to creditors and that business was at a total stop, with debts amounting to $20,000 against assets of $7200. Both brothers were disowned by their respective monthly meetings. Charles Stokes Dudley had probably, in any event, been increasingly drawn to the Church of England, which he joined about 1820. 
Hitherto, the work of the Bible Society from its foundation in 1804 had been entirely on a voluntary basis. Dudley now became salaried. Until 1852 he continued travelling the country, organizing and fostering auxiliaries. He published in 1821 a work entitled 'An Analysis of the System of the Bible Society', a 600 page volume of historical background, with guidance on the setting up and regulation of auxiliaries and branches. On 12 May 1824 he married Sarah Haycock, at Farnham, Surrey; the marriage produced thirteen children, eight of whom survived him. In 1852 he retired, having been the guiding hand behind the Bible Society's work for forty years. He died on 4 November 1862. 


@@@@@


doc= 58271


Macdonald sisters (act. 1837-1925), four daughters of a Methodist minister, George Browne Macdonald (1805-1868), and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Jones (1809-1875), went on to have notable lives through either marriage or parenthood. George Macdonald was an easy-going and energetic man and a kind father, although often absent. Hannah was the stricter parent, at times overwhelmed and depressed by the task of raising her large family on a minister's income. Her children remembered her as an excellent nurse and a family prohibition against idleness was relaxed only when one of the children was ill, which may have contributed to a family tendency to hypochondria. Both parents were well educated -- the children were allowed great freedom to use their father's library and were well taught by their mother. The family was musical and the children made a great deal of their own entertainment. Owing to the Methodist church's custom of relocating its ministers every three years the household was what the Macdonalds referred to as a 'moving tent'. This constant moving undoubtedly contributed to Hannah Macdonald's melancholy but also ensured an unusual degree of closeness among her two sons and six daughters (three children died in infancy and one daughter, Carrie, in her teens). Despite the drawbacks of this peripatetic life, the Macdonalds, especially the sisters, grew up to be spirited, witty, and a little wild. 
The eldest surviving daughter, Alice Kipling (1837-1910), mother of (Joseph) Rudyard Kipling, was born in Sheffield on 4 April 1837. The story that she once baked a mouse in pastry and dared a friend to eat it may be a family myth but she was certainly bold enough to try it and tough enough to find it amusing. By her teens she was engaged to an Oxford friend of her brother's who was studying for the ministry. 
In 1853 the family moved to London. They found London life exceedingly stimulating and the girls spent a lot of time with the Pre-Raphaelite artists, among them Edward Burne-Jones, whom they knew from childhood. Alice was writing poetry and attributed her failure to get into print to gender discrimination. She was not ready to settle down as a clergyman's wife and her engagement quietly died. She later made quite a hobby of getting engaged, most notably to the poet William Allingham, and her father had to speak to her about her flirting. In 1863 she met John Lockwood Kipling (1837-1911), an artist working for the Department of Science and Arts in South Kensington. They married in 1865 and immediately embarked for India, where Kipling had gained a post in an art school in Bombay. His calm good nature complemented her quick, sharp wit -- her brother observed how her words tumbled over each other in her haste to get them out. It is fortunate that she was happy in her marriage because she hated India. She turned her social talents to gaining professional advancement for her husband and to social advantage for them both. 
The birth of Alice's first child, Rudyard, late in 1865 was so difficult that the Kiplings decided any future children must be born in England. In 1868 she took Rudyard to England, where he stayed with her parents while she gave birth to her daughter Alice, known in the family as Trix. Something went wrong on this trip: perhaps Rudyard, the spoiled darling of an Indian ayah, was too much for the Macdonalds (George Macdonald was ill and died shortly after their visit), perhaps the sisters, now well married to husbands more prosperous than hers, annoyed Alice; whatever it was, the visit was a disappointment and may have led her to make the greatest mistake of her life. When her third child, John, died weeks after his birth in 1870, the Kiplings decided that the time had come for Rudyard and Trix to return to England. Possibly because Alice was at odds with her family, the children were sent not to their family but to strangers in Southsea, where they boarded for over ten years. The experience may not have been as traumatic as Rudyard later depicted it, but he suffered a breakdown as a result of it and Trix suffered mental illness for a large part of her life. The family coolness existed largely in Alice's mind and the family kept an eye on the two children; Georgiana and Edward Burne-Jones rescued Rudyard when he was in danger of going blind and alerted his mother to his condition. 
While the children were suffering in England, their parents were unhappy in India, missing their children but believing in the rightness of their actions. Alice's attempts to advance her husband's career bore fruit in 1875 when he was made principal of a new art school in Lahore. Both wrote in their free time and their social life prospered. They were introduced to the viceroy when John designed and Alice helped to make a series of banners for the Delhi durbar and thereafter they moved in the highest circles of Anglo-Indian society. This effort was not mere social climbing but was rather the means to financial security for themselves and their family. It financed a long trip home, as Alice realized that all was not well with her children. It set in place a network of connections that Alice could use to promote her son's career upon his return. 
By 1883 both children were back in India. The Kiplings rejoiced in being again what they called the family square. Indeed, their efforts at family unity seem a little fevered, as if to make up for all the years of separation. Nevertheless, they claimed to be ecstatically happy together. All four of them wrote and Alice proved Rudyard's fiercest critic. Alice's connections obtained Rudyard his first newspaper job. When Trix shocked Anglo-Indian society by attracting his son, the viceroy appealed to Alice Kipling to send her daughter away in order to prevent a misalliance. The viceroy blinked first and his son returned to England. The Kiplings were not universally liked in their last years in India, but they were respected, and Alice had her share in that. 
The Kiplings left India for good in 1893 and settled in Tisbury, in Wiltshire. The divisions between Alice and her sisters were largely healed and she spent a great deal of time with them. Neither of her children's marriages brought her the kind of satisfaction she might have hoped for -- Rudyard's wife was as formidable a personality as Alice herself, and equally determined to control his affairs, while Trix's marriage was always shaky and Alice believed that it was responsible for Trix's mental breakdowns. In her later years Alice looked after Trix herself and sometimes seemed as disturbed as her daughter. Only Rudyard Kipling's success gave cause for satisfaction. Alice died at Tisbury on 23 November 1910; John outlived her by only two months. 
Alice Kipling like many women of her time lived in the career of her husband and son. She probably had the greater impact on the former, although it is for the latter that she is remembered. 
The fifth Macdonald child and second surviving daughter, Georgiana Burne-Jones, Lady Burne-Jones (1840-1920), wife and biographer of Sir Edward Coley Burne-Jones, first baronet, was born in Birmingham on 21 July 1840. Like her elder sister, she was educated largely at home. When she was eleven the family first met Edward Burne-Jones, a schoolfriend of their elder brother. When the family moved to London, Georgie enrolled at the Government School of Design in Kensington. Although she appears to have had some talent, she saw her training as an adjunct to her main role as helper to Burne-Jones, to whom she was officially engaged at the age of fifteen. Their parents allowed the sisters a great deal of freedom to associate with Burne-Jones and his friends, all of whom repaid this trust with impeccable behaviour. Georgie was the quiet, steadfast sister, tiny in stature, with large, striking eyes whose gaze often seemed to be judging weaker mortals. Her patience was to be a singular asset to her married life. 
They were married in 1860. Burne-Jones fell ill, as was his habit in any stressful situation, and Georgie spent her honeymoon nursing him. A family biographer records an otherwise composed Georgie breaking a necklace in their hotel room and scrabbling on the floor to collect the lost beads (Baldwin, 135). She found that Burne-Jones was less inclined to encourage artistic endeavour in a wife than in a fiancee and this together with her awe at the abilities of her husband and his friends prevented her from developing her own talent. The birth of her first child, Philip, in 1861 separated her further from the artists' world, and her husband's inability to handle money led her to take command of the family's financial affairs. Yet the early years of marriage were happy. She always felt that happiness was a debit in an account that must be paid off by suffering in the future, and so it seemed to be when she fell seriously ill with scarlet fever in 1864, giving birth to her second son prematurely. She recovered but the baby died. Edward, predictably, was prostrated and in the way they dealt separately with their sorrow, something in the marriage was lost. It was said that Georgie always looked a little pale and faded afterwards, and she wrote years later that she felt the presence of the 'little shadowy babe' she had lost for the rest of her life (Flanders, 273). After the birth of their daughter in 1866 Edward embarked on a very public affair during the final years of the decade with the sculptor Marie Zambaco. They repaired their marriage but it was never quite the same. 
At this point Georgie embarked on a life less dependent on her husband. She had a series of influential friendships -- with William Morris (with whom she shared an interest in socialism and the experience of a disloyal spouse), with Rosalind Howard, who tried to interest her in women's suffrage, and with George Eliot, who encouraged her to educate herself. Georgie did educate herself, adopted Morris's politics, and bought a house. The house at Rottingdean, near Brighton, was always more hers than Edward's and she spent more time there as the years passed. When the 'Local Government Act' of 1894 empowered villages to elect parish councils, she ran as an independent and became the only woman member of the Rottingdean council, serving until 1901. 
Edward Burne-Jones died suddenly in 1898. He had asked Georgie to write his biography and she took great pride in doing so, producing a book that is still respected today, although she avoided excessive frankness about some of the personal details. She was close to her nephew Rudyard Kipling and his family, who had settled nearby. She opposed the South African War and was once rescued from an angry crowd by the pro-war Kipling when she hung out a banner proclaiming her beliefs. The villagers considered her eccentric but admired her fearlessness, while she gained an iconic status within the family. She left the parish council in 1901 and died at 55 Holland Road, Kensington, London on 2 February 1920. 
Georgiana Burne-Jones was perhaps the most complex of the Macdonald sisters. Although starting married life as they did, determined to live her life through her family, the deficiencies of her husband and the opportunities offered within their social circle enabled and encouraged her to find interests of her own. She was the strong one of the family, who sorted out everyone else's crises, but she made a good job of her own life too, a life that all too easily disappeared in the shadow of her family. 
The Macdonalds' third surviving daughter, Agnes Poynter, Lady Poynter (1843-1906), wife of Sir Edward John Poynter, first baronet, was born in Leeds on 25 September 1843. She was an excellent pianist and had a more placid and sunny nature than her sisters; the latter shared a fondness for what the family called 'the joy of grief' (Taylor, 21). She was thought the best-looking of the sisters -- John Lockwood called her 'tyrannously pretty' -- and attracted suitors from her early teens (ibid., 52). Although she enjoyed the company of the Pre-Raphaelite artists whom she met at Burne-Jones's studio, she gravitated to more mainstream fashionable society, preferring the modish crinoline to the plain aesthetic dress favoured by Georgie. This preference for the fashionable may explain why she married the dour and temperamental Edward Poynter. 
Satirized in George Du Maurier's novel 'Trilby' as Lorrimer, 'the industrious apprentice', Poynter achieved enormous financial and social success as an academic painter, specializing in epic canvases with classical themes, and as an administrator, becoming president of the Royal Academy. Poynter and Agnes were married in 1866 and embarked on a glittering social career that took its toll on their marriage and their health. Their son Ambrose was born in 1867 and Agnes was often unwell, suffering from headaches, possibly neuralgia or, as unkind observers guessed, from a difficult marriage. Edward Poynter worked for seven days a week and collapsed when a painting was finished; his working pattern suggests manic depression. He obviously loved Agnes, grieving almost excessively when she died, but he was quite unable to show emotion, and she was probably unique in feeling any sympathy for him. 
This bleak outlook, beneath the facade of social and professional success, was lightened somewhat when Agnes became pregnant unexpectedly in her late thirties. Her embarrassment about what was then considered very late motherhood was increased when she went into labour at a dinner party and was obliged to give birth in her hosts' house. The birth of her second son, Hugh, caused great mirth in her family and seems to have lightened the gloom that had settled over her household. Poynter does not appear to have been a cruel man -- his nephews Stanley Baldwin and Rudyard Kipling got on well with him -- but everyone agreed that any lightness and charm within that household emanated from Agnes. 
In later life the Poynters travelled in Europe but Agnes's health declined rapidly after 1900. In 1903 she underwent an operation, probably for cancer. She kept going, possibly to reassure her husband, even travelling to Turkey in 1905 to attend Hugh's wedding. She died in London on 12 June 1906. 
Agnes Poynter enjoyed the greatest marital and worldly success of all the sisters, judged by the standards of their time, but her life was in its way the least satisfactory. Her family blamed her husband for the sad life of this most loved sister, but he may not have been entirely at fault. Agnes illustrates how a certain lack of resourcefulness might overtake a pretty and vivacious woman when the dissatisfactions of mature life began to overtake the promise of youth and other consolations had to be found to take their place. At the same time, she was plainly indispensable to her husband, supplying the social grace and charm that he so conspicuously lacked. 
The fourth surviving daughter, Louisa Baldwin (1845-1925), mother of Stanley Baldwin, was born in Wakefield on 25 August 1845. She was quiet and somewhat lacking in self-confidence, perhaps overshadowed by the stronger personalities of her older sisters. In her teens she modelled for Burne-Jones and his friends, became proficient at making woodcuts, wrote fiction, and studied at the Wolverhampton School of Art. She had the reputation of being somewhat aloof, possibly because of her poor vision, which made it difficult for her to recognize people she did not know well. By the time she came of age the family was deeply involved in the art world, through the marriages of the two older sisters, but Louisa accepted the proposal of the earnest Worcestershire ironmaster Alfred Baldwin and married him in a double wedding with her sister Agnes in 1866. He converted her to high-church Anglicanism without difficulty, but she seems to have had some trouble adjusting to life in rural Worcestershire, where they settled to be near the business. She may have been lonely with a husband often preoccupied with the demands of a successful business and two sisters living in London. This may have contributed to the illness that overtook her after the birth of Stanley Baldwin in 1867. She appears to have had one and perhaps two miscarriages after his birth, and she may simply have settled on ill health as a way of ensuring that she had no more pregnancies. The causes and nature of her illness are mysterious, but it was extremely debilitating; she spent most of her time lying down, often in a darkened room, and if she went out at all it was in a bath chair. She tried a dazzling variety of cures and treatments, the most startling of all being the champagne cure, which caused her to fall down. Her three-year-old son emulated her by putting cushions on a chair and announcing 'Stanley poorly back' (Flanders, 128). The 1870s were spent travelling in pursuit of health -- biographers have based their diagnosis of hypochondria on Louisa's sudden return to energy and mobility when abroad or visiting her sisters (ibid., 149). 
Despite her poor health, Louisa's life does not seem to have been unhappy. Released from the duties of housekeeping, she read widely, studied languages, and wrote novels, poetry, and collections of stories. Her nephew Rudyard Kipling was a gentle critic. She was not a very good writer, but writing passed the time and gave her the creative outlet she craved. Nor did illness ruin her marriage -- Louisa and Alfred shared a strong religious faith that enabled them to view her illness as a trial sent to strengthen them. It was, however, what her brother-in-law John Kipling called a 'caded' life, sheltered to the extent that Louisa could not grow, either as a person or as a writer (Taylor, 102). 
In 1883 Louisa suddenly began to get well. The reason for her recovery is as mysterious as the cause of her illness. She took over a number of good works in Wilden, the Worcestershire village where they lived, including teaching in the Sunday school and running groups for the wives of her husband's workers. In 1892 Alfred was elected to parliament and they spent more time in London. Her recovery did not last long, and she gradually returned to a state of permanent invalidity, especially after Alfred's death in 1908. She lived to see her son become prime minister and commissioned Morris & Co. to design stained-glass windows for Wilden church as memorials to her family, after drawings by Burne-Jones. She died at Wilden on 16 May 1925 and was buried in Wilden churchyard. 
Louisa Macdonald Baldwin is in many ways the hardest of the sisters to capture. If more were known about her health, it might be proved either that she was a hypochondriac or that she genuinely suffered from a painful undiagnosed illness. Whether through her own lack of will or through circumstances outside her control, Louisa remains a frustrating case of a life that never quite took shape. 
The Macdonald sisters illustrated almost the whole range of roles open to women of their class in Victorian England. Alice exemplified the ambitious wife and mother; Georgie began as the self-sacrificing wife and ended as a parish councillor, a political force in her own right; Agnes was the model wife for a successful man, offering the social polish he lacked; and the life of Louisa, also a loyal wife, reflected the frustrations and limitations inherent in such a life. As a group they were strong-willed and somewhat intolerant -- their standards were high, and they made no effort to adapt to those who could not meet them. On the other hand they were intelligent and artistic, bringing out the talents of their spouses and descendants. Georgie's great-grandson Colin MacInnes said of them that they were 'the sort of family that one would perhaps rather read about than belong to' (Flanders, 329). 


@@@@@


doc= 58272


Macdonald sisters (act. 1837-1925), four daughters of a Methodist minister, George Browne Macdonald (1805-1868), and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Jones (1809-1875), went on to have notable lives through either marriage or parenthood. George Macdonald was an easy-going and energetic man and a kind father, although often absent. Hannah was the stricter parent, at times overwhelmed and depressed by the task of raising her large family on a minister's income. Her children remembered her as an excellent nurse and a family prohibition against idleness was relaxed only when one of the children was ill, which may have contributed to a family tendency to hypochondria. Both parents were well educated -- the children were allowed great freedom to use their father's library and were well taught by their mother. The family was musical and the children made a great deal of their own entertainment. Owing to the Methodist church's custom of relocating its ministers every three years the household was what the Macdonalds referred to as a 'moving tent'. This constant moving undoubtedly contributed to Hannah Macdonald's melancholy but also ensured an unusual degree of closeness among her two sons and six daughters (three children died in infancy and one daughter, Carrie, in her teens). Despite the drawbacks of this peripatetic life, the Macdonalds, especially the sisters, grew up to be spirited, witty, and a little wild. 
The eldest surviving daughter, Alice Kipling (1837-1910), mother of (Joseph) Rudyard Kipling, was born in Sheffield on 4 April 1837. The story that she once baked a mouse in pastry and dared a friend to eat it may be a family myth but she was certainly bold enough to try it and tough enough to find it amusing. By her teens she was engaged to an Oxford friend of her brother's who was studying for the ministry. 
In 1853 the family moved to London. They found London life exceedingly stimulating and the girls spent a lot of time with the Pre-Raphaelite artists, among them Edward Burne-Jones, whom they knew from childhood. Alice was writing poetry and attributed her failure to get into print to gender discrimination. She was not ready to settle down as a clergyman's wife and her engagement quietly died. She later made quite a hobby of getting engaged, most notably to the poet William Allingham, and her father had to speak to her about her flirting. In 1863 she met John Lockwood Kipling (1837-1911), an artist working for the Department of Science and Arts in South Kensington. They married in 1865 and immediately embarked for India, where Kipling had gained a post in an art school in Bombay. His calm good nature complemented her quick, sharp wit -- her brother observed how her words tumbled over each other in her haste to get them out. It is fortunate that she was happy in her marriage because she hated India. She turned her social talents to gaining professional advancement for her husband and to social advantage for them both. 
The birth of Alice's first child, Rudyard, late in 1865 was so difficult that the Kiplings decided any future children must be born in England. In 1868 she took Rudyard to England, where he stayed with her parents while she gave birth to her daughter Alice, known in the family as Trix. Something went wrong on this trip: perhaps Rudyard, the spoiled darling of an Indian ayah, was too much for the Macdonalds (George Macdonald was ill and died shortly after their visit), perhaps the sisters, now well married to husbands more prosperous than hers, annoyed Alice; whatever it was, the visit was a disappointment and may have led her to make the greatest mistake of her life. When her third child, John, died weeks after his birth in 1870, the Kiplings decided that the time had come for Rudyard and Trix to return to England. Possibly because Alice was at odds with her family, the children were sent not to their family but to strangers in Southsea, where they boarded for over ten years. The experience may not have been as traumatic as Rudyard later depicted it, but he suffered a breakdown as a result of it and Trix suffered mental illness for a large part of her life. The family coolness existed largely in Alice's mind and the family kept an eye on the two children; Georgiana and Edward Burne-Jones rescued Rudyard when he was in danger of going blind and alerted his mother to his condition. 
While the children were suffering in England, their parents were unhappy in India, missing their children but believing in the rightness of their actions. Alice's attempts to advance her husband's career bore fruit in 1875 when he was made principal of a new art school in Lahore. Both wrote in their free time and their social life prospered. They were introduced to the viceroy when John designed and Alice helped to make a series of banners for the Delhi durbar and thereafter they moved in the highest circles of Anglo-Indian society. This effort was not mere social climbing but was rather the means to financial security for themselves and their family. It financed a long trip home, as Alice realized that all was not well with her children. It set in place a network of connections that Alice could use to promote her son's career upon his return. 
By 1883 both children were back in India. The Kiplings rejoiced in being again what they called the family square. Indeed, their efforts at family unity seem a little fevered, as if to make up for all the years of separation. Nevertheless, they claimed to be ecstatically happy together. All four of them wrote and Alice proved Rudyard's fiercest critic. Alice's connections obtained Rudyard his first newspaper job. When Trix shocked Anglo-Indian society by attracting his son, the viceroy appealed to Alice Kipling to send her daughter away in order to prevent a misalliance. The viceroy blinked first and his son returned to England. The Kiplings were not universally liked in their last years in India, but they were respected, and Alice had her share in that. 
The Kiplings left India for good in 1893 and settled in Tisbury, in Wiltshire. The divisions between Alice and her sisters were largely healed and she spent a great deal of time with them. Neither of her children's marriages brought her the kind of satisfaction she might have hoped for -- Rudyard's wife was as formidable a personality as Alice herself, and equally determined to control his affairs, while Trix's marriage was always shaky and Alice believed that it was responsible for Trix's mental breakdowns. In her later years Alice looked after Trix herself and sometimes seemed as disturbed as her daughter. Only Rudyard Kipling's success gave cause for satisfaction. Alice died at Tisbury on 23 November 1910; John outlived her by only two months. 
Alice Kipling like many women of her time lived in the career of her husband and son. She probably had the greater impact on the former, although it is for the latter that she is remembered. 
The fifth Macdonald child and second surviving daughter, Georgiana Burne-Jones, Lady Burne-Jones (1840-1920), wife and biographer of Sir Edward Coley Burne-Jones, first baronet, was born in Birmingham on 21 July 1840. Like her elder sister, she was educated largely at home. When she was eleven the family first met Edward Burne-Jones, a schoolfriend of their elder brother. When the family moved to London, Georgie enrolled at the Government School of Design in Kensington. Although she appears to have had some talent, she saw her training as an adjunct to her main role as helper to Burne-Jones, to whom she was officially engaged at the age of fifteen. Their parents allowed the sisters a great deal of freedom to associate with Burne-Jones and his friends, all of whom repaid this trust with impeccable behaviour. Georgie was the quiet, steadfast sister, tiny in stature, with large, striking eyes whose gaze often seemed to be judging weaker mortals. Her patience was to be a singular asset to her married life. 
They were married in 1860. Burne-Jones fell ill, as was his habit in any stressful situation, and Georgie spent her honeymoon nursing him. A family biographer records an otherwise composed Georgie breaking a necklace in their hotel room and scrabbling on the floor to collect the lost beads (Baldwin, 135). She found that Burne-Jones was less inclined to encourage artistic endeavour in a wife than in a fiancee and this together with her awe at the abilities of her husband and his friends prevented her from developing her own talent. The birth of her first child, Philip, in 1861 separated her further from the artists' world, and her husband's inability to handle money led her to take command of the family's financial affairs. Yet the early years of marriage were happy. She always felt that happiness was a debit in an account that must be paid off by suffering in the future, and so it seemed to be when she fell seriously ill with scarlet fever in 1864, giving birth to her second son prematurely. She recovered but the baby died. Edward, predictably, was prostrated and in the way they dealt separately with their sorrow, something in the marriage was lost. It was said that Georgie always looked a little pale and faded afterwards, and she wrote years later that she felt the presence of the 'little shadowy babe' she had lost for the rest of her life (Flanders, 273). After the birth of their daughter in 1866 Edward embarked on a very public affair during the final years of the decade with the sculptor Marie Zambaco. They repaired their marriage but it was never quite the same. 
At this point Georgie embarked on a life less dependent on her husband. She had a series of influential friendships -- with William Morris (with whom she shared an interest in socialism and the experience of a disloyal spouse), with Rosalind Howard, who tried to interest her in women's suffrage, and with George Eliot, who encouraged her to educate herself. Georgie did educate herself, adopted Morris's politics, and bought a house. The house at Rottingdean, near Brighton, was always more hers than Edward's and she spent more time there as the years passed. When the 'Local Government Act' of 1894 empowered villages to elect parish councils, she ran as an independent and became the only woman member of the Rottingdean council, serving until 1901. 
Edward Burne-Jones died suddenly in 1898. He had asked Georgie to write his biography and she took great pride in doing so, producing a book that is still respected today, although she avoided excessive frankness about some of the personal details. She was close to her nephew Rudyard Kipling and his family, who had settled nearby. She opposed the South African War and was once rescued from an angry crowd by the pro-war Kipling when she hung out a banner proclaiming her beliefs. The villagers considered her eccentric but admired her fearlessness, while she gained an iconic status within the family. She left the parish council in 1901 and died at 55 Holland Road, Kensington, London on 2 February 1920. 
Georgiana Burne-Jones was perhaps the most complex of the Macdonald sisters. Although starting married life as they did, determined to live her life through her family, the deficiencies of her husband and the opportunities offered within their social circle enabled and encouraged her to find interests of her own. She was the strong one of the family, who sorted out everyone else's crises, but she made a good job of her own life too, a life that all too easily disappeared in the shadow of her family. 
The Macdonalds' third surviving daughter, Agnes Poynter, Lady Poynter (1843-1906), wife of Sir Edward John Poynter, first baronet, was born in Leeds on 25 September 1843. She was an excellent pianist and had a more placid and sunny nature than her sisters; the latter shared a fondness for what the family called 'the joy of grief' (Taylor, 21). She was thought the best-looking of the sisters -- John Lockwood called her 'tyrannously pretty' -- and attracted suitors from her early teens (ibid., 52). Although she enjoyed the company of the Pre-Raphaelite artists whom she met at Burne-Jones's studio, she gravitated to more mainstream fashionable society, preferring the modish crinoline to the plain aesthetic dress favoured by Georgie. This preference for the fashionable may explain why she married the dour and temperamental Edward Poynter. 
Satirized in George Du Maurier's novel 'Trilby' as Lorrimer, 'the industrious apprentice', Poynter achieved enormous financial and social success as an academic painter, specializing in epic canvases with classical themes, and as an administrator, becoming president of the Royal Academy. Poynter and Agnes were married in 1866 and embarked on a glittering social career that took its toll on their marriage and their health. Their son Ambrose was born in 1867 and Agnes was often unwell, suffering from headaches, possibly neuralgia or, as unkind observers guessed, from a difficult marriage. Edward Poynter worked for seven days a week and collapsed when a painting was finished; his working pattern suggests manic depression. He obviously loved Agnes, grieving almost excessively when she died, but he was quite unable to show emotion, and she was probably unique in feeling any sympathy for him. 
This bleak outlook, beneath the facade of social and professional success, was lightened somewhat when Agnes became pregnant unexpectedly in her late thirties. Her embarrassment about what was then considered very late motherhood was increased when she went into labour at a dinner party and was obliged to give birth in her hosts' house. The birth of her second son, Hugh, caused great mirth in her family and seems to have lightened the gloom that had settled over her household. Poynter does not appear to have been a cruel man -- his nephews Stanley Baldwin and Rudyard Kipling got on well with him -- but everyone agreed that any lightness and charm within that household emanated from Agnes. 
In later life the Poynters travelled in Europe but Agnes's health declined rapidly after 1900. In 1903 she underwent an operation, probably for cancer. She kept going, possibly to reassure her husband, even travelling to Turkey in 1905 to attend Hugh's wedding. She died in London on 12 June 1906. 
Agnes Poynter enjoyed the greatest marital and worldly success of all the sisters, judged by the standards of their time, but her life was in its way the least satisfactory. Her family blamed her husband for the sad life of this most loved sister, but he may not have been entirely at fault. Agnes illustrates how a certain lack of resourcefulness might overtake a pretty and vivacious woman when the dissatisfactions of mature life began to overtake the promise of youth and other consolations had to be found to take their place. At the same time, she was plainly indispensable to her husband, supplying the social grace and charm that he so conspicuously lacked. 
The fourth surviving daughter, Louisa Baldwin (1845-1925), mother of Stanley Baldwin, was born in Wakefield on 25 August 1845. She was quiet and somewhat lacking in self-confidence, perhaps overshadowed by the stronger personalities of her older sisters. In her teens she modelled for Burne-Jones and his friends, became proficient at making woodcuts, wrote fiction, and studied at the Wolverhampton School of Art. She had the reputation of being somewhat aloof, possibly because of her poor vision, which made it difficult for her to recognize people she did not know well. By the time she came of age the family was deeply involved in the art world, through the marriages of the two older sisters, but Louisa accepted the proposal of the earnest Worcestershire ironmaster Alfred Baldwin and married him in a double wedding with her sister Agnes in 1866. He converted her to high-church Anglicanism without difficulty, but she seems to have had some trouble adjusting to life in rural Worcestershire, where they settled to be near the business. She may have been lonely with a husband often preoccupied with the demands of a successful business and two sisters living in London. This may have contributed to the illness that overtook her after the birth of Stanley Baldwin in 1867. She appears to have had one and perhaps two miscarriages after his birth, and she may simply have settled on ill health as a way of ensuring that she had no more pregnancies. The causes and nature of her illness are mysterious, but it was extremely debilitating; she spent most of her time lying down, often in a darkened room, and if she went out at all it was in a bath chair. She tried a dazzling variety of cures and treatments, the most startling of all being the champagne cure, which caused her to fall down. Her three-year-old son emulated her by putting cushions on a chair and announcing 'Stanley poorly back' (Flanders, 128). The 1870s were spent travelling in pursuit of health -- biographers have based their diagnosis of hypochondria on Louisa's sudden return to energy and mobility when abroad or visiting her sisters (ibid., 149). 
Despite her poor health, Louisa's life does not seem to have been unhappy. Released from the duties of housekeeping, she read widely, studied languages, and wrote novels, poetry, and collections of stories. Her nephew Rudyard Kipling was a gentle critic. She was not a very good writer, but writing passed the time and gave her the creative outlet she craved. Nor did illness ruin her marriage -- Louisa and Alfred shared a strong religious faith that enabled them to view her illness as a trial sent to strengthen them. It was, however, what her brother-in-law John Kipling called a 'caded' life, sheltered to the extent that Louisa could not grow, either as a person or as a writer (Taylor, 102). 
In 1883 Louisa suddenly began to get well. The reason for her recovery is as mysterious as the cause of her illness. She took over a number of good works in Wilden, the Worcestershire village where they lived, including teaching in the Sunday school and running groups for the wives of her husband's workers. In 1892 Alfred was elected to parliament and they spent more time in London. Her recovery did not last long, and she gradually returned to a state of permanent invalidity, especially after Alfred's death in 1908. She lived to see her son become prime minister and commissioned Morris & Co. to design stained-glass windows for Wilden church as memorials to her family, after drawings by Burne-Jones. She died at Wilden on 16 May 1925 and was buried in Wilden churchyard. 
Louisa Macdonald Baldwin is in many ways the hardest of the sisters to capture. If more were known about her health, it might be proved either that she was a hypochondriac or that she genuinely suffered from a painful undiagnosed illness. Whether through her own lack of will or through circumstances outside her control, Louisa remains a frustrating case of a life that never quite took shape. 
The Macdonald sisters illustrated almost the whole range of roles open to women of their class in Victorian England. Alice exemplified the ambitious wife and mother; Georgie began as the self-sacrificing wife and ended as a parish councillor, a political force in her own right; Agnes was the model wife for a successful man, offering the social polish he lacked; and the life of Louisa, also a loyal wife, reflected the frustrations and limitations inherent in such a life. As a group they were strong-willed and somewhat intolerant -- their standards were high, and they made no effort to adapt to those who could not meet them. On the other hand they were intelligent and artistic, bringing out the talents of their spouses and descendants. Georgie's great-grandson Colin MacInnes said of them that they were 'the sort of family that one would perhaps rather read about than belong to' (Flanders, 329). 


@@@@@


doc= 58273


Macdonald sisters (act. 1837-1925), four daughters of a Methodist minister, George Browne Macdonald (1805-1868), and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Jones (1809-1875), went on to have notable lives through either marriage or parenthood. George Macdonald was an easy-going and energetic man and a kind father, although often absent. Hannah was the stricter parent, at times overwhelmed and depressed by the task of raising her large family on a minister's income. Her children remembered her as an excellent nurse and a family prohibition against idleness was relaxed only when one of the children was ill, which may have contributed to a family tendency to hypochondria. Both parents were well educated -- the children were allowed great freedom to use their father's library and were well taught by their mother. The family was musical and the children made a great deal of their own entertainment. Owing to the Methodist church's custom of relocating its ministers every three years the household was what the Macdonalds referred to as a 'moving tent'. This constant moving undoubtedly contributed to Hannah Macdonald's melancholy but also ensured an unusual degree of closeness among her two sons and six daughters (three children died in infancy and one daughter, Carrie, in her teens). Despite the drawbacks of this peripatetic life, the Macdonalds, especially the sisters, grew up to be spirited, witty, and a little wild. 
The eldest surviving daughter, Alice Kipling (1837-1910), mother of (Joseph) Rudyard Kipling, was born in Sheffield on 4 April 1837. The story that she once baked a mouse in pastry and dared a friend to eat it may be a family myth but she was certainly bold enough to try it and tough enough to find it amusing. By her teens she was engaged to an Oxford friend of her brother's who was studying for the ministry. 
In 1853 the family moved to London. They found London life exceedingly stimulating and the girls spent a lot of time with the Pre-Raphaelite artists, among them Edward Burne-Jones, whom they knew from childhood. Alice was writing poetry and attributed her failure to get into print to gender discrimination. She was not ready to settle down as a clergyman's wife and her engagement quietly died. She later made quite a hobby of getting engaged, most notably to the poet William Allingham, and her father had to speak to her about her flirting. In 1863 she met John Lockwood Kipling (1837-1911), an artist working for the Department of Science and Arts in South Kensington. They married in 1865 and immediately embarked for India, where Kipling had gained a post in an art school in Bombay. His calm good nature complemented her quick, sharp wit -- her brother observed how her words tumbled over each other in her haste to get them out. It is fortunate that she was happy in her marriage because she hated India. She turned her social talents to gaining professional advancement for her husband and to social advantage for them both. 
The birth of Alice's first child, Rudyard, late in 1865 was so difficult that the Kiplings decided any future children must be born in England. In 1868 she took Rudyard to England, where he stayed with her parents while she gave birth to her daughter Alice, known in the family as Trix. Something went wrong on this trip: perhaps Rudyard, the spoiled darling of an Indian ayah, was too much for the Macdonalds (George Macdonald was ill and died shortly after their visit), perhaps the sisters, now well married to husbands more prosperous than hers, annoyed Alice; whatever it was, the visit was a disappointment and may have led her to make the greatest mistake of her life. When her third child, John, died weeks after his birth in 1870, the Kiplings decided that the time had come for Rudyard and Trix to return to England. Possibly because Alice was at odds with her family, the children were sent not to their family but to strangers in Southsea, where they boarded for over ten years. The experience may not have been as traumatic as Rudyard later depicted it, but he suffered a breakdown as a result of it and Trix suffered mental illness for a large part of her life. The family coolness existed largely in Alice's mind and the family kept an eye on the two children; Georgiana and Edward Burne-Jones rescued Rudyard when he was in danger of going blind and alerted his mother to his condition. 
While the children were suffering in England, their parents were unhappy in India, missing their children but believing in the rightness of their actions. Alice's attempts to advance her husband's career bore fruit in 1875 when he was made principal of a new art school in Lahore. Both wrote in their free time and their social life prospered. They were introduced to the viceroy when John designed and Alice helped to make a series of banners for the Delhi durbar and thereafter they moved in the highest circles of Anglo-Indian society. This effort was not mere social climbing but was rather the means to financial security for themselves and their family. It financed a long trip home, as Alice realized that all was not well with her children. It set in place a network of connections that Alice could use to promote her son's career upon his return. 
By 1883 both children were back in India. The Kiplings rejoiced in being again what they called the family square. Indeed, their efforts at family unity seem a little fevered, as if to make up for all the years of separation. Nevertheless, they claimed to be ecstatically happy together. All four of them wrote and Alice proved Rudyard's fiercest critic. Alice's connections obtained Rudyard his first newspaper job. When Trix shocked Anglo-Indian society by attracting his son, the viceroy appealed to Alice Kipling to send her daughter away in order to prevent a misalliance. The viceroy blinked first and his son returned to England. The Kiplings were not universally liked in their last years in India, but they were respected, and Alice had her share in that. 
The Kiplings left India for good in 1893 and settled in Tisbury, in Wiltshire. The divisions between Alice and her sisters were largely healed and she spent a great deal of time with them. Neither of her children's marriages brought her the kind of satisfaction she might have hoped for -- Rudyard's wife was as formidable a personality as Alice herself, and equally determined to control his affairs, while Trix's marriage was always shaky and Alice believed that it was responsible for Trix's mental breakdowns. In her later years Alice looked after Trix herself and sometimes seemed as disturbed as her daughter. Only Rudyard Kipling's success gave cause for satisfaction. Alice died at Tisbury on 23 November 1910; John outlived her by only two months. 
Alice Kipling like many women of her time lived in the career of her husband and son. She probably had the greater impact on the former, although it is for the latter that she is remembered. 
The fifth Macdonald child and second surviving daughter, Georgiana Burne-Jones, Lady Burne-Jones (1840-1920), wife and biographer of Sir Edward Coley Burne-Jones, first baronet, was born in Birmingham on 21 July 1840. Like her elder sister, she was educated largely at home. When she was eleven the family first met Edward Burne-Jones, a schoolfriend of their elder brother. When the family moved to London, Georgie enrolled at the Government School of Design in Kensington. Although she appears to have had some talent, she saw her training as an adjunct to her main role as helper to Burne-Jones, to whom she was officially engaged at the age of fifteen. Their parents allowed the sisters a great deal of freedom to associate with Burne-Jones and his friends, all of whom repaid this trust with impeccable behaviour. Georgie was the quiet, steadfast sister, tiny in stature, with large, striking eyes whose gaze often seemed to be judging weaker mortals. Her patience was to be a singular asset to her married life. 
They were married in 1860. Burne-Jones fell ill, as was his habit in any stressful situation, and Georgie spent her honeymoon nursing him. A family biographer records an otherwise composed Georgie breaking a necklace in their hotel room and scrabbling on the floor to collect the lost beads (Baldwin, 135). She found that Burne-Jones was less inclined to encourage artistic endeavour in a wife than in a fiancee and this together with her awe at the abilities of her husband and his friends prevented her from developing her own talent. The birth of her first child, Philip, in 1861 separated her further from the artists' world, and her husband's inability to handle money led her to take command of the family's financial affairs. Yet the early years of marriage were happy. She always felt that happiness was a debit in an account that must be paid off by suffering in the future, and so it seemed to be when she fell seriously ill with scarlet fever in 1864, giving birth to her second son prematurely. She recovered but the baby died. Edward, predictably, was prostrated and in the way they dealt separately with their sorrow, something in the marriage was lost. It was said that Georgie always looked a little pale and faded afterwards, and she wrote years later that she felt the presence of the 'little shadowy babe' she had lost for the rest of her life (Flanders, 273). After the birth of their daughter in 1866 Edward embarked on a very public affair during the final years of the decade with the sculptor Marie Zambaco. They repaired their marriage but it was never quite the same. 
At this point Georgie embarked on a life less dependent on her husband. She had a series of influential friendships -- with William Morris (with whom she shared an interest in socialism and the experience of a disloyal spouse), with Rosalind Howard, who tried to interest her in women's suffrage, and with George Eliot, who encouraged her to educate herself. Georgie did educate herself, adopted Morris's politics, and bought a house. The house at Rottingdean, near Brighton, was always more hers than Edward's and she spent more time there as the years passed. When the 'Local Government Act' of 1894 empowered villages to elect parish councils, she ran as an independent and became the only woman member of the Rottingdean council, serving until 1901. 
Edward Burne-Jones died suddenly in 1898. He had asked Georgie to write his biography and she took great pride in doing so, producing a book that is still respected today, although she avoided excessive frankness about some of the personal details. She was close to her nephew Rudyard Kipling and his family, who had settled nearby. She opposed the South African War and was once rescued from an angry crowd by the pro-war Kipling when she hung out a banner proclaiming her beliefs. The villagers considered her eccentric but admired her fearlessness, while she gained an iconic status within the family. She left the parish council in 1901 and died at 55 Holland Road, Kensington, London on 2 February 1920. 
Georgiana Burne-Jones was perhaps the most complex of the Macdonald sisters. Although starting married life as they did, determined to live her life through her family, the deficiencies of her husband and the opportunities offered within their social circle enabled and encouraged her to find interests of her own. She was the strong one of the family, who sorted out everyone else's crises, but she made a good job of her own life too, a life that all too easily disappeared in the shadow of her family. 
The Macdonalds' third surviving daughter, Agnes Poynter, Lady Poynter (1843-1906), wife of Sir Edward John Poynter, first baronet, was born in Leeds on 25 September 1843. She was an excellent pianist and had a more placid and sunny nature than her sisters; the latter shared a fondness for what the family called 'the joy of grief' (Taylor, 21). She was thought the best-looking of the sisters -- John Lockwood called her 'tyrannously pretty' -- and attracted suitors from her early teens (ibid., 52). Although she enjoyed the company of the Pre-Raphaelite artists whom she met at Burne-Jones's studio, she gravitated to more mainstream fashionable society, preferring the modish crinoline to the plain aesthetic dress favoured by Georgie. This preference for the fashionable may explain why she married the dour and temperamental Edward Poynter. 
Satirized in George Du Maurier's novel 'Trilby' as Lorrimer, 'the industrious apprentice', Poynter achieved enormous financial and social success as an academic painter, specializing in epic canvases with classical themes, and as an administrator, becoming president of the Royal Academy. Poynter and Agnes were married in 1866 and embarked on a glittering social career that took its toll on their marriage and their health. Their son Ambrose was born in 1867 and Agnes was often unwell, suffering from headaches, possibly neuralgia or, as unkind observers guessed, from a difficult marriage. Edward Poynter worked for seven days a week and collapsed when a painting was finished; his working pattern suggests manic depression. He obviously loved Agnes, grieving almost excessively when she died, but he was quite unable to show emotion, and she was probably unique in feeling any sympathy for him. 
This bleak outlook, beneath the facade of social and professional success, was lightened somewhat when Agnes became pregnant unexpectedly in her late thirties. Her embarrassment about what was then considered very late motherhood was increased when she went into labour at a dinner party and was obliged to give birth in her hosts' house. The birth of her second son, Hugh, caused great mirth in her family and seems to have lightened the gloom that had settled over her household. Poynter does not appear to have been a cruel man -- his nephews Stanley Baldwin and Rudyard Kipling got on well with him -- but everyone agreed that any lightness and charm within that household emanated from Agnes. 
In later life the Poynters travelled in Europe but Agnes's health declined rapidly after 1900. In 1903 she underwent an operation, probably for cancer. She kept going, possibly to reassure her husband, even travelling to Turkey in 1905 to attend Hugh's wedding. She died in London on 12 June 1906. 
Agnes Poynter enjoyed the greatest marital and worldly success of all the sisters, judged by the standards of their time, but her life was in its way the least satisfactory. Her family blamed her husband for the sad life of this most loved sister, but he may not have been entirely at fault. Agnes illustrates how a certain lack of resourcefulness might overtake a pretty and vivacious woman when the dissatisfactions of mature life began to overtake the promise of youth and other consolations had to be found to take their place. At the same time, she was plainly indispensable to her husband, supplying the social grace and charm that he so conspicuously lacked. 
The fourth surviving daughter, Louisa Baldwin (1845-1925), mother of Stanley Baldwin, was born in Wakefield on 25 August 1845. She was quiet and somewhat lacking in self-confidence, perhaps overshadowed by the stronger personalities of her older sisters. In her teens she modelled for Burne-Jones and his friends, became proficient at making woodcuts, wrote fiction, and studied at the Wolverhampton School of Art. She had the reputation of being somewhat aloof, possibly because of her poor vision, which made it difficult for her to recognize people she did not know well. By the time she came of age the family was deeply involved in the art world, through the marriages of the two older sisters, but Louisa accepted the proposal of the earnest Worcestershire ironmaster Alfred Baldwin and married him in a double wedding with her sister Agnes in 1866. He converted her to high-church Anglicanism without difficulty, but she seems to have had some trouble adjusting to life in rural Worcestershire, where they settled to be near the business. She may have been lonely with a husband often preoccupied with the demands of a successful business and two sisters living in London. This may have contributed to the illness that overtook her after the birth of Stanley Baldwin in 1867. She appears to have had one and perhaps two miscarriages after his birth, and she may simply have settled on ill health as a way of ensuring that she had no more pregnancies. The causes and nature of her illness are mysterious, but it was extremely debilitating; she spent most of her time lying down, often in a darkened room, and if she went out at all it was in a bath chair. She tried a dazzling variety of cures and treatments, the most startling of all being the champagne cure, which caused her to fall down. Her three-year-old son emulated her by putting cushions on a chair and announcing 'Stanley poorly back' (Flanders, 128). The 1870s were spent travelling in pursuit of health -- biographers have based their diagnosis of hypochondria on Louisa's sudden return to energy and mobility when abroad or visiting her sisters (ibid., 149). 
Despite her poor health, Louisa's life does not seem to have been unhappy. Released from the duties of housekeeping, she read widely, studied languages, and wrote novels, poetry, and collections of stories. Her nephew Rudyard Kipling was a gentle critic. She was not a very good writer, but writing passed the time and gave her the creative outlet she craved. Nor did illness ruin her marriage -- Louisa and Alfred shared a strong religious faith that enabled them to view her illness as a trial sent to strengthen them. It was, however, what her brother-in-law John Kipling called a 'caded' life, sheltered to the extent that Louisa could not grow, either as a person or as a writer (Taylor, 102). 
In 1883 Louisa suddenly began to get well. The reason for her recovery is as mysterious as the cause of her illness. She took over a number of good works in Wilden, the Worcestershire village where they lived, including teaching in the Sunday school and running groups for the wives of her husband's workers. In 1892 Alfred was elected to parliament and they spent more time in London. Her recovery did not last long, and she gradually returned to a state of permanent invalidity, especially after Alfred's death in 1908. She lived to see her son become prime minister and commissioned Morris & Co. to design stained-glass windows for Wilden church as memorials to her family, after drawings by Burne-Jones. She died at Wilden on 16 May 1925 and was buried in Wilden churchyard. 
Louisa Macdonald Baldwin is in many ways the hardest of the sisters to capture. If more were known about her health, it might be proved either that she was a hypochondriac or that she genuinely suffered from a painful undiagnosed illness. Whether through her own lack of will or through circumstances outside her control, Louisa remains a frustrating case of a life that never quite took shape. 
The Macdonald sisters illustrated almost the whole range of roles open to women of their class in Victorian England. Alice exemplified the ambitious wife and mother; Georgie began as the self-sacrificing wife and ended as a parish councillor, a political force in her own right; Agnes was the model wife for a successful man, offering the social polish he lacked; and the life of Louisa, also a loyal wife, reflected the frustrations and limitations inherent in such a life. As a group they were strong-willed and somewhat intolerant -- their standards were high, and they made no effort to adapt to those who could not meet them. On the other hand they were intelligent and artistic, bringing out the talents of their spouses and descendants. Georgie's great-grandson Colin MacInnes said of them that they were 'the sort of family that one would perhaps rather read about than belong to' (Flanders, 329). 


@@@@@


doc= 58274


Macdonald sisters (act. 1837-1925), four daughters of a Methodist minister, George Browne Macdonald (1805-1868), and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Jones (1809-1875), went on to have notable lives through either marriage or parenthood. George Macdonald was an easy-going and energetic man and a kind father, although often absent. Hannah was the stricter parent, at times overwhelmed and depressed by the task of raising her large family on a minister's income. Her children remembered her as an excellent nurse and a family prohibition against idleness was relaxed only when one of the children was ill, which may have contributed to a family tendency to hypochondria. Both parents were well educated -- the children were allowed great freedom to use their father's library and were well taught by their mother. The family was musical and the children made a great deal of their own entertainment. Owing to the Methodist church's custom of relocating its ministers every three years the household was what the Macdonalds referred to as a 'moving tent'. This constant moving undoubtedly contributed to Hannah Macdonald's melancholy but also ensured an unusual degree of closeness among her two sons and six daughters (three children died in infancy and one daughter, Carrie, in her teens). Despite the drawbacks of this peripatetic life, the Macdonalds, especially the sisters, grew up to be spirited, witty, and a little wild. 
The eldest surviving daughter, Alice Kipling (1837-1910), mother of (Joseph) Rudyard Kipling, was born in Sheffield on 4 April 1837. The story that she once baked a mouse in pastry and dared a friend to eat it may be a family myth but she was certainly bold enough to try it and tough enough to find it amusing. By her teens she was engaged to an Oxford friend of her brother's who was studying for the ministry. 
In 1853 the family moved to London. They found London life exceedingly stimulating and the girls spent a lot of time with the Pre-Raphaelite artists, among them Edward Burne-Jones, whom they knew from childhood. Alice was writing poetry and attributed her failure to get into print to gender discrimination. She was not ready to settle down as a clergyman's wife and her engagement quietly died. She later made quite a hobby of getting engaged, most notably to the poet William Allingham, and her father had to speak to her about her flirting. In 1863 she met John Lockwood Kipling (1837-1911), an artist working for the Department of Science and Arts in South Kensington. They married in 1865 and immediately embarked for India, where Kipling had gained a post in an art school in Bombay. His calm good nature complemented her quick, sharp wit -- her brother observed how her words tumbled over each other in her haste to get them out. It is fortunate that she was happy in her marriage because she hated India. She turned her social talents to gaining professional advancement for her husband and to social advantage for them both. 
The birth of Alice's first child, Rudyard, late in 1865 was so difficult that the Kiplings decided any future children must be born in England. In 1868 she took Rudyard to England, where he stayed with her parents while she gave birth to her daughter Alice, known in the family as Trix. Something went wrong on this trip: perhaps Rudyard, the spoiled darling of an Indian ayah, was too much for the Macdonalds (George Macdonald was ill and died shortly after their visit), perhaps the sisters, now well married to husbands more prosperous than hers, annoyed Alice; whatever it was, the visit was a disappointment and may have led her to make the greatest mistake of her life. When her third child, John, died weeks after his birth in 1870, the Kiplings decided that the time had come for Rudyard and Trix to return to England. Possibly because Alice was at odds with her family, the children were sent not to their family but to strangers in Southsea, where they boarded for over ten years. The experience may not have been as traumatic as Rudyard later depicted it, but he suffered a breakdown as a result of it and Trix suffered mental illness for a large part of her life. The family coolness existed largely in Alice's mind and the family kept an eye on the two children; Georgiana and Edward Burne-Jones rescued Rudyard when he was in danger of going blind and alerted his mother to his condition. 
While the children were suffering in England, their parents were unhappy in India, missing their children but believing in the rightness of their actions. Alice's attempts to advance her husband's career bore fruit in 1875 when he was made principal of a new art school in Lahore. Both wrote in their free time and their social life prospered. They were introduced to the viceroy when John designed and Alice helped to make a series of banners for the Delhi durbar and thereafter they moved in the highest circles of Anglo-Indian society. This effort was not mere social climbing but was rather the means to financial security for themselves and their family. It financed a long trip home, as Alice realized that all was not well with her children. It set in place a network of connections that Alice could use to promote her son's career upon his return. 
By 1883 both children were back in India. The Kiplings rejoiced in being again what they called the family square. Indeed, their efforts at family unity seem a little fevered, as if to make up for all the years of separation. Nevertheless, they claimed to be ecstatically happy together. All four of them wrote and Alice proved Rudyard's fiercest critic. Alice's connections obtained Rudyard his first newspaper job. When Trix shocked Anglo-Indian society by attracting his son, the viceroy appealed to Alice Kipling to send her daughter away in order to prevent a misalliance. The viceroy blinked first and his son returned to England. The Kiplings were not universally liked in their last years in India, but they were respected, and Alice had her share in that. 
The Kiplings left India for good in 1893 and settled in Tisbury, in Wiltshire. The divisions between Alice and her sisters were largely healed and she spent a great deal of time with them. Neither of her children's marriages brought her the kind of satisfaction she might have hoped for -- Rudyard's wife was as formidable a personality as Alice herself, and equally determined to control his affairs, while Trix's marriage was always shaky and Alice believed that it was responsible for Trix's mental breakdowns. In her later years Alice looked after Trix herself and sometimes seemed as disturbed as her daughter. Only Rudyard Kipling's success gave cause for satisfaction. Alice died at Tisbury on 23 November 1910; John outlived her by only two months. 
Alice Kipling like many women of her time lived in the career of her husband and son. She probably had the greater impact on the former, although it is for the latter that she is remembered. 
The fifth Macdonald child and second surviving daughter, Georgiana Burne-Jones, Lady Burne-Jones (1840-1920), wife and biographer of Sir Edward Coley Burne-Jones, first baronet, was born in Birmingham on 21 July 1840. Like her elder sister, she was educated largely at home. When she was eleven the family first met Edward Burne-Jones, a schoolfriend of their elder brother. When the family moved to London, Georgie enrolled at the Government School of Design in Kensington. Although she appears to have had some talent, she saw her training as an adjunct to her main role as helper to Burne-Jones, to whom she was officially engaged at the age of fifteen. Their parents allowed the sisters a great deal of freedom to associate with Burne-Jones and his friends, all of whom repaid this trust with impeccable behaviour. Georgie was the quiet, steadfast sister, tiny in stature, with large, striking eyes whose gaze often seemed to be judging weaker mortals. Her patience was to be a singular asset to her married life. 
They were married in 1860. Burne-Jones fell ill, as was his habit in any stressful situation, and Georgie spent her honeymoon nursing him. A family biographer records an otherwise composed Georgie breaking a necklace in their hotel room and scrabbling on the floor to collect the lost beads (Baldwin, 135). She found that Burne-Jones was less inclined to encourage artistic endeavour in a wife than in a fiancee and this together with her awe at the abilities of her husband and his friends prevented her from developing her own talent. The birth of her first child, Philip, in 1861 separated her further from the artists' world, and her husband's inability to handle money led her to take command of the family's financial affairs. Yet the early years of marriage were happy. She always felt that happiness was a debit in an account that must be paid off by suffering in the future, and so it seemed to be when she fell seriously ill with scarlet fever in 1864, giving birth to her second son prematurely. She recovered but the baby died. Edward, predictably, was prostrated and in the way they dealt separately with their sorrow, something in the marriage was lost. It was said that Georgie always looked a little pale and faded afterwards, and she wrote years later that she felt the presence of the 'little shadowy babe' she had lost for the rest of her life (Flanders, 273). After the birth of their daughter in 1866 Edward embarked on a very public affair during the final years of the decade with the sculptor Marie Zambaco. They repaired their marriage but it was never quite the same. 
At this point Georgie embarked on a life less dependent on her husband. She had a series of influential friendships -- with William Morris (with whom she shared an interest in socialism and the experience of a disloyal spouse), with Rosalind Howard, who tried to interest her in women's suffrage, and with George Eliot, who encouraged her to educate herself. Georgie did educate herself, adopted Morris's politics, and bought a house. The house at Rottingdean, near Brighton, was always more hers than Edward's and she spent more time there as the years passed. When the 'Local Government Act' of 1894 empowered villages to elect parish councils, she ran as an independent and became the only woman member of the Rottingdean council, serving until 1901. 
Edward Burne-Jones died suddenly in 1898. He had asked Georgie to write his biography and she took great pride in doing so, producing a book that is still respected today, although she avoided excessive frankness about some of the personal details. She was close to her nephew Rudyard Kipling and his family, who had settled nearby. She opposed the South African War and was once rescued from an angry crowd by the pro-war Kipling when she hung out a banner proclaiming her beliefs. The villagers considered her eccentric but admired her fearlessness, while she gained an iconic status within the family. She left the parish council in 1901 and died at 55 Holland Road, Kensington, London on 2 February 1920. 
Georgiana Burne-Jones was perhaps the most complex of the Macdonald sisters. Although starting married life as they did, determined to live her life through her family, the deficiencies of her husband and the opportunities offered within their social circle enabled and encouraged her to find interests of her own. She was the strong one of the family, who sorted out everyone else's crises, but she made a good job of her own life too, a life that all too easily disappeared in the shadow of her family. 
The Macdonalds' third surviving daughter, Agnes Poynter, Lady Poynter (1843-1906), wife of Sir Edward John Poynter, first baronet, was born in Leeds on 25 September 1843. She was an excellent pianist and had a more placid and sunny nature than her sisters; the latter shared a fondness for what the family called 'the joy of grief' (Taylor, 21). She was thought the best-looking of the sisters -- John Lockwood called her 'tyrannously pretty' -- and attracted suitors from her early teens (ibid., 52). Although she enjoyed the company of the Pre-Raphaelite artists whom she met at Burne-Jones's studio, she gravitated to more mainstream fashionable society, preferring the modish crinoline to the plain aesthetic dress favoured by Georgie. This preference for the fashionable may explain why she married the dour and temperamental Edward Poynter. 
Satirized in George Du Maurier's novel 'Trilby' as Lorrimer, 'the industrious apprentice', Poynter achieved enormous financial and social success as an academic painter, specializing in epic canvases with classical themes, and as an administrator, becoming president of the Royal Academy. Poynter and Agnes were married in 1866 and embarked on a glittering social career that took its toll on their marriage and their health. Their son Ambrose was born in 1867 and Agnes was often unwell, suffering from headaches, possibly neuralgia or, as unkind observers guessed, from a difficult marriage. Edward Poynter worked for seven days a week and collapsed when a painting was finished; his working pattern suggests manic depression. He obviously loved Agnes, grieving almost excessively when she died, but he was quite unable to show emotion, and she was probably unique in feeling any sympathy for him. 
This bleak outlook, beneath the facade of social and professional success, was lightened somewhat when Agnes became pregnant unexpectedly in her late thirties. Her embarrassment about what was then considered very late motherhood was increased when she went into labour at a dinner party and was obliged to give birth in her hosts' house. The birth of her second son, Hugh, caused great mirth in her family and seems to have lightened the gloom that had settled over her household. Poynter does not appear to have been a cruel man -- his nephews Stanley Baldwin and Rudyard Kipling got on well with him -- but everyone agreed that any lightness and charm within that household emanated from Agnes. 
In later life the Poynters travelled in Europe but Agnes's health declined rapidly after 1900. In 1903 she underwent an operation, probably for cancer. She kept going, possibly to reassure her husband, even travelling to Turkey in 1905 to attend Hugh's wedding. She died in London on 12 June 1906. 
Agnes Poynter enjoyed the greatest marital and worldly success of all the sisters, judged by the standards of their time, but her life was in its way the least satisfactory. Her family blamed her husband for the sad life of this most loved sister, but he may not have been entirely at fault. Agnes illustrates how a certain lack of resourcefulness might overtake a pretty and vivacious woman when the dissatisfactions of mature life began to overtake the promise of youth and other consolations had to be found to take their place. At the same time, she was plainly indispensable to her husband, supplying the social grace and charm that he so conspicuously lacked. 
The fourth surviving daughter, Louisa Baldwin (1845-1925), mother of Stanley Baldwin, was born in Wakefield on 25 August 1845. She was quiet and somewhat lacking in self-confidence, perhaps overshadowed by the stronger personalities of her older sisters. In her teens she modelled for Burne-Jones and his friends, became proficient at making woodcuts, wrote fiction, and studied at the Wolverhampton School of Art. She had the reputation of being somewhat aloof, possibly because of her poor vision, which made it difficult for her to recognize people she did not know well. By the time she came of age the family was deeply involved in the art world, through the marriages of the two older sisters, but Louisa accepted the proposal of the earnest Worcestershire ironmaster Alfred Baldwin and married him in a double wedding with her sister Agnes in 1866. He converted her to high-church Anglicanism without difficulty, but she seems to have had some trouble adjusting to life in rural Worcestershire, where they settled to be near the business. She may have been lonely with a husband often preoccupied with the demands of a successful business and two sisters living in London. This may have contributed to the illness that overtook her after the birth of Stanley Baldwin in 1867. She appears to have had one and perhaps two miscarriages after his birth, and she may simply have settled on ill health as a way of ensuring that she had no more pregnancies. The causes and nature of her illness are mysterious, but it was extremely debilitating; she spent most of her time lying down, often in a darkened room, and if she went out at all it was in a bath chair. She tried a dazzling variety of cures and treatments, the most startling of all being the champagne cure, which caused her to fall down. Her three-year-old son emulated her by putting cushions on a chair and announcing 'Stanley poorly back' (Flanders, 128). The 1870s were spent travelling in pursuit of health -- biographers have based their diagnosis of hypochondria on Louisa's sudden return to energy and mobility when abroad or visiting her sisters (ibid., 149). 
Despite her poor health, Louisa's life does not seem to have been unhappy. Released from the duties of housekeeping, she read widely, studied languages, and wrote novels, poetry, and collections of stories. Her nephew Rudyard Kipling was a gentle critic. She was not a very good writer, but writing passed the time and gave her the creative outlet she craved. Nor did illness ruin her marriage -- Louisa and Alfred shared a strong religious faith that enabled them to view her illness as a trial sent to strengthen them. It was, however, what her brother-in-law John Kipling called a 'caded' life, sheltered to the extent that Louisa could not grow, either as a person or as a writer (Taylor, 102). 
In 1883 Louisa suddenly began to get well. The reason for her recovery is as mysterious as the cause of her illness. She took over a number of good works in Wilden, the Worcestershire village where they lived, including teaching in the Sunday school and running groups for the wives of her husband's workers. In 1892 Alfred was elected to parliament and they spent more time in London. Her recovery did not last long, and she gradually returned to a state of permanent invalidity, especially after Alfred's death in 1908. She lived to see her son become prime minister and commissioned Morris & Co. to design stained-glass windows for Wilden church as memorials to her family, after drawings by Burne-Jones. She died at Wilden on 16 May 1925 and was buried in Wilden churchyard. 
Louisa Macdonald Baldwin is in many ways the hardest of the sisters to capture. If more were known about her health, it might be proved either that she was a hypochondriac or that she genuinely suffered from a painful undiagnosed illness. Whether through her own lack of will or through circumstances outside her control, Louisa remains a frustrating case of a life that never quite took shape. 
The Macdonald sisters illustrated almost the whole range of roles open to women of their class in Victorian England. Alice exemplified the ambitious wife and mother; Georgie began as the self-sacrificing wife and ended as a parish councillor, a political force in her own right; Agnes was the model wife for a successful man, offering the social polish he lacked; and the life of Louisa, also a loyal wife, reflected the frustrations and limitations inherent in such a life. As a group they were strong-willed and somewhat intolerant -- their standards were high, and they made no effort to adapt to those who could not meet them. On the other hand they were intelligent and artistic, bringing out the talents of their spouses and descendants. Georgie's great-grandson Colin MacInnes said of them that they were 'the sort of family that one would perhaps rather read about than belong to' (Flanders, 329). 


@@@@@


doc= 58280


Alan son of Walter (c.1150-1204)], who served William the Lion ('r'. 1165-1214) as 'dapifer' until his death in 1204 and whose daughter Avelina married Duncan, sometime earl of Carrick. Alan added the Isle of Bute to the family lands, probably building the first castle of Rothesay. 


@@@@@


doc= 58281


Walter son of Alan (c.1198-1241), was the third hereditary steward and adopted the more dignified title 'senescallus' on reaching his majority 'c'.1219. He was a considerable benefactor of Paisley Abbey and held office as justiciar of Scotia (that is, Scotland north of Forth) between 1232 and 1241. A close alliance between the families of Stewart and Bruce, lords of Annandale, may be traced from Walter's time and continued until the early fourteenth century. Both his sons played a prominent part in the national life of mid-thirteenth-century Scotland. The elder, 


@@@@@


doc= 58282


Alexander of Dundonald (c.1220-1282), held the stewardship from 1241 until about the time of his death. He seems to have commanded the armed force which, at Largs, in October 1263, successfully defended Scotland against attempted invasion by Hakon IV, king of Norway. It seems to have been in Alexander's time that the Stewarts acquired the lordship of Cowal, with a castle at Dunoon. Moreover, the style 'senescallus' 'Scotie', 'stewart of Scotland', now replaced the older 'dapifer regis Scotie', 'steward of the king of Scotland', thus indicating a major office of state, significant in a national context. 
Walter's younger son, 


@@@@@


doc= 58283


Walter Bulloch Stewart, earl of Menteith (1225x30-c.1293), whose epithet came from the Gaelic 'ballach', 'freckled', married Mary, possibly daughter of Murdoch (Maurice) the elder, who had held the earldom of Menteith until 1213, when he had resigned it into the hands of King William, who granted it to Murdoch the younger, the previous earl's brother. In the 1230s the earldom was inherited by the younger Murdoch's daughter Isabel, who married Walter Comyn, recognized as earl in right of his wife. In 1260 the Countess Isabel, widowed since 1258, was deprived of the earldom, which was bestowed by Alexander III on Mary and Walter Bulloch. Earl Walter was the first member of the family to adopt 'senescallus', Stewart, as a surname, despite not holding the office personally. After his time it was normal for younger sons and their own direct descendants to use this surname. Alexander of Dundonald, to judge from a Paisley Abbey charter, evidently made the pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela; his oldest surviving son was baptized James, hitherto an uncommon personal name in Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 58284


Church, John (b. 1780), Independent minister, was of unknown parentage. He was found on the steps of a church in London, perhaps St John's, Clerkenwell, and admitted to the Foundling Hospital, where he was given his name. He spent his first six years in the care of a woman at Hadlow, near Tonbridge, in Kent, and then returned to the Foundling Hospital, where he remained until he was ten. There he received a rudimentary education, learning to read but not how to write. 
In 1791 Church was apprenticed to a carver and gilder in Great Portland Street, Marylebone, with whom he remained until 1799, when the indenture agreement was broken as a consequence of a quarrel with the master. He felt neglected during this period, often suffering want, and he took every opportunity to educate himself and to acquire a small personal library. After leaving this situation he worked at several jobs for short periods, and on 22 March 1801 he married the daughter of a Mr Elliott of Hampshire at the (Swedenborgian) New Church in the Strand. 
Church claimed to have regularly attended Anglican services during his apprenticeship, although he was probably introduced to Swedenborgianism by his employer. He soon moved decisively towards evangelical dissent. From about 1801 he attended meetings of the Itinerant Society and a few years later he began preaching publicly and started a Sunday school. In 1807 he joined the Grafton Street congregation under the ministry of the Revd Burnham and was baptized. He was tried and approved as a preacher, and almost immediately accepted a permanent appointment at an Independent chapel at Banbury, Oxfordshire. On 15 September 1807 he was ordained before a group of Baptist and Independent ministers. 
An admirer of the high Calvinist and antinomian doctrines of William Huntington (1745-1813), Church became a controversial preacher, and in 1808 his ministry at Banbury was curtailed due to rumours that he was sodomizing young men in the congregation. Conscious of having acted 'imprudently' (Church, 74), he refused to submit to an investigation of the allegations by the Grub Street congregation which received him upon his return to London. He subsequently took up various 'ad hoc' preaching appointments before becoming the regular minister at the Obelisk Chapel, St George's Fields. 
During 1813 rumours began spreading about Church's alleged connection with the White Swan, a notorious homosexual brothel in Vere Street, Clare Market. It was said that he acted as the brothel's chaplain, which involved performing mock marriage ceremonies for male couples. The 'Weekly Dispatch' published several stories about his life, and perhaps as many as 20,000 pamphlets and broadsides were printed. Church denied the connection with Vere Street, claiming that clerical opponents organized the publicity in order to discredit him. An attempt to prosecute him for sodomy failed, and his own legal action to prevent the 'Dispatch' from publishing further reports was successful. His following was not diminished by these events, and a year later he laid the foundation-stone of a new chapel, later known as the Obelisk Tabernacle, which was designed to accommodate larger numbers. Following the completion of the Tabernacle, his wife died. He remarried not long afterwards; his second wife, whose name is not known, is thought to have kept a seminary for ladies at Hammersmith. 
After two years of calm, Church's troubles were renewed. One night he dreamed that a number of scorpions were crawling about the floor of his chapel; he was able to kill all but two of the creatures 'which fled to the very seat that was occupied by ******* and another' (Church, 121). Shortly afterwards, on 26 September 1816, he was indicted at the Surrey assizes, Croydon, for attempted sodomy upon a young man of his congregation, Adam Foreman. This nineteen-year-old apprentice potter alleged that Church had entered his room one night, placed a hand upon his genitals, and feigned the voice of his mistress. Upon discovery of the ruse, Foreman claimed to have fled. Much publicity surrounded the trial, and on 17 August 1817 Church was found guilty. A large, menacing crowd gathered outside the Obelisk Tabernacle and burned its preacher in effigy. He was sentenced to two years' imprisonment, of which he served 730 days at Newington and Horsemonger Lane gaols. He received many visitors and had access to books, but felt great anguish for much of his sentence. Many of his followers remained loyal and his four children were cared for. On the evening of his release he preached to a congregation of more than 1000 and soon recommenced regular services. 
After his release from prison Church's life was spent without further public controversy. The date of his death is unknown. He published a number of sermons, the last in 1826; no record of his life after that date can be found. His opponents called him the devil incarnate, yet he was a popular and evidently charismatic preacher of the Christian gospel, to whom women in particular were drawn. It is not clear that his high Calvinist beliefs led, as his detractors insisted, to a wanton disregard of accepted Christian morality or 'practical antinomianism'. For his own part Church represented himself in his autobiography as 'a child of providence', a latter-day Moses whose life was attended by divinely appointed trials and triumphs. Although contemporary rumours about his sexual preferences and practices can be neither proved nor disproved, circumstantial evidence appears to suggest that the 'inordinate affections which led me into error' (Church, 159) to which he referred in this autobiography were homosexual inclinations. London ultra-radicals who delighted in publicizing instances of clerical vice first reclaimed him from historical obscurity; in the twentieth century his life was retold by historians interested in uncovering the homosexual subculture of Georgian England. 


@@@@@


doc= 58286


Meredith, William Henry (1874-1958), footballer, was born on 30 July 1874 at Blackpark, Chirk, Denbighshire, the ninth of ten children of Henry Meredith (died 1904), mining engine winder, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Hughes (died 1904). Both parents were Welsh, originally of farming stock, having travelled in 1873 from Trevonin to Chirk in search of work. Meredith attended the local Chirk School until the age of twelve, when he obtained work at the nearby Black Park colliery, initially as a pony driver and 'hutcher' before later becoming a boiler-firer. His ambition was then to become a mining engineer, but he was already a precocious footballer. 
By the age of fifteen Meredith was playing for Chirk reserves; by eighteen was a first team member, and in 1894 he won a Welsh cup medal. Uncertainty in the mining industry in 1893 led him to follow the example of his brother Sam, then a professional with Stoke City, to play semi-professionally for Northwich Victoria of the second division of the Football League. In September 1894 he signed professional forms for Manchester City, also in the second division, and in January 1895 he finally gave up his job at Black Park. 
Meredith was a forward, a right-winger, noted for his 'Scottish-style' close ball control and trickery. He was also a prolific goalscorer, and set many records for both club and country. In his first ten years with Manchester City he captained the club to promotion to the first division and, in 1904, to the club's first significant trophy, the FA cup. Meredith scored the only goal in a 1-0 victory over Bristol City at Crystal Palace. 
The following season Meredith was accused by the Football Association of accepting illegal wage payments and of attempting to fix the result of a crucial league match, an accusation he always denied. He was suspended from September 1905 to January 1907 and was banned from playing for Manchester City for life. He was subsequently bought by Manchester United, and made his debut for them in January 1907. He played for Manchester United for the next eight seasons, before professional football closed down in 1915 for the duration of the First World War. With Manchester United he won two league championships in 1908 and 1911 and helped the club to its first FA cup win in 1909. 
Meredith also had a prolific international career for Wales. For many years he held the record for the highest number of appearances in a Welsh jersey (forty-eight) and he was, along with brother Sam, a member of the first Welsh team to win the home international championship, in the 1906-7 season. 
Angered by the financial restrictions placed upon professional footballers and wanting to create more secure working conditions for professionals, Meredith was instrumental in forming the Players' Union in December 1907, and chaired its inaugural meeting at the Imperial Hotel, Manchester. The abolition of the maximum wage, the ending of restrictions on the freedom of movement of players between clubs, and the recognition by the FA that professional footballers were bona fide workers with the same rights of access to employment law as other workers -- these were key aims of the union. Insurance against injury and the establishment of a pension fund were also important items on the new union's agenda. 
The organization struggled for two years to establish itself before, in March 1909, the Football Association -- annoyed at the union's insistence on taking clubs to court in pursuit of unpaid wages rather than addressing their complaints to the association as supreme governing body -- decided to abolish it. Meredith and his Manchester United colleagues refused to resign from the union and were 'locked out' by their club. In September 1909, faced with a possible strike by professional players in support of Meredith and his 'outcasts' (as the locked-out men had become known), the FA relented and allowed the union to continue in existence. Meredith, though he never served in an official capacity in the organization, continued for the rest of his career to promote and publicize the union, principally via newspaper articles. 
Meredith returned to Manchester City as a 'guest' player during the First World War and played in the war leagues for three years. In 1921 his registration with Manchester United was cancelled and he finished his playing career with Manchester City. His last competitive match was an FA cup semi-final in 1924 against Newcastle, when he was a couple of months short of his fiftieth birthday, an exceptional age for a full-time professional player. 
Meredith was a popular subject for newspaper caricaturists during an era when sports photography was rudimentary. His toothpick, which he chewed incessantly while playing, was a readily identifiable trademark. He claimed he chewed toothpicks and matches instead of the traditional miner's tobacco twist, the latter being considered inappropriate for a footballer, since there were no convenient spittoons available at pitch-side. Fans would send him packets of toothpicks. His fitness was legendary: in a career of almost twenty years of top-class football, he hardly missed more than a dozen matches through injury. He was a strict teetotaller, a non-smoker, and a keen dietician, his spare, almost spindly frame leading to nicknames such as Old Skin, which he disliked. He was also ahead of his time where training was concerned: in an era when jogging and physical jerks were considered sufficient preparation for a game, he wrote many articles placing great emphasis on developing ball control. Until his fiftieth year he continued to polish his skills, insisting that no professional player could ever cease learning his trade. 
Meredith married Ellen Negus (1879-1933), a local Chirk girl, in April 1900 at St Mark's Church, Clowes Street, Manchester, and lived for some years in Nut Street, Belle Vue, Manchester. They had two children: Lily, born in 1903, and Winifred, born in 1906. In 1904 he opened a sports goods shop in St Peter's Square, Manchester. The shop closed following a fire in 1909, however, and Meredith was declared bankrupt. In 1914 he took a public house, the Church Hotel in Longsight, Manchester, and in the 1920s and 1930s he and his wife managed a second public house, the Stretford Hotel, Stretford Road, Manchester. 
In 1926 Meredith starred in a feature film, 'The Ball of Fortune', as well as a number of short coaching films. He would appear on stage in cinemas showing his films and answer questions from the audience. He was good friends with many music-hall stars of the pre-Second World War period, including George Robey (who designed Manchester United's cup final shirts in 1909) and Harry Weldon (who played Stiffy the Goalkeeper in a Fred Karno sketch that also featured Charlie Chaplin). The catch-phrase 'Meredith, we're in!' from another pre-First World War Karno sketch was said to have been inspired by Meredith. 
In retirement Meredith lived in Manchester with his daughter Winifred, a champion dancer and later principal of her own dancing school. He died at his home, in Burton Road, Withington, Manchester, on 19 April 1958 from heart failure and was buried four days later in the southern cemetery, Manchester. 


