@@@@@


doc= 58287


Sullivan, James (1903-1977), rugby player, was born at 35 Elaine Street, Cardiff, on 2 December 1903, the son of Cornelius Sullivan, a labourer at an ironworks, and his wife, Mary Dobbin. He attended St Alban's School, Cardiff. He played for the Cardiff rugby union first fifteen when he was seventeen and remains the youngest player to have represented the Barbarians, at just seventeen years and twenty-six days old when he played against Newport on 28 December 1920. Within six months he had signed as a professional for Wigan for a fee of $750. 
Sullivan made his rugby league debut for Wigan against Widnes on 27 August 1921 and kicked five goals. Within five years he had landed more goals than any other player in rugby league's history. In 1928 he became the first man to amass 1000 goals and by the time he retired in 1946 his tally was 2867 goals, a record which is still intact. His aggregate of 6022 points is second only to Neil Fox's 6220. 
Among Jim Sullivan's record-breaking feats, his twenty-two goals for Wigan against Flimby and Fothergill in a challenge cup-tie in 1925 remains unbroken in first-class rugby league. No player in the game's history has exceeded his 928 appearances. One of his most astounding achievements was to kick at least 100 goals in every season between 1921-2 and 1938-9, a feat not remotely paralleled. In 1922-3 he kicked 161 goals during the season to break Ben Gronow's record and in 1933-4 set a new record with 194 goals. That season he became the first man to top 400 points in a season. 
In 1924 Sullivan was in the first Wigan team to lift the challenge cup when it defeated Oldham 21-4 at Rochdale. In 1929 he became the first player to score in a Wembley final and the first captain to lift the challenge cup there, when Wigan defeated Dewsbury 13-2. He won three peacetime championships with Wigan and played in nine Lancashire cup finals. He was made player-coach at Wigan in 1931 and made his last appearance for the club at Batley on 23 February 1946. 
Tall and heavy, Sullivan presented a formidable problem to the opposition. Apart from his supreme ability as a goal-kicker, he possessed all the attributes necessary for a top-class full-back: uncanny positioning, enormous punting ability, fly-paper hands, and superb technique combined with devastating power in tackling. He is widely regarded as the finest full-back to have played the game. His skills were such that he was capped for Wales just eight days after his eighteenth birthday in 1921, before going on to win a record twenty-six Welsh caps, the last in 1939, when he kicked five goals in a 16-3 victory over England at Bradford. His sixty goals and 129 points remain records for Wales. 
At test level Sullivan won twenty-five caps against Australia and New Zealand. On his test debut against Australia at Sydney on 23 June 1924, he landed a goal from inside his own half with his first kick of the ball in the first few seconds of the match. The Australians had a holy dread of Sullivan's power with the boot, for his kicking often decided test matches against them. He played in five consecutive Ashes-winning series between 1924 and 1933, and went on three Lions tours (1924, 1928, and 1932), the last of them as captain. In 1936 he was selected as captain for a record fourth tour but declined for domestic reasons. He still holds the Great Britain records for appearances (fifteen), goals kicked (thirty-one), and points scored (sixty-two) in Ashes tests. In all international rugby league he stands supreme with sixty caps, having represented Wales, England, Great Britain, and Other Nationalities, in the course of which he amassed 160 goals and 329 points. 
After retiring as a player Sullivan became a phenomenally successful coach. Between 1946 and 1952 he guided Wigan to four championships, two challenge cups, six Lancashire cups, and four Lancashire league titles. He then took over at St Helens, and led them to their first challenge cup victory in 1956 and to the championship in 1953 and 1959. A fine golfer, snooker player, and cricketer, Sullivan also played baseball at international level for Wales. He was variously a boilermaker, butcher, haulier, masseur, and rugby league columnist for the 'News of the World'. His occupation was described as butcher when he married, on 24 November 1928 at St John's Roman Catholic Church, Wigan, Eva Linney Highton ('b'. 1903/4) of Wigan, the daughter of William Highton, a butcher. They had one child, Kevan. Sullivan died at the Royal Albert Edward Infirmary, Wigan, on 14 September 1977. His ashes were scattered on Wigan's ground, Central Park. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 58291


Thomas, David (1880-1967), educationist and socialist, was born on 16 July 1880 at Quarry Cottage, Llanfechain, Montgomeryshire, the son of David Thomas, a mason and farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth Jones. He was educated locally and briefly attended Oswestry grammar school before finding work in a draper's shop. In 1895 he became a pupil teacher in the British School in Llanfyllin. He subsequently worked as a teacher in Anglesey, Glamorgan, and London before moving to the slate district of Caernarvonshire in north-west Wales in 1905, becoming a schoolmaster in Tal-y-sarn in the Nantlle valley in 1909. It was during this period that he established himself as a leading Welsh socialist propagandist. Brought up a Wesleyan, his political principles led him to break with all Christian denominations for a period, although he subsequently returned to the nonconformist fold. His political message and the language he used to express it were both characterized by a strong moral sense informed by the influence of Christian belief. 
Thomas joined the Fabian Society and the Independent Labour Party (ILP) in 1907, and in 1908 he was embroiled in a debate on socialism in the columns of a local newspaper, 'Yr Herald Gymraeg'. This led him to write his major work, 'Y werin a'i theyrnas' ('The people and their kingdom'), which was completed in 1909 and published in 1910. This 248-page volume can be considered the most thorough and eloquent exposition of the socialist analysis of society and the socialist programme for change to be published in Welsh. 
By 1911 Thomas was arguing both within the ILP and within the Welsh labour movement more widely that socialists should identify themselves more clearly with Welsh culture and Welsh issues and history. This, he argued, was the only way in which socialism would become acceptable to Welsh-speakers (in 1901 49.8 per cent of the population of Wales spoke Welsh and 15 per cent spoke only Welsh), many of whom were steeped in the values of nonconformity and Liberalism. During 1911 and 1912 he strove to establish a Welsh region of the ILP and for the publication of more socialist material in Welsh. He organized a meeting at the 1911 national eisteddfod of Wales in support of these aims which, although he later denied the allegation, was widely interpreted as an attempt to construct a Welsh labour party. Socialism was often portrayed as being an alien, English intrusion into Wales during this period and his efforts were crucially important in countering these accusations. 
In north Wales, Thomas rapidly established himself as the leading socialist activist, establishing branches of the ILP and encouraging trade unionism among quarry workers and agricultural labourers. In 1912 he was instrumental in establishing the Caernarvonshire Labour Council and in 1914 the North Wales Council of Labour, of which he was secretary in 1920-22. During this period he was undoubtedly the most influential socialist working in the Welsh language, and he made an impressive attempt to marry the Welsh radical and nonconformist tradition to socialism and the Labour Party. In his stance as a conscientious objector during the First World War he brought the radical elements of both traditions together in his pacifist arguments. He was sent to work on a farm in Bersham near Wrexham for his opposition to the war. His attempts to fuse socialism with Welsh radical nonconformity have led one historian to conclude that he 'came closest during these years to achieving the required synthesis between Socialism and the Welsh spirit' (Pope, 24). 
After the war Thomas married Elizabeth Ann Williams (1881/2-1955) on 26 July 1919, with whom he had two children. He remained a Labour activist, but from 1922 an educational rather than an agitational emphasis can be discerned in his career. He became a teacher at Bangor in 1922, where he remained until 1945. He completed a University of Liverpool MA course in 1928, a study of the maritime and agricultural history of north Wales in the nineteenth century, and became increasingly active in the Workers' Educational Association (WEA) and adult education provision. In 1944 he established 'Lleufer' as a journal for the WEA in Wales and he remained as editor until 1965. He published a large number of books in Welsh including a biography (1956) of the influential socialist, poet, and educationist the Revd Silyn Roberts, with whom he had worked closely. He also wrote an autobiography, 'Diolch am gael byw' ('Thanks for having lived'), which was published posthumously. He was awarded an honorary MA of the University of Wales in 1960. Thomas died at 2 Pen-y-bryn, Burry Port, Carmarthenshire, his daughter's home, on 27 June 1967, and was cremated three days later at Morriston crematorium, Glamorgan. 


@@@@@


doc= 58292


Wagstaff, Harold (1891-1939), rugby player, was born on 19 May 1891 in Underbank, Holmfirth, Yorkshire, the son of Andrew Wagstaff, a painter's labourer, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Rhodes (1858/9-1904), of Rochdale. After playing junior rugby for his native village team Underbank, he signed for Huddersfield of the Northern Union for 5 gold sovereigns and played his first senior game at Bramley on 10 November 1906, when he scored a try in a 28-11 victory. He was aged only fifteen years and 175 days. He continued to play for Huddersfield until 1925, and became club captain in 1911. 
Wagstaff's time with Huddersfield saw the creation of a side immortalized as 'the team of all the talents'. During his career Huddersfield won the challenge cup three times, the championship three times, the Yorkshire cup six times, and the Yorkshire league championship six times. In the season of 1914-15 he led them to the famous all four cups clean sweep, a feat emulated only by Hunslet in 1907-8 and Swinton in 1927-8. 
Wagstaff was ideally built for the centre at 5 feet 11 inches and about 12 stone 8 pounds. He was strong and possessed a fine swerve but was never regarded as quick. His supreme gift was as a playmaker and strategist. He revolutionized the game by adhering to the principle that possession was sacrosanct: kicking was a last resort. In combination with Jim Davies, the Huddersfield stand-off, Wagstaff invented the standing pass manoeuvre following scrums. As a result he took terrific buffetings on his left side but the movement brought his team shoals of tries. Mystified opponents described the subterfuge as 'scientific obstruction'. 
On 17 October 1908 Wagstaff entered the arena of representative rugby when he won the first of fifteen caps for Yorkshire. At seventeen years and 141 days he is believed to be the youngest recipient of a county cap. Within another three months he became the youngest international player in history when he figured in England's 14-9 victory over Australia on 2 January 1909 on his home ground, Fartown. Between 1909 and 1923 he played in twenty-three international and test matches, the majority as captain. 
In 1914 Wagstaff was selected as captain of the Great Britain touring party to Australasia. That Ashes series was one of the most controversial in history, with the Australian authorities, despite British protests, deciding to play all three tests within one week. The decider at Sydney on 27 June has been enshrined in the game's annals as 'the Rorke's Drift test', in remembrance of a heroic action by a small British force against a Zulu army in 1879. An already depleted British team suffered a series of injuries in the match which reduced them from thirteen men to ten. Almost miraculously Wagstaff led his team to a 14-6 triumph and regained the Ashes. It was unquestionably his finest hour. 
Wagstaff again captained the Lions in Australasia in 1920, when the Ashes were retained, and was in charge for a third consecutive series victory in England in 1921-2. His last test match, at Salford on 14 January 1922, a 6-0 victory over the Kangaroos, was regarded as one of the most strenuous games ever played. At its conclusion Wagstaff was carried from the field by the crowd, minus his jersey, which had been ripped to shreds by idolatrous souvenir-hunters. 
Wagstaff was the most revered and influential player in Northern Union (later rugby league) football in the first quarter of the twentieth century. To contemporary observers he seemed to embody all the virtues to which sportsmen should aspire. First and foremost he was a centre three-quarter of such consummate skills that he earned the title the Prince of Centres. Yet he was more than merely the greatest player of his generation. He bore himself with dignity, was renowned for his sense of fair play, was the catalyst for new playing methods, and became the most successful and inspirational captain of his era at both club and representative levels. 
Wagstaff served in the Royal Army Service Corps as a motor driver in the First World War. On 4 January 1915 he married Ann Battye, daughter of Wilson Battye, of Arrundon, Cartworth, Holmfirth. They had one son, Robert. Wagstaff was the licensee of the Royal Swan Hotel, Westgate, Huddersfield, when on 19 July 1939 he died of cardiac failure and acute gastroenteritis at the Trinity Street Nursing Home, Huddersfield. He was buried three days later in Holmfirth cemetery. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 58293


Edwards, Huw Thomas (1892-1970), trade unionist and politician in Wales, was born at Pen-y-ffridd, Ro-wen, Caernarvonshire, on 19 November 1892, the youngest son of Hugh Edwards (1851-1936) and his first wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Williams (1855-1901). As was the custom of Anglicization at the time, his name was registered on his birth certificate as Hugh, but he was known for most of his life by the Welsh spelling, Huw. 
Edwards was brought up in a largely impoverished Welsh-speaking community. His father, who worked in the setts quarry at Penmaen-mawr and earned some small additional income from his smallholding, had very strong nonconformist religious beliefs, but, although he attended chapel for most of his life, these were not inherited by his son. However, nonconformist values relating to social justice, rather than Marxism, played a vital part in moulding Edwards's socialist views, as with many of his generation. He would later claim that the National Health Service established by Aneurin Bevan was 'Christianity at work'. 
The death of Edwards's mother in 1901 had an acute affect on him and partly accounted for his rebellious nature. After attending Pen-y-cae British school, Glanrafon church school, and Ro-wen British school, he left school at the age of fourteen, having received a minimal education, and also worked in the setts quarries of Penmaen-mawr and subsequently as a farm labourer. In 1909 he migrated to the south Wales valleys where he worked as a miner. He enjoyed the wide social activities available in that vibrant area, notably boxing, and he fought in boxing booths under the name Kid Edwards. In his autobiography he claimed to have been influenced by participation in the famous Cambrian Colliery dispute of 1910-11, by hearing Keir Hardie speak, and by the Senghenydd mine disaster of 1913, where he acted as a rescuer, but he did not appear to be active politically at that time. In 1911 he joined the army special reserve and was called up on the first day of the First World War, serving with the Royal Field Artillery as a driver until March 1918, when he was severely wounded and invalided home. The war and his difficult early experiences undoubtedly hardened him for the future demands of public life. 
After the war Edwards returned to north Wales and married Margaret Owen (1890-1966) of Rachub, Bethesda, on 9 March 1920. They had two children, Elizabeth Catherine (Beti) (1920-1979) and Gwynfor, who died in 1926 aged two. His son's death as a child, which he believed was caused by dampness in the family's cottage in Capelulo, had a profound effect on him and was one of the spurs which led him to take an increasingly active part in local politics. By this time he had also become a trade union activist and he lost his work at the Penmaen-mawr quarries following a dispute over union recognition. He became active in the Labour Party in 1923 and acted as agent for Labour candidates in the general elections of 1929 (Caernarfon Boroughs) and 1931 (Flintshire). He also became secretary of the North Wales Labour Federation, which met fitfully during the 1920s. In 1927 he was elected to the Penmaen-mawr district council and, despite being unemployed at the time, was elected its chairman in 1932. 
In 1932 Edwards's commitment to the labour movement, his organizational ability, and his appealing personality were recognized by the leader of the Transport and General Workers Union (TGWU), Ernest Bevin, who appointed him to a post with the union in area 13 (north Wales and Ellesmere Port district). The following year he became district secretary. His appointment led him to move with his family from the small largely Welsh-speaking community of Dwygyfylchi, near Penmaen-mawr, to Shotton, an Anglicized border town in the heavily industrialized part of Flintshire. He lived in Shotton until the mid-1950s when he moved to a larger house, Crud-yr-awel, in Sychdyn in a more rural area of Flintshire. 
The 1930s was a period when trade unions, and in particular the TGWU, were being rebuilt and Edwards played his part in north Wales, despite the fact that the semi-rural nature of the region made recruiting members and drawing workers together a difficult task. He tried to resolve disputes by negotiation rather than confrontation and developed good relations with local employers. He retained the respect of Bevin but was not on good terms with Arthur Deakin (Bevin's deputy and ultimate successor as general secretary of the TGWU). He remained secretary of the region until his retirement in 1953 when he was replaced by Tom Jones, who had been responsible for most day-to-day union activities in the post-war period while Edwards was involved with innumerable public duties at a local and national level. 
Edwards was active politically from the 1930s onwards, being nominated an alderman on Flintshire county council in 1939 on the grounds of his 'high reputation for sagacity and fair-mindedness'. He was one of a triumvirate of local figures who dominated politics in the county for many years -- the other two being the Conservative Sir Geoffrey Summers and the Liberal Thomas Waterhouse. In north Wales in general the traditional support for the Liberal party remained strong during the inter-war period but his promotion of the Labour cause in the area was to bear fruit in later years. He also became better known in the Labour Party in general, particularly in south Wales, where he was on good terms with such prominent politicians as Aneurin Bevan and James Griffiths, and by serving on the Welsh regional council of Labour. 
Edwards was active in supporting the war effort during the Second World War, ensuring that there were few labour disputes of any significance in north Wales, and he served on several planning committees, including the Welsh board of industry and the North Wales industrial development council. He was awarded the MBE but returned it in protest following Winston Churchill's comment during the 1945 general election campaign comparing the Labour Party to Hitler's Gestapo. Uncomfortable with honours, Edwards refused the offer of a knighthood on at least two occasions in subsequent years. During his career many constituencies offered him the opportunity to stand for parliament but he declined, believing that he could make a greater impact (one of his favoured terms) by other means. Yet he assisted many young politicians and, using all his powers of manipulation, was instrumental in ensuring the nomination of Eirene Lloyd Jones, later Eirene White, as the Labour candidate for Flintshire in 1945. Although she was defeated, when the constituency was split into two before the 1950 election she gained the nomination for East Flintshire and won the seat comfortably. 
By the end of the Second World War Edwards's reputation as a prominent figure in public life in Wales was cemented. He had already published in 1944 an article in the journal 'Wales' which set out his views for the future of Wales. Some of these views were provocative and outlandish. He argued, for example, that 75 per cent of churches and chapels in Wales should be knocked down or put to more productive use, but his main message was that Wales should be self-governing in all matters except 'defence'. 
At this time some Welsh members of parliament had been pressing for the establishment of the post of secretary of state for Wales with a seat in the cabinet, but the Labour government elected in 1945 rejected such proposals. Instead the deputy prime minister, Herbert Morrison, following representations made by the Welsh regional council of Labour (which included Edwards), decided to appease Welsh public opinion by establishing a largely toothless unelected advisory body to be known as the Council for Wales and Monmouthshire. It was the minister of national insurance, James Griffiths, who suggested that Edwards would be an ideal chairman, as he might be a unifying force in the fledgling council. 
The Council for Wales and Monmouthshire first met in 1949 to a barrage of criticism but Edwards's astute leadership ensured its survival, even when the Conservatives were in power for most of the 1950s. He was the dominant figure in the council and although it had been intended that the chair would be rotated among members, he was re-elected to the position year after year. Such was his influence at this time that he was dubbed the 'unofficial prime minister of Wales'. 
The 1950s saw an increase in the pressure to recognize Welsh national aspirations. The abortive Parliament for Wales campaign, which Edwards first condemned and later supported, was symptomatic of the growing strength of Welsh national feeling and of Edwards's own ambivalence. Many in the Labour Party, particularly those in south Wales who claimed to be international in outlook and opposed to what they perceived to be parochialism, were dubious about such developments, particularly as they were connected to the small but growing Welsh nationalist party, Plaid Cymru. In 1956 Liverpool city council's proposal to drown the Tryweryn valley in Merionethshire, and consequently destroy the community which lived there, to provide water for the city was a particularly emotive issue which led to an upsurge of Welsh nationalism. Edwards became involved with the unsuccessful campaign to save the valley. 
Meanwhile the Council for Wales and Monmouthshire had produced several useful reports, the most important of which was the council's third memorandum (1957), on government administration in Wales, which proposed the establishment of the post of secretary of state for Wales supported by a Welsh office. When it became clear that the proposals would be rejected by the Conservative government, Edwards travelled to London in December 1958 to meet the prime minister, Harold Macmillan. Government files suggest that Wales was being treated at this time as some form of unruly colony and Edwards's compromise proposal whereby a current minister would be given the additional title of secretary of state for Wales was considered by Macmillan to be a 'bogus plan'. Edwards was determined not to allow the ever growing momentum on the issue to be dissipated and he decided to resign the chair of the council in protest. The announcement of his resignation on 24 October 1958 was met with equanimity by the government but the impact on Welsh public life was not insignificant. The Labour Party included a commitment to the establishment of a secretary of state for Wales in its manifesto for the 1959 general election. 
During this period, and particularly following his move to Sychdyn, Edwards became friendly with a number of Welsh nationalists who undoubtedly influenced him. He composed Welsh poetry under the tutelage of the chaired bards Gwilym R. Jones and Mathonwy Hughes, and was primarily responsible for saving the Welsh newspaper 'Y Faner' (for which these two poets worked), which had run into serious financial difficulties. He was courted by Plaid Cymru leaders and, despite his long affiliation with the Labour Party, he announced at the Caernarfon national eisteddfod on 6 August 1959 that he was leaving Labour and joining Plaid Cymru. 
This decision effectively put an end to Edwards's political career. He felt obliged to resign from Flintshire county council and lost contact with influential members in the Labour movement. His defection had little effect on Labour's dominance of Welsh politics, nor did he become a leading figure in Plaid Cymru, where the leadership saw him as a maverick during a particularly difficult time for the party. He argued that the party should not stand in parliamentary elections but should become a movement similar to the Fabians, rather than a political party. This was anathema to the Plaid Cymru leader, Gwynfor Evans, whose single-minded approach was in contrast to Edwards's inconsistent manoeuvring. With Labour's return to power under Harold Wilson (whom Edwards believed to have good left-wing credentials) in 1964, the establishment of the Welsh Office under James Griffiths, as the first holder of the post of secretary of state for Wales, together with the advancement of several Welsh devolutionists, such as Cledwyn Hughes and Goronwy Roberts, Edwards returned to the Labour fold. However he had lost most of his influence by then. 
During the 1950s and 1960s Edwards served on many committees, including the BBC National Broadcasting Council, the Wales Gas Board and the north Wales advisory committee of the Welsh Hospitals Board. He was chairman of the Wales Tourist Board from 1952 to 1965, and he visited North America and parts of Europe to encourage tourism and to learn from the experiences of other countries in the field. He became a director of Television Wales and West, an independent television company, and he was successful in arguing the case for more Welsh-language programmes. He published two volumes of autobiography in Welsh, subsequently published in translation as a single volume entitled 'Hewn from the Rock', a book of his Welsh poems, and a history of the development of trade unionism in north Wales. 
Edwards died at Abergele Hospital on 8 November 1970, was cremated at Pentrebychan crematorium, and his ashes scattered near to where he was born on Tal-y-fan mountain -- a place which he had memorably described in a poem as 'mynydd yr oerwynt miniog' ('the mountain of the sharp cold wind'). A memorial stone was laid in the village of Ro-wen in 1992. 
A strong, attractive personality with a romantic streak and extremely generous to friends, the short but stockily built Edwards was a pugnacious fighter for the needs and rights of working people and on specifically Welsh issues. He was a persuasive public speaker but was at his most effective in committee; often from the chair he would state 'we're all agreed then', when in fact there was no unanimity. He was a pragmatic rather than doctrinaire socialist, whose propensity for changing his mind led to accusations of inconsistency. He was patriotic in the Welsh sense, a romantic lover of his country and its language and culture, but also one who came to believe that it should be allowed to govern its own affairs. But he lived in a period when the most important decisions about Wales were taken in London and, although he might influence events, he was seldom in a position to take any major decisions himself. 


@@@@@


doc= 58294


Williams, William Crwysfab (1875-1968), poet and Congregational minister, was born on 4 January 1875, the first son of the eleven children of John Williams and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Davies at 9 Fagwr Road, Craig-cefn-parc, in the parish of Llangyfelach, Swansea valley, Glamorgan. His father was a shoemaker and employed four others, including his own brother, J. Williams (Ap Llewellyn), who taught his nephew the intricacies of the strict metre. William was educated at Pencelyn primary school in Craig-cefn-parc, as well as through the activities of the Independent chapel of Pant-y-Crwys. He left school to follow the family trade, but he began preaching in 1892 and was accepted into Gwynfryn School, the seminary for preachers at Ammanford, Carmarthenshire. 
On 3 October 1894 he became a student at the University College of North Wales, Bangor, though he resided at the Bala-Bangor Congregationalist college, where he mixed with a notable generation of students who contributed immensely to the cultural and religious life of Wales. As a student Williams had adopted as his middle name Crwysfab (the basis of his later bardic name), and he also won his first eisteddfodic chair at the Hope Hall, Liverpool. He worshipped as a hero John Morris Jones, whose lectures he attended, and also greatly admired E. Herber Evans, the principal. It was at the University College that Williams met his future wife, Grace Harriet Jones (1876/7-1937), daughter of Robert Charles Jones, a Calvinistic Methodist minister. He married Grace, who later became a teacher, at Menai Bridge, Anglesey, on 16 August 1899; the couple had two sons and two daughters. 
Having been ordained in 1898 at Rehoboth, Bryn-mawr, an industrial town then in Brecknockshire, Williams, as a young minister, soon made an impact. At the national eisteddfod of Wales in Merthyr Tudful in 1901, he was accepted into the bardic circle as Crwys and began a long association, winning the national eisteddfod crowns at Colwyn Bay (1910), Carmarthen (1911), and Corwen (1919). In 1938 he was elected as the archdruid and served for eight years, accepting Princess Elizabeth as an honorary member of the Gorsedd y Beirdd in 1946. He visited the bardic circles of Cornwall and Brittany and was in the delegation in 1947 led by W. J. Gruffydd to study the Breton language. 
Williams left Bryn-mawr in 1915 after involving himself for six years as a councillor on the Brecknockshire county council as well as writing a history of the church. There were two reasons that he left: he wanted an itinerant ministry and he recognized the decline of the Welsh language in Blaenau Gwent. So in 1915 he moved to Swansea as the south Wales representative of the Bible Society, and for the next twenty-five years he combined his duties as a travelling secretary with his own lecturing, preaching, and adjudicating at eisteddfodau, as well as selling volumes of his own poetry. His first collection, 'Cerddi Crwys' (1920), went into six editions, and the next three volumes, 'Cerddi newydd Crwys' (1924), 'Trydydd cerddi Crwys' (1935), and 'Cerddi Crwys: y pedwerydd llyfr' (1944), were also best-sellers. An anthology of his well-known lyrics later appeared under the title 'Cerddi Crwys: detholiad' (1955; repr. 1965). 
Williams's lyrics became popular, such as 'Melin Trefin', the poems to the mill in Pembrokeshire; 'Dysgub y dail', to the road sweeper in autumn; and 'Y border bach', to the cottage flower beds. Three of his poems were included in the 'Oxford Book of Welsh Verse' (1962) and the editor, Thomas Parry, regarded Williams's 'San Malo' as one of the finest lyrics in the language. In prose he wrote of his life and travels in 'Mynd a dod' (1940) and 'Pedair pennod' (1950). 
In retirement Williams led an extremely active life, in great demand as a preacher and as an after-dinner speaker. His anecdotes and retentive memory made his performances very appealing. Between 1946 and 1953 he ministered at Rhydings English Congregationalist Chapel, Swansea, and he carried on preaching into his ninety-second year. He died of heart failure on 13 January 1968 at Mount Pleasant Hospital, Swansea, and was buried at Pant-y-Crwys cemetery in the Swansea valley on 16 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 58295


Jones, John Richard (1881-1955), builder and historian, was born on 29 June 1881 at 29 Barrington Road, Wavertree, Liverpool, the son of John Jones (1853-1936), a builder, and his wife, Catherine Parry (1855-1887). His mother died on 30 March 1887 when J. R. Jones was only five years of age; but his father was a remarkable individual who brought up his sons to take responsibility at an early age, in particular within the Welsh Presbyterian chapel of Webster Road. From 1899 onwards John R. Jones shouldered every year some responsibility, beginning as secretary to the Sunday school, becoming involved in young people's activities, and acting as a temperance witness, until he himself was made an elder (like his father) in 1932. Both were heavily involved in the planning of a large new Welsh Presbyterian chapel on the border of Allerton and Wavertree overlooking Penny Lane, completed in 1927. For a short period of time both he and his father served together as elders, a rather unique situation, although his command of Welsh was not so fluent as that of his father (known in the trade as John Jones Drinkwater because he refused to allow the customary 'price of a pint', an honorarium given to bricklayers on completing the first house of a block. He would tell them to go and drink water). 
Educated at Webster Road board school and Liverpool Institute, Jones became a bank clerk; but on 10 September 1912 he married Mary (died 1974), the daughter of John Hughes of Wavertree, the successful Liverpool Welsh builder and partner of his father in the building firm of Jones and Hughes. His brother married Mary's sister. Shortly after his marriage Jones became an estate agent and a property owner, becoming in time vice-president of the Liverpool Property Owners Federation. On 11 December 1913 their only daughter, Mair, was born. In June 1917 he joined the French Transport Company and saw service to 1919 in France, and was awarded for bravery the Croix de Guerre. It was this war experience that explains why a leading free churchman had life membership of the Territorial Army rifle association. 
After the war Jones became very involved in the life of Liverpool and Wales. As a Liberal politician he represented Wavertree on the city council (1936-7 and 1942-5). He became president of the Wavertree constituency Liberal Party, and served as honorary treasurer. His interests were wide. In June 1935 he was appointed a justice of the peace, serving the Liverpool bench. In addition, he served as chairman of the Liverpool Welsh Choral Union, executive member of the Liverpool National Society, and was heavily involved in the committees of the Liverpool presbytery. Jones served as chairman of the Undeb Cymry Fydd Glannau Mersi (Merseyside new Wales union) and the Young Wales Club with its premises in Upper Parliament Street. In 1932 he was a founder member of the Cylch XXV (Liverpool club), composed of up to twenty-five leaders of Welsh life, which came together monthly to discuss in Welsh subjects to do with Wales and the Liverpool area. He was behind the formation of a Welsh luncheon club that ceased in the early sixties, but the Cylch XXV continues to flourish long after his death. 
Jones maintained his links with Wales, for he had a second residence in Anglesey, and in 1940-41 he was high sheriff of the county. He gave generously to Anglesey-based institutions such as the annual eisteddfod, and supported the Anglesey Antiquarian Society and the National Society for the Preservation of Rural Wales. He also gave generously and was influential in the Undeb Cymry Fydd (New Wales Union) and the Urdd Gobaith Cymru (Welsh League of Youth), and was elected its vice-president in 1945. His lasting contribution must be his only book, 'The Welsh Builder on Merseyside: Annals and Lives', published by himself in 1946. The proceeds from the book were given to the Royal Southern Hospital, of which he was a life governor. Many of the builders mentioned were obscure individuals, but through his family contacts he was able to gather together an amazing mass of detail. It is a good example of the work of an amateur historian, and he treasured his membership of the Cambrian Archaeological Association. Jones died suddenly at his home, Cintra, 109 Menlove Avenue, Liverpool, on 28 January 1955 and was buried in Allerton cemetery, Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 58297


Jones, Enid Wyn (1909-1967), religious and social worker, was born in Wrexham, Denbighshire, on 17 January 1909, the only daughter of Dr David Llewelyn Williams (1870-1947), medical officer of health for Wrexham, and his wife, Margaret ('nee' Price) of Rhyl. Her brothers Eric and Alun became respectively a general medical practitioner and an adult educationist. The family moved to Cardiff in 1912, but she spent the war years in Rhyl; her father was with the Royal Army Medical Corps in France. At the end of the war the family was reunited at 33 Ninian Road, Cardiff, and in 1920 her father (who assumed the surname Llewelyn-Williams) became chief medical officer of health for Wales. 
Enid Williams was educated between 1919 and 1926 at the Welsh Girls' School, Ashford, Middlesex, during the last years of the formidable headmistress Anne Hildred Jones, who was at the helm from 1889 to 1929. From there she proceeded to the Domestic Science College in Cardiff (1926-7) and then she trained as a nurse at Cardiff Royal Infirmary. She met her future husband, the physician Emyr Wyn Jones (1907-1999), on the first sea journey of the Welsh League of Youth in August 1933, and they were married on 9 September 1936. They became actively involved in the cultural and medical life of Wales and of the Liverpool area. They had a daughter, Carys, and a son, Richard Gareth. 
The home of the Wyn Joneses at 15 Sandringham Drive, Liverpool, was rendered uninhabitable in 1941 as a result of the massive bombing attacks of the Second World War. As a mother, Enid had to make a secure place for the children at the homestead of Llety'r Eos, Llansannan, Denbighshire, but she continued to visit regularly her second home at 28 Rodney Street, Liverpool. When peace came Llety'r Eos became a lively cultural meeting place for the musicians and poets of the upland rural community of Hiraethog and the adjacent villages. Not only did many famous preachers of Wales, such as Tom Nefyn Williams, visit often, but also many international figures such as Pastor Andre Tromce, Pastor Martin Niemoller, and Danilo Dolci stayed there. 
An ecumenical at heart, Enid Wyn Jones belonged to the Presbyterian Church of Wales as well as the Society of Friends. At a time when women preachers were rare she gave substantial service for years to the Welsh-speaking congregations in south Lancashire. Her melodious singing voice and her ability as a pianist were additional assets. She was a fluent speaker who prepared her addresses with meticulous care. She had a great admiration for Rufus Matthew Jones, the American Quaker, and was a friend of the pacifist George Maitland Lloyd Davies and the Quaker writer Elfrida Vipont. She valued her involvement as a member of the religious panel of BBC Wales for six years. 
Enid Wyn Jones's involvement in the medical world included membership of the medical executive council of the counties of Denbighshire and Flintshire, followed by service (1960-67) to the Clwyd and Deeside Regional Hospital Board and the North Wales Hospital for Nervous Diseases. She was appointed a member of the nursing advisory committee of the Welsh Regional Hospital Board in 1963, elected its vice-chairman in the same year, and took a leading role in establishing the branch in Wales of the Royal College of Nursing and in the building of its headquarters at Ty Maeth, adjacent to the University Hospital, Cardiff. 
After several years of practical social welfare in the inner-city and dockland areas of Liverpool, under the aegis of the Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA) and the free churches, Enid Wyn Jones was drawn into wider fields of service. She was active in the New Wales Union and in the formation in 1967 of 'Merched y Wawr'. From 1955 she was a justice of the peace for the county of Denbighshire and the petty sessional division of Is-Aled, and she was a member of the British Red Cross Society. Her favourite committee was the North Wales Child Guidance Service. During 1958-9 she was president of the National Free Church Federal Women's Council, being only the second Welsh woman to attain that honour. She became president of the Welsh council of the YWCA, vice-president of the council for England and Wales (1959-67), and a member of the world council of the YWCA, in which capacity she attended world conferences. Towards the end of the quadrennial world council at Melbourne, Australia, in 1967, she sustained, without any warning, a subarachnoid haemorrhage. After a measure of recovery, and accompanied by her husband on the return journey, she had a fatal recurrence on the flight home above Bangkok on 15 September 1967. She was buried at the Henry Rees Memorial Chapel cemetery, Llansannan, on 20 September. 
Many of the articles which she contributed to the 'Free Church Chronicle' and the Welsh press describing her travels were included in the books published after her death and edited by her husband -- the bilingual volume 'In Memoriam Enid Wyn Jones' (1968) and the Welsh language volume 'Cyfaredd cof' (1970). The article and address that sum up her life of service (delivered at Folkestone in March 1958) is entitled 'A Housewife in Search of God' and was published as a pamphlet. 


@@@@@


doc= 58298


Jowett, John Henry (1863-1923), Congregational minister, was born in Beaumont Town, Northowram, Halifax, on 25 August 1863, the fourth child of Josiah Jowett (died 'c'.1905), tailor and draper, and his wife, Hannah Marshall (died 1911). Both his parents were members of Halifax's Square Congregational Church, whose minister, Enoch Mellor, provided J. H. Jowett with the model for his own career. 
After four years at Hipperholme grammar school, Halifax, Jowett became, at the age of fourteen, a pupil teacher at Victoria Street board school, and in 1882 entered the Airedale Congregational College in Bradford to prepare for the ministry. During his first year at Airedale he won a scholarship to the University of Edinburgh, from which he graduated in 1887. Twenty-three years later Edinburgh conferred on him the honorary degree of doctor of divinity. After returning to Airedale in 1887 he spent two terms at Mansfield College, Oxford, and in October 1889 began his first ministry at St James's Congregational Church, Newcastle upon Tyne. After six years in Newcastle he was called to the pastorate of Carr's Lane Congregational Church, Birmingham, following the death of R. W. Dale. While in Birmingham, Jowett took the initiative in raising $25,000 for the establishment of the Digbeth Institute, in one of the city's poorest districts, which opened in January 1908 as a community centre for worship and recreation. 
A holiday in the United States in the summer of 1909 led to an invitation to the pastorate of the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, New York, reputedly the wealthiest church in the city. Despite a petition signed by 1400 members and worshippers at Carr's Lane and a memorial from Birmingham magistrates, Jowett accepted the invitation from New York in January 1911. It was this invitation that brought Jowett to the notice of the secular press, and he was reputed to have been enticed across the Atlantic by the offer of a large salary. In fact Jowett accepted the call to Fifth Avenue only on condition that his salary should be no more than the equivalent salary he had received at Carr's Lane. In New York, Jowett preached regularly to congregations of 1200-1500 people, and although at times he regretted not being in England during the First World War he argued the justice of the allied case in the New York press. 
In February 1917 Jowett received an invitation to return to England to succeed Campbell Morgan at the Congregational Westminster Chapel. While the British prime minister, David Lloyd George, wrote to Jowett urging him to return to England, the American president, Woodrow Wilson, urged him to remain in the United States. He accepted the call from Westminster Chapel, but only on condition that, with the United States entering the war in April 1917, he delay his return until the spring of 1918. Jowett began his ministry at Westminster Chapel on Whit Sunday 1918, preaching to a congregation which included David Lloyd George and his wife, but the ministry was to last only four years. In the summer of 1917 there appeared the first signs of the pernicious anaemia that would ultimately kill him. Ill health obliged him to retire from the pastorate of Westminster Chapel in December 1921, though he continued to preach at Sunday morning services until May 1922. In November 1922 he was made a Companion of Honour. 
Jowett was a shy, humble man who was always slightly puzzled by the amount of public interest he aroused. He was tall, lean, balding with a full moustache, and always dressed fastidiously. He married, on 20 May 1890, Lizzie Ann, daughter of Francis Winpenny of Barnard Castle, and although they had no children of their own they adopted a daughter, Monica, in 1910. 
Jowett's power as a preacher derived from a powerful, rich, musical voice and a masterly use of language. The burden of his message was 'the grace and love of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ', and having experienced no intellectual difficulties with Christianity himself he had little to say to those who had. From 1907 until 1922 he wrote a monthly devotional article for the 'Christian World', and published some twenty-five books, consisting largely of revised versions of his sermons. He served as chairman of the Congregational Union in 1906 and as president of the National Council of Evangelical Free Churches in 1910-11. He was an enthusiastic advocate of church unity and caused a storm of protest when, in February 1920, he accepted an invitation from the dean of Durham to preach in the cathedral -- the first dissenter to preach in an English cathedral since the Commonwealth. 
The last six months of Jowett's active life were devoted to a campaign designed to prevent another world war. In August 1922, despite growing weakness, he attended the conference, at Copenhagen, of the World Alliance for Promoting International Friendship through the Churches. And in the autumn he persuaded the archbishop of York, Cosmo Gordon Lang, to join him in a series of meetings designed to persuade British Christians to enlist as 'an act of personal dedication... in the cause of international brotherhood' ('Christian World'). The campaign reached its climax with a meeting in London's Queen's Hall in December, but Jowett's speech there was to be his last. A few days later his health collapsed and he died on 19 December 1923 at Belmont, Surrey, survived by his wife. His funeral was held at Westminster Chapel on 22 December, followed by cremation at Golders Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 58306


Lorimer, David Lockhart Robertson (1876-1962), diplomatist and linguist, was born in the Free Church manse, Strathmartine, near Dundee, on 24 December 1876, the son of Robert Lorimer, a minister of the Free Church of Scotland, and his wife, Isabella Lockhart Cornish Robertson. His elder brother was John Gordon Lorimer (1870-1914), who became an administrator in India. Educated at Dundee high school, David Lorimer entered the Indian army in 1896. After seven years attached to different regiments he was seconded to the political department of the government of India, and spent most of the rest of his professional life as a vice-consul, consul, or political agent in various parts of the Persian Gulf and (after 1920) on the north-west frontier of British India. In the course of his time as vice-consul for Khuzestan (at Ahvaz between 1903 and 1909) he developed a close friendship with the semi-independent ruler of the region, the wali of Posht-e-Kuh, which proved politically useful at the time of the British occupation of Iraq in the First World War. 
After marrying Emily Overend ['see below'] in 1910, Lorimer served in Bahrain, Kerman, and 'Amara in lower Iraq between 1911 and 1920; he was created CIE in 1917. After the war the Lorimers returned to India, where David Lorimer spent four years as political agent in Gilgit. He retired from the service in 1927, and the Lorimers spent most of the rest of their lives in Welwyn Garden City. They had an adopted daughter. 
David Lorimer is best known for a number of descriptive grammars of some of the languages spoken in or around the north-west frontier of India, the area that is now northern Kashmir and northern Pakistan. As one of his obituarists remarked, 'From the very beginning of his career the study of the life and languages of the various peoples among whom chance led him to work provided him with a 'spare time' interest which was to last throughout his life' (Mackenzie, 181-2). Either by himself or with his wife, he published a dozen books of descriptive grammar and dialectology on Pashtu (1915), Badakshani and Bakhtiari (1919), Dumaki (1939), Werchikwar (1962), and Burushaski (3 vols., 1935 and 1938), a 'philologically unconnected language' (ibid.). He was awarded one of the first Leverhulme research fellowships to visit Hunza to work on Burushaski from 1933 to 1935. 
Lorimer was a member of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters and, jointly with his wife, was awarded the Burton medal of the Royal Asiatic Society in 1948. During the Second World War he assisted with postal censorship, and also became associated with the School of Oriental and African Studies of the University of London, which appointed him an honorary fellow in 1953. Lorimer died in Queen Victoria Memorial Hospital, Welwyn Garden City, on 26 February 1962. He bequeathed his large collection of linguistic materials, slides, photographs, cine films, and other materials to the library of the School of Oriental and African Studies (PP MS 60), where it remains. The University of Copenhagen published a three-volume study on Bahktiari ethnography, poetry, and linguistics based on this collection: 'West Iranian Dialect Materials: from the Collection of D. L. Lorimer', edited by F. Vahman and G. S. Asatrian (1987-95). 
Lorimer had been predeceased by his wife, 
During the First World War, Emily Lorimer was director of the Red Cross missing and wounded enquiry department in Egypt. In 1916 Emily and David Lorimer were posted to Mesopotamia: while her husband was political officer at 'Amara, Emily edited the 'Basra Times' (1916-17). In 1917 she was mentioned in dispatches from Mesopotamia and was appointed OBE in the same year. On their return to England from India in 1927, she became a deputy commissioner of the Girl Guides (1927-30) and spent a year (1930-31) as acting warden of Bedford College House, University of London. She was correspondent for 'The Times' on the expedition with her husband to Hunza (1933-5), of which she wrote a vivid account for the general reader entitled 'Language Hunting in the Karakoram' (1939). She translated numerous German works (publishing under the name Emily Overend Lorimer), including Hitler's 'Mein Kampf' which appeared as a 'Penguin Special', 'What Hitler Wants' (1939). Like her husband she worked during the Second World War on postal censorship. She died in the Cottage Hospital, Welwyn Garden City, on 10 June 1949. 


@@@@@


doc= 58307


Duncan, Sara Jeannette (1861-1922), novelist and journalist, was born in Brantford, Upper Canada (now Ontario), on 22 December 1861, the oldest surviving of the eleven children of Charles Lees Duncan (1832-1907), a prosperous Scottish Presbyterian dry goods merchant, and Jane, 'nee' Bell (1837-1931), from New Brunswick and of Irish descent. Educated at Brantford Ladies' College and Brantford Collegiate Institute, Duncan satisfied the expectations of her class and time by training as a teacher (at Brant County model school in 1879 and Toronto normal school in 1882). Between 1880 and 1884 she published poems and essays in Ontario newspapers, vigorously seeking a full-time position as a journalist. In 1884 she suggested to 'The Globe' (Toronto) and 'The Advertiser' (London, Ontario) that she might report on the New Orleans cotton centennial fair; her articles (under the pen-name Garth) appeared in several Canadian and American newspapers. From 1885 to 1888 she wrote for 'The Globe', the 'Washington Post', and the 'Montreal Star', and contributed to the important Toronto journal 'The Week'. In the spring of 1888, though Canadian women were still unenfranchised, she was one of the 'Montreal Star''s parliamentary correspondents in Ottawa. 
In September 1888, with the Montreal journalist Lily Lewis, Duncan began the unchaperoned round-the-world trip which produced her first book, 'A Social Departure: how Orthodocia and I Went Around the World by Ourselves' (1890), dedicated irreverently 'to Mrs Grundy'. It was a great success, making possible the international career which she had resolved upon as a young woman in Canada. Its journalistic flair and sharp social observation recur in all her later writing, whether in popular magazine genres or the one-volume commercial best-seller addressed to a middle-class audience. She wrote an interesting 'new woman' novel ('A Daughter of Today', 1894) and experimented with both Henry James's 'international' themes, in the charming 'An American Girl in London' (1891) and 'Cousin Cinderella' (1908), and his style, in the tedious 'The Path of a Star' (1899). But Duncan's edgy satire would eventually isolate her between John Galsworthy, whose bourgeois subjects and audience she shared, and E. M. Forster, whose modernist vision she anticipated in her later critiques of Anglo-Indian life. In 1912 Forster described her as 'clever and odd -- nice to talk to alone, but at times the Social Manner descended like a pall' ('Selected Letters', 1.159). 
Presented at court on 17 March 1890, Duncan married Everard Charles Cotes (1862-1944), entomologist at the Indian Museum in Calcutta on 6 December 1890 in St Thomas's Church in that city. A child (undocumented) was reportedly born in 1900 but died within days. She resided in Calcutta, Simla, and Delhi and shuttled between India and London to manage her career. Her Canadian journalism of the 1880s has been studied, but her extensive Indian journalism (assisting her husband in editing the 'Indian Daily News' from 1895) remains untraced; a formidable anonymous attack on Lord Curzon in the 'Contemporary Review' of August 1900 has recently been identified. Her novels were usually serialized in London and the USA before publication in Britain and America. Duncan was market-wise and tailored much of her writing to popular expectations -- the children's book 'The Story of Sonny Sahib' (1894) generated royalties until 1940 -- but her experience of Anglo-India produced a core group of successful novels of increasing depth and post-colonial political insight: 'The Simple Adventures of a Memsahib' (1893), 'His Honor, and a Lady' (1896), 'Set in Authority' (1906), and 'The Burnt Offering' (1909). These novels centre on the Anglo-Indian professional class into which she had married; their social wit and ruthless irony sharply distinguish them from the popular Anglo-Indian romances of the period, a genre which she repeatedly satirized. 
It is 'The Imperialist' (1904), however, that is Duncan's major novel. A richly envisioned chronicle of political inexperience set in Brantford (here called 'Elgin'), its combination of bourgeois subject and ironic viewpoint make it the first recognizably 'modern' Canadian novel. It was, however, initially rejected by Canadian readers. Duncan invested funds in Canada and strove to have her books published there; she retained a strong belief in its tradition of egalitarian civility. Late-twentieth-century appreciation of 'The Imperialist' would have consoled her for the post-1920 oblivion of her Anglo-Indian novels -- too conventional for modern readers and too sceptical for Edwardians. 
Duncan's husband became proprietor of the Eastern News Agency, and when they were separated by the First World War, she turned London playwright, but without success; she never returned to India after 1915. Reunited in 1919, the Coteses established themselves prosperously in England, where family recollections describe Redney (as she was nicknamed) holding court, a formidable personality but of frail physique. Between 1914 and her death she published four late novels of lesser distinction. She died of pneumonia and emphysema on 22 July 1922 at her home, Barnett Wood Lodge, Ashtead, Surrey, leaving her estate to her husband, who remarried in 1924. She was buried in St Giles's Church, Ashtead. 


@@@@@


doc= 58308


Woodham, Henry Annesley (1813-1875), journalist, was baptized on 1 September 1813 in the parish church of Newbury, Berkshire, where his father, Henry Edward Higmore Woodham, was a solicitor. His mother, Elizabeth Spooner Woodham (died 1857), was the daughter of Thomas Lamb, a surgeon in Newbury. He was educated, like George Canning before him, at the Revd Charles Richards's school in Winchester, and at Cambridge, where he matriculated as a pensioner of Trinity College on 20 October 1834. In February 1835 he migrated to Jesus College, and was elected a foundation scholar there at midsummer. Between 1837 and 1839 he twice won the members' prize for Latin orations, and in 1839 came fifth in the classical tripos. In December 1841 he was the first fellow of Jesus to be elected under the new college statutes. In 1843 he published an edition of Tertullian's 'Apologeticus', a competent rather than a distinguished performance, apparently intended for undergraduate use. His second and last avowed book appeared in 1846, 'An Application of Heraldry to the Illustration of Various University and College Antiquities', but his literary career was just beginning rather than ending, for in 1845 he became one of the university men whom the new editor of 'The Times', J. T. Delane, was recruiting to his staff. Woodham remained a leader writer for the paper until within nine months of his death. 
Woodham was not the last 'Times' journalist to combine academic and newspaper work, but he was decidedly one of the most idiosyncratic. He remained a fellow of Jesus until his marriage, on 28 November 1848, to Elizabeth Humfrey (died 1851), daughter of Charles Humfrey, a banker, of Cambridge, and flatly refused to work in London or after 3 p.m. Delane was thus compelled to send up materials and suggestions for leading articles by the early train, while Woodham sent down his productions in the evening or on the next day. Like all Delane's writers he had to be ready to turn his hand to any subject, but perhaps it was not without point that the editor repeatedly set him to writing on railway accidents. Woodham wrote also on mesmerism, bank frauds, the income tax, pauper education, fire insurance, sewage, notable murders, and dozens of other topics. He had various specialisms: India, iron-clad ships (perhaps oddly for a clergyman), and foreign affairs, especially after Henry Reeve withdrew from the paper in 1855. He did not always give satisfaction to his employers. Mowbray Morris, the manager of 'The Times', thought that he often wrote like a pedagogue, and Delane occasionally complained of Woodham's refusal to vary his routine, even in emergencies. But most of the time the editor was glad to have so dependable and copious a writer on his staff. Woodham's annual salary was $1200, and in return he wrote more than 200 articles a year, averaging 2000 words each. It is easy to see what Delane meant when he remarked in 1869 that 'Woodham is, as usual, writing all the paper himself' (Dasent, 2.244). Woodham's articles were less lively than his private letters: he took care to subdue himself to the 'Times' style; but his contributions were marked by a good judgement and good humour, which were not always characteristic of the Thunderer's pronouncements. Among his most memorable achievements was his sympathetic article on Abraham Lincoln's death (published 29 April 1865). Another was a biography of the duke of Wellington, published in 'The Times' on 15 and 16 September 1852 and issued in the same year, without the author's name, in book form. This biography has often been attributed to Samuel Phillips, and authorship of it appears to have been claimed by Henry Reeve. But it was almost certainly Woodham's work. 
Woodham was a devoted Cambridge man, dismissing Oxford as 'that sink of port and prejudice' ('The Times' Archive, Delane MSS, 3/107). He was twice an unsuccessful candidate for the regius chair of history. In university politics he was a conservative liberal. His wife's death in 1851 made his college his sole refuge: in 1862 he was elected an honorary fellow, and delighted in being the only man since Cranmer to have become a fellow of Jesus twice. His collegiate feeling extended to 'The Times'. He liked to lure Delane, Reeve, and (especially) Morris to Cambridge and to get them drunk in the combination room. He was something of a toper himself, and decidedly a gormandizer. Food is a recurring theme in his letters -- pheasants, mangoes, mutton, lobster at Hunstanton, and turtle soup at Bristol ('rather too thick'). When Delane mismanaged an invitation to the lord mayor's banquet, so that Woodham got neither drink nor food, he never heard the last of it. But for all that Woodham was a serious man and a wise friend, with considerable insight into human nature. He advised his colleagues on everything from Delane's coat of arms to Morris's troubles with his unsatisfactory son. 

'The Times' did not quite monopolize Woodham's energies. He was made LLD in 1849 and elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1856. He contributed frequently to the 'Edinburgh Review' between April 1848 and July 1850. He died at his home, 66 Hills Road, Cambridge, on 16 March 1875, and was buried beside his wife and mother at St Mary's Church, Reading. 


@@@@@


doc= 58310


Morshead, Edmund Doidge Anderson (1849-1912), schoolmaster and translator, was born on 4 February 1849 at Salcombe Regis, Devon, the third of the four sons of the Revd John Philip Anderson Morshead (1810-1881) of Salcombe Regis and his wife, Alethea, 'nee' Yonge. He was the grandson of Colonel John Anderson (died 1831), who married a Miss Morshead of Plymouth in 1800 and added her surname to his own in 1805. In 1861 Edmund was sent to Winchester College, his father's former school, as were his brothers. He soon gained a reputation for his wit and his remarkable capacity to memorize poetry. Proceeding on a scholarship to New College, Oxford, in 1867, he went on to gain firsts in moderations (1869) and in 'literae humaniores' (1871). In 1874 he was made a fellow of the college, but by that time had been appointed to the staff at Winchester College, where, apart from a period in Oxford in 1874-5, he spent the rest of his career. On 1 August 1878 he married Mary Fearon, whose brother W. A. Fearon was Morshead's colleague and, from 1884 to 1901, headmaster of Winchester. 
Morshead's career was in many ways typical of the learned schoolmasters of the later nineteenth century, before the professionalization of academic life drove a wedge between school and university teaching. He produced several translations of Aeschylus and Sophocles, edited selections from Schiller and Byron, and published occasional verse compositions. His main claim to fame, however, rests on what was written about him. In 1880 his pupils Charles Locock and Francis Montagu produced a 'pronouncing dictionary' of his speech mannerisms ('Morsheadic', soon changed to 'Mushri'). This was first circulated in manuscript and later 'jellygraphed'; printed editions appeared in Oxford (1880, 1888) and London (1901). The 'Mushri-English Pronouncing Dictionary' was a spoof, yet it included a detailed, and apparently accurate, account of Morshead's strange phraseology and pronunciation. The most sustained jest of its kind, it is also perhaps unique in being an idiolectal dictionary. 
Several influences combined to provoke the dictionary's appearance. The idiosyncrasy it celebrated was already manifested by Winchester Notions, the most venerable and complex of all school slangs. Awareness of individual differences was also heightened in Winchester in 1880 by the successful campaign to have a Liberal candidate elected to parliament. Feelings ran high in the school, where most of the staff were Conservative supporters; Morshead belonged to a small group of Liberals. The form and style of the dictionary owe much to the comparative philology then popular; it is probably significant that it appeared soon after James Murray's appeal in April 1879 for lexicographical information for the 'New English Dictionary'. 
Morshead's individuality was reinforced in the classroom by his mobile countenance, which his pupils watched for signs of impending jokes; a feature caught by two surviving photographs. Morshead was, however, not just an eccentric; the sparse evidence for his educational thinking suggests that he was a civilized and liberal man, free from many of the prejudices of his time and class. Speaking at the inauguration of the Birmingham branch of the Classical Association in 1906, he described its extreme attackers and defenders as impatient Philistines in the first case, and bigoted Pharisees in the second. Morshead was a keen walker and fisherman, both in his native Devon and abroad. In 1903 deteriorating eyesight forced him to retire, and he moved to Southwark -- a somewhat surprising decision that evidenced a commitment to charitable work; he gave lectures at the working men's college and also served as manager of local elementary schools. He died at his home, 29 Trinity Square, Southwark, on 24 October 1912, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 58311


Skelton, Barbara Olive (1916-1996), writer and literary femme fatale, was born on 26 June 1916 at The Croft, Ellington Road, Taplow, Buckinghamshire. Her father, Eric George Skelton, a descendant of the playwright Sheridan, was a major in the West India regiment, but was invalided out of the army at an early age; her mother, Eveline Ada Williams, of partly Danish origin, was a former Gaiety girl. A temperamental child, 'bun-faced, with slanting sludge-coloured eyes' (Skelton, 'Tears before Bedtime', 4), Barbara lost her virginity to a margarine millionaire while still in her teens. 
Barbara worked as a model, but after the Second World War began she became a denizen of bohemian London, dividing her amorous favours between Peter Quennell and Feliks Topolski, who came to blows over her one night in the Gargoyle Club. Barbara and Quennell shared an attic in Bedford Square, rented from Cyril Connolly, but in 1942 she went to Egypt, at Donald Maclean's suggestion, to work as a Foreign Office 'cipherine' in Cairo. There she added King Farouk to her list of lovers. Barbara always disdained conventional good looks, once citing Erich von Stroheim as her 'beau ideal': she retained a soft spot for the king, despite his lashing her with his dressing-gown cord. 
Back in London, she was re-introduced to Cyril Connolly (1903-1974), writer and editor; he fell in love with her, and they were married on 5 October 1950. Marooned in Barbara's tiny cottage, high up in the Kentish Downs, with only a ferocious South American coatimundi, some guinea fowl, and a goose to keep them company, the Connollys fought -- as he put it -- like a couple of kangaroos. Paralysed by writer's block and the melancholy of middle age, Connolly -- known to his spouse as Pungle or Pop -- lay in bed for hours on end, sucking the sheets and muttering 'Poor Cyril' like a mantra. 
On one of the Connollys' trips to London, Barbara began a passionate affair with her husband's new publisher, (Arthur) George Weidenfeld ('b'. 1919); to complicate matters further, Weidenfeld published her first novel, 'A Young Girl's Touch' (1955), which was dedicated to Connolly and was, like all her fiction, thinly disguised autobiography. Connolly was devastated by her intense if transient physical infatuation with Weidenfeld; the affair became the talk of literary London, and after a series of near-farcical comings and goings they reluctantly divorced in the spring of 1956, with Weidenfeld cited as co-respondent. 
Shortly afterwards, on 26 August 1956, Barbara Skelton married Weidenfeld; the newly-weds spent their honeymoon in Italy, on Ischia, where Connolly happened to be staying with W. H. Auden. Life as a publisher's wife proved entirely uncongenial, and passion turned to positive dislike: she had affairs with Alan Ross and the painter Michael Wishart -- for whom she was 'as feline in appearance as she later proved to be in character' (Wishart, 149) -- but when, in due course, Weidenfeld divorced her, Connolly was cited as co-respondent. 
Connolly remained the one great love of Barbara Skelton's life, and after her divorce in 1959 she moved to New York, where she worked in a bookshop and as a dentist's receptionist, and added the critic Kenneth Tynan, the editor Bob Silvers, and the cartoonist Charles Addams to the cast of admirers. In 1966 she was briefly married to Derek Ainslie Jackson (1906-1982), a war hero living in Paris who combined the Oxford professorship of spectroscopy with success as an amateur jockey; his fortune was founded on the 'News of the World' and from then on Barbara was never short of a penny, even though they were divorced after a year. She settled in the south of France, where she enjoyed a tumultuous relationship with the French writer Bernard Frank; while staying with her there in the summer of 1974, Connolly suffered a heart attack, and died in London two months later. 
Barbara published a collection of stories, 'Born Losers' (1965), and a second novel, 'A Love Match' (1969), which had to be withdrawn after John Sutro threatened a libel action. But she is best remembered for her two volumes of autobiography, 'Tears before Bedtime' (1987) and 'Weep No More' (1989), which combine waspishness and wit in equal measure. She had a keen eye for the absurd, and a ruthless ability to skewer friends and foes alike with an exact and colourful turn of phrase, comparing Farouk in exile to 'a huge sawdust teddy bear badly sewn at the joints', and noting Connolly's 'Chinese coolie's legs protruding from below his knee-length shorts' (Skelton, 'Tears before Bedtime', 91, 110). 
To the end of her life Barbara Skelton retained her pantherine good looks, and her hour-glass figure remained as supple as that of a thirty-year-old; she had fair hair, and her high cheek-bones and glittering eyes reminded Quennell of 'the youthful concubine of a legendary Mongol chieftain' (Quennell, 21). Quick-witted, funny, and well-read, she could be alarmingly sullen, moody, and farouche: the important thing was to make her laugh, after which one's sins of neglect were briefly forgiven. 
Much to her regret, Barbara was unable to have children. Lonely, restless, and easily bored, she returned to England with her cats in 1993. Towards the end of 1995 she was diagnosed as having a brain tumour. She spent her last weeks with Connolly's daughter Cressida and her family in Worcestershire, and died there, at Wick Manor, Wick, near Pershore, on 27 January 1996. She was buried at Wick. 


@@@@@


doc= 58313


Deighton, John (1747/8-1828), bookseller and publisher, is of unknown origins. By the time that he announced his arrival in Cambridge from London, in April 1778, he was a bookseller and master bookbinder, although no record of his apprenticeship has been found. He purchased the stock of Richard Matthews, a relatively minor bookseller with premises on Regent Walk, at the heart of the university, and quickly expanded the business, adding to the stock and supplying, binding, and repairing many books for the university library. On 11 February 1779 he married Mary Readhead (1758/9-1819) of Cambridge, and in November of that year he purchased the stock of the bankrupt John Woodyer, who, in partnership with William Thurlbourne, had once been the pre-eminent Cambridge bookseller. Deighton moved to Woodyer's premises on Trinity Street, opposite the Senate House, a prominent location long occupied by booksellers. He also began publishing books by Cambridge authors, and by 1785 his imprint had appeared on at least thirty books. At the end of that year Deighton left Cambridge to take over the bookselling business of William Cater in Holborn, London; in 1792 he moved further up Holborn, having purchased the valuable stock of Lockyer Davis. His move to London coincided with a marked increase in his publishing activity, and in the nine years that he stayed there over 200 works appeared with his imprint. 
In October 1794 Deighton returned to Cambridge to take over the stock of John and Joseph Merrill, at the same time taking on the mantle of the university's leading copyholding bookseller, a position which he maintained to his death. He purchased prominent premises on Trinity Street -- situated between the Senate House and the two largest colleges, Trinity and St John's -- and rapidly made his shop a central focus of university life, where students enrolled for professorial lectures and learned of their preliminary ranking into classes after the oral disputations. As a bookseller he continued to supply most of the needs of the university library as well as of students and scholars, both in Cambridge and further afield. He issued regular catalogues of retail stock and acquired a particular reputation for his ability to obtain foreign works. In addition he established the first publishing house in Cambridge that could boast a national reputation, exploiting the expanding local and national markets for educational works. Reflecting the interests of the university, his list was particularly strong in mathematical and classical works. He issued a popular guide to the university and town, a glossary of university slang, and the annual 'Cambridge University Calendar'. Most of Deighton's publications were printed at the university press, and his contracts provided the press with a significant proportion of its income. When the university printer, John Burges, died unexpectedly in 1802 Deighton was temporarily appointed until a suitable replacement could be found. In addition he succeeded the Merrills as the Cambridge agent for the bibles and prayer books published by the university press. Deighton apprenticed his two children, John (1791-1854) and Joseph Jonathan (1792-1848), as printers, and in January 1813 he took them into partnership. Suffering ill health he retired in 1827, the business being continued by his sons. He died, aged eighty, at his home in Market Street, Cambridge, on 16 January 1828 and was buried at St Michael's Church, Trinity Street, on 23 January. Though the lack of personal references suggests that he was not a man of great charisma, Deighton was clearly a man of great energy and ability, and he wielded significant power within the university. 


@@@@@


doc= 58314


Nursey, Perry (bap. 1771, d. 1840), landscape painter, was baptized at Stonham Aspal, Suffolk, on 25 June 1771, the second son of John Nursey, a surgeon apothecary, and his wife, Catherine Fairfax ('c'.1742-1827). 
Nursey followed his father's profession as a surgeon, having probably been his apprentice. He entered a practice at Woodbridge in 1794, perhaps not long after which he became surgeon to the workhouse at Melton, close by. In 1795 he eloped to Scotland with Anne Simpson ('c'.1776-1844), the heir to an estate at Little Bealings, between Ipswich and Woodbridge, and a ward in chancery, and there they married. He gave addresses in London in 1799 and 1801, though he was almost certainly living at Little Bealings by the end of 1799. There, at The Grove, he 'laid out the grounds in the best style of ornamental planting' (Page, 43). In 1814 he published an 'Essay on Picturesque Gardening, Planting, and Rural Improvements', in which he related the man-made scene to paintings by seventeenth-century masters of classical landscape, such as Claude. He was credited by J. C. Loudon with having discerned, in or before 1816, a variety of the black poplar ('Populus nigra viridis'). 
In 1832 Nursey was referred to as an architect and landscape gardener. He had sold The Grove in 1826-7 and moved to Foxhall nearby, where he built himself a house; he was living there in 1831. He altered the exterior of Theberton Hall between 1830 and 1834, probably having done the same to The Grove for its new owner. In 1832 he was occupying a friend's house, Foxburrow Hill (now Foxboro Hall), outside Melton. Designated an architect, of Melton, he was declared bankrupt on 31 December 1833; there had already, in 1822, been a passing suggestion of financial insecurity. A forced auction of his art collection was held at Foxburrow on 10-11 April 1834. Advertisements for it in the 'Ipswich Journal' offered some 350 prints after old masters, gathered with some emphasis on the seventeenth century and on landscape; 100 prints after Thomas Gainsborough; 43 drawings by David Wilkie; 25 pictures with attributions -- probably unreliable -- to seventeenth-century Dutch and Flemish painters; finally, 150 paintings and sketches by himself, cried up as 'vivid and faithful transcripts' of local scenery ('Ipswich Journal', 7, 26 March 1834). 
According to Dawson Turner, Nursey had an 'enthusiastic love for the art [of painting], that I have seldom, if ever, known exceeded' (Turner, 87). It is, indeed, as an amateur landscape painter that he is still faintly remembered. Much of his work was done in oils, generally on a modest scale; he painted out of doors, and his subjects were frequently topographical. He appears to have had some instruction, probably when young, from Alexander Nasmyth, for whose manner of landscape painting his own sometimes came to be mistaken. None of his work can now be securely identified. Nothing by him is recorded as in a public collection, but several works remain known through reproductive prints. He exhibited some landscapes at the Royal Academy in 1799 and 1801, and another in 1830 with the Norwich Society of Artists, with whom he also exhibited a portrait. At the British Institution in 1815 he exhibited a large picture of an episode in the Peninsular War, based on a drawing by a witness. In London, W. P. Frith derided his landscapes for having a greenness beyond old-masterly sanction. His admirers were, rather, among his country neighbours. The poet Edward Fitzgerald, a poor judge of pictures, owned a number of his works and was indulgently content to find in them a 'genuine feeling of Nature' ('Letters', 1.213). Another literary friend and admirer in the district, again no judge, was Bernard Barton. Conferring more credit on Nursey, although not necessarily as a painter, is a reference to him in a letter by John Constable, written from London in 1814 to the elder John Dunthorne. Although concerned with one of his own pictures, Constable's words imply that both he and his correspondent knew Nursey, and that he heeded his opinion. There is no record of their further association, but pictures by Nursey have passed occasionally (and optimistically) as by Constable. A glimpse of Nursey's responsiveness to older masters of landscape is allowed by Thomas Green, who noted in 1821 that he 'looked with ecstasy at my Hobbema' ('GM', 456). 
Nursey's particular relationship was not, however, with any landscapist but with Wilkie, whom he came to know by 1814, possibly through the piano maker William Stodart. In the warmer months of 1816, 1818, 1822, and 1823 Wilkie made short visits to The Grove, where he and Nursey painted. Nursey enjoyed Wilkie's technical experience, also learning through making copies of his pictures. Wilkie, himself diffident about painting landscape, was with little doubt spurred on in the endeavour by Nursey's enthusiasm for it. As well as the drawings by Wilkie already mentioned, Nursey collected prints after his pictures and found local buyers for them. Their easy friendship was shared by their families, and was strengthened by an attachment formed between Nursey's eldest son, Robert, and Wilkie's sister Helen. Robert died in 1824 while staying with Wilkie. In 1825 Wilkie left for three years on the continent, and soon afterwards the Nurseys moved from Little Bealings. These events appear to have dissolved the relationship. Wilkie has left an expressive drawing of Nursey, made in 1823 and now in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. 
The impression left of Nursey in the country is of a convivial man, esteemed in his neighbourhood, churchgoing and attentive to the poor. He left Suffolk for London after 1834, perhaps after 1837, and died at his home, 3 Broadley Terrace, Marylebone, on 12 January 1840. 
Famously, Nursey proclaimed his commitment to art by naming five of his ten children after painters. His youngest son, Claude Lorraine Richard Wilson (1816-1873), taught in schools of art at Leeds, Bradford, Belfast, and Norwich, and was said to have been one of Wilkie's assistants. Nursey's second son, also Perry (1799-1867), became a clergyman, a poet, and a painter of landscapes which are sometimes confused with his father's. 


@@@@@


doc= 58323


Becher, Sir William (bap. 1580, d. 1651), diplomat and government official, was the grandson of a London alderman and the eldest son of William Becher, a London merchant tailor, and Judith Quarles, daughter of another merchant tailor. He was baptized at St Lawrence Jewry, London, on 4 May 1580. Educated at Westminster School as befitted the son of a prosperous city family, Becher matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 10 October 1594 and graduated BA in 1597. He entered the Inner Temple the following year. 
Becher remained close to Westminster's schoolmaster William Camden. He wrote news letters to Camden and often served as a middleman in Camden's contacts with continental intellectuals. Becher had a substantial reputation as a news writer and intelligencer among a wide circle of contemporaries, including the news writers John Chamberlain and George Garrard. 
Becher's first diplomatic post was as a messenger in Sir George Carew's embassy to Paris between 1606 and 1608. Becher had been recommended to Carew by Sir Michael Hicks, a client of Robert Cecil, first earl of Salisbury, secretary of state, and lord treasurer. Becher supervised Salisbury's son and heir in Paris and during travels on the continent while also writing news to the father. Left in Paris as agent when Carew was recalled, Becher was not employed by the new ambassador, Sir Thomas Edmondes. Desperate for a position, two years later he was back in Paris as tutor to Henry, Lord Clifford, only son of the fourth earl of Cumberland and son-in-law of Salisbury. Henri IV's assassination during this time inspired Becher to write a romance about the king's life and loves. In 1614 Becher was a candidate for a duchy of Lancaster seat at Knaresborough, Yorkshire, in the Addled Parliament, likely through the influence of the Slingsby family, local duchy officials, whom he had met in Paris. That same year Becher was sent by Secretary Winwood with Sir John Merricke's embassy to Muscovy, where he was miserably unhappy for the next two years. But in 1617 he was back in London, in touch with the rapidly rising new royal favourite George Villiers, who may also have met Becher in Paris, and through Villiers's good offices secured the post of English agent in France on the departure of Edmondes. Becher was soon recalled, however, as relations between England and France deteriorated. 
Becher sat in the parliament of 1621, having been nominated for two seats, one in the gift of Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel, the patron of Camden as Garter king at arms, and the other in the gift of Villiers. Becher chose to accept Villiers's continued patronage, deepening a relationship that endured until the favourite's assassination. Becher was selected on Villiers patronage to every parliament of the 1620s and was one of the duke's most active and vocal defenders in the house and out, to the extent that his fellow MPs considered him little more than the duke's mouthpiece. In 1622 Becher was knighted and accompanied Lord Chichester's embassy to the Palatinate and early in 1623, once again through Buckingham's favour, obtained the post of clerk to the privy council to replace Sir Albertus Morton. But Becher had apparently not completely abandoned his intellectual aspirations since, on the heels of this appointment, he was rumoured to be in hot contention with many of the leading intellectuals of the day for the provostship of Eton College. He had Buckingham's strong support for this position too, but Buckingham, beset by suitors and mired in numerous complicated patronage deals not to mention a trip to Spain, changed his mind, preferring Sir Henry Wotton instead. Becher was compensated with a $2500 payment, reversions to other offices, and continuance in the post of council clerk and Buckingham's good graces. 
As a council clerk, Becher was considered to have financial and organizational acumen, and perhaps even a genetic predisposition to these talents as he came from a family of merchants who had also been defence contractors and speculators. Becher was involved in the planning and preparations for all of Buckingham's military expeditions in the 1620s. He was chosen secretary to the council of war in 1624 and, as such, treasurer for Mansfeld's expedition to the Palatinate, which he accompanied in person to report on the mission. Subsequently he seems to have been involved in Charles I's marriage negotiations in France with another old Paris acquaintance, Sir Henry Rich, now earl of Holland, and in June 1625 it was Becher who publicly read the declaration of the king's marriage at Whitehall. In December 1626 Becher sailed with the Rhe fleet as Buckingham's personal secretary and was at the centre of the negotiations with the Rochellois. It was Becher whom Buckingham sent back to England the following summer to obtain further funding and reinforcements for this mission, a task frustrated by lack of funds and bureaucracy, both of which Becher worked furiously to overcome. He returned with little money, few provisions, and few men, and, when the mission ended, was then assigned to disband what was left of Buckingham's army when it returned to England. Becher expected to sail with the duke's planned 1628 expedition as well, despite a severe attack of kidney stones during the final preparations. 
After Buckingham's assassination in 1628, Becher retained the favour of the king, who kept him on as a council clerk and master of requests in extraordinary, and honoured the grants and reversions issued to Becher by the deceased favourite as much as a decade later. In the council office, he served a number of commissions concerned with financial matters including the treasury commission of 1635-6. Becher was also clerk to the Irish committee of the council which brought him into contact with Robert Boyle, first earl of Cork, one of the wealthiest men in the three kingdoms. Cork paid Becher $40 a year to look after his business in the committee and to report to him on other business there. This relationship grew to include private investments and other business deals that benefited Becher's fortunes. 
In 1640 Becher had a brush with the investigations undertaken by the Long Parliament and, after a few days in the Fleet, decided to confess he had been in error and divest himself of his clerk's position. While the king, short of money himself, opposed Becher's attempts to sell the office for personal profit, he was apparently not sorry to see Becher go. There is no indication, as Gerald Aylmer asserted, that Becher was forced out because he was suspected of being a Catholic; his greatest sin seems to have been that he was an ageing royalist. Becher's clerkship was sold to Sir Richard Browne, the royal agent in Paris, and Becher himself spent the war years in and out of England and France. Despite comments about his advancing age and declining health, he apparently suffered no impediment in offering to sell guns to the earl of Cork in 1643 or when smuggling guns to the king's forces between 1643 and 1645 from his perch in Rouen. Becher's estate and activities were investigated by the committee for the advancement of money in 1649, although the outcome of their proceedings is unknown. Becher died in 1651 at his home in Putney where he was buried before the high altar in Putney church. Becher never married, but named one natural son, also William Becher, a lawyer, in his will. Taxes of $1000 had been assessed on his estate in 1646 and 1647, indicating that it was substantial. The will left legacies of more than $1250 to his sisters and their children, $300 for poor clergy, and the rest to his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 58324


Meautys, Sir Thomas (c.1590-1649), government official, was the third son of Thomas Meautys (died 1614) of West Ham, Essex, and St Julian's Hospital, Hertfordshire, and Elizabeth (died 1641), daughter of Sir Henry Coningsby of North Mimms, Hertfordshire. The family was descended from John Meautas (or Meautis), a native of Calais and secretary of the French tongue to Henry VII. Thomas Meautys's great-great-grandfather, Philip, was a clerk of the privy council under Henry VII and Henry VIII. His great-grandfather, Sir Peter, gentleman of the privy chamber to Henry VIII, undertook delicate continental missions for the king and acquired the family's Essex estates, former monastic property. 
Meautys attended Lincoln's Inn and as a young man was employed by Robert Cecil, first earl of Salisbury. Salisbury's secretary, Sir Thomas Wilson, his uncle by marriage, probably introduced him to Sir Francis Bacon, later lord chancellor and by 1616 he was in Bacon's employment, as were two of his brothers, while a third was employed by Bacon's protege Sir John Finch. Meautys and his brothers benefited from their association with Bacon through holding a series of administrative offices in chancery. In 1619 he became an extraordinary clerk of the privy council. He was elected to the parliament of 1621 for the Cambridge borough through the lord chancellor's patronage and would also represent it in every Caroline parliament up to the Short Parliament, though usually as an inactive member. 
In 1621, however, Meautys was a vocal and vehement defender of Bacon, accused of using his office to solicit bribes. He said he could see the proceedings were already 'chalked out' and demanded hard evidence of his patron's offences. Ultimately he was accused by the house of having served as middleman in the lord chancellor's misconduct, but seems to have escaped punishment when Bacon submitted to the charges. This trial infused him with a bitterness and cynicism toward politics and government, attitudes especially evident in the long series of letters he wrote to his cousin and future mother-in-law, Jane, Lady Bacon. 
Whether involved in misconduct or not, Meautys did serve as middleman for Bacon in numerous financial and political transactions. He negotiated Bacon's transfer of a lease on York House to the lord treasurer Sir Lionel Cranfield in hope of obtaining his assistance in Bacon's quest for restoration. It was also through Meautys that Bacon approached the king and the royal favourite, the duke of Buckingham, on matters ranging from approval for the publication of Bacon's life of Henry VII to his return to court. Buckingham defended the offices and reversions held by Meautys in chancery when they were attacked by the new lord keeper, John Williams. When he attempted to redeem a reversion to a mastership of requests, however, Sir John Coke approached Buckingham for that office. He suggested Meautys be given one of the two council clerkships about to become vacant and Buckingham agreed, though he upheld incumbent clerk Sir Francis Cottington's wish to be paid $450 for the office. Meautys was later allowed to recoup the money from the making of a baronet, for which he preferred his cousin, Sir Frederick Cornwallis. 
In 1626 Buckingham aided Meautys in his attempt to add the clerkship of writs and processes in Star Chamber to his collection of offices. Meautys borrowed $600 of the $900 it cost him from Jane, Lady Bacon. Sir Francis Bacon died in April 1626 and the probate of his will a year later made Meautys, along with the other chief creditor, Sir Robert Rich, co-administrator of his patron's debt-ridden estate. He funded a marble monument with an epitaph composed by his cousin Sir Henry Wotton to be erected over the grave of his beloved master in St Michael's, Gorhambury, Hertfordshire, and seems to have done quite well for himself out of Bacon's estate. Gorhambury was conveyed to trustees for the use of Meautys, who leased it to his cousin-by-marriage, the earl of Sussex, and then to the earl's widow and her new husband. 
In June 1626 Meautys was admitted to Gray's Inn and took up residence in Bacon's old chambers there. The following September he purchased the crown manor of Redbourne, Hertfordshire, once held by Bacon. His combined income from land and the offices he held has been estimated at between $1000 and $1200 per annum, a comfortable sum despite his complaints that the demands of continual service deprived him of any free time. Some of his colleagues in the council office believed him expert at 'slipping his neck out of the collar' of his service in the post, undertaken in rotation. After Bacon's death he apparently conducted occasional business for members of the nobility such as Bacon's old friend Edward Sackville, earl of Dorset, and Thomas Wentworth, earl of Cleveland, of whose family Meautys counted himself a member. 
Twice during the 1630s Meautys applied for a licence to remove butcher's offal from London, but was denied both times. On the basis of his council clerkship, he was appointed muster-master general in March 1636. In 1638 Meautys and his heirs were granted a weekly market and three annual fairs at Redbourne, and that same year he became treasurer for life to the Company of Starchmakers. The next spring he was one of two council clerks designated to attend the king on his journey to York, but he fell ill and returned to London to recover. He was elected to the Short Parliament for Cambridge on the lord keeper's nomination, alongside Oliver Cromwell, but despite his provision of money and venison for feasting the corporation at the spring election, he lost the seat in the Long Parliament to town councillor John Lowry. 
In February 1641, the same month he was knighted by the king at Whitehall, Meautys arranged for his Coningsby nieces to inherit Redbourne, but changed his mind on his marriage three months later, settling the manor on his young bride, Anne ('bap'. 1615, died 1680), daughter of Jane, Lady Bacon. He was reportedly very ill again in 1642: 'pore man he lokes miserably', one of his cousins wrote (Verney, 1.254). He effectively retired and was living at Gorhambury when he was lightly taxed by the parliamentarian commissioners in 1645. He died at Gorhambury and was buried at Bacon's feet in St Michael's Church on 31 October 1649. His infant daughter Jane was his sole heir but his estate passed to his brother Henry at the child's premature death in 1652. His widow married Sir Harbottle Grimston, an old business acquaintance and later speaker of the Convention Commons, who purchased Redbourne and Gorhambury. 


@@@@@


doc= 58331


Archdale, Helen Alexander (1876-1949), feminist and journalist, was born at Nenthorn, Berwickshire, on 25 August 1876, the daughter of Alexander Russel (1814-1876) and Helen Evans, nee Carter (1834-1903) ['see under 'Edinburgh Seven]. Her father, who died a month before her birth, was editor of 'The Scotsman' and had been an active supporter of Sophia Jex-Blake in her attempts to secure medical education for women in Edinburgh. Her mother was one of the students involved in that campaign. 
Helen Russel was educated at St Leonard's School, St Andrews, and subsequently at the University of St Andrews. On 9 October 1901 she married Captain, later Lieutenant-Colonel, Theodore Montgomery Archdale (1875-1918), who at the time was stationed in India. They had two sons and one daughter. She appears to have been estranged from her husband from about 1913. 
In September 1908, on her return from India, Helen Archdale joined the militant Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) and soon became a prominent member. She took part in the Scottish suffrage demonstration on 9 October 1909, and a few days later, together with Adela Pankhurst, Maud Joachim, Catherine Corbett, and Laura Evans, disrupted a meeting addressed by Winston Churchill in Dundee, was convicted of breach of the peace, and imprisoned. All four immediately started a hunger strike, and were released after four days. Early in 1910 Helen Archdale became the Sheffield organizer of the WSPU, being briefly relieved by Adela Pankhurst during a spell of ill health. In 1911 she moved to London and became the prisoners' secretary of the union. In December 1911 she herself received a sentence of two months' imprisonment for window-breaking. From October 1912 onwards she worked in various capacities on the union's new organ 'The Suffragette' and from 1915 on its successor 'Britannia'. In addition, during the First World War she started a training farm for women agricultural workers, served as a clerical worker with Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps from 1917, and in 1918 worked in the women's department of the Ministry of National Service. 
In addition to her friendship with Adela Pankhurst, whom she helped by employing her as a governess for her children while on holiday in Switzerland in 1913, Helen Archdale had an intense relationship with Lady Rhondda, which seems to have begun in committee work during the First World War, though they also shared a background in suffrage militancy. By the early 1920s, she was sharing an apartment, and, together with her family, a country house (Stonepits, Kent) with Lady Rhondda. In 1920 Lady Rhondda founded the political and cultural weekly 'Time and Tide' (its feminist orientation was implied by the understood complement: 'wait for no man'); Helen Archdale was the editor. Soon after, the feminist Six Point Group was formed along lines enunciated in 'Time and Tide', with Helen Archdale as a founder member (she was the group's international secretary until 1933). However, philosophical disagreements, as well as Lady Rhondda's increasing editorial interventions, resulted in her being effectively forced out of the editorship of 'Time and Tide' in 1926. Although she remained a director of Time and Tide Publishing Company, after her resignation specifically feminist concerns were gradually marginalized in 'Time and Tide'. 
However, Helen Archdale's feminist involvement continued unabated. From 1927 she was a co-opted member of the Liaison Committee of Women's International Organizations in Geneva, and was increasingly drawn into the mainstream of internationalist and pacifist feminism. From 1926 to 1934 she chaired Equal Rights International, an organization dedicated to promoting campaigning for equality of women with men in law and in the workplace. This organization was relatively short-lived, mainly because of tensions within the membership, particularly the increasingly fraught relations between Alice Paul of the Women's Party of the USA and the other members. However, the Open Door Council and Open Door International, of which she was also a founder member, lasted much longer. These organizations were more specifically devoted to women's equality within the workplace, especially by opposing 'protective' legislation which they claimed was used to restrict women's access to higher paid employment. 
Helen Archdale was also prominent in a number of other feminist organizations in the inter-war period. She was at various times secretary of the Women's Political and Industrial League, and a member of the International Federation of Business and Professional Women, the Electrical Association of Women, and the Institute of Journalists. She also contributed articles to 'The Times', the 'Daily News', 'Christian Science Monitor', and 'The Scotsman'. 
Helen Archdale seems not to have been politically active during the Second World War. Her daughter Helen Elizabeth (Betty) Archdale served in the Women's Royal Naval Service, and later became principal of the women's college in the University of Sydney, Australia. Helen Archdale died at 17 Grove Court, St John's Wood, London, on 8 December 1949, her husband having predeceased her. 


@@@@@


doc= 58335


Irons, Evelyn Graham (1900-2000), journalist, was born on 17 June 1900 at 136 Hyndland Road, Kelvinside, Glasgow, the daughter of Joseph Jones Irons, stockbroker, and his wife, Edith Mary Latta. Her middle-class family possibly had connections with the Grahams of Montrose, and she was descended from Henry Bell, developer of steam navigation. She was educated at St Bride's School, Helensburgh, and at Somerville College, Oxford (1918-21), where she was awarded a second-class degree in English and was a skilled canoeist. 
Evelyn Irons had an early ambition to be a writer and moved to London to work in a bookshop. In 1927 she became the 'Daily Mail''s fashion correspondent for the women's page despite her characteristic rejection of cosmetics. She was a handsome and well-dressed woman with an open face and swept-back short hair. She became editor of the feature page by 1931 and was living in Chelsea with Olive Rinder when she interviewed Radclyffe Hall for an article entitled 'How other women run their homes'. She and Olive became part of Hall's circle, Hall and her partner, Una Troubridge, admiring the 'marriage' between Evelyn and Olive. In 1931 Irons was made editor of the women's page, and in March of that year interviewed Victoria Mary (Vita) Sackville-West (1892-1962). She fell 'desperately in love' with Vita, who returned her feelings. The love poems in her 'Collected Poems' that Sackville-West wrote in 1931 are addressed to Evelyn Irons, to whom she dedicated the entire collection. Olive Rinder, who 'actively encouraged' (Glendinning, 240) Irons's relationship with Sackville-West, was herself in love with Vita. The three entered into an uneasy menage that culminated in a disastrous holiday in Cornwall, after which Irons put an end to both relationships. Vita had been extravagant both emotionally and materially, and once gave Evelyn a suitcase full of men's pyjamas, but she could be possessive and jealous. Though Vita was stung by Evelyn's desertion and sent her a poem, 'Valediction', they remained in touch until Vita's death. Olive moved into a cottage near Sissinghurst. On 14 July 1931 Evelyn Irons met Joy McSweeney (died 1978) at a party, and spent the rest of her life with her. Four years later she saved McSweeney from drowning, for which she received the rare distinction of the Stanhope gold medal from the Royal Humane Society. 
In 1935 Irons joined the 'Evening Standard', where she edited the women's pages until the outbreak of the Second World War. She worked for the air raid patrol and the London fire service, and transferred herself to the news desk on the 'Evening Standard', announcing to the unsuspecting chief news editor that she was now working for him. She managed to secure herself an assignment with a division of the free French forces under General Jean de Lattre de Tassigny, with whom she formed a close professional relationship throughout the war. With the Premiere Armee Francaise, Irons entered Germany with Charles de Gaulle early in 1945 as the only accredited British correspondent. She was the first woman to be awarded the croix de guerre, for her part in the French seizure of a Bavarian village. As she recalled it, she 'somehow had got ahead of the advance, and four of us in a jeep came to this village and found no allied troops had arrived. So we took it ourselves' (interview, in Knightley, 346). She was also probably the first female correspondent to reach Eagle's Nest -- Hitler's summer retreat at Berchtesgaden -- in 1945; she reported triumphantly that she had sampled Hitler's 'excellent Rhine wine'. She also secured an interview with Rudolf Hess's wife, Ilse, in a French prison. 
After the war Irons continued at the news desk. In 1952 Lord Beaverbrook sent her to the United States to report on Eisenhower's presidential campaign. Having known very little about the subject she became so attuned to American politics that she was asked to stay on. She based herself in New York, settling in Brewster, and reported on a number of significant events. In 1954 she discovered the whereabouts of Edward Montagu, Michael Pitt-Rivers, and the marquess of Milford Haven after they had fled from Britain following an infamous homosexual trial. She was holidaying in Hungary with Joy McSweeney in 1956 when the revolution began, and had to cut short a house party to attend the wedding of Marilyn Monroe and Arthur Miller. She was one of the few reporters to break the United States news embargo on the Guatemalan revolution of 1957. Leaving many of her male colleagues languishing in a bar in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, she used rudimentary Spanish to hire a donkey and a guide to transport her through guerrilla-occupied jungle to the Guatemalan border. Her only worry was what Beaverbrook would say when she claimed expenses for the donkey. 
From 1959 Evelyn Irons worked for the London 'Sunday Times', and stayed with the paper until she retired. Having enjoyed tending the grounds of Sissinghurst with Vita Sackville-West, she was a keen gardener, cultivating English roses in her wild riverside home in Brewster. She also had a holiday home in Skiathos. After Joy McSweeney's death in 1978 she learned to drive. Having been in good health until her late nineties, she died in Brewster on 3 April 2000, two months before her 100th birthday. 


@@@@@


doc= 58338


Brooking, Sir Harry Triscott (1864-1944), army officer, was born on 13 January 1864, the son of Lieutenant Arthur Yelverton Brooking (1841-1869) of the Indian army and his wife, Constance (died 1870). He had a sister, Constance Emily. Brooking was educated at Wellington College and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, from which he was commissioned into the South Wales Borderers on 6 February 1884. The following year he was transferred to the 21st Madras infantry of the Indian army. He remained with this regiment (renamed the 61st pioneers in 1903) for the rest of his regimental career. 
The Indian army, at the turn of the century, offered numerous opportunities for active employment and Brooking took full advantage of them. He saw combat in Burma (1888-9), where he was mentioned in dispatches; the Chin hills expedition (1892-4); the north-west frontier (1897); and Tirah (1897-8), where he was present at the actions of Chagru Kotal and Dargai. He also obtained staff experience, becoming deputy assistant adjutant-general for the Madras district in 1898. In 1900 he went to China as deputy assistant quartermaster-general, part of the multi-national force dispatched to suppress the Boxer uprising, and was present at the relief of Peking (Beijing). He was again mentioned in dispatches and received the brevet of major. After completing his tour as commanding officer of the 61st pioneers (1906-11) he rejoined the staff. When the First World War broke out he was general staff officer, grade 1, of the 5th (Mhow) division. On 30 November 1889 he had married Amy Agnese Smith (died 1934), daughter of Albert Smith; they had one daughter. 
Brooking's wartime career was spent mainly in Mesopotamia. His command of the 12th Indian brigade (20 September 1915 to 7 May 1916) and, later, the 15th Indian division (from 7 May 1916) demonstrated the qualities of self-reliance, initiative, decision, and resolve which he had absorbed from his experience of frontier warfare. In February 1916 he extricated the advanced detachments of the 12th brigade from Butaniyyah in the face of considerable Arab opposition, afterwards inflicting retribution on the villages of hostile tribes. In September 1916 his successful action as general officer commanding 15th division at al-Sahilan, near Nasiriyyah, probably prevented a serious Arab rising. His greatest achievements, however, came on 28-9 September 1917 at Ramadi where his division captured 3500 Turks, and at Khan Baghdadi on 26-7 March 1918 where his composite 'Brookforce' captured 4000 Turks. 
Brooking was a small, slight figure, but a man of great determination and energy. His operational method was characterized by careful preparation, good intelligence, guile, and speed. He excelled at subterfuge and showed a preference for night-time deployments. His victories at Ramadi and Khan Baghdadi have been described as 'among the most perfectly conceived and conducted minor battles of the whole war' (Anglesey, 144). 
Brooking was eight times mentioned in dispatches during the war. He was made CB in 1914, KCB in 1916, KGMG in 1917, and KCSI in 1919. He retired in 1920 and settled to a quiet and private life in Bournemouth with his wife and daughter, Eileen Constance, later Lady Greenway (died 1963). He died at Marrick, 79 Lansdowne Road, Bournemouth, on 17 January 1944, shortly after his eightieth birthday. 


@@@@@


doc= 58341


Biggs, John (1801-1871), hosier and political reformer, was born at Leicester, first of the seven children of John Biggs (1774-1827), hosier, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Heggs (1780-1862), of Arnesby, Leicestershire. By the time his father died in 1827 the firm of John Biggs & Sons was firmly established and his family were worshipping among the dissenting elite at the Unitarian Great Meeting. 
John made his father's firm one of the largest in Leicester, noted for its export trade to North America and Australia, and its innovations in fancy hosiery and glovemaking. In 1859, when he invested heavily in equipping a steam-powered factory, it became one of the most modern. Respected even by Chartists as a model employer, he exposed the malpractices to which the framework-knitters were commonly subjected, welcomed a bill to abolish frame-rent, the source of most abuses, and demanded greater regulation of children's employment. 
From 1826 Biggs participated vigorously in the local reform agitation, helped found the Political Union and Reform Society, and liberally supported the anti-cornlaw campaign. In 1846, he and a fellow hosier were publicly acclaimed as 'the Cobden and Bright of the Midland Counties'. 
Meanwhile Biggs was among the leaders of the reformed corporation of Leicester, mayor in 1840, 1847, and 1856, and borough magistrate from 1840. His hopes that reform would initiate a municipal renaissance were soon frustrated when his modest proposals for street-widening and a new town hall were rejected in 1845 by the Improvement committee in an ill-tempered squabble between 'expenders' and 'economists'. 
Disillusioned with the Reform Society and having quarrelled with the MPs it supported, Biggs began in 1847 an ultra-radical crusade, aiming to win control of its electoral machine, to obtain the election of genuinely radical MPs, and to agitate for a truly popular franchise. The success of his initial coup, which secured control of the Reform Society, ejected the sitting MPs, and won the election of his two radical candidates, provoked a fifteen-year-long battle between the factions. Biggs was himself elected MP for Leicester in 1856. At this point he dominated the scene like a political boss, the electoral machine at his command, the radical newspaper at his disposal. To his opponents he was the 'Dictator', leader of a 'Chartist clique'. It was a precarious dictatorship, however, maintained by his uncompromising commitment to total victory, and his audacity in facing one setback after another. Finally a by-election in 1861 produced the setback from which he could not recover -- a Conservative victory. The only answer was Liberal reunion; the only way was by compromise. Biggs would not oppose it; but he would not take part in it. In 1862 he gave up his parliamentary seat, resigned from the municipality, and withdrew completely and finally from politics. Political failure coincided with financial failure, possibly the result of slack trade, costly new machinery, and political expenses. In 1862 his house, used as security for a debt of $10,086, had to be sold, including his collection of allegedly 'old master' paintings. The business was sold to another firm as a going concern. At the same time Biggs suffered severe personal loss within his household. In the space of a few months his mother, his sister, and her husband, J. F. Hollings, editor of the radical 'Leicestershire Mercury', historian and luminary of the Literary and Philosophical Society, all died; the last by his own hand. 
For the rest of his life Biggs lived in a terrace house, 46 West Street, near the prison. After he died there, unmarried, on 4 June 1871, his estate was valued at 'under $1000'. He was buried on 8 June at Welford Road cemetery. The service was conducted by the Revd C. C. Coe, minister of the Great Meeting, whose sermon was afterwards published. Biggs was not forgotten by the public. A subscription, intended to provide a memorial over his tomb, received such support that a public statue was decided upon. Among the donations was a sum contributed by Leicester men who had emigrated to Philadelphia, USA. The statue, created by G. F. Lawson, was of Shap granite, 7 feet tall and mounted on a plinth. It presented Biggs in dignified maturity, upright, sturdy, and benign. Erected in Welford Place, it was later replaced by a bronze cast and set up facing in a different direction. 
Unpretentious and generous in prosperity, dignified in adversity, John Biggs won a unique place in the affections of the Leicester public. He was less successful in the House of Commons. He addressed it seven times in his first year as MP, but his 'homely style' ('Leicester Journal', 28 Feb 1862) seems to have failed to earn more than patronizing respect for his integrity. After that he was a silent member. 
A judgement on Biggs must include events after his death. Within five years Leicester was at last dignified by a new town hall. Frame-rent was abolished in 1875. The 'Education Acts' helped to end the evils of children's employment. His radical campaign rescued the local Liberals from their inertia, and after 1867 the reunited party profited from his cultivation of the popular forces when the non-electors he had rallied became the electors of the new order. 


An active partner in the family firm, William, like his brother John, also pursued a political career. Elected to Leicester town council in 1836, he served it continuously for thirty years, was elected mayor in 1842, 1848, and 1859, and appointed JP in 1850. In July 1852 he was elected MP for Newport, Isle of Wight, and represented it until his resignation in December 1856. 
As a councillor, Biggs got rid of the old corporation's historic regalia, organized the police force, and supported John's proposals for extensive improvements. As mayor in 1859 he welcomed the volunteer movement, and secured the formation of a company of the rifle corps in Leicester. 
William Biggs's speech to the 1841 Derby commercial convention won him a regional reputation; and although his midland counties charter of 1842 failed to rally Chartists to his middle-class leadership, his initiative helped secure the invitation to stand for Newport. He spoke twenty times in the house, mostly in support of progressive or charitable causes, notably the Homes for Penitent Females, the Leicester branch of which he had helped to found; but his didactic style did not please. 
The sale of the family firm forced William Biggs's sons to seek careers elsewhere. After 1866 he followed three of them to Liverpool. He died there on 8 October 1881 at his house in Upper Parliament Street. He was buried in Welford Road cemetery, Leicester, beside his brother John. Biggs was survived by his wife, daughter, and four sons, of whom the third, Arthur Worthington Biggs, was knighted in 1906. 




@@@@@


doc= 58342


William Biggs (1805-1881), hosier and political reformer, was born in Leicester on 18 January 1805, the third child of John Biggs and Elizabeth Heggs. On 26 May 1837 he married Mary Deborah, daughter of John Worthington, yarn merchant, of Leicester. This allied him with a family of distinguished Unitarian ministers; and in her he found a wife who, the few surviving letters suggest, shared the excitement of his political career, and communicated it to their children. 


@@@@@


doc= 58343


Joseph Biggs (1809-1895), hosier and supporter of Italian independence, was born in Leicester, the fourth son of John Biggs and Elizabeth Heggs. Co-partner in the family firm, he managed the glove department and gave evidence to Muggeridge's inquiry for the royal commission on framework-knitters. In 1837 he married Matilda, daughter of W. H. Ashurst, solicitor, of London ['see 'Biggs, Matilda Ashurst], and, by 1852, had moved to Barden Park, Tonbridge. Through the Ashursts, Biggs was introduced to an extensive circle of progressive friends, including the Italian patriot Giuseppe Mazzini, with whom Matilda maintained an intimate correspondence until her death on 15 October 1866. Mazzini visited Matilda, possibly at Leicester, certainly at Barden Park. Although Biggs at first showed an understandable reserve, he, with his children, became warmly attached to him, and subscribed to his cause. In 1852, after a prolonged visit to Italy, he wrote an indignant letter about its rulers, and in 1854 drew up a paper on British policy, which Mazzini highly commended. Although privately complaining of a lack of spontaneity in Biggs, Mazzini continued to give him warm greetings and send Christmas presents to his daughters. After Matilda's death, Biggs moved to Notting Hill Square, London. By 1893 he was living in St John's Wood. He died there on 19 October 1895 at his home, 3 Alexandra Road. He was survived by three of his four daughters one of whom, Maude Ashurst Biggs, posthumously published extracts from her father's American diary, 'To America in Thirty-Nine Days: before Steamships Crossed the Atlantic' (1927). 


@@@@@


doc= 58349


Pauling, George Craig Sanders (1854-1919), civil engineer and railway promoter, was born on 6 September 1854 at 4 Park Terrace, South Street, Lorrimore Road, Walworth, Surrey, the eldest child of the two boys and two girls born to Richard Clark Pauling (1833-1894), civil engineer, and his wife, Jane Sanders Bone (1834-1915). His father, grandfather, and great-uncle were all railway contractors. Pauling's father, having spent several years in India, intended him for service in that country, but George's schooling ended when the family income was reduced by his father's illness and irregular employment. 
After casual work, Pauling was taken on as a pupil in 1870 by Joseph Firbank, a major railway contractor. In 1874 his father was appointed engineer to the Cape Government Railways, and first his younger brother Harold and then George himself joined him there in 1875; he soon became a contractor on his own account, forming Firbank, Pauling & Co. with his former employer. They won the contract for a tunnel on the Grahamstown line, then under construction, and made a respectable $15,000 profit. Thus financially secure Pauling married in 1878 Annie Ayton; they had two sons. 
Throughout his life Pauling could not resist the lure of speculating in a variety of schemes and business ventures; he invested in a saddlery, and in an ostrich and cattle ranch started by friends, and having become a freemason he undertook to build the masonic temple in Grahamstown. He then departed for England, in 1879, with his wife and baby son, intending to find work there, but was forced to return in haste on learning that his investments in Grahamstown were at risk. Everything was going against him: a drought had reduced yields on the ranch, part of the masonic temple had collapsed, and one of his loans was unlikely to be repaid. In some desperation, Pauling called in his creditors in 1880. He later invested in gold mining at Witwatersrand, but left before the astonishing richness of that field was appreciated. 
During the 1880s Firbank, Pauling & Co. undertook a number of major railway projects. The line between Port Alfred and Grahamstown was completed in 1884, and the firm was also responsible for Kimberley Railway. This 'brought to completion the railway construction scheme, which had been initiated in 1874 to connect the harbours of the Cape Colony with Kimberley' (Heydenrych, 535). In June 1885 Pauling's wife died, and Pauling sent his two sons to England to be cared for by his mother. In the succeeding years he operated on an international scale, travelling extensively through the Turkish dominions, where a railway was planned from Alexandretta (Iskenderun), through Persia, to Karachi. Pauling subsequently built railways in Greece and Puerto Rico. He constructed the line from Haifa to Damascus and undertook a number of other major civil engineering works, including the Tata and Shirawata dams in India. On 1 November 1887 Pauling married Edith Kate Halliwell in the UK; they had one daughter. 
In 1889 Pauling was in Johannesburg having discussions with the financier Baron Emile D'Erlanger regarding investment in mines, when tenders were invited for the first railway in the Transvaal. This was the 'Rand tram', a railway from Johannesburg to Boksburg. Pauling, in partnership with James Butler, secured the contract; work began in 1890, and later additional lines were laid from Johannesburg to Krugersdorp and from Boksburg to Springs. Pauling and Butler also constructed part of the Delagoa Bay Railway at Krokodilpoort. 
Through President Kruger, a friend of the family, and also through Cecil Rhodes, other railway projects materialized. These included the line from Vryburg to Mafeking, which Pauling completed in 1891, at Rhodes's request. His firm also constructed the line from Beira to Umtali, and on to Salisbury. Other major lines included the railway from Mafeking to Bulawayo, the line across Sir Lowry's Pass to Caledon, and also the railway from Ashton, via Swellendam and Riversdale, to Mossel Bay. 
During these turbulent years, Pauling, a strong and sturdy man, always apt to respond with his fists rather than with words, resisted epidemics of cholera and conflicts with native peoples and with animals, mostly lions. He also undertook civil engineering projects in England, as one of the partners of Pauling and Elliott, until the partnership was dissolved in 1894. The contracting work was then undertaken by Pauling & Co. 
Pauling was appointed commissioner of public works to the first legislative assembly in Rhodesia in 1895. At a later date he also served as vice-chairman of the Rhodesian chamber of mines. Pauling in 1903 established another firm, the Transvaal Engineering and Contracting Company, which built further railways in Natal and elsewhere. 
More than anyone else, Pauling was the architect of the railway system in southern and central Africa. Between 1900 and 1918 he built several hundred miles of railway in Rhodesia, including an extension to the Katanga copper mines at Elizabethville (Lubumbashi) in partnership with Belgian interests. He was also responsible for part of the Benguela railway across Angola, as well as the railway from Port Herald to Blantyre in Nyasaland. 
It is not known what became of his second wife but on 17 November 1906 Pauling married Dolores (Lola) Guibara and the marriage produced another daughter. Having abandoned freemasonry in his early years, Pauling subsequently became a staunch Roman Catholic. He generously funded the building of a Catholic church at Effingham, Surrey, where his last years were spent. Pauling died at his home, The Lodge, Effingham, on 10 February 1919, and was survived by his third wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 58350


Cornforth, Fanny (1835-1909), artists' model and intimate companion of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, was born at Steyning, Sussex, on 3 January 1835, and baptized there on 1 February 1835, the daughter of William Cox ('bap'. 1814, died 1859), a journeyman blacksmith, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Woolgar ('bap'. 1814, died 1847). Her youngest sister Fanny died in February 1847, and their mother two months later. The family moved to Brighton, where Sarah was in service at a respectable lodging-house in 1851; her father lived half a mile away with his second wife. 
As she later told an American collector, Sarah Cox and a 'cousin' (probably her great-aunt) attended a fete, held in London at the Surrey Gardens in Walworth on 25 August 1856, to celebrate the return of the regiments of guards from the Crimea. Also in the crowd were Edward Burne-Jones, Ford Madox Brown, Cormell Price, and Dante Gabriel Rossetti (1828-1882) who dislodged her hair 'as if it were an accident' (MS letter from Samuel Bancroft jun. to Caroline Kipling, 2 April 1899, Bancroft collection, Delaware Art Museum). On the following day Sarah, accompanied by her aunt, went at his invitation to Rossetti's studio 'and he put my head against the wall, and drew it for the head of the girl in the calf picture ['Found']' (ibid.). The encounter was to change both their lives. By winter 1858 Sarah -- living in Dean Street, Soho, London -- was modelling for Rossetti, Burne-Jones, and J. R. Spencer Stanhope. Rossetti introduced her to the watercolourist and diarist George Price Boyce, and in the following spring they both helped her move to rooms in Tenison Street, Lambeth. Here she probably developed her acquaintance with Timothy Hughes ('c'.1831-1872), a part-time model and, like his stepfather George Cornforth, a turner or mechanical engineer. Courted by Boyce, Sarah remained attached to Rossetti, and in July 1859 Boyce sought consolation by commissioning him to paint her portrait. When it was seen by his friends three months later, Arthur Hughes expected that Boyce would 'kiss the dear thing's lips away' (Allingham and Williams, 67). 'Bocca baciata', described by Swinburne as 'more stunning than can be decently expressed' ('Swinburne Letters', 1.27), marks a turning point in Rossetti's art, heralding the abandonment of his Pre-Raphaelite past. 
Sarah almost certainly hoped for a future with Rossetti, and broke down when the news reached her of his marriage to Elizabeth Siddal in May 1860. Uncertain of her long-term security, she impulsively turned to Hughes, whom she married in that year at St John's, Waterloo, on 11 August. She maintained her career as a model, continuing to sit for Burne-Jones and Rossetti, amalgamating the names of her dead sister and husband's stepfather into a new professional identity: Fanny Cornforth. But she remained committed to Rossetti, and was sharing lodgings with him at Lincoln's Inn within weeks of Siddal's death in February 1862; a sketch which Rossetti made at the time puts the nature of their relationship beyond doubt. Fanny remained intimate with Rossetti for much of the ensuing decade; her husband Timothy Hughes, a shadowy figure described by Gabriel as her 'incubus', died in 1872. 
Rossetti took Fanny with him when he moved to Tudor House, Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, in autumn 1862, and they visited Paris together in 1863. Her existence was concealed from his mother but was accepted by his brother and close friends, who enjoyed Fanny's high spirits, good nature, and untutored Sussex vernacular. J. A. M. Whistler and William Bell Scott, the ambiguities of whose affairs resembled Rossetti's own, were ready to receive her as a guest; outside bohemia her role as his housekeeper satisfied the requirements of respectability. While at Tudor House, Fanny sat for many of the works which now sustain Rossetti's reputation: 'Fazio's Mistress' (1863; Tate collection), 'Woman Combing her Hair' (1864; priv. coll.), 'The Blue Bower' (1865; Barber Institute of Fine Arts, University of Birmingham), and 'Lady Lilith' (1866; Delaware Art Museum). She may also have modelled for Frederick Sandys (1829-1904), an occasional resident of Cheyne Walk. 
Increasingly preoccupied with the image of Jane Morris, Rossetti came to find Fanny's presence an embarrassment, and in summer 1868 he established her at 36 Royal Avenue, Chelsea. Yet she retained the keys of Tudor House, and still saw herself as its chatelaine. 
Throughout his frequent absences in the 1870s Rossetti never ceased to regard Fanny as his responsibility -- in September 1872, as yet unrecovered from a major breakdown, he wrote from Scotland: 'you are the only person whom it is my duty to provide for, and you may be sure I should do my utmost as long as there was a breath in my body or a penny in my purse' ('Letters to Fanny', 37-9). Aware that it would be impossible to support Fanny by conventional means, Rossetti endowed her with pictures and money, and on more than one occasion, correctly foreseeing disputes after his death, certified that she was the rightful owner of the works in her possession. 
In September 1877 the increasingly erratic Rossetti informed Fanny that he could no longer provide for her, and she impetuously threw in her lot with John Bernard Schott (1837-1891). With Schott, a former publican and the son of an army bandmaster, from the firm of Mainz music publishers, Fanny left Royal Avenue to run the Rose Tavern in Jermyn Street. On 13 November 1879 they were married, nine days after Schott had obtained a divorce from his first wife. But as Rossetti's health declined, Fanny once more willingly responded to his emotional demands, which by then were bordering on supplication. In something of a return to the old days of their intimacy, in September 1881 Fanny accompanied Rossetti to the Lake District where, during his vain attempt to recover his health, she probably tried to induce him to write a will in her favour. She no doubt felt that she had the claims of a wife in all but name, and later declared that she had given up all for Rossetti. But when in a few months the end finally came, no such provision had been made; the family kept her at arm's length and were spared any personal embarrassment when her request to see Rossetti's body arrived too late. 
After Rossetti's death and in financial difficulties, Fanny and Schott established the short-lived Rossetti Gallery in Bond Street, London, hoping to sell the pick of her collection of Rossetti's manuscripts and drawings. In April 1884 they left the Rose Tavern and moved to Kensington, where John Bernard died in 1891. Fanny devoted herself to raising her younger stepson, the invalid Frederick Schott. She must have hoped that his brother Cecil's talent as an artist -- Rossetti had apprenticed him to Frederic Shields -- would contribute to their future maintenance. But Cecil Schott's later years as studio assistant to George Frederic Watts were brought to an abrupt end in 1896 by a custodial sentence for house-breaking; on release he began a new life in South Africa. As a widow, while she and Fred moved through a series of rented rooms in west London, Fanny came to be regarded as a Pre-Raphaelite relic, the custodian of more than 120 portraits, sketches, and studies. Artists and collectors including Samuel Bancroft jun. (1840-1915), a Delaware industrialist, and Charles Fairfax Murray (1849-1919) visited her, anxious to salvage her memories and the residue of her treasures. 
After Fred's death in 1898 Fanny's faculties began to fail and she gradually became reliant on a meagre allowance from John Bernard's sister Rosa Villiers, who in 1905 removed her from her rooms in Hammersmith without disclosing her destination. Within a year Fanny was dispatched under the name Sarah Hughes to seaside lodgings at Felpham, near Bognor, where her progressive dementia soon prompted the landlady to press for her permanent removal. A short spell in the local workhouse infirmary was followed by transfer to the West Sussex County Asylum on 30 March 1907; she died there on 24 February 1909 and went to a common grave in Chichester cemetery. 
According to Rossetti's brother, Fanny Cornforth was 'a pre-eminently fine woman, with regular and sweet features, and a mass of the most lovely blonde hair -- light-golden or 'harvest yellow''. But, he added, 'she had no charm of breeding, education, or intellect' ('Family Letters', vol. 1, p. 203). These deficiencies never troubled, and may even have attracted, Rossetti himself, but came to exasperate his friends, who saw her as an unfortunate echo of his bohemian past, and 'a living denial of the legend they wished to create' (Drewery, Moore, and Whittick, 13). Finding concealment impossible, Rossetti's biographers dismissed Fanny as the personification of 'the sordid frailties of a great man' (Edmund Gosse to T. J. Wise, 2 Oct 1923, BL, Ashley MS 3854, fol. 30). By the 1950s her path to notoriety had culminated in assertions, based on a misapprehension of her age and what little was known of her circumstances, that she had once earned her living as a prostitute. 
The facts of Sarah Cox's life show that, like Lizzie Siddal and Jane Morris, she was the daughter of a family of manual workers, fascinated by an older man of exceptional talent from a world beyond her experience. As Fanny Cornforth, she was the second artistic muse of Rossetti's career -- the inspiration for his landfall on the shores of aestheticism and symbolism. Despite the strains and incongruities of their relationship, her persistent loyalty and his emotional dependence combined to form the enduring bond between them. 


@@@@@


doc= 58351


Morgan, Hector Davies (1785-1850), Church of England clergyman, was the only son of Hector Davies of London (died 6 March 1785, aged twenty-seven) and Sophia, daughter of John Blackstone, first cousin of Sir William Blackstone. Hector's grandfather, the Revd David Davies, master of the free school of St Mary Overy, Southwark, took the name and arms of Morgan on his second marriage, to Christiana, one of the four nieces and heirs of John Morgan of Cardigan. Upon her death in 1800 Hector succeeded to the name. He matriculated from Trinity College, Oxford, on 24 February 1803, and proceeded BA in 1806 and MA in 1815. 
About September 1809 Morgan was presented by Lewis Majendie to the donative curacy of Castle Hedingham in Essex, where he remained for thirty-seven years. On 7 October 1817, under the new statute of 57 George III c. 130, one of the earliest savings banks in Essex was opened by Morgan's exertions at Castle Hedingham for the Hinckford hundred. He was acting secretary until 28 November 1833, and while serving in this capacity published 'The Expedience and Method of Providing Assurance for the Poor' (1830) and an address, 'The Beneficial Operation of Banks for Savings' (1834), with a brief memoir of Lewis Majendie. About the same time Morgan became chaplain to George, second Baron Kenyon. 
Morgan was appointed Bampton lecturer in 1819, and was collated by the bishop of St David's, on 7 August 1820, to the small prebend of Trallong, in the collegiate church of Brecon. He resigned the cure of Castle Hedingham in July or August 1846, and moved to Cardigan, where his second son, Thomas, was living. Morgan, who was married but whose wife's name is unknown, died there on 23 December 1850. 
Two essays by Morgan -- 'A survey of the platform of the Christian church exhibited in the scriptures' (1816) and 'The doctrine of regeneration as identified with baptism and distinct from renovation, investigated, in an essay on baptism' (1817) -- each won a prize of $50 from the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge and Church Union in the diocese of St David's, established on 10 October 1804 by Thomas Burgess, bishop of St David's. But his principal work was 'The Doctrine and Law of Marriage, Adultery, and Divorce' (2 vols., 1826), which shows accurate and extensive reading and legal knowledge. 
Morgan's eldest son, John Blackstone Morgan (died 1832), was curate of Garsington, Oxfordshire. A third son, James Davies Morgan (1811-1846), was an architect who unsuccessfully submitted designs for the Palace of Westminster in 1835 and for the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, in 1839. He lived principally at Hedingham, Essex, and designed St John's Church, Cornish Hall End, Essex. There were also two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 58353


Nichols, Mary Sergeant Gove (1810-1884), campaigner for medical reform and women's rights, was born at Goffstown, New Hampshire, USA, on 10 August 1810, the second daughter and third child of William A. Neal (died 1845) and Rebecca R. Neal. Her paternal grandfather was Scottish, while her mother's family were Welsh. Mary Neal was largely self-educated; her voracious reading was influenced by her father's interests as a radical democrat and her mother's universalist sympathies; she reputedly memorized classical and medical authors from an early age. On 5 March 1831 Mary Neal married Hiram Gove. His surly and domineering character, combined with four stillbirths and her need for outside intellectual interests, brought the relationship to an end in 1842. 
Mrs Gove then embarked upon a lively social and intellectual life. Jacksonian democracy, antipathetic towards elites, privilege, monopoly, or restrictions on knowledge, proved a favourable climate for independent-minded women: popular education was expanding; Sylvester Graham was publicizing his theories on diet, health, and sex; Fanny Wright was endorsing 'free love'; Dr William A. Alcott was expounding communitarian ideas; and enthusiastic religion was beginning to overtake staid orthodoxy. Mrs Gove started school teaching with boarders and lecturing to women on the lyceum circuit. Already unorthodox in reading medical materials, her interest in the subject was intensified by her own persistent ill health and her unhappy marriage, several family deaths, and her brother's career as a doctor. She began giving physiology lectures to Boston ladies in 1838: her runaway success led to tours of New England, New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Ohio, and she became the first woman in America to speak in public on the subject of contraception. She also edited the Worcester 'Health Journal and Advocate of Physiological Reform' from 1840. Here she reflected on the inadequacy of medical training and trained doctors for women, and also criticized over-dependence on drugs, bloodletting, constricting garments, and excessive childbearing. Her advocacy of women's property rights and freedom of expression sharpened as a result of her acrimonious divorce and her lengthy battle for custody of her child and her income. She wrote numerous articles, often anonymous because of her sex, advocating healthy, wholesome diet, fresh air, and abstinence from stimulating drinks. 
In 1842-3 Mrs Gove fell in love with an English teacher, Henry G. Wright, from James Pierrepoint Greaves's Ham House, near London. He introduced her to European hydrotherapy, and in her enthusiasm she launched the 'Health Journal and Independent', which lasted only one issue. In spite of this disappointment she studied techniques in a new water-cure centre in Brattleboro, Vermont, for several months in 1845 and then worked as a resident physician in a water-cure house in Lebanon, New York, before opening her own establishment in New York in May 1846. Women could neither train nor qualify as doctors, but she graduated from being a teacher to acting as a physician. She enjoyed great success as a pioneering woman treating her sisters and became an advocate of natural childbirth. 
Mrs Gove campaigned both through practical example and through the press in the late 1840s. She contributed to 'Godey's Lady's Book', the 'Democratic Review', and the 'Water-Cure Journal', described her work in 'Experience in Water-Cure' (1849), and wrote three novels, 'Uncle John' (1846), 'Agnes Morris' (1849), and 'The Two Loves: Eros and Anteros' (1849). She continued her lectures on dress reform and economic independence, and her house became a centre of like-minded radicals like Albert Brisbane, the Fourierist, and Edgar Allan Poe. Amid these activities she met and eventually married, in a Swedenborgian ceremony on 29 July 1848, 
Nichols, born in Orford, New Hampshire, USA, had studied medicine at Dartmouth before embarking on a career as a radical democratic journalist. On one occasion a libel suit got him several months in gaol in Buffalo. He had worked in William Lloyd Garrison's abolitionist office in Boston, in Lowell, and in New York before qualifying as a doctor. By 1850 Thomas Low Nichols had become a vice-president of the American Vegetarian Society, acted as secretary of the American Hygienic and Hydropathic Association, and appointed himself permanent secretary of the Society of Public Health. In 1851 the newly wedded couple set up their American Hydropathic Institute, the first water-cure medical school: students secured diplomas following a successful three-months' training course. In 1852 they moved to West Chester, New York, where they offered summer courses in water-cure techniques. The following year, under T. L. Nichols's name, they published the sensational best-seller, 'Esoteric Anthropology' (1853): to Victorian America it was sexually explicit. Finding themselves too advanced for other reformers the Nicholses began their own 'Journal of Health, Water-Cure and Human Progress' in 1853. The following year Mary attacked oppressive marriage bonds in her thinly disguised autobiographical novel, 'Mary Lyndon' (1854). The Nicholses vigorously campaigned for the water-cure as the basic reform, a prelude to the regeneration of mankind. These developments coincided with their movement towards communitarianism: under the influence of Fourier, the Nicholses decided to found a school with the American anarchists Josiah Warren and Stephen Pearl Andrews in the Modern Times Colony, Long Island. Delays and sensational publicity intervened and the experiment foundered. 
The contemporary spiritualist craze now attracted Mary Nichols, who soon became a medium. In 1855 the Nicholses moved west to Cincinnati and established their Progressive Union in Yellow Springs, Ohio. A vegetarian water-cure community, it collapsed in 1857 when, following apparitions of St Ignatius of Loyola, the Nicholses and eight others became Roman Catholics. Self-denial, chastity, and Catholic community proved irresistible: the church provided an eternal medium of health education. The Nicholses travelled extensively through the mid-west, the south, and Texas preaching their gospel of health to priests and nuns. After returning to New York in 1861 they fled to Britain to avoid the American Civil War. 
Welcomed to London by Cardinal Wiseman, the Nicholses embarked on a health campaign in Ireland. After establishing their literary credentials with the Howitts, Edmund Yates, Dickens, Robert Chambers, J. Garth Wilkinson, and others, they thrived. Mary Nichols was soon writing for periodicals -- 'The Athenaeum','Temple Bar', 'Fraser's', 'All the Year Round' -- as well as producing two more novels, 'Uncle Angus' (1864) and 'Jerry' (1872). Thomas wrote a best-selling autobiography, 'Forty Years of American Life' (1864), and numerous articles for 'Chambers's Encyclopaedia'. A brief sojourn in Crosshill, Glasgow, during which they published the 'Journal of Sanitary and Social Science' (1873), proved less successful. In the hydropathic boom they began a 'school of life' at their new water-cure centre, Aldwyn Towers, in Malvern, in 1867. There they practised medicine (Mrs Nichols claiming to have healing powers) and spiritualism, produced their 'Herald of Health' (1875), and made provision for the first mass in Malvern since the Reformation. Archbishop John McCloskey of New York and Cardinal Manning were visitors. The Nicholses eventually settled in Earls Court, London, where they continued to hold seances and to busy themselves in social reforms; they campaigned against capital punishment and military conscription, and ran anti-vaccination and anti-vivisection campaigns. 
In 1875 Thomas Low Nichols began his Co-operative Sanitary Company, which marketed health products including Turkish baths, soap powders, 'foods of health', cereals, egg preservers, Count Rumford soup, tonic drinks, and water filters. His pioneering firm preceded those of J. H. Kellogg, T. R. Allinson, and other health-food enthusiasts in Britain. He also inaugurated vegetarian restaurants in London, providing simple recipes for cheap, wholesome food, hygienically prepared and well cooked. In their writings and lectures to all sorts and conditions, he and his wife ceaselessly promoted vegetarianism, dress reform, the creation of garden suburbs, and temperance, co-operating with and visiting like-minded Europeans. 
In later life Mary Nichols was blind for five years until Dr Charles Bell of Nottingham operated on her two cataracts. Unfortunately breast cancer and a fractured femur then curbed her activity and eventually led to her death on 30 May 1884 in Brompton, London. She was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. Age, financial pressures, the death of his wife, and the unfortunate publicity in the 'Pimlico case' made Nichols surrender the editorship of the 'Herald of Health'. He moved to Sutton, Surrey, from where he continued his pamphlet publishing, and died quietly and forgotten at Chaumont-en-Vezin, in France, in 1901. Their one daughter died young. 
The Nicholses were important transatlantic links in radical feminist, medical, and religious movements of the nineteenth century. They were propagandists of the platform, printed word, and varied, if ultimately unsuccessful, practical enterprises. Promoting health education, natural birth control, and social improvement, they were at once backward-looking and progressive: they sought a reinvigorated version of the older, simpler, puritanical, and close-knit New England communal lifestyle. Self-denial and self-restraint for the common good formed a providential code which was guaranteed, for the Nicholses, through spiritualism and, ultimately, the Catholic church. Wholesome education, food, and social and sexual relations were essential: only then could man be liberated from the 'artificial' oppression of law or economic interests, and physical or spiritual contaminants. They believed that simplicity would allow the masses to look after themselves: complexity was invariably a creation of self-interested groups for their own ends. A healthy environment, pure foodstuffs, and basic necessities for all within a readily accountable democratic social order of mutual interests was their ideal. 


@@@@@


doc= 58354


Thomas Low Nichols (1815-1901). 


@@@@@


doc= 58355


Grey, Richard, third earl of Kent (b. in or before 1478, d. 1524), nobleman, was the son of George Grey, second earl of Kent, and his first wife, Anne Bourchier, 'nee' Woodville (died 1489). Aged at least twenty-five when he succeeded his father in 1503, he wasted his family's fortunes -- possibly, as Dugdale says, he was a gambler. In a striking series of alienations he gave away or sold most of the lands, principally in Bedfordshire, that he had inherited: the beneficiaries were Henry VII's administrator-courtiers, Charles Somerset, Baron Herbert (later earl of Worcester), Sir John Hussey (Kent's brother-in-law), Sir Richard Empson, Sir Henry Wyatt, and Giles, Baron Daubeney. The earl also fell quickly into debt to the king: he failed to pay livery for his father's lands, and he was fined 2500 marks for abducting Elizabeth Trussell, whose wardship the second earl had left to Richard's half-brother Henry; he then failed to keep up the instalments laid down for the payment of the fine. 
An indenture of 6 May 1507 acknowledged the recovery to the king's use of several manors, to be held by the crown until these debts were paid, as Earl Richard was 'not of power, habilite ne havyour to content and pay to our seid sovereign lorde the seide sommes of money... without in manner his utter doing' (TNA: PRO, E 368/290, rots. xlviii-l). On 19 August 1507, moreover, Kent was bound in recognizance of $10,000 not to sell, lease, or grant any of his lands without the king's consent, and he was to attend on the king 'soo that he bee see daily ones in the day within the kinges house' ('CClR', '1500-09', no. 797). Rather than reflecting the rapaciousness of the king, still less the shrewdness of a nobleman seeking to escape from the constraints of an entail, these transactions are best seen as an attempt by Henry VII -- moved by 'pitie', as Henry Grey would later claim (Bedfordshire and Luton Archives and Record Service, L 24/530) -- to preserve a nobleman's patrimony from destruction. But no permanent restrictions were placed on Earl Richard's ability to dispose of his inheritance, and the sequence of alienations continued after the death of Henry VII, with courtiers such as Sir William Compton prominent among the beneficiaries. By the time he died, at London, on 3 May 1524, Earl Richard, who was variously described as 'as unmeet to governe his estate as a naturall Ideott', 'a praye sett open to the spoyle of all men', and leading an 'unstayed and disordered lyffe', had wrecked his inheritance (ibid., L 24/525; 24/530, fol. 1'v'; DD OR 1064, fol. 9). He was buried at Whitefriars, London. 
Although Henry VII appointed him to the Order of the Garter in 1505 (the highest honour at the king's disposal), Earl Richard played no visible role in the government and politics of the realm. He did, however, attend on some ceremonial and diplomatic occasions, such as the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1520 and the reception of the emperor Charles V on his visit to England in 1522, and he served, too, on the French campaign of 1513, albeit in a subordinate role. He was also something of a literary patron, if in a small way. Alexander Barclay's 'Myrrour of Good Maners' is said to have been printed in 1520 at the instance of the earl, who similarly promoted Brian Anslay's translation from Christine de Pisan, 'Boke of the Cyte of Ladyes' (1521). Earl Richard married twice. His first wife, whom he married 'c'.1506, was Elisabeth Hussey, sister of the courtier Sir John (later first Baron) Hussey; she died in 1516, and under a contract of 23 January 1521 he married Mrs Margaret Dawes ('nee' Fynche, formerly Curteys), the widow of a London alderman, who lived until 1540 or 1541. There were no children of either marriage. His heir was his despised half-brother Henry, whose hopes of taking up the title of earl of Kent and recovering the family manors were not realized. 


@@@@@


doc= 58356


Cottle, Thomas John (1761-1828), plantation owner and philanthropist, was the eldest of the four children of Thomas Cottle (1726-1765), solicitor-general of St Kitts, Leeward Islands, West Indies. Cottle inherited the Round Hill plantation on the neighbouring island of Nevis from his father. He became a member of the Nevis island council in 1794, and was its president at various periods between 1803 and 1816. In February or March 1803 he married Frances Huggins, daughter of Edward Huggins. They had three children, one of whom died in infancy. 
Nevis gained notoriety in 1810 when Cottle's father-in-law, an irascible planter, subjected thirty-two of his slaves, men and women, to a brutal flogging in Charlestown market place. This was witnessed by a number of visitors to the island and led to a public outcry in England. Cottle wrote a defence of Huggins's general character, published in 1811, but this may have said more for his family loyalty than for his stance on the treatment of slaves, as he did not condone the punishment nor support slavery in principle, although he opposed immediate abolition in the interest of the colonial economy and the interests of the landed proprietors. Though a slave owner himself, Cottle, a devout Anglican, stood out from the vast majority of his fellow planters by his efforts to improve the working conditions of his slaves and by paying Methodist missionaries to educate them and convert them to Christianity. 
Such missionaries had been preaching and teaching in the fields since the mid-eighteenth century but the established church had been slow to show any enthusiasm for a ministry to slaves: it was not until 1792 that the Church of England established the Society for the Conversion and Religious Instruction and Education of the Negro Slaves on the West Indian islands under the auspices of Beilby Porteus, bishop of London. As a result, colonial governors were directed to persuade their legislative councils to pass laws ameliorating the conditions of their slaves. Missionary chaplains and schoolmasters were sent out to convert and instruct them, and a local 'Slave Amelioration Act' was passed in Nevis in 1798. However, by 1812 Nevis still possessed no schools for slaves. 
In that year the desultory ministry was shaken up by the arrival of Daniel Davis as rector of St Paul's, Charlestown, himself a planter's son from St Kitts who, while preparing for ordination at Oxford, had become convinced of the evil nature of slavery. Davis's evangelism not only led to the establishment of nineteen schools for slaves on Nevis, but inspired Cottle to build a chapel on his estate. The five parish churches of Nevis were too small even for the planters and their families, many of the plantations, like Round Hill, being far from any church. Cottle's chapel at Round Hill would not simply be a place where slaves could meet, segregated from the parish church, but a place where his own family and his slaves could worship together. The first service was held in the church on 5 May 1824. Davis duly reported to the Conversion Society: 'Mr Cottle made it a holiday for all his slaves, they consequently attended, as did many of the ladies and gentlemen of the island' (LPL, Christian Faith Society F/1, p. 96). The Cottle Church, as the picturesque ruins of its walls and gables are now known, was the first Anglican church in the Caribbean to be built specifically for members of both the white and black communities. Cottle's example was followed from an unexpected quarter by Peter John Huggins, son of the notorious Edward and brother of Frances Cottle, who built a chapel for his slaves on the neighbouring estate of Montravers. Soon the building of such chapels became general practice in other British islands, many of them subsequently becoming parish churches. 
Cottle died on Nevis on 1 February 1828 and a memorial tablet was erected at his church, commemorating 'a fond father and an affectionate husband, a kind relative and sincere friend, and to his negroes a mild and humane master ever anxious to promote their temporal benefit, and proving his regard to their external happiness by the erection of this chapel for their improvement.' The tablet was later removed to the nearby parish church of St Thomas, where it remained at the end of the twentieth century pending its return to the Cottle church following the stabilization of the ruin. 


@@@@@


doc= 58359


Glanville, Eleanor (1654-1709), entomologist, was the elder of the two daughters of Major William Goodricke (died 1666) and his wife, the widow Eleanor Poyntz, 'nee' Davis (1617-1657). Her father left $1000 to Mary, his younger daughter, and to Eleanor the estates which her mother had brought to the marriage in 1652. Thus, Eleanor found herself a very rich woman in her own right having inherited several properties, including Tickenham Court in Somerset where she established her home. On 14 April 1676 she married Edmund Ashfield (died 1679), an artist from Lincolnshire, with whom she had three children, Forest Edmund ('b'. 1677) and in 1678 twins, Mary (died 1730), and Katherine, who died at birth. Following the death of her first husband, she married Richard Glanville ('b'. 1664) in November 1685. Four more children were born; two died in infancy but were survived by Richard ('b'. 1687) and Eleanor ('b'. 1688). Glanville proved to be a violent husband and by 1698 the marriage had failed. He began desperately trying to lay hands on Eleanor's fortune, circulating stories of her madness and forcing her children to sign affidavits against their mother, but his bid was unsuccessful; Eleanor had shrewdly turned over her properties to trustees while retaining the right to direct her own affairs. Problems with her husband and children seem to have encouraged stories in the local neighbourhood of her insanity, or at least eccentricity, not helped by her interest in collecting butterflies -- a practice thought to be odd. 
Eleanor had begun her interest in butterfly collecting at an early age, but started to make a serious collection soon after separation from her husband. Collecting insects became an obsession and she paid her servants to collect for her. She taught them how to pack specimens in folded papers and to preserve and transport them safely back to her. Eleanor's payments were generous, as long as the specimens were handed over in perfect condition -- 6died per specimen in most cases, but for a special butterfly and caterpillar even 1's'. 
Eleanor became a correspondent of James Petiver (1660-1718), a London apothecary, naturalist, and insect collector, Joseph Dandridge ('c'.1664-1718), silk-screen printer and owner of one of the finest butterfly collections of the time, and the botanist Adam Buddle ('bap'. 1662, died 1715), whom she described as a cousin. They introduced her to other naturalists with whom she exchanged information. Petiver used many of her specimens and information received from her in his great work 'Gazophylacium naturae artis' (1703). He described 'Callophrys rubi' (hairstreak butterfly) from her specimens and gives her credit in his text. Many of her butterflies and moths provided new records for Britain, including the now famous Glanville fritillary ('Melitaea cinxia'). The common name was first given to the species by James Dutfield in 'A New and Complete Natural History of English Moths and Butterflies' (1748-9). Eleanor Glanville published nothing, but the earliest record of a local list of insects, made by E. Glanville on the insects of the Bristol area, may be from her hand. When she went to London in 1703 taking with her a large collection of butterflies her visit caused some excitement among naturalists in the capital. A few of her specimens exist in the Natural History Museum, as part of the Petiver collection. 
No doubt her husband's behaviour and that of her children drove Eleanor to distraction. She bequeathed her estate to her second cousin Sir Henry Goodricke, except for some small legacies to her children. Her estates were left in the hands of her trustees, and there were legacies for her trustees and her executor. Her son Forest contested the will, mainly on the grounds of his mother's lunacy; in 1712 he won his case and the will was set aside. Eleanor Glanville died in the early part of 1709 at Tickenham Court; the exact date of death is not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 58362


Deane, Charles Anthony (1796-1848), diver and inventor of diving equipment, was born in September 1796 at 53 Hughes Fields, Deptford, Kent, and was baptized at St Nicholas's Church, Deptford, on 2 October 1796, the son of John Deane ('bap'. 1766, died 1830), a seaman in the East India Company service, and Eleanor Thompson (1769-1846). The family, although much reduced in circumstances in the nineteenth century, was descended from Sir Anthony Deane ('c'.1638-1720?), surveyor to the Royal Navy and a friend of Pepys. This seagoing tradition was maintained and as a result of their father's service with the East India Company both Charles and his brother 
On completing his apprenticeship, Charles Deane married Sophia McIntosh (1794-1836) on 25 May 1817 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. In 1822 he found work as a caulker at Barnard's shipyard in Deptford, where his father also worked in the same trade. His last two voyages had been aboard the 'Warren Hastings' along with his younger brother, who had recommended him. It is probable that the brothers had benefited from the East India Company custom that allowed those on board to profit from private trade. Charles, who was of an inventive mind, was able to afford to work up the smoke helmet apparatus which he had devised and to patent the design on 4 November 1823. It consisted of a beaten copper helmet with three windows of thick glass, attached to a canvas and leather suit. A supply of air to the helmet was provided by a bellows pump and a second pipe allowed for the escape of the stale air. It is probable that his employer, Edward Barnard, assisted him in the project because some months later he assigned the rights to Barnard for the not inconsiderable sum of $417. The apparatus, demonstrated to several important bodies at home and abroad, was accepted as a useful tool in the days when fire was an ever-present danger in wooden ships and in warehouses and yards storing highly inflammable materials. It was not, however, a commercial success. 
Charles's younger brother John had by this time completed his apprenticeship and had found employment with the Thames estuary boatmen from the neighbouring port of Whitstable. This was the centre of an active salvage industry and maintained a flourishing trade in recovering anchors and cargoes in wrecks. It is likely that he took part in bell dives during this work and suffered from the shortcomings of the equipment along with the rest. The principle of the diving bell had been known for centuries but the need for something better was obvious. John Deane had married Agnes Norris (1800-1844) on 9 August 1823, and with a family to support he decided in 1826 to join with his brother to promote and develop the helmet as a diving apparatus. Although in principle it worked in exactly the same way as Smeaton's force pump bell of 1788, the forced air supply helmet's utility lay in its autonomy: it enabled the diver to move freely and work on the sea bed for much longer periods and with comparative ease. This was a tremendous advantage compared with the static nature of the bell. 
The adapted 'open helmet dress', as it became known, consisted of the copper helmet with its forced air supply and its heavy glass eyepieces, and stout canvas and leather suit. The used or foul air was now allowed to bubble away at the edge of the breastplate or short jacket. Its major limitation was that the diver was unable to lean too far forward in case the water entered under the breastplate, thereby flooding the suit and helmet. This defect was later rectified by Augustus Siebe with his 'closed dress'. 
Charles and John Deane had already met Siebe who lived and worked in Soho, then the centre of the London metal trade, and had been the manufacturer of Charles's original smoke helmet. In 1830, with Barnard, Charles and John decided to entrust the manufacture and marketing of their apparatus to Siebe as he had -- or had local access to -- all the necessary engineering skills. He improved the apparatus by the addition of a powerful hand-operated cylinder pump and substituted the newly invented Macintosh waterproof indiarubber material for the less effective canvas and leather. The invention was now in the public eye and Siebe sold some twenty suits over the next few years. Its legal owner, Edward Barnard, seemed content to leave it in the hands of the Deanes and Siebe, although its final development into the standard closed dress apparatus was Siebe's alone. 
The Deane brothers used the closed dress apparatus on several famous salvage operations, starting with the East Indiaman 'Carn Brea Castle', lost in August 1829 on the infamous 'back of the Wight'. This project was the first commercial use of the apparatus and many others followed, including dives on the 'Royal George' and even on the 'Mary Rose'. The brothers recovered guns and many other artefacts from these famous wrecks. Some from the 'Royal George' were exhibited at 209 Regent Street, London, in 1835. This led to the publication of the first books on helmet diving methods: 'Submarine Researches' (1835) by Charles and 'Method of Using Deane's Patent Diving Apparatus' (1836) by John, the world's first helmet diving manual. 
It is typical of Charles Deane's difficult and unstable character that in his book, and in general, he refused to acknowledge his brother's contribution to their joint enterprise. John Deane, a far more robust and generous spirit, as his book title suggests, was just the opposite. The brothers finally fell out in 1844 when Charles received a grant from the government of $400 in recognition of his work on the diving dress. He refused to apportion any of the money to John. 
Charles, the weaker man physically, gave up his diving activities in 1839 as a possible result of diver's sickness -- the bends. Without regular employment he soon fell on hard times. His first wife had died in 1836 and, unable to look after his family of ten children, he was declared insane and confined for a time in Peckham Lunatic Asylum. On 7 November 1845 he married his second wife, Mary Bond ('b'. 1807). The final tragedy came on 7 November 1848 when, after many setbacks in promoting his other inventions, he cut his throat with a razor and died at 5 Providence Place, Commercial Road, in east London. 
John Deane meanwhile continued his successful career as Britain's leading submarine engineer. This led in 1854 to his appointment as chief submarine engineer to the Admiralty in the Crimea to undertake the clearance of wrecks sunk by the Russians to block the entrance to Sevastopol harbour during the Crimean War of 1854-6. He was by this time a widower, his wife having died in August 1844. A family friend in Whitstable, Sarah Ann Browning (1827-1865), took on the job of surrogate mother to his five children and on his return from the Crimea they were married on 7 October 1856 in Whitstable parish church. He had earned a rest from his strenuous labours and decided to retire at the age of fifty-six. He bought several properties in Ramsgate and enjoyed several years of quiet comfort until his death there -- at 90 Hardres Street -- on 9 July 1884. He had married again, on 10 September 1868; his third wife was his sister-in-law, Ruth Norris (died 1883). 
Although the Deane brothers did not reap the full financial benefit of their simple but brilliant invention and for a time suffered from others taking their glory, they have at last been recognized as pioneers in what is now a considerable industry. Their story was told at length in John Bevan's book 'The Infernal Diver' (1996), which helped to restore them to their rightful place among the great innovators of the early nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 58363


John Deane (1800-1884), who was born on 6 April 1800 at 53 Hughes Fields, Deptford, and baptized on 2 May 1800 at St Nicholas's Church, Deptford, enjoyed a free education at the Royal Hospital School at Greenwich (now the National Maritime Museum). On leaving (Charles in 1810, John in 1813), both were apprenticed to ship's captains; Charles to a lowly coastal trader, the 'Ceres', and John, more fortunately, to the famous Captain 'Fighting' Tom Larkins of the East Indiaman 'Warren Hastings'. 


@@@@@


doc= 58364


Goodman, Arnold Abraham, Baron Goodman (1913-1995), solicitor and public servant, was born on 21 August 1913 at 26 Bodney Road, Hackney, London, the younger son of Joseph Goodman (1879/1880-1940), master draper, and his wife, Bertha (1887-1959), daughter of Joseph Mauerberger, businessman. His name was given on his birth certificate as Aby Goodman, but in 1931 his father re-registered him as Abraham; he adopted Arnold as a first name during the Second World War. Both parents were of Jewish descent; his mother came from a wealthy family with strong connections in South Africa, and her ambition and determination ensured that by the 1930s the family had moved out of the East End and into Hampstead. Food was the emotional currency of the young Goodman's household. He was born large, and his mother's relentless feeding at home made him very big for his age by the time he went to the Grocers' School in Hackney. This fat child learned to deflect bullies by being amiable and funny. As he grew up, there was always the demanding memory of his mother to push him on and always a passionate relationship with food. His sickly brother Theo, artistic and sensitive, was also an important influence. Goodman developed a sense of disappointment and frustration that he lacked real creative ability of his own. The values by which he lived were determined by this complex combination of feelings -- an obligation to please and gain approval, an immense sense of his own worth, and a genuine respect for creativity and the arts. 
From the Grocer's School, Goodman proceeded to University College, London, where he formed a lifelong friendship with L. C. B. (Jim) Gower and graduated with second-class honours in law in 1933. After taking the LLM in 1935, and serving articles with the London firm of Rubinstein Nash (his mother being a friend of one of the partners' wives), he studied Roman law and Roman-Dutch law at Downing College, Cambridge, obtaining firsts in both parts of his degree. Abandoning thoughts of practising in South Africa, he joined the firm of Royalton Kisch, which specialized in conveyancing and local government work. As a young solicitor he scored a notable success in a case brought against Croydon borough council on behalf of parents whose daughter had contracted typhoid from drinking contaminated water. On the outbreak of the Second World War he enlisted with the Royal Artillery, joining an anti-aircraft battery in Enfield under the command of the archaeologist Mortimer Wheeler. After a spell as battery quartermaster sergeant -- according to Wheeler, 'the best... in the army' ('The Independent', 15 May 1995) -- he was transferred to the Royal Army Ordnance Corps, southern command. Demobilized in November 1945, with the rank of major, he returned to the law first with Royalton Kisch and then (from 1947) as a partner in Rubinstein Nash. Stanley Rubinstein was chairman of the Performing Right Society, and the firm had many clients from the worlds of the media, literature, and the arts. Goodman took many of these clients with him when in 1954 he founded his own practice, Goodman Derrick -- Derrick being Henry 'Mac' Derrick (1916-1964), a wartime colleague at southern command and a keen amateur organist. The firm expanded rapidly, specializing in particular in media, copyright, and libel law. 
Goodman's introduction to political work came, like much else in his career, through a contact he had first made in the war: George Wigg, who introduced him to Wilson and the group of mainly left-wing MPs who surrounded Aneurin Bevan in the early 1950s. But it was not until 1957 that Goodman's breakthrough case took place. This was the controversial 'Spectator' libel trial in which three leading Labour figures, Bevan, Richard Crossman, and Morgan Phillips, were accused of being drunk at an International Socialist Congress in Italy and may have perjured themselves while denying it. Goodman at least suspected the perjury but was certainly not told. The triumphant victory of the three under his guidance made national news. Following the trial he regularly represented MPs and worked for the party leader Hugh Gaitskell during the Vassall spy inquiry in 1962 and in a long-running case against 'The Guardian'. 
Goodman had charm, he was witty, and he could frequently persuade people to do what he or his clients wanted. When the charm failed, he would deploy an injured look or simply decline to understand the grounds for refusal. He was not an ideological or a campaigning lawyer but a highly effective advocate for his clients. He would have remained an interesting and successful solicitor, but in January 1963 Gaitskell died from a rare disease, and after a bitter leadership election Harold Wilson was elected leader of the Labour Party. Goodman was on the fringes of the Gaitskell set and therefore on the fringes of politics. Soon he was at the very heart. There is a certain irony in the way in which it was Goodman's expertise in media law that brought him to the attention of Wilson. The irony derives in part from Goodman's own ambiguous relationship with fame and publicity (he later became notorious for his own propensity to litigation), in part from the fact that one of his key roles for Wilson was to keep Labour affairs out of the media. Despite this it was as a media lawyer that Wilson first made use of Goodman, and it was for his power to intimidate journalists that Goodman proved extremely useful to many. 
Wilson made Goodman. Without Wilson's patronage and need for consultation and a peculiar kind of friendship, Goodman would not have risen to the heights he did. After he became Wilson's lawyer, and especially after 1965 (when Wilson elevated him to the Lords, as Baron Goodman of the City of Westminster), his career made him a unique figure in post-war British history. It bothered Goodman as he grew older that his public stature was due to Wilson's patronage. His waspish references to Wilson in his memoirs reflected annoyance that he, in a sense, owed it all to the younger man from Huddersfield. It is hardly surprising that Wilson asked so much of him. With no family constraints and with a willingness to cancel meetings or break off dinners to do Wilson's bidding, Goodman became a close confidant. Throughout the government of 1964-70 he visited Wilson every week or every other week and frequently sat opposite him in the chancellor of the exchequer's chair in the cabinet room, serving as a sounding board. 
On Wilson's first day in number 10 he asked Goodman to chair a committee to explore the future of the London orchestras. It was the first of Goodman's many distinguished contributions to the arts. Shortly afterwards, Wilson asked him to be chairman of the Arts Council of Great Britain. It was his most successful job in public life, and one which he held until 1972 (when he was appointed CH in recognition of his services). He was a dynamic and effective chair, and his influence extended out from the arts to a range of organizations in which he played the role of fixer, usually as chairman. He was elitist and metropolitan in his view of arts policy; Jennie Lee, the arts minister until 1970, was interested in regional and popular culture. This led to occasional rows and delays in making decisions, but in the main the relationship was fruitful and successful. 
In the ten years after 1965, when he was at the height of his powers, Goodman's influence was felt on the development of bodies as diverse as the charity Motability (which he founded), the Housing Corporation, English National Opera, the Royal Opera House, the Royal Shakespeare Theatre, the National Theatre, the British Council, the Institute of Jewish Affairs, and numerous committees of inquiry. In 1967 his friend David Astor persuaded him to become chairman of the trustees of 'The Observer' (in which capacity he oversaw the sale of the newspaper in 1976), and he was an influential chairman of the Newspaper Publishers' Association from 1970 to 1976. In addition he ran his private practice, Goodman Derrick, which grew into a successful partnership based on libel and media law. He was later described by one friend and client as 'the greatest negotiator of the age' ('The Independent', 15 May 1995). His style of fixing was imaginative and resourceful. For example, he was asked to write an assessment of the potential cost of the new 'university of the air'. He considered the amount that the cabinet was likely to accept and then cooked a response that made this look plausible. Wilson backed the scheme strongly and the Open University was created. In the Lords on 23 May 1974 Goodman said: 'When I see the figure I mentioned and the figure it is now costing I ought to blush with shame'. He did not blush because it might not have been established except for his 'foolish miscalculation' ('Hansard 5L', 351, cols. 1649-50). 
Despite being the establishment's lawyer, Goodman did not accumulate vast wealth of his own. He did not take a salary from any of his public offices and often did not bill clients he counted as friends -- and there was no shortage of friends. Indeed Arnold's friends could crop up in the most useful places. In 1969 the public accounts committee investigated the Arts Council, of which Goodman was chairman. Harold Lever was the committee's chairman. The auditor-general suggested there might be some conflict of interest. He said to Lever: 'Do you think you ought to preside over this committee since I believe that Lord Goodman is rather a pal of yours?', to which Lever replied: 'A pal? No, he is not a pal of mine, he is a very dear friend' (Goodman, 'Tell Them', 282). The report cleared the council of any wrongdoing. This acquisition of friends was close to the root of Goodman's motivation in life. He spent forty-five years on the telephone. This relentless quest for work, this unstoppable giving of aid and advice, filled a void in his life that in most other people would be occupied by home, family, and children. Goodman liked being at the centre; he liked doors opening, people taking his calls, people knowing who he was -- and he liked people doing things because he asked them. As the Goodman wagon rolled, he expected people to do what he wanted. He was perplexed when one musician refused to do his bidding, unimpressed by Goodman's allusion to the needs of 'important people, titled people'. In the world of access, social cachet, and influence, he was absolutely at sea with people for whom such things were meaningless or trivial. Work also served emotional needs for friendship and companionship, and introduced him to the series of widows who acted as his consorts from the late 1950s. The most important of these was Ann Fleming, widow of the James Bond creator, Ian, who used to stay in his Portland Place flat when visiting London. Fleming in turn introduced Goodman to new clients such as Evelyn Waugh: 'The only person who can save your trust is Lord Goodman... he admires your work, is clever and funny, he has done much for me and never sends a bill. He has saved me from the solicitors, found me a doctor... and can get tickets for the National Theatre. (Brivati, 96)' Goodman also fell for Jennie Lee (Nye Bevan's widow) and was later close to Anthony Eden's widow, Clarissa. Although he was clearly besotted with Lee, and friends remember them kissing and cuddling, the evidence suggests that his sexuality was deeply repressed. What each of these formidable women had in common was a similarity to the most important female presence in his life -- his domineering mother, Bertha. 
When Wilson lost power in 1970 Goodman took on a number of new public roles in addition to his main job at the Arts Council, and continued to build up his practice. He was also dispatched by Edward Heath to Rhodesia as a secret negotiator with Ian Smith (having performed a similar role for Wilson, in the run-up to the latter's talks aboard HMS 'Fearless'), a task to which he was particularly unsuited. From 1964 to 1970 Goodman had seen Wilson most weeks for their late evening chat. When Wilson, a little unexpectedly, returned to number 10 in 1974, the same pattern of involvement in the prime minister's life was not re-established and the centre of the political world began to shift away from Goodman. Indeed, the corporatist establishment of the age of Harold Wilson was in terminal decline in the second half of the decade. The self-destruction of Jeremy Thorpe was emblematic of a new era. The part of Goodman that always felt ambivalent about being in the spotlight welcomed the change. Another part of him wanted to cling to the wreckage of his life at the centre of politics, but this was made more difficult because of the cooling of his relations with Wilson. The last two decades of his life witnessed a gradual decline in his health and his public standing, along with an increasing sense of isolation as old friends died and a new political establishment came to dominate. 
Goodman's acceptance of the mastership of University College, Oxford, in 1976 contributed further to the cooling of his relations with Wilson. As Goodman later told the story, during Wilson's last days in office he asked Goodman to help him become master of University College. 'It was one of the most awkward moments of my life, since I had in my pocket at the time a letter from the Fellows of the College offering the job to me' (Brivati, 270). Goodman's tenure at University College was notably successful and happy for him. He continued to fix and run things, but on a much less exalted scale, replacing politicians with dons and students. He presided over a potentially fractious college body with great skill, and was especially successful at fund-raising. He also helped to put the Oxford Union on a sound financial footing. He retired as master in 1986, and in 1993 celebrated his eightieth birthday with a gala banquet at Lincoln's Inn hall and the publication of his largely unrevealing memoirs, 'Tell Them I'm on My Way'. 
Though never accountable for his actions to any electorate, Arnold Goodman was a man of influence and power from the time of the Profumo scandal in 1963 until the election of Margaret Thatcher in 1979. He was the fixer for the British establishment. He spent a large part of his life helping other people: lending money, finding jobs, saving marriages and companies, giving time to good causes, and pressuring his wealthy friends to donate to the charities that he chaired. Above all he was friend to a host of private people and a benefactor to many. The darker side of this remarkable life was that he used his influence to protect powerful people from the press, and sometimes the quick fixes he put in place caused more long-term harm than good. His last years were overshadowed by a lawsuit brought by the Portman family in 1993, and by allegations that he had systematically siphoned off funds from the family trust in order to provide loans to his friends, including senior Labour Party figures. The case was eventually settled in 1999 when Goodman Derrick paid $500,000, though without admission of guilt, and the allegations remained unproven. Goodman died, unmarried, of bronchopneumonia at Newstead Home, Denewood Road, Highgate, London, on 12 May 1995. A memorial service was held at the Liberal Jewish Synagogue; he had been president of the Union of Liberal and Progressive Synagogues from 1987 until his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 58365


Holt, Emily Sarah (1836-1893), novelist and author of religious tracts, was born at Stubbylee, Lancashire, and baptized on 25 June 1836 at Bacup, Lancashire, the second daughter and third child of John Holt (died 1856) of Stubbylee Hall, landowner, and his wife, Judith, 'nee' Maden (died 1843). She accompanied her widowed father and brother to Oxford, where they lived while her brother was pursuing his undergraduate studies. She was educated at home by a governess; her later writings indicate that she was well read, especially in history and literature, with a strong emphasis on the English past and the history of the Christian church. 
Her brother James Maden Holt (1829-1911) succeeded to the family estates on their father's death in 1856. For the rest of her life she lived in her brother's household, first in Kensington, London, and subsequently at Balham Hill, Surrey. Her first publication, 'Memoirs of Royal Ladies' (2 vols.), appeared in 1861. It was one of many collective biographies of women published in the nineteenth century. Most of these works focused on great and famous figures; Holt, however, provided biographies of largely unknown or little-noticed women who were not always good role models. Several, such as Jeanne de Valois and Charlotte de Montmorency, were forced to marry for political or dynastic reasons; nearly all suffered from a loveless or a brief marriage. For an introduction to such women as Ela de Rosman, Alicia de Lacy, Joan of Kent, or Constance, second wife of John of Gaunt, this work is still probably a useful starting place. The essays are documented and show a wide knowledge of the sources. 
Holt's next published work was 'Mistress Margary: a Tale of the Lollards', which appeared in 1868. This was the first of forty-five books which were published regularly until 1897. They were historical novels for girls aged about ten to sixteen. Published by John F. Shaw, these books were clearly successful. They move at a brisk pace and incorporate historical information while telling a story of everyday life, families, love, and marriage to which girls could relate. An indication of their long print life was given by the advertisements for variously priced editions included with each new publication. The more expensive editions were touted as gift books, the less expensive as Sunday school prizes. 
These works were based on Holt's historical research; she usually acknowledged her sources in the preface and often pointed out which characters were entirely her own invention and which were based on fact. Girls and women were always leading characters in these books. Her message to her readers was consistent: what females do is important; marriage is not their only option. A forced or a mercenary marriage is not likely to be successful. Holt's other message, also stressed by her good female characters and their male counterparts, was a total commitment to evangelical Anglican Christianity. Heroes and heroines were persecuted, imprisoned, even killed for their beliefs, but in the end they were victorious either on earth or in heaven. 
Holt was adamantly opposed not only to Roman Catholicism but also to the Puseyite movement in the Church of England. This outlook of low-church protestantism was shared by James Maden Holt, who held office in the Church Association and the Trinitarian Bible Society, and sat as Conservative MP for North-East Lancashire from 1868 to 1880, opposing the disestablishment of the established church in Ireland, while supporting legislation in 1874 to suppress ritualism in the Church of England. Her 'Memoirs of Royal Ladies' hints at anti-Catholicism, although as a historian the author admitted that most of the women she included had no alternative to Rome. More strident was the preface to 'Robin Tremayne of Bodmin: a Story of the Marian Persecution' (1872), in which she wrote, 'For 43 years [since the emancipation of Roman Catholics in 1829] England has been creeping gradually closer to the outstretched arms of the great enchantress'. Given her religious opinions, it is not surprising that the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries were the periods on which she most frequently focused. She wrote about the Lollards, several other medieval proto-reform movements, and the religious upheavals of the Tudor era. She also created books out of several medieval legends, such as that of Thomas Becket's mother, as well as such unlikely subjects as Piers Gaveston. 
Holt published a book about medieval daily life as well as a biography of John Wyclif. In 'Light in the Darkness' (1896) she returned to collective biography, in this case of King Alfred and other Englishmen. She died, unmarried, at 49 Balham Hill, Surrey, on 25 December 1893. 
Holt is scarcely ever noticed in works about nineteenth-century children's literature. When she is mentioned it is only as a minor Sunday school writer. While there is certainly a didactic religious tone to her books, she was also telling a good and, so far as she could, historically accurate story. It is probable that she influenced at least as many girls as did Charlotte Yonge, and she may also have inspired in many girls an interest in history. 


@@@@@


doc= 58366


Smith, George Joseph (1872-1915), bigamist and murderer, was born on 11 January 1872 at 92 Roman Road, Bethnal Green, London, the son of George Thomas Smith, insurance agent, and his wife, Louisa Gibson. Little is known about his early life. Caroline Thornhill, his first known spouse, maintained that he was sent to a reformatory in Gravesend when he was nine and that when he left, at the age of sixteen, he returned home to live with his mother and began a career of petty theft. Certainly, on 7 February 1891 he was convicted at Lambeth police court of the theft of a bicycle and sentenced to six months' imprisonment. Smith's activities between 1891 and 1896 are uncertain. An alleged three-year service with the Northamptonshire regiment during this period has never been substantiated. 
As far as is known, Smith's first and only legal wife was Caroline Beatrice ('b'. 1879), daughter of Edward Thornhill, bootmaker, of Leicester. The two were married there on 17 January 1898, with Smith using the name George Oliver Love. Smith soon led his bride into crime. By providing her with false references he secured positions for her in domestic service in London and on the south coast and then induced her to steal valuables from the households in which she worked. On 9 January 1901, however, he was convicted at Hastings of receiving goods stolen by his wife and sentenced to two years' imprisonment. Thereafter Smith became a professional bigamist. His technique was to ensnare lonely and vulnerable women with promises of matrimony and then to desert them, before or after marriage, as soon as he had gained possession of their money. Between the Thornhill marriage and his last arrest in 1915 he married at least seven women. With only one did he maintain a lasting relationship. The exception was Edith Mabel ('b'. 1878), 'nee' Pegler, whom Smith married, under his real name, on 30 July 1908 at Bristol. He returned to her between his other marriages, accounting for his long absences by pretending to be an antiques dealer whose business necessitated extended trips around the country and abroad. 
Smith murdered three brides. Using the name Henry Williams, he married the first of these, Bessie Constance Annie Mundy ('b'. 1875), at Weymouth on 26 August 1910. Bessie had inherited a fortune of about $2500 upon the death of her father, George Barclay Mundy, a bank manager at Warminster, but the money was invested in gilt-edged securities and managed for her by a family trust. In May 1912 the couple rented a house at 80 High Street, Herne Bay, in Kent. Smith took legal advice as to how he might secure possession of his wife's legacy and on 8 July he and Bessie executed wills in favour of one another. Two days later Smith brought Bessie to the surgery of Dr F. A. French, a local physician, and told him that she had had a fit. French prescribed bromide of potassium as a sedative. When the doctor last saw Bessie alive, on the afternoon of 12 July 1912, he thought she looked 'in perfect health'. But the next morning he was summoned to Smith's house and found her dead in the bath. An inquest was held before Rutley Mowll, coroner for east Kent, on 15 July. Concluding that 'Mrs Williams' had drowned in the bath after suffering an epileptic fit, the jury returned a verdict of death by misadventure. Smith obtained probate of his wife's will in September and the securities held in trust for her were paid into his hands. 
Neither of the subsequent murder victims had substantial financial resources, so Smith persuaded them to take out life insurance. This apart, his procedure was almost identical to that in the Mundy case. The brides were whisked off to places where they were unknown, their uncertain health was established by visits to local doctors, and then they were drowned in their baths. Under his real name he married Alice Burnham ('b'. 1888), daughter of Charles Burnham, a fruit grower of Aston Clinton in Buckinghamshire, on 4 November 1913 at Portsmouth. After she had insured her life for $500 and made a will in Smith's favour, he took her to Blackpool where, on 12 December 1913, he drowned her in the bath at their lodgings at 16 Regent Road. Smith persuaded his last victim, a clergyman's daughter named Margaret Elizabeth Lofty ('b'. 1876), to insure her life for $700. He married her, under the name John Lloyd, on 17 December 1914 at Bath, and murdered her the very next day, at 14 Bismarck Road, Highgate. Inquest juries returned verdicts of accidental death in both cases. Smith realized $506 from the insurance paid under Alice Burnham's will but was not given the opportunity to benefit from that of Margaret Lofty. 
Smith's arrest resulted from a report of the Lofty inquest that appeared in the national press. It was seen by Charles Burnham, Alice's father, and by Joseph Crossley, the son-in-law of her Blackpool landlady, and although the names were different both noted the striking similarity between the two cases and communicated their suspicions to the police. On 22 June 1915 Smith was eventually brought to trial at the central criminal court for the murder of Bessie Mundy and, notwithstanding a spirited defence by Edward Marshall Hall, was convicted and sentenced to death. He was hanged at Maidstone Prison on 13 August 1915 and buried there. 
Smith stood 5 feet 9 inches in height and moved in what was described as a 'military walk'. He had brown hair and a fair complexion and sometimes sported a ginger moustache. Cruel and unscrupulous, he nevertheless attracted a succession of naive and impressionable women. One of his bigamously married brides spoke of the hypnotic power of his eyes. Much is explained, however, by his genteel appearance, his pretensions to independent means, and his capacity for unctuous flattery. 


@@@@@


doc= 58368


William Emerton Heitland (1847-1935), classical scholar, was born on 21 December 1847 at Colkirk, Norfolk, the eldest child of Arthur Allan Heitland, an unsuccessful gentleman farmer, and his wife, Mary. They had two other sons and four daughters, of whom one son and three daughters reached full age. William was educated at Dedham grammar school and Shrewsbury School, where the classical teaching of the headmaster, Benjamin Hall Kennedy, was a lasting influence upon him. Relying on scholarships because of his family's straitened circumstances, he proceeded in 1867 to St John's College, Cambridge, and in 1871 graduated BA, being the most distinguished examinee (senior classic) in the classical tripos. He was immediately elected a fellow of St John's, which he remained until death. He was college lecturer in classics 1871-85 and tutor 1883-93. 


@@@@@


doc= 58370


Maclean, Arthur John (1858-1943), Scottish Episcopal bishop of Moray, Ross, and Caithness, and Syriac scholar, was born on 6 July 1858 at 15 Springfield Place, Bath, the last of ten children of A. J. Macleane (1811/12-1858), clergyman and Latin scholar, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of R. S. Hutchings, clergyman and orientalist, and his wife, Elvina. Maclean (he dropped the final 'e' after university) belonged to a branch of the Macleanes of Ardgour which migrated to India after the Jacobite rising of 1745 and achieved great prominence there. His father, after a short period in the Indian Civil Service, settled in England but died two months before Maclean's birth. In 1865 Maclean was sent, with his brother Douglas, to live with his sister Flora and her husband, the Revd James Cholmeley, in Lincolnshire. Like his surrogate father Maclean was a gifted mathematician. Educated first in Huntingdon, he then went to Eton College in 1873 as a king's scholar, and then in 1876 to King's College, Cambridge, where he gained a first-class degree, ninth wrangler, in mathematics (1880) and until 1883 was college mathematical lecturer (as he was also at Selwyn College). His vacations from Cambridge were spent in his beloved Scottish highlands (he later claimed to have seen the Loch Ness monster), and especially on the island of Cumbrae where he learned to read and speak Gaelic and was inspired by the teachings of the Oxford Movement. In December 1882 he was ordained deacon, and in June 1883 was priested in the Scottish Episcopal church. From 1882 to 1886 he was priest-in-charge of Portree, Skye, where he began by building a parish church, St Columba's. 
In 1886 Maclean travelled to Orumiyyeh, in the Azerbaijan province of Persia, as the first head of the archbishop of Canterbury's mission to the Assyrian Christians which had as its purpose not conversion, which its statutes forbade, but the strengthening of faith and religious practice. He oversaw the establishment, by 1891, of an upper school for young clergy, four high schools for boys, and seventy-eight village schools. The mission press acquired Syriac type and printed liturgical and other works. In 1890 a house of Anglican Sisters of Bethany was founded in Orumiyyeh with an associated girls' school. He learned to speak modern Syriac, and later published an important grammar (1895) and dictionary (1901) of the language, as well as learning classical Syriac which he employed in several significant liturgical studies. 
In March 1891 Maclean left Persia for Portree, his former parish. In 1892 he co-authored an account of the Assyrian Christians and in the same year he was honoured by being appointed canon of Cumbrae and dean of Argyll and the Isles. He built a rectory, and married Eva Maclean (died 1951), daughter of John Maclean MD, on 14 June 1894; they had no children. After a period as rector of St John's, Selkirk (1897-1903), where he became a central figure in the campaign for lay representation in the Episcopal church, he was appointed Pantonian professor and principal of the Episcopal Theological College in Edinburgh. He spent only five terms at the college but his energy, devotion, and financial skills saved it from near ruin. He was consecrated as bishop of Moray, Ross, and Caithness in December 1904 (in the same year he received the degree of DD from Cambridge and from Glasgow) and resigned as principal at Easter 1905. He then took up residence in Eden Court, Inverness, where he remained for the rest of his life, actively involved in diocesan affairs and a central figure in the production of the Scottish prayer book of 1929. On 8 February 1935 he was elected primus of the Scottish Episcopal church, which he represented at the coronation of George VI in 1937. He resigned just a fortnight before his death, at his home, Eden Court, Inverness, on 24 February 1943. He was buried on the 27th in Tomnahurich cemetery, Inverness. 


@@@@@


doc= 58371


Brooks, Ernest Walter (1863-1955), ancient historian and Syriac scholar, was born in Hambledon, Horndean, Hampshire, on 30 August 1863, the only child of the Revd Walter Brooks, curate of Hambledon, who died when Ernest was a child, and his wife, Emily Grace, 'nee' Browning. In September 1876 he went as a king's scholar to Eton College, where, as a pupil of F. St John Thackeray, he achieved an outstanding academic performance (winning numerous prizes, having fifteen pieces of work 'sent up for good', and frequently topping divisions), but it was not altogether a happy time. In November 1878 he was the victim of a particularly nasty practical joke orchestrated by M. R. James which led to a formal complaint being made by Brooks and his stepfather. James had taken a strong dislike to Brooks, describing him as 'not nice and a convenient object for venting one's superfluous energies upon' (Pfaff, 30). While this may have been due to a straightforward clash of personalities (the other collegers in this instance seem to have sided with Brooks), it is possible that it was also influenced by Brooks's close family relationship, via his mother, to the flamboyant historian Oscar Browning, whom James despised, and who had recently been dismissed from his post at Eton. 
In October 1883 Brooks entered King's College, Cambridge, as a scholar, and there he again flourished academically. In addition to taking a first class in each part of the classical tripos (1886 and 1887; MA 1890), he was also Bell university scholar (1884) and Carus 'Greek Testament' prizeman (1885). His relationship with Browning (who had taken up residence in King's College in 1876) developed, and after leaving Cambridge he moved to London where, as an independent scholar based at the British Museum, he became involved in researching the Browning family history as well as producing his earliest academic articles. These mostly concentrated on seventh- to ninth-century Byzantine history, and this side of his work eventually culminated in his masterful chapters dealing with the political and military history of the Eastern empire which were published in the 'Cambridge Medieval History' (vol. 1, 1911; vol. 2, 1913; and vol. 4, 1923). 
Brooks's academic reputation was built, however, upon his specialization in Syriac historical texts. He began with an edition and translation of the short Syriac chronicle of AD 846 (published 1897), and continued with the publication of further Syriac chronicles attributed to authors such as Zacharias Rhetor, James of Edessa, Eliya bar Shinaya, and John of Ephesus (this last was his last major work, published in 1935-6). To these can be added his editions of Syriac hagiographical texts (the lives of various Syrian Orthodox saints by John of Ephesus and others, plus the Syriac version of the life of St George), and of theological texts attributed to Severus of Antioch and Nestorius. He was not always in good health, occasionally suffering from prolonged bouts of insomnia that allowed him to work for only a few hours a day, and yet his output was not only prolific but notable for its learning, conciseness, and lucidity. His editions and translations of Syriac historical texts made them available, often for the first time, to historians of the Eastern empire and of the Near East in general, and so transformed their discipline. Unusually his scholarship won the respect of contemporary scholars not only in the West but also in the Near East (where his admirers included the Syrian Orthodox patriarch of Antioch, Ignatios Ephrem Barsaum, himself a noted Syriac scholar). His first formal recognition came with the award of an honorary doctorate by the University of Louvain (1927), which was followed (in 1938) by his election as a fellow of the British Academy. The nomination papers for the fellowship simply described him as 'the most distinguished Syriac scholar in England'. 
In 1927 Brooks married Ellen Amy, the daughter of Major-General G. B. Mellersh. Shortly afterwards they went to live in Geneva, but on his retirement from active research (he resigned from the British Academy in 1941) they moved to Milford-on-Sea, Hampshire, where he died, at the War Memorial Hospital, on 26 March 1955. 


@@@@@


doc= 58372


Margoliouth, Jessie Payne (1856-1933), Syriac scholar, was born on 23 February 1856, at 27 Kensington Square, Kensington, London, the second of four daughters and two sons of Robert Payne Smith (1818-1895), dean of Canterbury and orientalist, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Freeman (died 1894). Brought up in Oxford and (from 1871) Canterbury, she was trained in both Syriac and lexicography by her father, and proceeded to assist him in the production of his monumental 'Thesaurus Syriacus' (1868-1901), one of the truly great works of British lexicography and one that is unlikely to be superseded. On his death she took over responsibility for the 'Thesaurus' and saw it, and its final 293 columns, through to completion in 1901. In this she was assisted by David Samuel Margoliouth (1858-1940), the Laudian professor of Arabic in Oxford, whom she had married in London on 25 April 1896 (they had no children). Even her marriage can be attributed to her devotion to the 'Thesaurus', for in a letter a friend quotes her as saying: 'She finds Professor Margoliouth of Oxford so very kind and useful in helping her with her Father's book, 'that she is going to marry him so that they can work at it together' -- ! This is exactly as she puts the fact. (Coakley, 393, n. 303)' In 1927 she completed this great lexical endeavour with her 'Supplement to the 'Thesaurus Syriacus'', an important volume which contains some 345 pages of new entries. 
In 1903 Margoliouth published her 'Compendious Syriac Dictionary' (which has been frequently reprinted), an abridgement of her father's work with words rearranged in alphabetical order, rather than being listed by their Semitic roots, and with English rather than Latin translations. It has been an essential tool for successive generations of Syriac students, and has encouraged many to take up the study of this rich language and literature. Margoliouth's own enthusiasm for Syriac culture, as well as her strong Christian faith and humour, can be detected in the short Syriac imprecations that begin each section of the dictionary, playing as they do with words and roots beginning with the appropriate letters of the alphabet. Her lexical work required her to read an extraordinary range of published and unpublished Syriac texts, leading one eminent contemporary orientalist to comment after visiting her: 'the house is not a 'house' but a 'store-house' of erudition, where Mrs. Margoliouth, with her extensive Syriac knowledge, supplies the last volume of a living encyclopaedia' (Mingana, 218). 
This Syriac expertise led to Margoliouth's involvement, from the 1880s, with the Archbishop of Canterbury's Mission to the Assyrian Christians in Turkey and Persia, which had as its purpose not conversion, which its statutes forbade, but the strengthening of faith and religious practice. At first a consultant, she later became a member of the mission committee, and in 1913 edited a selection of accounts of the mission, 'Kurds and Christians', with the Revd F. N. Heazell. Her own devotion to the Assyrian cause was strengthened by an extended tour of the mission and surrounding regions with her husband in 1901. On the orders of the War Office the couple spent the First World War lecturing in India (he returned in 1917, she in 1918). This was followed by a lengthy stay in Iraq, from which time both were active in their support of the persecuted and massacred Assyrians and Armenians. 
In 1931 Margoliouth and her husband moved from 88 Woodstock Road, Oxford, to Romney, Boars Hill, near Oxford, where she died on 18 August 1933. She was buried on 21 August at Hoop Lane cemetery, Golders Green, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 58374


Wigram, William Ainger (1872-1953), advocate of the Assyrian church and people, was born on 16 May 1872 at the vicarage in Furneaux Pelham, Hertfordshire, one of the seven children of Woolmore Wigram (1831-1907), vicar of Brent Pelham with Furneaux Pelham, and his wife, Harriet Mary (died 1927), daughter of the Revd Thomas Ainger, of Hampstead. A baronetcy in the Wigram family descended to William's older brother Edgar in 1920. Wigram was educated at King's School, Canterbury, and matriculated at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1891. He took his degree in 1893 and became a pupil of Bishop B. F. Westcott of Durham. He was ordained deacon in 1896 and priest in 1897, and served two assistant curacies in the Durham diocese, the latter at St Barnabas, Sunderland. There he was recruited by O. H. Parry in 1902 for the Archbishop of Canterbury's Mission to the Assyrian Christians. The archbishop's mission worked to sustain the Assyrian Church of the East (more commonly called the Nestorian church) in Persia and Turkey by means of schools, printing, parish work, and support for the patriarch. Wigram served ten years in the mission, the last five (1907-12) as its head. His chief responsibility was to conduct a school for boys and ordinands in Van in eastern Turkey. In 1910 he removed the school to Bibaydi in the mountains north of Mosul in an attempt to challenge the Catholic dominance over the local Christians. A tireless walker, he toured villages, making frequent visits to the patriarch's remote home of Kochanes. Wigram's experiences in the country of the Church of the East, recorded in anecdotal style, can be read in his book 'The Cradle of Mankind' (1914, with illustrations by Edgar Wigram). 
Unlike some others associated with the mission, Wigram never became discouraged about the future of the Church of the East. He remained a trusted adviser of Archbishop Randall Davidson, who awarded him the Lambeth degree of DD in 1910. Wigram's most notable success was in bringing the Assyrian Church of the East into contact with the wider ecclesiastical world. His book 'The Assyrian Church, 100-640 A.D.' (1910) popularized this name for the church among English speakers. The book also argued that the Nestorianism of the Church of the East was merely nominal. Others had come to this conclusion before, but Wigram gave it practical effect. Legislation to allow intercommunion between the Anglican churches and the Church of the East, taken up by the Lambeth conference of 1910 and finally passed in 1920, was largely the result of his diplomacy among the bishops on both sides. 
Seeking other work with eastern churches, Wigram left the Assyrian mission in 1912 for a chaplaincy in Constantinople. There he was overtaken by the First World War and interned. In 1918 he was intercepted on his way home and posted to Mesopotamia as a political officer to help manage the resettlement of the displaced Assyrian people in their old lands. The resettlement failed, however, as did all efforts to re-start the archbishop's mission. With the election of an eleven-year-old boy to the patriarchate in 1920 the church further weakened itself, but Wigram continued to support the patriarch as the only credible political leader of the whole people. After five years in Greece (1922-6) as chaplain to the British legation, Wigram visited Iraq again in 1928. His conviction that the British government owed the Assyrians a settlement as an autonomous people (expressed in a number of occasional writings, although toned down for his book 'The Assyrians and their Neighbours', 1929) made him unwelcome to the authorities there. After the end of the British mandate in 1932, the treatment of the Assyrians by the new Iraqi government confirmed his belief that Britain had betrayed them. Wigram accompanied the young patriarch Mar Eshai Shimun to Geneva to plead his cause before the League of Nations in 1933. Wigram's intransigence lost him the confidence of Archbishop Cosmo Gordon Lang, and when in 1938 Lang finally gave over responsibility for relations with the Assyrians to the bishop of Jerusalem, Wigram retired from Anglican-Assyrian affairs in disgust. 
Wigram held a canonry of St Paul's Church, Malta, from 1928 to 1936. He was a well-known lecturer for the Hellenic Travellers' Club and author of 'Hellenic Travel' (1947). He never married, and from about 1929 lived with his sister at Green Acres, Wells, Somerset. He died on 16 January 1953 at the Old Manor, Salisbury, Wiltshire. One of the last visitors to call on him before his death was Mar Eshai Shimun. 


@@@@@


doc= 58376


Tate, John (c.1448-1507/8), merchant and paper maker, was probably the eldest son of John Tate ('c'.1409-1478), mercer and sometime mayor of London, and his wife, Elizabeth, whose maiden name was probably Marshall. He was apprenticed to the Mercers' Company and was made free in 1474. It was probably in this year that he married Elizabeth, with whom he had three sons, John, Robert, and Thomas. Elizabeth outlived her husband by at least fifteen years and remarried. In his will, Tate described himself as 'of Mincing Lane... Citizen and Mercer of London' (Blewett, 'John Tate... further observations', 258-63). Tate must have inherited his father's house in Mincing Lane where he also owned another at the time of his death as well as estates near Hertford, in Essex, and elsewhere, so he possessed considerable wealth. 
Tate traded as a mercer and therefore principally in fine cloth but possibly in other goods too. The Tate family was influential in the city of London for its members held the offices of alderman, sheriff, and mayor at various times. His father was also a member of the staple at Calais. They would have had trading links with Italy as well. Whether it was these connections or the return from the continent in 1475 of another mercer, William Caxton, who established the first printing press in Britain in London, that turned Tate's attention to paper making will never be known. 
The first paper that was used in England came from Italy and France, and by this period had become of sufficient quality and cheap enough to rival parchment. The colophon in the 'De proprietatibus rerum' printed by Wynkyn de Worde in 1495 reveals that John Tate had established a paper mill in England and had made the paper for this book. The paper has Tate's unique watermark, an eight-pointed star or petals of a flower set in a double circle, and de Worde used this paper in some of his other books. This watermark appears also in the printed version of a papal bull recognizing the marriage of Henry VII to his distant cousin Elizabeth of York, issued in 1494. This is the earliest definite surviving evidence of Tate's paper, although earlier dates of 1476, 1485, and 1491 have been suggested. To have produced paper ready for printing in 1494 must have required an earlier production date but when is not known. The quality of Tate's paper is good and stands comparison with contemporary sheets. 
The moulds Tate used to produce the paper were probably Italian and a study of the watermarks shows that he made at least two different sizes of sheet on various moulds. This suggests that the mill was quite a large establishment. Tate adapted the water-powered Sele mill, a little upstream from Hertford and its royal castle. No details of the machinery have survived. Henry VII visited the mill in May 1498 when Tate probably had special watermarks of Tudor roses attached to his moulds. Publications and manuscripts with Tate's watermarks have been found as late as 1510 or even 1512 but it is very doubtful whether production continued as long as this. Tate instructed in his will, made on 10 October 1507, that his paper mill be sold, which suggests that it was not functioning by then. However, Thomas Bolle of Hertford was to receive some 'whit or other paper' which must indicate that the Sele mill was in use at least as a warehouse (Blewett, 'John Tate... further observations', 258-63). The reasons for Tate's ceasing production are unknown. He died in London in 1507 or 1508, and was buried at St Dunstan-in-the-East. It would be another fifty years before a second paper mill was established in Britain and then only for brown paper. 


@@@@@


doc= 58378


Doharty, John (1709-1773), land surveyor, was born on 17 January 1709 at Bewdley, Worcestershire, the son of John Dougharty (1677-1755), a land surveyor and teacher of mathematics, and his wife, Priscilla Fereder (died 1741). Nine years earlier the couple had had another son John, who died within a few days of his birth. The surviving son John was educated at the King's School, Worcester (1716-23), and the technical skill that he displayed in his first surveying commissions suggest that he had been sent thereafter to London for professional training. His brother 
The family had a flourishing land-surveying business which produced estate maps for the local gentry and aristocracy, with whom contacts were forged through pupils at the father's school and the adjacent King's School. Between 1727 and 1732 Joseph produced fine estate maps of lands in Shropshire and Herefordshire as well as Worcestershire, and between 1731 and 1733 Joseph and more especially John undertook the arduous fieldwork for their father's famous survey of Hanbury Hall, Worcestershire. John Dougharty's last dated map was completed in 1736, and in 1737 Joseph died, leaving John Doharty junior, as he then styled himself, to continue the surveying work alone. The first map he had produced by himself was made in 1732, and some eighty of his maps and plans have now been discovered. These include surveys of the earl of Coventry's lands in Worcestershire and Gloucestershire (1738-40), apparently intended to form an estate atlas to match his father's of Hanbury Hall. Although most are of estates in the west midlands, Doharty also worked for clients, notably King's College, Cambridge (1747-51), as far afield as Middlesex and Somerset. His maps exemplify the range of a land surveyor's work, having been drawn for such purposes as boundary disputes, promoting enclosure, and assisting estate management, but they show greater technical skill and finer aesthetic judgement than many such maps. Doharty also undertook land valuation work, laid out pleasure grounds in Worcester, invested in property, and was one of the original partners in the first porcelain works in the city. His last map is dated 1755. 
The death in that year of Doharty's father, whom, as he remained unmarried he had continued to live with and support, marked the start of his decline. His melancholy writings of the period indicate his insecurity and megalomania with a hint of trouble with a woman, ill health, and fire. In 1755 he left Worcester to live with his nephew John Powell on the western outskirts of London, but he was admitted a pensioner of Sutton's Hospital (the Charterhouse) on 31 March 1760. Absent for a time because of infirmity and insanity, he died there on 6 April 1773 and was buried there on 9 April. 
The surviving maps and plans drawn by both brothers and their father (listed as appendix 1 to Smith, 'The Doharty family') bear witness to the skill and industry of these important west midland land surveyors. 


@@@@@


doc= 58380


Walker, John (c.1550-1626), cartographer, was born probably in West Hanningfield, Essex, one of three sons of John Walker ('c'.1516-1589), and his wife, Eleanor ('c'.1525-1589). The family had occupied the copyhold farm of Kents in West Hanningfield from about 1503 or soon after, his father being a yeoman and carpenter, an occupation in Essex that signified a builder of timber-framed houses. His younger brother Cyprian (died 1631) continued in his father's trade and John Walker himself seems to have derived his early livelihood from building houses, and as late as 1584 to 1597 he was styling himself 'architector'. His marriage has not been traced, but he and his wife, Lucy ('c'.1555-1627), had three children, all baptized at West Hanningfield: Joan in 1574, John in 1577, and Jane in 1579. Walker's early familiarity with the skills of measuring led him to the new practice of surveying landed estates and into an emerging profession otherwise dominated by minor or professional gentry. His earliest extant work was on the manor of West Tilbury for Andrew Jenour in 1584. It is the third oldest surviving scaled map of an Essex estate, remarkable for its thoughtful layout, attention to detail, and careful drawings of buildings, all of which were to be hallmarks of the maps of Walker and, later, his son. It was clearly not the work of a novice but the source of his training as a surveyor and draughtsman is unknown. Although Ralph Agas might have been his tutor, it is more likely to have been Israel Amyce of Wakes Colne (Edwards and Newton, 24). Walker's first surveys of West Tilbury in 1584 and Boxted in 1586 are reminiscent of Amyce's style and much of his early work was for clients or in places plausibly connected with Amyce. In 1589, when he was residing at Ballingdon-cum-Brundon on the Suffolk-Essex boundary, he surveyed Earls Colne, where Amyce lived, and their names occur together as contributors to the Armada loan collected at the spring assizes in Chelmsford; Walker contributed the surprisingly large sum of $25. 
Walker's introduction to the county gentry led to commissions to survey the mid-Essex estates of Sir Thomas Mildmay in 1591, Edward Neville, Baron Bergavenny in 1592, Sir John Tyrell in 1597, and Sir John Petre in 1598. In the maps produced for them he established his reputation for accuracy in fieldwork and a distinctive style of draughtsmanship with fresh colouring and clear handwriting, notably in maps of Chelmsford and Horndon. Further work followed for these and other clients, from 1599 mostly in a partnership with his son in which he directed the fieldwork and his son drew the maps. Although clearly based in mid-Essex throughout this period he occurs irregularly at West Hanningfield until after 1609, when he was elected bailiff of the manor in 1612, 1615, and 1616. He apparently trained Samuel Walker, son of his brother Cyprian Walker, who continued map making in a debased style until 1645, but he himself gave up all surveying after his son's death in 1618. He was buried at West Hanningfield on 8 June 1626. 


In 1611 John Walker married Penelope Warner of South Hanningfield and they lived in West Hanningfield for their short and childless marriage. Two crudely drawn maps in 1616 betray a sudden decline; he was buried at West Hanningfield on 9 April 1618. The two John Walkers were accomplished map makers in a formative period of English cartography. Twenty-nine of their maps and surveys have survived, the great majority in Essex Record Office. 


@@@@@


doc= 58381


John Walker (bap. 1577, d. 1618), cartographer, was baptized at West Hanningfield on 24 June 1577. He and his father produced twelve maps together between 1599 and 1616. Careful analysis of their similar calligraphy has shown that John Walker junior, who had the better hand, was the draughtsman of all their joint maps after 1601. His ability may partly explain a widening demand for their surveys. These included Mascalls Bury in White Roding for Sir John Poyntz in 1609, which was John Walker junior's first commission by himself. In 1614 he undertook the family's only survey outside Essex, albeit for an Essex landowner, Sir Edward Barrett. This was a fine map of the manor of Foxcote in Hampshire. For a new client perhaps unused to interpreting a large-scale map he adopted his father's earlier practice of explaining its purpose 'to be as it were a Lanthorne and light for the Lord or Owner of the landes... for the readier and easier findinge out of any thing in the sayde Survey that they doe desier' (Edwards and Newton, 64). 


@@@@@


doc= 58383


John Bartholomew (1831-1893) was born on 25 December 1831, probably at 4 East St James Street, Edinburgh. He was trained as a geographical draughtsman and engraver and spent two years with the noted German geographer Augustus Petermann in the London offices of Justus Perthes of Gotha. He travelled widely to obtain new work and introduced a programme of improvements, including the installation of lithographic printing, which brought considerable economies. On 5 July 1859 John married Annie (1836-1872), the daughter of John McGregor (1788-1863), a smith of Greenock. He moved into new premises in 1870 at 31 Chambers Street. Following his first wife's death, on 4 March 1874 he married Anne Cumming (1837-1908), the daughter of Primrose Nimmo, a master brassfounder of Edinburgh, and his wife, Anne Philip, who was related to George Philip, the founder of the Liverpool map makers, who in 1879 suggested the idea of a merger between the two companies. John rejected the idea, preferring to retain his independence and to continue working in his native Scotland. 
The latter half of the nineteenth century was a time of exploration and colonial expansion, and maps were in demand to illustrate and exploit the changes that were taking place. John Bartholomew benefited from these opportunities by receiving requests for large numbers of maps and many new atlases, many from Edinburgh or Scottish publishers such as Fullarton, Nelson, Chambers, and Collins. In addition to regular work, he undertook special commissions such as engraving medical and botanical illustrations and the map of Treasure Island for Robert Louis Stevenson's famous novel. New quarter-inch maps of Scotland (1862) and England and Wales (1866) produced for A. and C. Black were followed by a set of thirty regional maps of Scotland (1875-86) at the half-inch to 1 mile scale. Land relief was shown by hachuring, a shading of short lines to imitate shadow cast by slopes: however, John experimented with the new technique of showing relief by layer colouring, where each height layer is represented in a different colour, graduating from light green through increasing shades of brown to white for mountain tops. This system was used for their now famous half-inch to 1 mile 'Reduced Ordnance Maps' of Scotland (1890-95) and England and Wales (1897-1903), which, with their subsequent editions, have become a trademark for Bartholomew. John had a reserved nature, which made him unwilling to enter fully into public life, but he took great interest in the reformation of the Scottish Rights of Way and Recreation Society (1880) and was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1857. Among his sponsors were the publisher W. G. Blackie and the surveyor and geographer George Everest. John retired in 1888 and died in London on 30 March 1893. 
John Bartholomew's elder son from his first marriage, 


@@@@@


doc= 58384


Bartholomew family (per. 1805-1986), map publishers, were Edinburgh geographers of international renown. The founder of the business was 


@@@@@


doc= 58385


English, William (fl. 1219-1231), physician and astronomer, is known only through references in his own works or in the manuscripts in which those works are found. He says of himself that he was born in England and settled at Marseilles, and describes himself as a practising physician, learned in astronomy. There is a question as to whether he knew Arabic. Among the works doubtfully attributed to him is the translation, from Arabic, of a short treatise in the tradition of Kiranides, as 'De virtute aquile' ('On the virtue of the eagle'). The manuscript in which it is found (Oxford, Merton College, MS 324, fol. 14'r') gives the translator as 'magister Willelmus Anglicus'. It is true that in his genuine astronomical works William English introduced new Arabic material, but most probably he gathered his information through hearsay, perhaps through Jewish scholars. 
Four works can be attributed to English with confidence. 'De urina non visa' ('On unseen urine') is found in numerous manuscripts and consists of a short treatise on astrological medicine. It first deals with the general principles of astrology applied to the parts of human body and their diseases; then follow some medical details about the liver (supposed to 'cook' urine) and some rules governing the evolution of diseases. The aim of this work, which influenced a few other treatises of the same kind, was to offer a method, founded on astrology, of making diagnosis and prognosis without examining the urine of the patient. In one anecdote English says that he predicted exactly, during the year 1219, that a patient would continue to live two months and eight days. According to the given astral positions, this event took place at the very end of 1219, thus placing the redaction of the treatise after this time. A French version of 'De urina non visa' was transcribed in 1463 by Johannes de Boorles (Turin, Biblioteca Nazionale, MS M IV 11, fols. 125-131'v'). 
The second work, 'Astrologia', is found in four manuscripts, one of which (Seville, Biblioteca Capitular y Colombina, MS 5-1-25, fols. 1-33) gives 1220 as the date of composition and the author as 'magister Werbellinus, civis Massiliensis, qui anglicus est natione' ('Master Werbellinus, citizen of Marseilles, who is English by birth'). It presents the theory of planets according to Ptolemy's 'Almagest', focusing on the principles ruling the construction of astrolabes and the establishing of astronomical tables. Without explicitly mentioning them, English relied on the Toledan tables. 

'Astrolabium Arzachelis' is dated 1231 in some manuscripts and appears as the first introduction (actually rather clumsy) into the Latin West of the universal astrolabe known as the 'saphea [Arzachelis]', that is, 'Arzachel's plate'. The astrolabe is universal in the sense that it is not restricted to a particular geographical latitude; Arzachel (Ibn al-Zarqali) was an eleventh-century Toledan astronomer. Contrary to what has sometimes been stated, the work by English is not an abridgement of that of Arzachel (which was translated into Latin in 1263 by Profatius) and English declares that he worked for six years on this topic. Both sections of the 'Astrolabium Arzachelis' have been edited: the first, on the construction of the 'saphea', by L. A. Sedillot ('Memoire sur les instruments astronomiques des Arabes', 'Memoires Presentes par Divers Savants a l'Academie des Inscriptions et Belles-lettres', 1st ser., 1, 1841, 185-8; reprinted in R. T. Gunther, 'The Astrolabes of the World', 1, 1932, 259-62) and the second, on the uses of the 'saphea', by P. Tannery ('Le traite du quadrant de maitre Robert Angles', 'Notices et extraits des manuscrits de la Bibliotheque Nationale', 35, 1897, 75-80; reprinted in P. Tannery, 'Memoires scientifiques', 5, 1922, 190-97). At the end of the treatise is appended a table of the stars ('De stellis fixis'), which has sometimes been wrongly considered as an independent work. 
The fourth work by English is 'Tractatus de metheoris'. The only manuscript in which this is found (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 6552, fols. 39'v'-41'v') gives 1230 as the date of composition. Contrary to what is stated in the rubric title (which has been repeated by all scholars), it is a summary of the four books of Aristotle's 'Meteorologics', not of the fourth book only, even though it begins with this -- English ordered his matter according to where the phenomena take place: in the earth, in the air, or in the ether. The interest of this 'Tractatus' lies in its early date. 
The attribution of other works to William English is very doubtful. The 'Scripta Marsiliensis' cannot have been written, on the evidence of their content, before the end of the thirteenth century. The supposed translation of Canamusali's treatise on ophthalmology is actually a compilation by a twelfth-century Salernitan physician, David Armenicus. Other works also should be rejected: 'De quadratura circuli', 'Questio de scientia', 'Utrum in maiori quantitate...', 'De qualitatibus et proprietatibus signorum'. The identification of William English with William of Aragon, author of a commentary on Pseudo-Ptolemy's 'Centiloquium' and of a treatise on dreams, is not firmly grounded. 
William English was during the sixteenth century confused with 


@@@@@


doc= 58386


Cox, Joseph Mason (1763-1818), physician and asylum keeper, was born on 31 August 1763 at Bristol, the son of John Cox (died 1788), a grocer, and Elizabeth Mason. His maternal grandfather, Joseph Mason, was the proprietor of a madhouse at Fishponds, near Bristol. About 1778 Joseph Mason Cox was placed by his grandfather as apprentice to Ebenezer Ludlow, a surgeon-apothecary of Sodbury. From November 1783 until August 1784 he was pupil to James Padmore Noble, surgeon to the Bristol Infirmary. He then pursued further medical studies in London, and subsequently at Edinburgh, Paris, and Leiden. Cox gained his MD at Leiden in June 1787. His early interest in the treatment of mental disorder was displayed in the subject of his thesis, 'De mania'. 
After Joseph Mason's death in 1779 the Fishponds madhouse was managed first by his daughters, Sarah and Elizabeth. When Sarah died in 1781, it passed to Elizabeth and John Cox. Following the death of his father, in June 1788, Joseph Mason Cox took over the house. He succeeded in consolidating Fishponds as one of the most successful of provincial private asylums. It catered for up to seventy patients, received mainly from the western counties. Cox married the wealthy Sarah Snooke of Bourton on the Water on 18 June 1795. They subsequently took up residence at Overn Hill House, Downend, Bristol. Cox later acquired other properties, including the manor of Patchway, near Bristol. 
In addition to treatment at Fishponds, Cox also offered private consultations. His reputation as a mad-doctor was enhanced considerably by the publication of 'Practical Observations on Insanity' in 1804, generally acknowledged as one of the period's most significant treatises on mental disorder. An enlarged second edition was published in 1806, and a third in 1813. There was also an American edition, as well as translations into French and German. Cox adhered to the established view that, given the correct treatment, most cases of insanity were curable in the early stages. Most of the methods he advocated in 'Practical Observations' were similar to those of other contemporary practitioners, and included the use of emetic and purgative medicines, blisters, limited bleeding, and cold and warm baths. Purging he considered generally indispensable, as maniacs 'are frequently and most uniformly costive'. Vomiting, he was convinced, 'takes the precedence of every other curative mean'. 
Although Cox argued that kindness and tenderness should be utilized wherever possible, he also accepted the need for coercive or drastic methods in certain cases. His celebrity largely rests on one particular treatment, known as the rotating chair or the circular swing chair, which he adapted from the work of Erasmus Darwin. The patient would be tightly strapped into a suspended chair, and rotated by a keeper turning a lever. The intensity of the treatment would vary according to the velocity, the duration, and whether the patient was in a vertical or prone position. The physical effects of swinging ranged from sleep, through vertigo, to evacuation and vomiting, which Cox considered particularly beneficial. There were also 'moral' treatment benefits, arising from the discomfort and fear induced, which acted as a deterrent to the repetition of undesirable behaviours. The circular swing chair remained in vogue, in public and private lunatic asylums, until about 1830. 
A contemporary wrote that Cox was 'a fair classical scholar, spoke French fluently, and was altogether an accomplished gentleman and a pleasant companion. He was passionately fond of music, and for many years belonged to a quartet party, of which Joe Sturge was the leader' (Smith, 166). 
Cox's later years were marred by poor health. He gave up the management of Fishponds in 1817, passing it on to his nephew. He died at Downend on 11 July 1818, aged fifty-five, and was buried at Downend Baptist Church, Bristol. His wife, Sarah, survived until 1852. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' noted 'his amiable manners, the accomplishments of his mind, and the numerous Christian virtues which adorned his character through life and supported him in a long and painful illness' ('GM', 92). 


@@@@@


doc= 58392


Main, Thomas Forrest (1911-1990), psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, was born on 25 February 1911 in Johannesburg, Transvaal, to James Robert Main (1872-1946), shipwright and later mine manager, and Jessie Miller Dundas (1876-1965). Main was one of three children; a fourth died in adolescence. His father joined the South African army in 1914, and the rest of the family returned home to Teesside in some poverty. His disabled father returned after the war. 
An intelligent child, Main won a scholarship to the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne, in 1922, and at sixteen obtained a medical scholarship to Durham University. He was an excellent scholar and an outstanding rugby player. He began writing poetry at school and continued this throughout life, making gifts of poems to children, grandchildren, and godchildren. In 1933 he graduated MBBS with honours and obtained his MD (Durham) in 1937. At Newcastle there was an outstanding medical school where the paediatrician Sir James Spence, who highlighted the emotional components of children's illness, greatly influenced Main. Thereafter his aims turned to psychiatry: he obtained the diploma in psychological medicine at Dublin in 1936 and at an early age he became consultant psychiatrist at Gateshead Mental Hospital, Stannington, Northumberland. At medical school he had met his future wife, Agnes Mary 
(Molly; 'b'. 1911)
, daughter of James McHaffie, a medical practitioner; he married her on 27 February 1937. They both became psychoanalysts after the war. Of their four children two followed his path into psychiatry and psychoanalysis. 
Main's adventurous character was well suited to the new role for psychiatrists in the Second World War. To understand the anxieties of parachutists he made several jumps himself, and went to the front line in France to experience battle terror at first hand. Asked to study the causes of the Salerno mutiny, he attributed it to the forced regrouping of soldiers whose loyalty to their own regiments had been disregarded. He also studied the effects of battle training that had attempted artificially to stimulate hatred of the enemy but which had often led to depression. The practice was discontinued following his report. He took part in the outstanding achievements of military psychiatry -- officer selection, the handling of delinquents and misfits, and the maintenance of morale. Appointed psychiatrist to the Eighth Army, Main had a disagreement with General Montgomery and became psychiatric adviser to the twenty-first army group. As lieutenant-colonel he became a senior member of the team at Northfield Military Hospital, the foundation experience of the therapeutic community movement of which he was a leader in the years after the war. A good wordsmith, he coined the phrase 'therapeutic community', meaning that a hospital as an institution should study its own processes to enhance its therapeutic powers and to recognize its anti-therapeutic aspects. He was mentioned in dispatches. 
Main had the opportunity to develop a therapeutic community at the Cassel Hospital for Functional Nervous Disorders, Ham Common, Surrey, of which he became director in 1946. The Cassel Hospital had been a private foundation of the Cassel family but became part of the National Health Service in 1948. The family (in the person of Lady Louis Mountbatten) retained close involvement for many years. Main undertook psychoanalytic training under Michael Balint, and was supervised by both grand ladies of British psychoanalysis, Anna Freud and Melanie Klein. At the Cassel Hospital he developed psychodynamic training for nurses and encouraged doctors to train as psychoanalysts. He involved the whole community -- lay staff and patients -- in consultation. However, he fought to maintain his position as medical superintendent, insisting that the organization needed a central authority. This suited him as he enjoyed his power and authority and his ability to bring about changes. The Cassel Hospital pioneered the psychotherapeutic treatment of mothers who had become depressed after childbirth, bringing their infants into hospital with them so as not to inflict separation on the nursing pair. Later, whole families were admitted and a nursery school was started. Gleefully he indented for double beds under the NHS. Later, Main joined Michael Balint in a short-term psychotherapy workshop that made a significant contribution to a new area of psychoanalytic work. His final achievement was to create the Institute for Psychosexual Medicine of which he was the principal leader and first president. Main fought orthodox psychiatry for its blindness to the findings of Freud and believed that psychoanalysis would take over biological psychiatry. 
Main had charisma: handsome, elegant, silver-haired, and silver-tongued, always with a rose in his buttonhole, he was a stimulating teacher to generations of psychiatrists. Under his direction the hospital constantly evolved. A fine writer, his carefully crafted papers, edited by his psychoanalyst daughter, Jennifer, reached international readership. He became a vice-president of the Royal College of Psychiatrists and would have been an innovative president both of the college and of the Psychoanalytic Society -- which ensured that he was not. Main was a sociable man who gave good parties, played the piano enthusiastically, and wrote fluent poems. A fanatical fly fisherman, he invented his own fly. He was an atheist in later life and was left wing in his politics. Main died of carcinoma of the colon at his home, 6 Sherwood Close, Barnes, London, on 29 May 1990 and was cremated on 7 June at Putney Vale crematorium. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 58393


Tajfel, Henri (1919-1982), social psychologist, was born in WLocLawek, Poland, on 22 June 1919, the elder son of Icek Henyne Tajfel, a Jewish businessman, and his wife, Ruchla. Since university education was almost inaccessible for Jews, Tajfel went to France after completing his secondary schooling at the Jewish 'Gymnasium' in 1937. His studies of chemistry at the University of Toulouse were cut short by the outbreak of war in 1939. He joined the French army, was captured in 1940, and was incarcerated as a prisoner of war until 1945. On his release he found that his parents, brother, and other family members had been exterminated. He went to work with international relief agencies for war victims, first in France and Belgium, and later in the British zone of West Germany. These experiences led him to turn to psychology, which he began to study part time at the University of Paris during 1946-7, continuing at the Universite Libre de Bruxelles, where he qualified in 1949. 
On 6 October 1948 Tajfel married Anna-Sophie Eber; they had two sons. He then moved to Britain, becoming a British citizen in 1957. On winning a state scholarship with an essay on prejudice, a topic that remained central to his work, Tajfel continued his studies and graduated in 1954 at Birkbeck College, London University. After two years as a research assistant at the University of Durham he completed a PhD at London and moved to Oxford to become lecturer in social psychology and fellow of Linacre College, Oxford, where he remained for ten years. Tajfel rejected the then prevailing mode of abstract psychologizing focused on the individual, stressing the importance of the social context. He demonstrated the key role of social categorization for the analysis of interactions between individuals and groups, initiating a new approach to the study of ethnocentrism, stereotyping, social influence, and inter-group relations that came to be adopted by the new generation of social psychologists. During the early 1960s Tajfel, with his enormous zest and cosmopolitanism, was prominent in helping to bring together a group of social psychologists from several European countries, which led to the foundation of the European Association of Experimental Social Psychology. He played a leading part in the creation of a distinctive European tradition in this sphere. During his period at Oxford Tajfel spent a year at the Center for Cognitive Studies at Harvard (1958-9) and another at the Center for Advanced Studies in the Behavioral Sciences at Stanford (1966-7). On his return to England from Stanford he was appointed to the first chair of social psychology at Bristol, where he stayed until 1982, retiring to Oxford shortly before his death. 
At Bristol Tajfel assembled a talented group of researchers, many of whom became successful in their own right. His department became a place of pilgrimage for social scientists from all over the world. Not long after his arrival in Bristol Tajfel hit upon the minimal group paradigm, an idea that occurred to him as he walked in an Amsterdam street. It is a method for inducing an arbitrary differentiation between two groups, which, in spite of its artificiality (no actual contact), seems to affect the manner in which group members perceive 'the others'. It formed the basis of Tajfel's social identity theory, which holds that a critical element of groups is the fact that they build a defining identity into their members, which inevitably entails evaluation and comparison with other groups. The theory was extremely influential and gave rise to much debate as well as to a large volume of research on inter-group attitudes and behaviour. Although Tajfel wrote and edited several books, his main contributions are in journal articles and book chapters. An exception is his 'Human Groups and Social Categories' (1981), which provides a condensed overview of his life's work. 
Tajfel was not a religious person, but he had a deep sense of Jewish identity -- so strong that even in a German prisoner-of-war camp he could not bring himself to conceal it, though he pretended to be a French Jew. Politically he was always a man of the left. As a student in France he belonged to a communist group until the Hitler-Stalin pact; in Britain he supported the Labour Party until he considered Liberals more radical. His interests were wide and varied. Apart from architecture, his tastes in the arts were for the moderns. It was typical that he used pictures by Kandinsky and Klee in some of his experiments, and he was fascinated by the history of the cinema. As regards music, he was particularly fond of such composers as Bartok and Schoenberg. Tajfel's character is admirably captured in a foreword to the above-mentioned book by the distinguished American psychologist Jerome Bruner: 'He is a man of huge hospitality in the broadest sense. He listens, reacts, brings you another drink, argues you down and sets you back up. He sets his guests at each other when he fears pseudo-agreement, thunders at them when he thinks their differences finical. Add one further element to that. Tajfel is the canonical European, not only linguistically equipped with several languages deployed with breathtaking speed and fluency, but with a deep sense of European culture. (Tajfel, xii/xiii)' Tajfel died of cancer at his home at 7 Polstead Road, Oxford, on 3 May 1982 and was buried at the Jewish cemetery, Wolvercote, in Oxford three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 58394


Mapother, Edward (1881-1940), psychiatrist, was born on 12 July 1881 at 6 Merrion Square, Dublin, the only son of the seven children of Edward Dillon Mapother (1835-1908), surgeon to St Vincent's Hospital and president of the Royal College of Surgeons of Ireland (1879-80), and Ellen, daughter of John Tobin MP of Halifax, Nova Scotia. In 1888 the family moved to London when E. D. Mapother went into private practice at 32 Cavendish Square. Edward Mapother was educated at University College school and hospital, from where he graduated MB BS in 1905, winning medals in pathology and medicine. After graduation he served as houseman under Risien Russell at the National Hospital, Queen Square. In 1908 Mapother obtained his MD (London) and was appointed to the new London county council asylum at Long Grove, Epsom. He worked with an exceptionally gifted team of young psychiatrists, including Hubert Bond and Bernard Hart, who were experimenting with the new psychological theories of Janet and Freud. The tension between the neurological work carried out at Queen Square and the psychotherapeutic regime instituted at Long Grove was to inform Mapother's intellectual outlook for the rest of his career. 
With the outbreak of war in 1914 Mapother volunteered for the Royal Army Medical Corps. He worked as a surgeon in the military hospitals at Etaples and Millbank and later in Mesopotamia and India. In April 1917 he was invalided back to England with sciatica. He retrained in military psychiatry at Maghull Military Hospital and was appointed neurologist to the 2nd Western General Hospital in Manchester. Mapother demonstrated great energy and organizational ability in his new post, establishing two subsidiary neurological hospitals in Stockport which he administered almost singlehanded until his demobilization in March 1919. 
In September 1919, Mapother was appointed medical superintendent to the Ministry of Pensions war neurosis centre in the requisitioned Maudsley Hospital. After the centre's closure in October 1920 Mapother returned to Long Grove, yet he never abandoned his commitment to the Maudsley. He was deeply involved in the protracted discussions concerning its future funding and organization. Mapother was insistent that the institution fulfil its original purpose as a centre for voluntary treatment and psychiatric research. In January 1923 his efforts were rewarded. The Maudsley reopened with Mapother as its medical superintendent. It was a position he was to hold until the end of his career. The post provided the institutional space and intellectual opportunity for Mapother to realize his own vision of psychiatry. At a disciplinary level Mapother strengthened the academic status of the science, forging close links between the Maudsley and the University of London. In 1924 the hospital was recognized as a centre for postgraduate education and in 1936 Mapother was elected to the university's newly created chair in clinical psychiatry. 
Intellectually Mapother promoted an eclectic therapeutic. He was suspicious of system-building philosophies which attempted to explain all the symptoms of mental distress through reference to a single cause. In his presidential address to the psychiatric section of the Royal Society of Medicine ('Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine', 1936) and his unpublished Bradshaw lecture before the Royal College of Physicians (1938) Mapother attacked the 'therapeutic chanticleers' of psychoanalysis who mistook diagnostic concepts for clinical entities. Yet within the Maudsley he tolerated the use of all forms of therapy, from hormone treatment to Jungian analysis. 
In 1939 Mapother resigned from the Maudsley Hospital due to ill health. In his career he had secured status, funding, and clinical success not simply for the Maudsley but for British psychiatry as a whole. As a teacher, he had trained many of the most influential psychiatrists in post-war Britain, including Aubrey Lewis and William Sargant. As a manager, he had established a programme of research and funding through his close negotiations with the Medical Research Council and the Rockefeller Foundation. He died at Mill Hill Emergency Hospital on 20 March 1940 from asthma and pulmonary fibrosis. His ashes were scattered in the grounds of the Maudsley. Mapother was survived by his wife of twenty-five years, Barbara Mary (died 1945), the daughter of Charles Reynolds. They had no children, but in 1950 their name was commemorated through the Mapother bequest which instituted two research studentships in psychiatry and an eponymous annual lecture at the Maudsley. 


@@@@@


doc= 58395


Brown, William (1881-1952), psychologist and psychiatrist, was born on 5 December 1881 at the School House, Slinfold, Horsham, Sussex, the second son of William Brown, a schoolmaster of Northumbrian origins, and his wife, Kezia Harriett ('nee' Evans). He attended Collyer's School in Horsham, winning a scholarship to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1899, where he took mathematical moderations in 1902 and final honours in natural science (physiology) in 1904. In the following year he added 'literae humaniores' while studying psychology as a special subject under William McDougall. He spent some time in Germany as the 1906 John Locke scholar in mental philosophy before embarking on mathematical and medical studies in London. In 1910 Brown earned a DSc (and the Carpenter medal) from the University of London for pioneering work on applying Karl Pearson's statistical ideas to psychological measurement. 
Meanwhile, Brown held a lectureship in psychology at King's College, University of London, from 1909, becoming reader in 1914 (when he also qualified in medicine at King's College Hospital). In 1921 Brown succeeded McDougall as Wilde reader in mental philosophy, remaining in Oxford until his retirement in 1946. It was largely through his efforts, and an endowment of $10,000 from one of his patients, Mrs Hugh Watts, that the Institute of Experimental Psychology, of which he was the first director (1936-45), was founded in 1936, and psychology at last gained honour school status in 1946. 
However, serving as a Royal Army Medical Corps officer during the First World War, Brown joined a small band of fellow neuropsychologists (including McDougall, W. H. R. Rivers, and C. S. Myers) who were attempting to treat the war neuroses that afflicted large numbers of front-line troops. This experience had gradually transformed Brown from quantitative psychologist into the eclectic psychotherapist and psychiatrist of his later years. Already sympathetic to Freudian ideas, he became interested in the treatment of shell-shock by hypnotically induced abreaction while training at the Maghull Military Hospital. This technique was the bedrock of his work as neurologist to the British expeditionary force in France (1916-18), as commandant of the Craiglockhart Hospital for Neurasthenic Officers (where the poets Siegfried Sassoon and Wilfred Owen had earlier been patients of Rivers) between 1918 and 1919, and also at the Maudsley Hospital. Paralleling this evolution was his steady acquisition of medical qualifications: DM (Oxford) in 1918, then MRCP and FRCP in 1921 and 1930 respectively. But the war period also changed Brown's life in more immediate and personal ways by the death of his wife, whom he had married on 29 September 1906, May Leslie Rayment English ('b'. 1880/81), daughter of Edmund English, early in 1916 and his marriage, on 19 July 1917, to a military nurse, Dorothea Mary ('b'. 1889/90), daughter of PC Edwin Stone of the Somerset constabulary. There were three children from these marriages, a son from the first, then another son and a daughter from the second. 
Although publishing widely on medical aspects of psychology from 1922 onwards, Brown's 'The Essentials of Mental Measurement' (1911), based on his DSc thesis, had brought him to early prominence within the growing British psychological establishment, not least by sparking off a prolonged conflict with Charles Spearman. Indeed, Brown's attack on Spearman's notion of general intelligence was renewed (albeit with growing unease on Brown's part) in the later editions which were co-authored with Godfrey Thomson, an even more implacable opponent of Spearman's theories. To Spearman's public delight Brown defected to the general intelligence camp in 1932, when he published strong evidence supporting a key aspect of Spearman's theory of intelligence. 
By the late 1920s, however, Brown was devoting less time to academic psychology than to administrative matters in Oxford and to his burgeoning clinical practice, which included appointments at King's College Hospital, London, and at the Bethlem Royal Hospital. His writings on psychiatry now focused on grander issues such as religion and war, and on the foundations of the discipline, in 'Mind, Medicine and Metaphysics' (1936), for instance, rather than on the practical concerns of his earlier professional life. 
Brown was active in many societies concerned with advancing psychological knowledge. He served as president of section J (psychology) of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1927, and of the Society for the Study of Addiction between 1935 and 1937. In the last year of his life the British Psychological Society, an organization with which he had been closely associated from as early as 1907, chose him as its president. 
Brown died from a coronary thrombosis on 17 May 1952 at the Berystede Hotel, Sunninghill, near Windsor, Berkshire. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 58396


Craik, Kenneth James William (1914-1945), psychologist, was born on 29 March 1914 at 10 Trinity Road, Leith, Scotland, the son of James Bowstead Craik, writer to the signet, and his wife, Marie Sylvia, 'nee' Robson. Having studied psychology under James Drever sen. (and philosophy under Norman Kemp-Smith) at the University of Edinburgh, Craik moved to St John's College, Cambridge, and joined Frederic Bartlett's Cambridge Psychological Laboratory (Drever having warned Bartlett: 'Next term I am going to send you a genius'). Craik rapidly turned to research on hearing and perception, gaining a reputation for technical prowess in designing and making equipment as well as for intellectual liveliness and breadth of interest. After obtaining his PhD, with a thesis on visual adaptation (1940), he became a fellow of St John's (1941). With the onset of the Second World War the laboratory's work soon became oriented towards topics of military significance, particularly flying. Craik produced a steady stream of papers on such topics as visibility through fighter windscreens, instrument lighting, and differentiating muscular from mental fatigue, many involving an experimental cockpit he had designed. Most appeared as reports for the various official armed services committees on which he sat. Against this background of tackling practical problems of engineering and physiology Craik produced his only book, 'The Nature of Explanation' (1943), a short but remarkably prescient work. After a brief, perspicuous, critique of traditional philosophical positions and an account of the modes of explanation emerging in such contemporary scientific developments as quantum physics, he turned to psychological explanation, and asked, 'What structure and process are required in a mechanical system to enable it to imitate correctly and to predict external processes or create new things?' At this point calculating machines came to the fore as centrally important models for psychological processes and Craik proceeded, speculatively, to explore their possible bearing on perception. '[T]he nervous system is viewed as a calculating machine capable of modelling or paralleling external events.' Craik rejected the symbolic logic and abstraction of contemporary logical positivism, viewing logical positivism's formal exercises as the last trace of a doomed 'a priorism' 'fated to yield to an experimental approach'. Craik thus helped to initiate the information processing approach which was later to revolutionize post-war American psychology as 'cognitive psychology'. The posthumously published two-part paper 'Theory of the human operator in control systems' ('British Journal of Psychology', 1948) developed his ideas further in relation to the new communication and control theory (renamed 'cybernetics' by Norbert Weiner in that year). 
These two works aside, Craik's mature work remained largely inaccessible, much being officially restricted or for internal circulation in the applied psychology unit (of which he became the first director in 1944). Craik died in Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, on 7 May 1945 after being involved in an accident while cycling. 
While Craik's reputation was maintained by his close colleagues, there was little visible basis for it available to outsiders. This was rectified in 1966 with the publication of 'The Nature of Psychology', an edited selection of unpublished papers, essays, and other writings (including the first description of what was later called the Craik-O'Brien-Cornsweet illusion). Evidence for the long-rumoured breadth and originality of Craik's interests and thought was at last available. Besides psychological theory and experimental work it included a variety of philosophical essays and pieces -- some but fragments -- on topics such as claustrophobia, Marxism, and science, and 'War as a part of life', plus a full, 80-item bibliography which included his wartime research. The tantalizing glimpses of Craik's unrealized potential contained in this volume reproduced on a wider scale the sense of loss which his Cambridge colleagues had always felt. In 1976 the Kenneth Craik Laboratory, Cambridge, was named in his honour. 


@@@@@


doc= 58397


Thouless, Robert Henry (1894-1984), psychologist, the son of Henry James Thouless, an iron-founder's clerk, and his wife, Bell Maud Bird ('nee' Harper) was born at 48 Grove Avenue, Lakenham, Norwich, on 15 July 1894. He attended the City of Norwich School before moving to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge in 1912, gaining a BA in natural sciences in 1915. After war service as brigade signal officer in the British Salonica forces he obtained an MA in 1921, was elected to a fellowship of Corpus Christi the same year, and obtained his PhD (Cambridge) under C. S. Myers in 1922. As lecturer in psychology, he subsequently helped to establish psychology at the universities of Manchester (1921-6) and Glasgow (1926-38), before joining the education department, Cambridge, as reader in educational psychology (emeritus reader after his retirement in 1961), becoming a much loved Cambridge figure. In 1923 he married Priscilla Gorton (author of 'Modern Poetic Drama', 1934); they had a son and a daughter. He was re-elected fellow (non-resident) of Corpus Christi College in 1945 (his earlier fellowship had lapsed in 1924). Actively involved in the British Psychological Society (serving as president in 1949) and in intra-disciplinary affairs throughout his long career, Thouless played an invaluable role in establishing psychology as an academic discipline and a profession in Britain. 
Thouless's most long-standing interest was in the relationship between psychology and religion; he turned his PhD thesis into the first British textbook on the topic, 'Introduction to the Psychology of Religion' (1923, 3rd edn 1961). A monograph on the medieval mystic Julian of Norwich ('The Lady Julian', 1924), academic papers (including the 1954 Hulsean lectures, published as 'Authority and Freedom: some Psychological Problems of Religious Belief', 1954), and several popular works followed. Devoutly Christian, he strove to allay fears of psychology among fellow believers and to identify links between the new psychotherapies and Christian approaches to the cure of souls. Associated with this was an intense involvement in psychical research, on which he published 'Experimental Psychical Research' (1963), and over ninety articles, as well as being president of the Society for Psychical Research (1942-5). He left two, as yet uncracked, ciphered messages for posthumous decoding via a medium. 
Thouless's reputation within the discipline rested on more orthodox work, notably his highly successful textbook 'Social Psychology' (1925), the first such British work to address social psychology. On occasion he linked the religious and social psychological strands (for example, in his Riddell memorial lectures, 1940). Thouless was one of the few British psychologists of his generation to specialize in social psychology (then expanding rapidly in the USA). His approach was initially largely non-experimental, ignoring the quantitative research on attitudes and their measurement which, by 1937, was dominating the sub-discipline in the United States, but later editions of 'Social Psychology' laid increasing stress on statistical procedures, on which he also published specialist articles. His experimental research concentrated on psycho-galvanic skin response changes in relation to emotion, and perception, including the discovery in 1931 of 'phenomenal regression to the real object' in which, for example, obliquely viewed discs appear less elliptical than they should. A claim by Thouless made in 1933 for a racial difference in the extent of this was subsequently rejected. Thouless's major educational work was 'A Map of Educational Research' (1969). Lay readers knew him best for his popular 'Straight and Crooked Thinking' (1930) and its sequel, 'Straight and Crooked Thinking in War Time' (1942). 
The range of Thouless's work, his contribution to the discipline's institutional development in Britain, and popularization of its findings render him a major figure, while his efforts towards reconciling psychology and religion countered the image of psychology as intrinsically anti-Christian. He was, however, an eclectic rather than an original theorist. Thouless died at his home, 2 Leys Road, Cambridge, on 25 September 1984. 


@@@@@


doc= 58399


Anderson, John (1817-1892), warehouseman and department store owner, was born in Aberfeldy, Perthshire, the son of Peter Anderson, a carrier, and his wife, Margaret. His parents died when he was young, and Anderson became an apprentice draper in Perth. After failing to recover his savings of $6 from his employer, he moved to Glasgow in 1835, finding work in a draper's shop. He opened his own small draper's shop in Clyde Terrace in May 1837: according to tradition, he began with a vest-length of cloth, which he made up and sold for sufficient profit to invest in two vest-lengths. Trading on a cash-only basis, in April 1838 he moved to larger premises at 4 Clyde Terrace; eventually he expanded Anderson's General Warehouses to include numbers 2, 3, 4, and 5. 
In 1845 Anderson introduced the concept he called 'universal trading' -- selling different classes of goods under one roof, in the manner of what became known as a department store. Anderson's tactic was to purchase goods in bulk and sell them at massive discounts, in sales advertised heavily in the local press. His profits came from the large and rapid turnover of his stock. His cut-throat tactics, and the innovative practice of selling books, engravings, fancy goods, and all manner of products under one roof, were condemned by rival shopowners. However, attempts to bring him to heel, by boycotting his suppliers and querying the quality of his sale goods, were unsuccessful. Anderson called in inspectors to verify the accuracy of his advertisements, and found new suppliers to replace those who succumbed to the threats of his rivals. 
In 1867 Anderson showed the defiant side of his nature once again, after moving to a new home in the socially exclusive Park Gardens. His neighbours were distressed to find a mere shopkeeper living among them and offered to buy him out if he would move elsewhere. In a typically fiery retort Anderson threatened to paint the facade of his house in a bright tartan pattern if the matter was raised again. It was not, and Anderson lived happily there for the rest of his life. 
In 1856 Anderson's General Warehouses in Clyde Terrace housed seventeen departments. He moved to larger premises that year, in the Polytechnic Hall in Jamaica Street, one of Glasgow's fashionable shopping streets. Naming the store the Royal Polytechnic Warehouse, he lured customers with popular evening lectures, waxworks, exhibitions, and other events. The volume of business continued to grow and in 1867 he moved once more, to 95-99 Argyle Street. In 1887 the mammoth store provided employment for up to 275 men and women. 
Anderson possessed strong Christian beliefs and was a teetotaller. In 1836 he joined the Sabbath Morning Young Men's Society for Religious Improvement, and his association with religious causes lasted throughout his life. He made donations to the Salvation Army during the difficult early history of the organization. In 1838 he married Robina Deacon Graham; they had five sons and two daughters. From 1866 Anderson charged customers an admittance charge of 2died during the new year holidays each year, and he raised around $7000 for charities by this means alone. 
Anderson retired from the business in October 1891, handing control to his sons Alexander and Charles. He died on 7 June 1892 at his home, 3 Park Gardens, Glasgow. He was survived by his wife. 
The world's first department stores are generally believed to have emerged in England, France, and the USA during the 1850s. However, John Anderson instigated his system of 'universal trading' in 1845 and by 1850 was selling not only drapery and furnishings, as other early department stores did, but books, engravings, and a wide variety of other goods, in separate departments. If he was not the first department store owner, he was certainly a pioneer of the type of shop, and the retailing methods, which were to become identified with the department store. 


@@@@@


doc= 58400


Wilson, Walter (1849-1917), milliner and department store owner, was born at Main Street, Gorbals, Glasgow, on 21 August 1849, the son of Arthur Wilson, a grocer, and his wife, Jane. He was educated at Mrs Alexander's school, Margaret Street, Glasgow (1854-9), and then at the Gorbals youth school (1859-63). In 1863 he began working for a hosiery agent, and was subsequently employed by three wholesale provision merchants before entering into partnership with Hugh Kean in 1869 to trade as hat cleaners and blockers. Wilson and Kean moved to 68 Jamaica Street in 1874, where they continued as hat manufacturers until the partnership was dissolved in 1876 and Wilson carried on the business alone. On 27 July 1871 he married Jane Williams Binnie; they had a son and three daughters. 
In 1878 Walter Wilson & Co. opened The Colosseum, a millinery shop, at 68 Jamaica Street. Wilson subsequently stopped manufacturing hats, and instead purchased stock directly from other manufacturers to sell to the public at wholesale prices. With a ready-money policy, and a motto of small profits and quick returns, his business flourished. By 1879 Walter Wilson & Co. employed 150 assistants and carried a stock of 25,000 hats. Ten years later, the firm employed close to 500, and the shop had been extended to carry a wide range of goods, from drapery and millinery to books and tea, in 23 departments. 
As with John Anderson, the owner of Glasgow's first department store, Wilson's greatest talents lay in advertising, marketing, and staging attention-grabbing publicity stunts. He advertised heavily and brashly in local newspapers -- on the American scale, as he told the 'Glasgow Herald' in 1887 -- using coded texts and unusual lay-outs to attract the attention of readers. His publicity coups included employing up to 2000 of Glasgow's unemployed as sandwich-board men during a local recession in 1886, and celebrating Queen Victoria's jubilee by closing his store, chartering five steamers, and taking 16,000 poor children for an outing to the Clyde resort of Rothesay in June 1887. In September of that year he held a fete for nearly 40,000 children on Glasgow Green; and in 1889 he posted circulars for the winter season from the top of the recently completed Eiffel Tower in Paris. Another widely reported stunt was his offer to supply uniforms for the entire Glasgow police force, in return for being allowed to print, 'The Colosseum Tea' on their helmets. The offer was not accepted. The Colosseum was the first department store in Scotland to introduce electric lighting (1882), motor-car deliveries (1896), and sky signs. In 1895 Wilson began publishing the 'Colosseum Home Magazine' for his customers. Wilson's in-store attractions were legendary, ranging from fairy grottoes and 'world fairs' to mirror mazes and novelty acts such as the amazing gravitating woman. Never a man to do things by halves (other than on occasions, such as that of the 'Great Procleusmatic Sale' of 1883, when Wilson offered '$100,000 for $50,000'), he opened a book department in 1895, stocking more than a million volumes. 
In 1887 Wilson took his brother-in-law Robert Binnie into partnership. Binnie took greater responsibility for the Grand Colosseum Warehouse in Glasgow (as it was named from 1894), as Wilson concentrated on plans to expand his commercial empire. During the 1870s, inspired by the example of his lifelong friend, the grocery chain magnate Sir Thomas Lipton, Wilson attempted unsuccessfully to start up a chain of independent retail stores in Glasgow. During the 1890s his energies were channelled again to expansion, when he opened branches of The Colosseum throughout Scotland, and in major cities in Ireland and in England. The venture failed, because his branch managers often built up customer loyalty and then left to open their own stores, in competition with the local Colosseum. The branches had all closed by the end of 1902. 
During the 1890s Wilson opened branches of a new up-market millinery store in Glasgow, London, and Edinburgh, under the name of Treron et Cie. In 1904 he decided to develop the business, closing the London and Edinburgh stores in order to concentrate on new premises in Glasgow, and opened Les Grands Magasins des Tuileries on the ground floor of the Maclellan Galleries in fashionable Sauchiehall Street. Les Grands Magasins des Tuileries catered primarily for affluent customers and Wilson abandoned his cash-only policy, providing credit to those who opened a deposit account with the store. Other innovations included the American practice of offering bargain prices on selected goods to forenoon shoppers. Trerons, as it became known after Wilson's death in 1917, became one of Glasgow's most popular department stores until it closed in 1986. 
Wilson was a neat and dapper (and, latterly, a rather stout) figure, with a shy nature which belied his flamboyant business reputation. His favourite recreation was to take long bicycle rides, and he is believed to have been the first man in Scotland to own a motorcycle. He was also a keen swimmer and in 1868 was a founder member of Queen's Park, Scotland's first football club. Possessing a strong sense of civic duty, Wilson became a councillor for the Gorbals ward of the city from 1887 until he retired in 1896, serving on many committees. He was appointed a magistrate in 1893. He was a justice of the peace, a member of the city's Merchants' House and Grocers' Company, and served as the convener of the printing and advertising committees for the city's great international exhibitions in 1888 and 1901. He died on 17 October 1917 at the Majestic Hotel, Harrogate, and was survived by his wife. Wilson was buried in the Cathcart cemetery, Glasgow, on 20 October. 
Wilson was one of the leading department store owners in Glasgow, a city noted for its great retail palaces. His innovative advertising and publicity stunts were widely imitated by other British store owners, and he introduced many of the fresh ideas and business methods he encountered on his frequent visits to American and French department stores. According to the American Gordon Selfridge, who opened his store in Oxford Street in 1909, London's department stores were staid and old-fashioned before his arrival in the capital, and their owners lacked drive and imagination in marketing and salesmanship. Wilson's career provides evidence that nineteenth-century provincial store owners were willing to adopt the most modern business and marketing techniques learned from foreign department stores, and he was one of several who possessed the showman's talents, marketing skills, and entrepreneurial spirit to rival those of his American contemporaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 58401


Smith, May (1879-1968), industrial psychologist, was born on 29 August 1879 at 44 Russell Street, Hulme, Chorlton, Lancashire, the elder of the two daughters of Thomas Smith, an iron turner, and his wife, Augusta, 'nee' Mathews. May Smith's father, though austere in his religious views (denouncing pastimes such as dancing as sinful), had equally strong literary and philosophical interests which ensured that discussions on such matters were commonplace within the home. After attending Manchester Science School, where she was also a pupil teacher, Smith won an education scholarship to Owens College, Manchester. Graduating with a BA that had included philosophy (and a little psychology) and a London University (external) diploma in education in 1903, she then taught for the next two years in the practising school associated with the education department. 
In 1905 Smith was appointed lecturer in educational psychology at Cherwell Hall, a training college for secondary school teachers in Oxford. Having also arranged to study in Oxford for her Manchester MA in philosophy, she began attending William McDougall's psychology lectures and eventually joined his small group of pupils studying experimental psychology. Although her first taste of research was as McDougall's assistant, Smith soon branched out into independent work on the effects of sleep deprivation on mental functioning. Later, a collaborative study with McDougall concerning alcohol and certain drugs led to an official request during the First World War to examine possible links between drink and prostitution. This lengthy, if inconclusive, inquiry equipped her with valuable interviewing and reporting skills. 
Smith's qualities as a researcher were eventually recognized and, at the age of forty, she found herself starting a new career with the newly established Industrial Health Research Board (IHRB), a post she held from 1920 until officially retiring in 1944. She was awarded a DSc by London University in 1930 and appointed OBE in 1945 for her services as a pioneer industrial psychologist. It was entirely characteristic of Smith's pragmatic style of research that to prepare for her first IHRB investigation, on fatigue and working hours in the laundry trade, she experienced the tasks at first hand, incidentally acquiring some basic skills, while spending several weeks as a laundry worker. During the investigation itself, she earned much goodwill and co-operation from managers and workforces alike by shrewdly helping out with the actual laundry work at busy times. Contemporaries, too, found her friendly and unpretentious, praised her good sense and also admired her knack of judging exactly how indiscreet she could be with her gossip. 
In the late 1920s opportunities for collaborating with researchers from other fields opened up when Smith and several other IHRB investigators moved into the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. In addition to a long-standing collaboration with Major Greenwood, professor of epidemiology and vital statistics, a partnership with the professor of medical psychology, Millais Culpin, forged during a study of the condition known as telegraphists' cramp, proved to be especially significant for the development of industrial psychology. Initially, it was assumed that the condition was associated with fatigue until Culpin brought his experience of war neuroses to the work and evidence began to emerge of a psychoneurotic element. Subsequent studies on other groups of workers suggested that a 'nervous' factor contributed similarly to many occupational illnesses. Her book, 'An Introduction to Industrial Psychology', published in 1943, did much to introduce the wider world to the notion that applying psychological ideas could be of benefit in the workplace. 
May Smith was anything but idle after leaving the IHRB in 1944. The following year she became a part-time lecturer in applied psychology at Birkbeck College, London, retiring only in 1955. From as early as 1914 she had been a stalwart of the British Psychological Society, serving in various capacities including honorary librarian (1932-59) and deputy president (1948-54). On 21 February 1968 she died, aged eighty-eight, at Otto House, 44 Sydenham Hill, Lewisham, London. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 58402


William (1102-1128), prince, was born on 25 October 1102, the only legitimate son of Robert, duke of Normandy (b. in or after 1050, d. 1134), William the Conqueror's eldest son, and Sibyl of Conversano (died 1102/3), a lady of the Norman-Italian aristocracy whom Robert married while on his return journey from the first crusade, and who died shortly after bearing her child. 
The word 'Clito' signifies an heir to a kingdom or principality, and can be more briefly translated as 'prince' (its Old English equivalent was 'aetheling'). Its application to William underlines the fact that, as the only son of the Conqueror's eldest son, his right to the Anglo-Norman succession posed a grave danger to the regime of his royal uncle, Henry I. Indeed, according to the rule of primogeniture (which governed many but not all successions at this time), William's claim to the Anglo-Norman crown was better than Henry's own. 
Henry I had ascended the English throne in 1100 when his elder brother, Robert Curthose, was returning to Normandy from the crusade. At the battle of Tinchebrai in 1106 Henry defeated and captured Robert, relegating him to what appears to have been a luxurious imprisonment for the remaining twenty-eight years of his life. King Henry and William Clito first met immediately after the battle, at the Norman stronghold of Falaise, when William was not yet four years old. Anxious to avoid any hint of wrongdoing toward the child, Henry placed him in the custody of Elias de St Saens, count of Arques (on the north-east frontier of Normandy), and the husband of one of Robert Curthose's natural daughters. This act of mercy cost Henry dearly in later years, for as William Clito grew toward maturity he became the focus for rebellions within Normandy and for hostility from outside. 
In 1109 a conflict arose between Henry I and Louis VI of France over the issue of Henry's purported obligation to render homage to Louis for Normandy, and also to neutralize the great Norman frontier castle of Gisors. The conflict spread after Foulques (V), count of Anjou, acquired Maine in 1110, and refused to render the traditional homage to Henry for the province. Count Robert of Flanders joined the coalition but died shortly afterwards. Henry, aware of the potentially grave danger of William Clito's claim to rule Normandy, took steps to have him arrested ('c'.1110-11), but William was spirited out of Normandy and, with his guardian Elias, wandered from court to court seeking support against his uncle. William received the backing of Louis VI, Foulques, and several Normans. But Henry I in the meantime outmanoeuvred Louis and Foulques militarily, and in 1113 concluded advantageous peace treaties with both men. Henry sealed his peace with Anjou by having Foulques's daughter Matilda betrothed to his sole legitimate son, William the AEtheling. William Clito, deprived of major supporters, retired to the court of Flanders where he was welcomed by its new count, the young Baudouin (VII). He is reported to have joined Baudouin's court as a boy of about ten, 'c'.1113, and to have received knighthood from Baudouin at fourteen (1116). 
Count Baudouin may have begun his series of attacks against Normandy on William Clito's behalf as early as 1114. By 1117 his raids against north-east Normandy enjoyed the support of several Norman magnates of the Pays de Caux and Talou, and also of Louis VI and Count Foulques, who had again broken with Henry I and once more supported William Clito. Between about mid-1118 and the summer of 1119 Henry I was engaged in full-scale warfare, the most widespread and dangerous of his reign, against King Louis, counts Foulques and Baudouin, and a growing number of Norman rebels, all of whom supported William's accession to the duchy of Normandy. 
Flanders withdrew from the conflict when, in the autumn of 1118, Baudouin received a battle wound that proved to be mortal. In May or June 1119 Henry lured Foulques from the coalition supporting William Clito by arranging the marriage of Foulques's eldest daughter, Matilda, to Henry's son, William the AEtheling. William Clito's only major protector was now Louis VI who, on 20 August 1119, with William in his army, was severely defeated by Henry in the battle of Bremule in the Norman Vexin. Louis and William both fled without their warhorses, and afterwards Henry I and William the AEtheling returned the horses to their two adversaries, fully equipped, as an act of chivalry and sweet condescension. At the papal council of Rheims in October 1119 Louis, with William Clito again at his side, appealed to Pope Calixtus II (who happened to be Louis's wife's uncle), but the result of Calixtus's intervention was a peace treaty between the two kings ('c'.1120) that was very much in Henry's favour. Meanwhile, with the collapse of the coalition and rebellion, William Clito had appealed directly to Henry in October 1119 near Aumale in north-western Normandy, urging the king to release Robert Curthose from confinement, and promising in return to accompany him to Jerusalem and never return. Henry, who had suffered perhaps a score of broken promises over the past two years on William Clito's behalf -- and several assassination attempts -- declined to release Robert. He did offer to welcome William to his court, grant him authority as earl over three English counties, and treat him as a son. William (now seventeen) declined the offer and resumed his exile. 
The peace of 1120, which gave promise of good relations for the next generation between the previously warring parties, was destroyed by William the AEtheling's death in the sinking of the 'White Ship' on 25 November 1120. William Clito's cause was thus revived, and in 1123 it acquired renewed force with his betrothal (later followed by marriage) to Foulques's daughter, Sibyl, the younger sister of William the Aethling's widow, Matilda of Anjou (who became a nun of Fontevrault). William's fortunes received further backing from a revolt in Normandy in 1123-4, involving Amaury de Montfort, count of Evreux, Waleran, count of Meulan (the lord of several important castles in the Risle valley), Hugues de Montfort-sur-Risle, and others. The rebellion collapsed, however, when an army consisting of the leading rebels was defeated, and most of them were taken prisoner, near Bourgtheroulde in spring 1124, by soldiers of Henry I's 'familia'. Louis VI was kept out of Normandy when Henry I's son-in-law, Emperor Heinrich V, threatened a large-scale invasion of France. And, much to the fury of Foulques, Henry arranged through his ties with the papal court to have William's Angevin marriage annulled on the grounds of consanguinity, strictly interpreted. 
Henry I, whose first wife, Matilda, had died in 1118, remarried in 1121 in the hope of producing another male heir, but his second marriage was barren. In autumn 1126 Henry passed over the candidacy of William Clito and persuaded his court to accept his daughter Matilda, now a childless widow, as successor to the throne. Louis VI, on news of this decision, again threw his full support behind William Clito. In January 1127 he arranged a marriage between William and the French queen's half-sister, Jeanne de Montferrat, and granted William the lordship of the French Vexin. Shortly afterwards William led an armed band to Henry's frontier castle of Gisors to issue a formal claim to Normandy. He was by now a chivalrous and attractive young man, and a number of Normans are said to have rendered him the respect due their natural lord. 
On 2 March 1127 the situation changed dramatically when Count Charles of Flanders was murdered at mass. By 13 March Louis VI was in Arras to help punish the murderers and participate in the selection of the new count (Charles having been childless). On Louis's advice and command, the Flemings chose William Clito in preference to several other candidates (William's own claim derived from his grandmother, William the Conqueror's wife, Matilda of Flanders, who was the mother of both Robert Curthose and Henry I). As count of Flanders, the most urbanized principality in northern Europe, William now possessed the resources to advance his claims on Normandy more forcefully than ever before. Indeed, as the son of Robert Curthose, William constituted a threat to Henry's hold on England as well, as he showed in a charter for St Omer, dated 14 April 1127, in which he promised to confer privileges on the townsmen if ever he should rule over England. 
When Henry heard the news of William's advancement at his Easter court at Woodstock, he was 'much distressed'. Faced with the prospect of a renewal of the coalition that had nearly wrested Normandy from him nine years earlier, he devoted money, energy, and all his diplomatic ingenuity to forestalling the impending alliance and shaking the new count's hold on Flanders. To keep domestic peace (always his foremost priority) and to safeguard the integrity of his Anglo-Norman dominions, it was essential that Henry move swiftly to keep his enemies off balance. Thus he secretly sent money to various disappointed claimants to Flanders, putting himself nominally at their head, encouraging them all until he could discern which one might win sufficient support to unseat William. By 1128, as a result of Henry's machinations and William's inept handling of Flemish townspeople and their commercial interests, the county was in a state of general rebellion. Louis VI returned briefly in May to support William in his need, but suddenly withdrew in response to a military feint by Henry I, who sat with his army at the castle of Epernon, between Paris and Chartres. 
By this time Count Thierry of Alsace had emerged, with Henry's aid, as William Clito's chief rival to the Flemish countship. Hostilities continued in Flanders until late July 1128, when William, whose military fortunes seemed to be reviving, was mortally wounded in an assault on Thierry's castle of Aalst. His death brought the crisis, and Henry's troubles, to a sudden halt. It was an anticlimactic end to the career of one who, as child and man, had played a central role in Anglo-Norman affairs for over twenty years, without ever setting foot in Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 58405


Patey, David Howard (1899-1977), surgeon, was born on 25 October 1899 at 88 Tillery Street, Abertillery, Monmouthshire, the eldest of the three children of Frank Walter Patey ('c'.1877-1962/3), hotel furbisher, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Davies (died 1941). His father was English, from the west country, and his mother Welsh. He attended Llandovery School, where an iron regimen of the classics and rugby football prevailed, and having decided on a career in medicine he entered the Middlesex Hospital medical school in London with an entrance scholarship in classics in 1916. 
Patey's studies (and rugby) were interrupted in 1918 by a period of combatant service in France and Belgium with the 2nd battalion of the Monmouthshire regiment. After returning to the Middlesex his brilliant student career culminated in 1923 in his being awarded the scholarship for the best student of the year at the Middlesex and the gold medal for the best medical student in the whole of the University of London. Patey became a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1924. His graduate training continued at the Middlesex, including two years in the pathology department that awakened what was to be a long-lasting interest in the morbid anatomical approach to disease. He became MS (London) in 1927. On 5 February of the same year he married Gladys Joyce (1898-1981), daughter of Gilbert Summers, of Hounslow; they had two sons and a daughter. 
Between 1922 and 1932 Patey held surgical posts in London at the Middlesex Hospital, the Hampstead General Hospital, St Mark's Hospital, St Peter's Hospital, and Acton Hospital. He was appointed to the consultant staff of the Middlesex in 1930, the same year in which he was awarded the Jacksonian prize of the Royal College of Surgeons for an essay on tumours of the parotid salivary gland. In the following year he became Hunterian professor at the college. A sound clinician and operative surgeon, undoubtedly his major contributions lay in the fields of research and teaching. Particularly in his early years, his research ranged over a wide field, a conspicuous feature of his publications being that they have stood the test of time. 
Without question Patey's most important work concerned the management of cancer of the breast and parotid tumours. The operation he described for removing the affected breast was as effective in removing cancerous tissue as its predecessors, but caused much less disfigurement. It was a seminal forerunner of the modern trend towards limited excision, relying on other means to deal with distant spread. By contrast his approach to the treatment of the apparently benign but potentially malignant tumours of the parotid was to insist on excision with wide margins, because they were thus eminently curable but likely to recur if the margin of clearance was compromised. The contrast between these two approaches to superficially similar situations demonstrates Patey's intellectual strength in stripping a problem down to its fundamentals. The quality of his research work was marked in 1964 by his election to an honorary fellowship of the American Surgical Association, a signal honour bestowed on few British surgeons. Patey was also president of the section of surgery at the Royal Society of Medicine (1951-2) and Colles lecturer at the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland (1957), and he wrote more than a hundred learned publications. 
Patey's bedside teaching was effective, but the full flowering of his educative role started in 1952 when he was appointed director of the department of surgical studies at the Middlesex Hospital medical school. He developed intellectually stimulating teaching methods. Apart from traditional bedside and outpatient teaching, he encouraged undergraduates to present cases at clinical demonstrations, organize co-operative seminars depending on literature searches, and undertake small research projects, some of which were published. These innovative techniques have been widely copied. 
In 1952 the Society of University Surgeons in North America invited Patey to attend their annual meeting. Patey was impressed with the energy and enthusiasm of the young surgeons presenting their scientific work and returned to England determined to foster a similar development. He interested Professor Sir James Paterson-Ross, later president of the Royal College of Surgeons in London, in the concept, and they contacted the heads of all the university departments of surgery in the United Kingdom and Eire. Their suggestion that a surgical research society should be founded met with enthusiasm. When a subcommittee was set up to formulate the rules, Patey insisted on two of great importance, whose influence later spread widely beyond the society: namely, that papers should be spoken and not read, and that their delivery should take no longer than ten minutes. The first meeting of the Surgical Research Society was held at the Middlesex Hospital in 1954, with Sir James as the first president and Patey the first honorary secretary. Initially limited to fifty the membership later increased tenfold. Patey was the society's president from 1958 to 1960. 
From its inception the Surgical Research Society had a profound influence on the development of surgical research in the British Isles because it coincided with the burgeoning of many new academic departments of surgery and provided a critical forum for young surgeons striving to apply new scientific methods to surgical problems. This influence spread to Australasia and South Africa, where similar societies were founded. Much of the reason for this success lay in Patey's characteristics: clarity of mind, scrupulous logic, transparent honesty, true humility, and the grace and charm with which he conducted himself, even when he was preventing a speaker from overstepping the ten minutes. 
Of average height and powerful build and with a massive head, conservative in dress (the last at the Middlesex to wear spats), Patey's characteristic and frequently mimicked foibles of speech endeared him to staff and students. After he retired Patey continued to study philosophy and mathematics, and taught himself Russian to A-level standard. He was a man of profound, though not unquestioning, religious faith and for many years acted as churchwarden at St Mary's, Bryanston Square, London. Proud of his Welsh roots, he was never happier than when holidaying in Wales, walking and fishing, or when playing the piano for family gatherings, concentrating on songs with a Welsh flavour. Patey died from cancer of the prostate on 27 March 1977, at his home, 2 Cannongate Close, Hythe, Kent. He was buried at Barham crematorium, near Canterbury, on 2 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 58406


Benjamin, Arthur Leslie (1893-1960), composer and pianist, was born on 18 September 1893 in Sydney, Australia, the son of Abram Benjamin and his wife, Amelia (whose maiden name may also have been Benjamin). His father worked on the stock exchange. Benjamin began his career as a pianist at the age of six. He studied at Bowen House preparatory school, Brisbane, then at Brisbane grammar school. During his teens he worked as a demonstrator at a Brisbane piano store; visiting Europe with his parents, he saw his first opera in Brussels. 
In 1911 Benjamin went to the Royal College of Music, London, and studied composition with Charles Villiers Stanford, with whom he shared an admiration for Brahms; he studied fugue with Frederick Bridge. After gaining a scholarship in 1912 he stayed until 1915, when he joined the Royal Fusiliers, later transferring to the Royal Flying Corps. 
After the war Benjamin returned to Sydney, where he taught the piano at the New South Wales State Conservatorium. Back in London in 1921, he composed, taught, and adjudicated, winning in 1924 the Carnegie award for composition with his first published work, a string quartet. In 1926 he became a piano professor at the Royal College of Music; his pupils included Benjamin Britten, William Blezard, Ivan Clayton, Irene Kohler, and Joan and Valerie Trimble. As an adjudicator for the Associated Board he visited Latin America and the Caribbean, where he was influenced by local dance rhythms. His 'Jamaican Rumba' (1938) has had a popular worldwide reputation ever since: on the strength of it he received a yearly barrel of rum from the Jamaican people. 
Benjamin wrote film music from the 1920s onwards, for example 'Waltz' and 'Hyde Park Gallop' for 'An Ideal Husband' (1947). In Alfred Hitchcock's 'The Man Who Knew Too Much' (1955) he is seen rehearsing his own cantata at the Royal Albert Hall, and later listening in the audience at the performance. He also wrote for a documentary on the ascent of Everest (1953). As a concert pianist he performed his own concertino in 1926, conducted by Henry Wood. He gave the premiere of Constant Lambert's piano concerto in 1931, with Lambert conducting. 
The first of Benjamin's five operas, 'The Devil Take Her', was performed at the Royal College of Music in December 1931, and again in 1933-4 with the Vic Wells company under Sir Thomas Beecham. His second, 'Prima Donna' (1933), was produced at the Fortune Theatre in 1949 and revived at the Royal College of Music in 1968. In 1940 Benjamin became conductor of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation orchestra, with which he stayed for five years. While in Vancouver he composed his first symphony. At the same time he was a resident lecturer at Reed College, Portland, Oregon. 
After returning to London, Benjamin resumed teaching at the Royal College of Music. On an Arts Council commission he wrote the longest and most serious of his operas, 'A Tale of Two Cities' (1950), which was broadcast three times on BBC radio's Third Programme in 1953. The New Opera Company gave the first stage production at Sadler's Wells in 1957; a year later it was broadcast on BBC television. Meanwhile his fourth opera, 'Manana' -- the first opera commissioned for television by the BBC -- was screened on 1 February 1956. At his death Benjamin's final opera, 'Tartuffe' (1957-60), was finished in short score, with just a few pages orchestrated; this was completed by Alan Boustead, who conducted the New Opera Company at Sadler's Wells in the 1964 premiere. 
A colourful and warm-hearted man, Benjamin liked to dress casually in an open-necked shirt worn loosely outside his shorts. He was a Savile Club member; his hobbies included cooking (assisted by his Jamaican manservant), theatre, bridge, and nude sunbathing, which he undertook in the seclusion of his Hampstead bungalow garden. He spent many winters in Jamaica, travelling both ways on a banana boat. 
Benjamin admired above all Brahms -- his proudest possession was a signed photograph -- and Puccini, whose dramatic technique and orchestration he emulated. He stood at a large draughtsman's desk in the window of his living room to orchestrate. His professionalism he attributed to the example of his close friend Ralph Vaughan Williams. While insisting that he did not teach composition, he was glad to advise young composers, including Richard Stoker and Alun Hoddinott. He considered Benjamin Britten a genius, and his opera 'Peter Grimes' a masterpiece, but he disliked Beethoven's 'Pastoral' symphony -- 'Damned cuckoos!' he exclaimed, according to one pupil. 
In 1956 the Worshipful Company of Musicians awarded Benjamin the Cobbett medal for composition. His individual approach took in all styles, and like his antipodean successors Malcolm Williamson and Barrington Pheloung, he made no distinction between light and serious. 
Latterly Benjamin developed a heart condition, but enjoyed the resulting daily glass of brandy 'on doctor's orders'. He died at the Middlesex Hospital, London, on 10 April 1960, eight days after the American premiere of 'A Tale of Two Cities' at the State College, San Francisco. He was cremated at Golders Green on 14 April; his ashes were scattered on the crocus lawn there. 


@@@@@


doc= 58408


Cade, (Dorothy Mary) Rowena (1893-1983), founder of the Minack Theatre, Cornwall, was born at The Homestead, Spondon, Derbyshire, on 2 August 1893, the elder daughter and second child in the family of two daughters and two sons of Charles James Cade (1850-1917) and his wife, Mary Rowena Elizabeth Casterton, 'nee' Smelt (1859-1946). Her father owned the town's cotton mill and the family had lived in the area for over three hundred years. Her great-great-grandfather was Joseph Wright, a well-known painter of the industrial revolution. Her consuming interest in theatre dated back to when, at the age of eight, she played Alice in a family production of 'Through the Looking Glass', though in other ways she was a tomboy, preferring tree-climbing and games. When she was nine the family moved to Cheltenham, as her uncle was headmaster of Cheltenham College junior school, and later she became what she described as an 'unwilling pupil' at Cheltenham Ladies' College. At the beginning of the First World War she was sent to Sir John Gilbey's estate at Elsenham to work in the remount stables, where she happily traded living in a fine great house for looking after herself in an old caravan. Her job was to select and break in horses to be sent out to France and Belgium for the cavalry. 
Cade's father died during the war, the family was scattered, and the Cheltenham house sold. After moving around a good deal she and her mother finally went to Cornwall, and Rowena decided that she wanted to settle there. Shortly afterwards she bought the whole of the Minack headland, not far from Land's End, for just $100 and had Minack House built there, using local granite from a nearby quarry. The Cades had been used to making their own entertainment and throughout the 1920s they had put on a number of plays in the garden with family and friends, Rowena making and designing costumes. It was a more ambitious project, a production of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' in 1928, and its repeat a year later, that made her determined to provide a proper theatrical space. Below her garden was a natural amphitheatre and it was there that Cade set about creating the magnificent open-air Minack Theatre, on the cliffs above Porthcurno. She was assisted by her gardener, Billy Rawlings, and a local craftsman, Charles Thomas Angove. From the first the work was hard: terraces had to be cut for seating and it took months even to make a surface for a rough stage. The Minack Theatre became her all-consuming passion and she was to spend every working moment in it until almost the very end of her life. Charles Angove recalled her single-handedly carrying twelve 15 foot wooden beams that were washed up on the beach from the shore to the theatre, and local people remembered seeing her bringing sacks of sand on her back up the steep cliff path from the beach. No one who ever saw her at work could forget the spare, almost gaunt, figure with short silver hair and weather-beaten face, dressed in her uniform of jersey, knee breeches, thick socks, and boots, and almost always carrying a bucket of cement or concrete. The first production at the theatre was 'The Tempest' in 1932, lit by batteries and car headlights. Regular productions followed right up until the Second World War, while the work of providing seating, a better playing area, and, eventually, a dressing-room continued, all the work being undertaken by Rowena Cade and her two assistants. The war put paid to any performances until 1944 when the film 'Love Story' was filmed there. As soon as it was possible she worked unceasingly to make improvements, more seating, a car park, steps up from the beach, safety measures -- as late as the 1960s getting from one side of the stage to the other over a deep inlet was hazardous to say the least. In 1966 Billy Rawlings died and Rowena inscribed his name on a seat, the only one which has this distinction, the others bearing the names of past productions. 
From the two or three plays in a summer during the 1950s the season grew to sixteen weeks every year, with companies competing to play at the theatre, which now also boasts a proper lighting and sound box, better dressing rooms, a cafe, lavatories, and an exhibition centre. Since the Second World War almost every kind of play has been produced, from Shakespeare and the classics to modern comedy and musicals. Large-cast plays with a strong storyline and a good deal of action (such as Shakespeare) generally work best there, as more intimate and static drama is liable to disappear when performed against such a stunning natural background. From the outset Rowena Cade financed the theatre from her own pocket, and after several failed attempts to find a body willing to take over the upkeep of the theatre from her, she finally gave it to a specially formed charitable trust, the Minack Theatre Trust. She was still working in the theatre in 1976 when she was well over eighty, and before she died she bought a nearby bungalow and more land to provide theatre offices and a larger car park. She died peacefully at Minack House on 26 March 1983, and was buried on 30 March. Few twentieth-century women can have left so spectacular a physical memorial behind them. 


@@@@@


doc= 58409


Farman, Henry (1874-1958), aviator and aircraft manufacturer, was born in Paris on 28 May 1874, though both of his parents were British. His father, a journalist, had long been resident in France, so that the first language of his three sons was French. Henry (a name by which he liked to be known by his friends, although he adopted the spelling Henri for wider use) was the second of the sons. All three were educated at home and had more freedom to follow their own interests than was usual among their contemporaries. Henry's earliest ambition was to be an artist, and he studied oil painting at the academies Colarossi and Julian in Paris, and in the studio of Gustave Courtois. He soon turned his attention to cycling, and became a champion in the craze sweeping Europe in the early 1890s, riding in competition for the Panhard von Paris Vienne trophy. He then took up motor racing and trained as an engineer. Having entered into a partnership with his brother Richard (Dick), they established the largest motor agency in Paris, the Palais de l'Automobile, dealing in Delauney-Bellevilles, Panhard-Levassors, and Renaults. 
However, a near-fatal accident soured Farman's interest in automobiles. His brother Maurice A. Farman (1877-1964), a keen balloonist, had given him his first taste of aeronautics, and he now decided to explore the possibilities of powered flight. He crowned his new interest by purchasing in 1907 a biplane from Gabriel Voisin, who had achieved controlled flight himself only that same year. Farman took delivery of Voisin's biplane in September 1907. Convinced that aviation offered a niche for his talents, he set himself to solve the problem of gaining improved lateral control by discarding the vertical curtains rigged between the wings in the manner of a child's box-kite, replacing them with simple struts and their associated wing-warping controls with movable flaps at the rear of the wings -- the precursors of modern ailerons. He undertook a series of experimental flights at Issy-les-Moulineaux, Paris. 
Simultaneously Farman worked on an aeroplane of his own design. His name rapidly became associated with competition flying, and his early achievements included an absolute speed record, which was confirmed by the Federation Aeronautique International, of 32.73 m.p.h, and the closed circuit distance record. Then on 13 January 1908, after a number of attempts over four months of endeavour, he succeeded in winning the 50,000 French francs prize for the prix Deutsch Archdeacon by flying a return distance of 1 km, rounding a flagpost placed 500 m from the starting point without landing. He used the greater part of the prize moneys which he amassed through his flying achievements for aviation research and design. During the early months of 1908 he visited both Belgium and the United States on exhibition tours, claiming to be the first man to fly in New York. 
Farman's early records had been captured by aircraft powered either by Antoinette or Vivinius liquid-cooled motors, power plants which delivered inadequate power to weight ratios. After adopting the new Gnome rotary motor, an engine developed by his friend Laurent Seguin and capable of giving greater power for less weight, he won further laurels. On 31 October 1908 he took first place in the contest for the grand prix de Rheims, flying the 27 km from Chalons-sur-Marne to Rheims in twenty minutes. This was the first cross-country flight made in Europe, and one which was made in friendly rivalry with Louis Bleriot and outshone his friend Leon Delagrange, the wealthy Parisian sculptor who was also a pioneer of aviation. 
In 1909 Farman paid a visit to Great Britain, chiefly to compete at the flying meeting at Blackpool (20 October 1909). Although he won the prizes both for distance (some 47 miles) and speed (36.38 m.p.h.), he proved something of a disappointment to thrill seekers in the crowd, who expected something of the panache they had witnessed from Hubert Latham, who had competed in a gale. Flamboyance was not Farman's way. Always a cautious pilot, he carefully lapped the course with steady precision, leaning slightly forward in the cockpit and keeping low, often with only some 20 feet beneath his wheels, seeming almost to caress the ground with a wing-tip as he rounded a pylon. In November 1909 he achieved a distance record of 137 miles, flying for over four hours. 
Farman described his early flying achievements in 'The Aviator's Companion' (1910), which he co-wrote with his brother Dick. In 1912, with his brother Maurice, also an aviation designer, he founded the firm of Henri et Maurice Farman, which became firmly established at 167 rue de Silly, Billancourt (Seine). After the outbreak of war they were operating at full stretch to construct their pushers of the Longhorn and Shorthorn type. They were used during the early days of the war in Flanders, but thereafter were confined mainly to training use at the schools of the Royal Flying Corps. Their appellations referred to the absence or not of a front elevator, although legend has it that the bovine reference stemmed from a remark from Major John Higgins on seeing a row of these machines: 'Voila! Les vaches mecaniques'. Their popularity with military pilots, both British and French, was attested by Air Vice-Marshal Amyas Borton, who recalled that by 20 September 1914 he had completed fifty hours flying at the front in a machine which he had collected from the Farman factory on 24 August. 
After the war the Farmans successfully entered the civil aviation market. In 1937 nationalization of the French aviation industry forced the firm to merge with the Hanriot organization, and, having no wish to become mere employees of the state, Henry and Maurice retired. Henry later founded and became the first president of the Association des Amis du Musee de l'Air. He was slightly under average height and with dark good looks, sartorial elegance, and a neat, imperial beard; he was frequently taken to be of Gallic origin, although he did not become a naturalized French citizen until 1937. He died at his home, 55 avenue Foch, Paris, on 17 July 1958. 


@@@@@


doc= 58414


Bennett, Crystal-Margaret (1918-1987), archaeologist, was born on 20 August 1918 in Alderney, the third of five children of George Rawlings, a soldier, and his wife Elizabeth ('nee' Jennings). Educated at La Retraite Convent School and then Bristol University, where she received a bachelor's degree in English, she married Philip Roy Bennett (1907-1986), a draughtsman, in 1940. He was an Anglican, and she converted from Roman Catholicism to the Church of England on his account. Their only child, Simon, was born in 1945, and they divorced in 1946. 
Bennett's archaeological career began in 1954 at the Institute of Archaeology, University of London, where she took the postgraduate diploma in the archaeology of the Roman provinces in the west and later the diploma in Palestinian archaeology under Kathleen Kenyon. After directing two excavations at Roman sites in England she joined Kenyon's pioneering excavations at Jericho in Palestine in 1957. 
In 1958, while taking part in excavations at Petra in Jordan, Bennett became interested in the Iron Age Edomite site of Umm al-Biyara in the centre of Petra. At the time little was known about the Edomites, the Iron Age inhabitants of southern Jordan, so she undertook excavations there between 1960 and 1965. Umm al-Biyara was an almost inaccessible rock massif; even donkeys were unable to climb it, and all water and supplies had to be carried by hand (or dropped by helicopter). The Edomites became the prime focus of her research from then on; she also excavated the Edomite sites of Tawilan (1968-70, 1982) and Busayra, the probable capital of Edom (1971-4, 1980). Her results considerably revised the generally accepted chronology of Edom, clearly dating Edomite pottery to the seventh century BC, rather than to the thirteenth century BC as previously thought. Although she published regular preliminary reports on her excavations in academic journals, she did not produce a final report for any of these sites. After her death this work passed to younger colleagues for completion. 
Bennett was assistant director of the British School of Archaeology in Jerusalem from 1963 to 1965, and director from 1970 to 1980. After the Six Day War of 1967 and Israel's occupation of the West Bank it became difficult to cross from Jerusalem to Jordan, which affected the British School's archaeological work in Jordan. In 1970 she therefore set up at her own expense an office in Amman which acted as a base for British excavations in Jordan. In 1975 she was asked by the Jordanian department of antiquities to direct a rescue excavation on Amman citadel, prior to the building of a new museum. This work lasted three long seasons, the final results being published after her death by her assistant director. Bennett's experiences in Jordan convinced her that there was a real need for a permanent British archaeological body in the country, and together with Kenyon she persuaded the British Academy to found and fund the British Institute at Amman for Archaeology and History. Bennett served as its first director from 1980 to 1983. 
Bennett was tall, well-built, provocative, and energetic, although late in life illness confined her to bed for long periods, even during excavations. At a politically difficult time she managed to remain friends with Israelis and Arabs, and was never shy of using her close friendship with the Jordanian royal family to solve seemingly intractable bureaucratic problems. She was generous to younger scholars, helping them to establish their own archaeological projects. She was made an OBE in 1980 for services to archaeology in Jordan and was awarded an honorary degree of DLitt by Trinity College, Dublin, in 1983. After a short retirement in Cyprus, she died of liver disease at her home, Tolbury House, Bruton, Somerset, on 12 August 1987, and was buried at Bruton on 17 August 1987. 


@@@@@


doc= 58416


Crouse, John (1737/8-1796), printer and newspaper proprietor, was the son of William Henry Crouse (died 1804) of Norwich, theatre proprietor and comedian, and his wife, Esther. William Crouse held one of the twenty-eight shares in the Theatre Royal, Norwich, where he and Esther were managers of the theatre wardrobe. On 20 April 1752 John was apprenticed to the Norwich printer and bookseller William Chase, son of the printer and local politician, also William (1692-1744). In July 1760 Crouse bought the stock of the local bookseller Robert Goodman and set up his own business at the Bible and Star in Cockey Lane, Norwich. In the following year, on 18 July, he began his first newspaper, the 'Norwich Gazette', which enjoyed only moderate success. On 6 March 1763 he was admitted to the freedom of Norwich and, three years later, he opened a printing office over Lewis's warehouse, Upper Market Place. On 14 December 1768 it was agreed that Crouse and William Chase were, on alternate months, to supply all printing materials to the town's Theatre Royal. Several months later, on 8 April 1769, Crouse began a new newspaper, the 'Norfolk Chronicle', which was distributed throughout the county. In addition to this title he printed an extensive number of books, some incorporating maps, including Robert Potter's translation 'The Tragedies of Aeschylus' (1777). This volume had an impressive list of over 550 subscribers, an indication of Crouse's standing in the printing trade. 
In the next decade Crouse became a major contractor for the Norwich to London mail coach (the second mail coach, introduced on 28 March 1785) to run from the King's Head in the town's market place. To Crouse goes the credit of publishing the first point-to-point timetable in Britain ('Norfolk Chronicle', 16 April 1785). This detailed the mail coach routes -- one via Colchester, the other via Newmarket -- from London to Norwich, with all the horse posts connected to the new service. In the same year Crouse took as a partner William Stevenson ['see under 'Stevenson, Seth William], who helped him to run his 'medicinal warehouse' in the market place. Stevenson admired Crouse for his integrity, generosity, and goodness of heart. The partnership was enlarged at the end of September 1794 to include Chase's relative Jonathan Matchett ('c'.1771-1844) and was renamed Crouse, Stevenson, and Matchett. Between 1794 and 1796 the firm printed posters detailing 'Mail coaches; Hambro [Hamburg], Yarmouth, Norwich etc', announcing through-running to 'Hambro' by packet. 
It is debatable which is Crouse's most important work. The 'Norfolk Chronicle' became a major journalistic force in the county and survived until 1955. His tabulated timetable became the standard format for road and, later, rail transport, replacing the old stagecoach maxim 'if God permits' with minute-by-minute timing. Crouse was unmarried, though his 'reputed daughter', Esther Bowyer Crouse, was living with him in 1796. He became seriously ill in September of that year and died on 18 November 1796, aged fifty-eight. Crouse was buried at St Peter Mancroft Church, Norwich, on 24 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 58418


Todd, Anthony (bap. 1718, d. 1798), foreign secretary of the Post Office, was born at Bridge End Farm, Frosterley, in co. Durham, and baptized at Stanhope, co. Durham, on 20 February 1718; he was the second son and fourth child of Thomas Todd ('bap'. 1677, died 1765/6), farmer, and his wife, Eleanor Todd (died 1773), of Dalton-le-Dale, co. Durham. His parents, who may have been related, since they had the same surname, worked Bridge End Farm and were near neighbours of Ferdinando Craggs, brother of the postmaster-general James Craggs (1657-1721). The Westgarth family, which enjoyed close connections with the Post Office, also lived nearby. 
Todd was probably educated at Wolsingham grammar school but from about 1732 he was trained in Post Office business by Charles Westgarth (died 1733), clerk of the west road. John Westgarth, a clerk in the foreign office of the Post Office, subsequently gave him instruction in that organization's handling of diplomatic correspondence and overseas mail, and in its interception of suspicious items. In 1738 Todd was appointed to the foreign office, and in 1747 was made second clerk to George Shelvocke (1702-1760), secretary of the Post Office. Such pluralism was unusual but arose from the upsurge of secret service business following the Jacobite rising of 1745. Todd was the obvious successor as foreign secretary of the Post Office when John Lefebure died in January 1752. This made him responsible for supervising the opening and copying of foreign correspondence, liaison with the deciphering branch to deal with intercepted items in code, and making recommendations to be laid before the king. As such he was in regular contact with the secretaries of state and the first lord of the Treasury. He enjoyed an annual income of about $850 but only $200 of this was official salary, the rest being secret service money. Todd soon recognized the existing system's over-reliance upon a small and ageing staff and made two recommendations, which were accepted by George II in 1754. These resulted in the appointment of a fourth copying clerk and the instruction of two young trainees in the arts of engraving forged seals and of opening and deciphering correspondence. Todd's foresight paid considerable dividends during the Seven Years' War, and in 1762 he was awarded a gift of $500 for his services to the late king. At the same time his official salary was increased by $100 a year. 
On 12 June 1758 Todd married Ann Robinson (died 1765), the daughter and heir of Christopher Robinson (died 1762) of Appleby, Westmorland, resident surveyor in the Post Office. Her first cousin was the influential John Robinson, Treasury secretary under Lord North. The marriage brought Todd $5000, with which he purchased an estate of about 150 acres at Walthamstow, Essex. His father-in-law's death in 1762 brought him property in the City of London and at Sandal, Yorkshire, as well as $9000 in trust for his family. His wife gave birth to three daughters between 1761 and 1765 but the family's very happy home life came to an abrupt end when the third birth destroyed her health, and she died on 7 August. The youngest child survived her mother by only two months. 
When Shelvocke died in March 1760 Pitt supported Todd for the resulting vacancy of secretary of the Post Office but Newcastle chose Henry Potts. Todd despised Potts and did everything in his power to undermine him but ministerial changes transformed his fortunes. In December 1762, several months after Bute succeeded Newcastle at the Treasury, Potts was dismissed. Todd replaced him but remained foreign secretary, which gave him unprecedented control over the Post Office and the secret and private offices. His annual income was now nearly $2000 and between 1763 and 1765 he carefully built up his own connection. All the existing Post Office clerks were retired or transferred and the department became filled with his own dependants. His relations with the board were excellent and he claimed credit for the 'Franking Act' of 1765. 
When Rockingham took office in July 1765 joint postmaster-general Lord Hyde informed Grantham that Todd was 'experienced, able, active, obliging and honest' (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/8/64) and he was confirmed as foreign secretary within days. However, Rockingham's dismissal of the secretaries of state and the postmasters-general left Todd 'in a violent funk' ('Eglinton MSS', 390) and on 19 July the new ministers restored Potts as secretary to the Post Office. Todd was obliged to withdraw to the secret office and to bear the loss of half his income. On Potts's sudden death, on 1 January 1768, Todd was immediately reappointed by the Chatham ministry to his old position, while again remaining foreign secretary. 
For the next fifteen years Todd remained at the zenith of his influence and prestige. He enjoyed the confidence of successive postmasters-general, not least that of Francis Dashwood, eleventh Baron Le Despencer. With his backing Todd introduced several important innovations; in particular the collection of letters from London receiving houses was improved in 1769, the system of expresses was reformed in 1770, and a 'penny post office' was established in Dublin in 1773. Le Despencer supported Todd's determination to protect the office from excessive political interest. Demands from MPs to appoint their local postmasters and a number of patronage requests from Lord North were all turned down. In return Todd looked after the joint postmaster-generals' interests and dependants, while continuing to advance his own increasingly powerful connection. 
The American War of Independence diverted attention from reform to government service. Todd's robust health enabled him to endure a necessarily arduous workload. He was frequently at his desk until 3 a.m. and became renowned in the office for telling hilarious jokes designed to keep up everybody's spirits. Rising costs, the loss of forty boats, and serious damage to others hampered communication with the army in America but Todd's efforts successfully maintained a fleet for service. He also guarded against waste and fraud and promptly reverted to a peacetime establishment in 1783. His activities brought him highly lucrative rewards. He was worth at least $60,000 in 1782, with an annual income approaching $4000, over half of which was derived from poundage on packet expenditure. 
In 1782 Todd secured a brilliant marriage for his second and only surviving daughter, Eleanour (1762-1856), to James, Viscount Maitland (1759-1839), son of the seventh earl of Lauderdale and at that time MP for Newport. Lauderdale, who had amassed substantial debts, accepted Todd's offer of $30,000, and the marriage took place at Walthamstow on 15 August 1782. On his wedding day Maitland was promised $1000 for each child of the marriage, and to Todd's delight a grandson, later the ninth earl, was born on 12 February 1784. A further eight siblings followed. 
Todd's new son-in-law provided a valuable link to Charles James Fox, while the successful careers of his own friends gave him similar contact with the younger Pitt and his supporters. Todd considered himself 'above being of any one party whatever' (Lauderdale MSS, priv. coll. 26 July 1782) but several new factors began to threaten his influence. As the movement for economical reform gathered pace there were repeated Treasury inquiries and his poundage fees were strongly criticized. Burke's act of 1782, which substantially reduced the annual total of secret service money, resulted in Todd receiving less than $2000 for the secret office, compared with the previous $7100. In addition the government now required a daily service with the continent for intelligence purposes. Out-port merchants also demanded faster posts. Motivated by a desire for increased revenue and greater efficiency William Pitt became interested in the plans of John Palmer (1742-1818) to use coaches to secure faster inland posts. Todd, who favoured mail carts, resorted to a variety of spoiling tactics to prove Palmer's scheme impracticable, including attempts to impose unworkable timetables, publication of partial revenue statistics, and the running of mail carts in direct competition. The foreign secretary, the marquess of Carmarthen, also clashed with Todd over appointments and salaries within the secret office. In 1786 Pitt persuaded Todd to drop his opposition to Palmer's scheme, and in return Pitt supported Todd against Carmarthen and forced Lord Tankerville, one of the postmasters-general, to resign over a minor issue, in August 1786. Tankerville was unwilling to go quietly and his kinsman Charles Grey took up his case in the Commons in May 1787, by demanding an investigation into abuses in the Post Office. When Pitt agreed to refer this to the existing commission for inquiry into fees in the public offices Todd embarked on defensive action. In July 1787 he resigned as foreign secretary, in favour of his nephew John Maddison (1741-1808), which effectively secured the latter's endowment for life. The commission's report, published at the end of May 1788, was unsparing in its criticism, and Todd was explicitly blamed for permitting the sailing packets to be wastefully run and his poundage was roundly denounced. It was clearly easier for his critics to recommend the abolition of sinecures, including the foreign secretaryship, and the replacement of fees and perquisites by salaries, than to grapple with the genuine administrative problems or to acknowledge Todd's previous valuable reforms. 
In the late 1780s Todd, now over seventy, began to suffer ill health and thereafter made little effort to influence policy. When the new establishment of 1793 suppressed the controller-general's place Todd was once more left unrivalled in the office. He now enjoyed an annual salary of $1000 and a further $400 a year as compensation for perquisites; he was also allowed to retain his existing shares in the packets. Most of the work in the office was already being undertaken by Francis Freeling (1764-1836), the resident surveyor, who was made joint secretary in 1797, when the octogenarian Todd was no longer able to attend. The board allowed him to remain at home in Walthamstow on full salary, an arrangement that was shortly afterwards condemned by a Commons' committee as unwarrantable and extravagant indulgence. The joint postmasters-general ignored these criticisms but ordered Todd to sell his share in the 'Grantham' packet boat. 
On 18 April 1798 Todd's growing infirmities convinced him that he should draw up his will, in which the bulk of his estimated $80,000 fortune was bequeathed in trust for his daughter and grandchildren. He died at his house at Walthamstow on 8 June 1798. In the Post Office he continued to be remembered as 'a man of singular abilities and generally beloved' (Ackermann, 2.234). Freeling succeeded as secretary and remained in office until 1836. 


@@@@@


doc= 58419


Robertson, Isabella (1841-1922), ballad collector, was born on 1 February 1841 at her father's croft, Denhead of Boyndlie, Buchan, Aberdeenshire. She was the eldest of five children and only daughter of James Robertson and his wife, Jean Gall, of Strichen, Aberdeenshire. Bell's mother, her sister, and their mother (Bell's grandmother) each had a wide repertory of songs, with many of which Bell became familiar. Although Bell herself was no singer, she had a great love of the songs, and was thus responsible for preserving many of their number, displaying her extraordinary power and precision of memory. She attended a dame-school, run by Janet Taylor, who earned her living chiefly by spinning, and who was herself a tradition-bearer. Bell extended her range from Janet Taylor and from some of the other pupils, girls who were singers or the daughters of singers. Bell also added to her collection at 'meal-and-ales' (harvest home celebrations); she puts on record, for instance, one song heard on such an occasion when she was 'about 14', another when she was 'about 18' (Keith, 249, 273). Travelling people, tinkers, were also a source. 'They used to camp beside my mother's house and the children came to beg, and my brothers, who were boys at the time, used to ask them to sing' (ibid., 251). She found it difficult to make out the words in their singing, perhaps because it was in a style more ornamented than that of the local farming community. 
Bell afterwards spent five and a half years in Glasgow as housekeeper to her four brothers, one of whom was to become a minister of the Free Church in Argyll. Afterwards she returned home to help her mother, after whose death she went into service. For fourteen and a half years she was housekeeper to Alexander Mackie, an invalid with one arm, first at Mill Aden, then in a two-roomed cottage at one of the lodges of Aden House, Aberdeenshire. Her yearly wage was $2, with keep. When her health broke down she retired to New Pitsligo, Aberdeenshire. Encouraged by Mrs Frank Russell of Aden, in 1906 she published a volume of verse, 'Lays of Buchan'. 
At New Pitsligo, Gavin Greig and the Revd J. B. Duncan made Bell's acquaintance. In 1904 they had been commissioned to prepare a volume of local traditional music, predominantly song tunes, but had found it impossible to dissociate the music from the words. Bell remembered words by way of the tunes, giving as excuse for her imperfect recollection of a broadside text, 'It was the tunes that fixd the old songs in my memory' (Lyle, 324). Greig found in her his most important single source: she contributed 383 items to the collection. She was also a shrewd commentator; in the Greig-Duncan MSS she has two volumes of ballad notes, two of song notes, and one of letters to Duncan. She has been rightly called 'the most voluminous transmitter of ballads in the history of ballad-collecting' (Keith, 289). Bell Robertson died at 7 High Street, New Pitsligo, at the age of eighty-one on 19 August 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 58422


Jacob, Violet Augusta Mary Frederica (1863-1946), writer, was born on 1 September 1863 at the House of Dun, near Montrose in Angus (Forfarshire), on the east coast of Scotland. She was the eldest of the three surviving children of William Henry Kennedy-Erskine (1828-1870), laird of Dun, and Catherine (1839-1914), daughter of William Jones, landowner, of Henllys, Carmarthenshire, Wales. A brother, John ('b'. 1864), died in infancy, and her younger sister, Millicent Augusta Lilian, born in 1867, died in 1883 at the age of sixteen. Her brother, Augustus John William Henry Kennedy-Erskine (1866-1908), who had succeeded as laird, died and was buried at sea, aged forty-two. 
Violet Kennedy-Erskine grew up at Dun, and was educated at home, showing early literary and artistic interests. Her first book, which she also illustrated, was published by Blackwood in 1888, and was a comic narrative poem in Scots, written collaboratively with William Douglas Campbell. This minor work is of much less interest than her later poetry, also mainly in Scots, although it is perhaps her fiction which most strongly justifies Jacob's place in the canon of Scottish literature. Much of her writing draws imaginatively on her early experience of life in Angus, and on knowledge of her family's past. The Erskines of Dun were an ancient family, whose history she later recorded in 'The Lairds of Dun' (1931). Lands at Dun purchased by Sir Robert Erskine of that ilk in 1375 belonged to the family until the twentieth century. Several of Jacob's ancestors were notable figures. John Erskine, fifth laird of Dun, a moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, was active in the emergence of the reformed church in Scotland and friendly with John Knox, although considered moderate by Mary, queen of Scots. The House of Dun, designed by William Adam, was built for David Erskine ('bap'. 1673, died 1758), the thirteenth laird, an eminent Scottish judge who, as a covert Jacobite, espoused different religious and political affiliations from his predecessors. He is the likely model for the character David Logie in what is probably Violet's most significant achievement, her novel 'Flemington' (1911); the house, which also appears fictionalized as Balnillo, was acquired by the National Trust for Scotland. Violet's grandmother Augusta was a daughter of the actress Dorothy Jordan and the duke of Clarence (later William IV). These and other aspects of her family history may partly account for her sympathy for the unconventional throughout her work. 
On 27 October 1894, at St John's Episcopal Church, Princes Street, Edinburgh, Violet married Arthur Otway Jacob (1867-1936), an Irishman born in Maryborough (now Portlaoise), educated in Dublin, and serving as a lieutenant with the 20th Royal Hussars, a cavalry regiment of the British army. It is not known how the couple met. Arthur Jacob rose to the rank of major, refusing further promotion because he suffered badly from asthma. Their son, Arthur Henry Jacob, known as Harry, was born on 25 August 1895 in Colchester, the site of the regimental barracks. 
Arthur Jacob departed with his regiment in 1895 for India, to be stationed at Mhow, an army cantonment town on the plains of Indore state, Central India Agency. Violet and Harry followed soon after. Their years in India were happy ones, recorded by the writer in diaries and letters she sent to her mother, and 'Diaries and Letters from India, 1895-1900' was published posthumously in 1990. Violet Jacob responded warmly to local life, learning to speak some Hindustani, and taking a strong interest in Hindu culture. She met various rulers of the Central Indian States, including the maharajas Holkar of Indore and Sindhia of Gwalior. She also had friends and acquaintances among expatriates; one, Adela Nicolson (1865-1904), went on later to publish poetry under the name Laurence Hope. Although Violet Jacob worked as a nurse in the local military hospital at Mhow (and nursed again during wartime), she enjoyed considerable freedom in India, riding on the plains, and collecting and painting plants. Shortly before her death she offered her five volumes of Indian flower paintings to the University of Edinburgh; these were later moved to the Royal Botanical Gardens in Edinburgh. 
Arthur Jacob's regiment was posted to South Africa from 1901 to 1902, participating in the last few months of the South African War. The Jacobs also went with the hussars to Egypt (1903-4). Susan Tweedsmuir, later married to the writer John Buchan, accompanied her mother to Cairo as a girl, and met Violet Jacob, writing in her autobiography: 'Violet had published a small book of poetry, which made her a little suspect to the military society of Cairo. But her charm and beauty and aptitude for getting on with people helped her to live down even poetry' (Tweedsmuir, 54-5). A painting of Violet Jacob as a young woman shows a large-eyed, pale-skinned beauty, and the poet Hugh MacDiarmid, too, was later to remember her as a charming and handsome woman looking younger than her years (Garden, 10). 
Violet Jacob published a volume of poetry in English, 'Verses', in 1905, but while in India had already embarked on her first novel, 'The Sheepstealers' (1902). Set in the Welsh borderlands, and based around the Rebecca riots of the 1840s, this was well received on publication, and was compared with the work of Thomas Hardy (in, for instance, 'The Spectator', 13 September 1902). Although the Jacobs lived in various English garrison towns they stayed at Llantomas, near Hay-on-Wye, Herefordshire, around 1908, and seem to have kept rooms there for many years, as Violet had relatives who probably offered the Llantomas house as a base, which the Jacobs used when they were on leave, and after Arthur Jacob's retirement. In 1908 Violet Jacob published two fictional works rooted in the Anglo-Welsh borderlands, a historical novel, 'The History of Aythan Waring', and a slight novella, 'Irresolute Catherine'. 
Violet Jacob also wrote fiction and poetry for children; an early volume was 'The Golden Heart and other Fairy Stories' (1904), while 'Tales Told by the Miller' (1909) are for older children. Her writing enabled her to augment the family income, and the quality of her work varies, but her adult Scottish fiction is very fine. 'The Interloper' (1904) takes her beloved Angus as its location. Set in the early nineteenth century, the tale of young Gilbert Speid who returns from Spain to his inherited estate near Montrose echoes the work of Scott and Stevenson, and contains some excellent Scots dialogue, while Violet Jacob's style remains distinctively economical and ironic. This historical romance with tragicomic qualities was reprinted in 1912 and again in 1926. 'Flemington' (1911) is an even more powerful novel, set mainly in Scotland after the Jacobite defeat at Culloden in 1746, exploring themes of loyalty and betrayal, and the nature of justice. It was described by John Buchan in a letter of 31 December 1911 as 'the best Scots romance since 'The Master of Ballantrae'' (National Library of Scotland, MS 27416), and was well received by critics when it first appeared, and again when republished in 1994. The Angus locations are vividly evoked, and the many memorable characters include a sensitive young artist-protagonist, Archie Flemington, his strong and ambitious grandmother Christian, and Skirling Wattie, the legless beggar, whose singing voice suggests the lyrical qualities of Scottish folk culture. Although the narrative is gripping, and lightened by Jacob's wit, it is a sombre work. 
Violet Jacob lost her mother in 1914, and the First World War brought further grief. Her son, Harry, died aged twenty, fighting with the Royal Fusiliers at the battle of the Somme in 1916. Around this time she moved around a good deal, writing letters from both Preston and Colchester during the war years. Although drawing strength from her Christian faith, according to Susan Tweedsmuir she never recovered entirely from her son's death. After this she wrote no more novels, but mainly produced poetry and shorter prose. 
Many of Violet Jacob's poems were initially published in 'Country Life'. Her first collection was 'Songs of Angus' (1915), and this was very successful, appealing to exiled Scots, including soldiers, during wartime. The Aberdeenshire vernacular poet Charles Murray, who had emigrated to South Africa, wrote to Violet Jacob admiringly from there. The opening poem of this volume, 'Tam i'the Kirk' has been much anthologized. 'More Songs of Angus and Others' (1918) was followed by several more volumes, mainly in Scots. Her poetry was also published in 'Northern Numbers' (1920-22) by the young C. M. Grieve (Hugh MacDiarmid), then working as a reporter in Montrose, who called her in the 'Scottish Educational Journal' (17 July 1925) 'by far the most considerable of contemporary vernacular poets'. John Buchan included her in his anthology, 'The Northern Muse' (1924). Violet Jacob's Scots poetry, which influenced among others Helen Cruickshank, draws on the ballad tradition and folk-song; it is skilfully crafted, notable for its handling of structure and metre. 'The Scottish Poems of Violet Jacob' (1944) contains some of her best work, and was reprinted several times. Some of her poetry was set to music in the late twentieth century. 
In 1920 the Jacobs moved for a time to Ludlow in Shropshire, but still grieving for her son, Violet Jacob found it difficult to settle. Nevertheless, she published a volume of tautly written short stories in 1922, 'Tales of my Own Country', set in Angus, which the Jacobs still visited regularly. In 1977 some further previously uncollected, and mainly unpublished, short stories from the 1920s and 1930s were discovered; the Second World War and paper shortages had blocked their publication. These appeared as 'The Lum Hat and other Stories' in 1982, edited by Ronald Garden. 
The Jacobs visited India for a second time in 1922-3, accompanying Violet's relation Eilean Sandys-Thomas to her wedding in Bombay. They visited old haunts and explored new ones. Violet Jacob met the begum of Bhopal, then the only woman ruler of an Indian state, and a figure of some consequence, but Violet's diary of this visit remained unpublished at the end of the twentieth century. A young relative considered Violet Jacob herself 'quite a formidable, grand lady' (private information) when he met her in the early 1930s. The Jacobs were now spending their summers at Llantomas and winters abroad, because of Arthur's health. They appear to have spent several months in Liguria, Italy, in 1930, and in 1936 were in the south of France; some watercolours, sketches, and short essays reflect these travels. 
Although Violet Jacob received an honorary degree (LLD) from Edinburgh University in 1936, she did not court fame. Only rare photographs of her remain, and she refused the use of her likeness in publicity for her work. She was a very private person, whose published letters and diaries suggest a spirited personality, yet are not very 'personal'. The few extant unpublished letters to friends and acquaintances reveal intermittent glimpses of her inner life. Arthur Jacob's death late in 1936 was a terrible blow; although the couple had enjoyed independent interests it had been a long and happy marriage, and Violet wrote to a friend: 'I hardly know how to stand up to life now, but will try. I have lost what was more than life to me' (Montrose Library, correspondence of David Waterson, MS X/510/8). She moved back to Scotland, living at Marywell House near Kirriemuir in Angus until the end of her life. In these later years she apparently met the poet Marion Angus, but the meeting was not a success. 
Violet Jacob died at Marywell House, near Kirriemuir, of heart disease on 9 September 1946 and was buried three days later. 'The Scotsman' obituary (11 September 1946) acknowledges her achievements, remarking that she 'was a woman of very strong character, with a delightful sense of humour'. She was not buried in the Erskine burial-ground at the House of Dun, but shared her husband's grave under a modest headstone in the public graveyard at Dun kirk. 


@@@@@


doc= 58423


Mather, Ebenezer Joseph (1849-1927), founder of the Royal National Mission to Deep Sea Fishermen, was born on 12 June 1849 at Foregate Street, Stafford, the son of Henry Penkett Mather ('c'.1805-1886), a shoe manufacturer, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Douthwaite. Although raised a member of the Plymouth Brethren, Mather later joined the Church of England (about 1883) and remained an Anglican for the rest of his life. Following his education at Mr Charles Hammer's private academy, Rhyll, in 1861, Mather worked as a junior clerk in a Worcester bank and later as a market gardener. He became an auditor about 1869 and was licensed as a broker of the City of London. On 4 September 1872 he married his first wife, Caroline Eliza (1849-1925), 'nee' Lough, at Islington register office; they had eight children, two boys and six girls. In 1880 he was appointed as secretary to the Thames Church Mission (TCM), which had been founded in 1844 following the demise of the Episcopal Floating Church Society, to continue the Church of England's work among seafarers on the Thames. 
In 1881 Samuel Hewett, owner of the Short Blue [fishing] Fleet, invited Mather to visit his employees in the North Sea. Following this visit, and in the light of growing public concern with conditions in the fleets, Mather gave a paper on Christian work at sea to the Newcastle church congress in October 1881. He also urged the TCM committee to employ a 'sailing Bethel' for evangelistic work among the fishing fleets, and the 'Ensign' was launched on 14 June 1882, the new venture becoming known as the Mission to Deep Sea Fishermen (MDSF). The TCM committee, however, found the development increasingly burdensome, and in 1884 sought to separate the two aspects of its work. This led, in 1886, to the MDSF being reconstituted as an independent organization under the direct control of Mather and a new council (which included Sir Frederick Treves, R. M. Ballantyne, Dr A. T. Schofield, and G. A. Hutchison). The MDSF quickly moved off in new directions involving the establishment of 'sailing hospitals' and a highly publicized campaign against the North Sea liquor trade engaged in by vessels known as copers ('coopers'). These developments, however, led to severe financial worries, and in 1887 Mather published his history of the MDSF, 'Nor'Ard of the Dogger', in an attempt to increase public support. With the growing financial burdens, Mather found himself the butt of increasing criticism. He became the subject of inquiry by his council regarding financial irregularities, and was forced to resign in August 1889. When the magazine 'Truth' picked up the story, Mather, encouraged by R. M. Ballantyne, sailed in January 1890 for Australia, where he spent two years researching details for a popular travel book which he published as 'The Squatter's Bairn'. 
Details about the remaining thirty-seven years of Mather's life are very sparse. He spent some time as an editor with the 'Church Family Newspaper', and in 1918 was awarded a civil-list pension of $50 p.a. 'in consideration of his valuable work in connection with the Fishermen's Mission and of his inadequate means of support' ('Fish Trades Gazette', 6 July 1918). In retirement he lived on Canvey Island, Essex, where he published (anonymously) his biography, 'Memories of Christian Service'. Following the death of his wife he married his nurse, May Ethel Timewell (1873-1957?), on 16 June 1925, but was to survive only two further years before dying, at their home in Cotswold Gardens, Canvey Island, of heart failure on 23 December 1927. He was buried in the grounds of the nearby church of St Nicholas. 


@@@@@


doc= 58424


Davis, Richard (1750-1814), surveyor, was baptized at Windsor on 22 July 1750, the second of four sons of John Davis (died 1762), clockmaker and locksmith, and his wife, Anne (died 1764). He entered Eton College on 24 May 1757 and left in 1761. The family had a long association with the college, maintaining the school clock and doing other small building works. His name next appears in a notice in 'Jackson's Oxford Journal' of 6 October 1781, advertising his services in selling a gentleman's property in Stokenchurch, Oxfordshire, in which he describes himself as 'Land-Surveyor at Lewknor'. Another notice throws some light onto his missing years: 'RICHARD DAVIS, of LEWKNOR... (removed from Hammersmith) Surveys and Plans ESTATES, and transacts every other Kind of Business with respect to the Purchasing, Selling, or Letting of Estates, Houses &c. on the most reasonable Terms' ('Jackson's Oxford Journal', 23 March 1782, 3). Davis generally referred to himself as 'Richard Davis of Lewknor', as here, to avoid confusion with Richard Davis of nearby Bloxham, also a surveyor. In 1784 Davis secured his first commission; this was as surveyor to the enclosure in Stanford in the Vale and he prepared a map of the enclosure (now lost). In 1785 he undertook the survey and valuation of the manor of Stutteridge, near Stokenchurch, Oxfordshire. In 1786 Davis was appointed topographer to his majesty King George III by the earl of Salisbury, lord chamberlain of the household, and he retained this designation until his death. The royal appointment is not readily explicable although his grandfather had been clockmaker to George II and his father received the royal warrant as locksmith to Windsor Castle: but the appointment certainly gave a major impetus to Davis's career, and from then on his services were frequently sought as surveyor of estates as far afield as Wales; he was also commissioner to the enclosure in Oxfordshire and in Berkshire. 
Davis's home at Lewknor was close to Oxford and he gained numerous commissions from Oxford colleges, including Merton College and New College, as well as from the university itself. In 1787 Davis was asked by Christ Church to survey the open fields and old enclosures in the parish of Benson, for which he also produced a beautifully penned terrier, with the titles highlighted in gold leaf, in which he used decimal fractions for both acreages and shilling values. This was one of several surveys he did for the college. Davis also worked for the board of agriculture, who in 1794 published his 'General view of the agriculture of the county of Oxford with observations on the means of its improvement', the forerunner of Arthur Young's edition of 1813. In his 'View' Davis included a small-scale map of the county compiled by himself. 
Davis's 'New map of the county of Oxford from an actual survey' was produced in response to the Society of Arts' encouragement of large-scale county mapping. In 1790, when the first advertisement for the map appeared, publication was planned for August 1792, but this turned out to be far too optimistic. The price for each map was to be 21/2 guineas with 1 guinea to be paid at the time of subscribing. The map was finally published on 1 August 1797 by John Cary of the Strand, London, in sixteen sheets, at a scale of 2 inches to the mile (1:31,680), in an edition estimated to have been of no more than 200, of which 34 are known to be extant. The scale of 2 inches to the mile was chosen as it had been used by John Rocque for his map of neighbouring Berkshire. Subscribers' copies were numbered in the upper left-hand corner of the title sheet and signed by Davis. The map shows the Oxfordshire landscape before enclosure in most instances. An inset plan of the city of Oxford gives detailed and up-to-date information about changes in the city since previous maps were published. A facsimile edition by Oxfordshire County Libraries was published in 1975 under the editorship of Philip Riden. 
Davis lived the comfortable existence of the country gentleman. He was fond of hunting and his name regularly appeared on the Oxfordshire game duty lists. As the owner of a sizeable estate Davis was active in local affairs and he frequently attended parish meetings. He was also head of a large family; with his wife, Anne -- of whom nothing beyond her name is known -- he had three sons and four daughters. Surveying various estates belonging to Oxford colleges and acting as commissioner to the enclosures provided Davis with a handsome income. By 1790 he could afford to buy an estate at Aston Rowant, Oxfordshire. He built a comfortable 'cottage orne' there called Grove Cottage where, on 10 January 1814, he died. He was buried in Lewknor churchyard on 15 January. Davis's wife and son Thomas managed the estate until 1832 when it was sold. Davis's other goods were divided between his surviving two daughters, Elizabeth and Caroline; the latter received also the copper plates of his survey of Oxfordshire. Davis is a good example of a successful estate and county surveyor who was simultaneously involved in the business of agricultural improvements. 


@@@@@


doc= 58428


Goodman, James (1828-1896), Church of Ireland clergyman and music collector, was born on 22 September 1828 at Ballyameen, Dingle, co. Kerry, third of the nine children of Revd Thomas Chute Goodman ('bap'. 1793, died 1864) and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Gorham, of Castleisland, co. Kerry. His father and paternal grandfather John were successive curates in the Church of Ireland (Anglican) parish of Dingle. He is believed to have received private tuition -- from either a neighbour, Joseph King, or a Mr Earle -- before entering Trinity College, Dublin, in 1846 to read arts and qualify himself in divinity. He graduated BA in 1851 and was ordained a priest on 22 May 1853. 
In October 1852 Goodman married Charlotte King (1826-1888), daughter of his presumed former tutor King. The Kings lived at Ventry, the Goodmans near by on a rented farm of 105 acres overlooking the sea. Goodman was by then working as curate for the Irish Church Missions -- to convert Irish-speaking Roman Catholics to protestantism -- and thus continued in different parts of co. Cork until becoming rector of Abbeystrewry parish (later canon of Ross) and taking up residence in the rectory at Baltimore Road, Skibbereen. During the 1850s the couple had had three sons: Francis George ('b'. 15 July 1853), Godfrey ('b'. 13 Dec 1854), and James ('b'. 11 Nov 1856), who died in an accident in 1881. Frank and Godfrey both moved to England, their descendants living in England and Wales. 
The English surname Goodman appears in Ireland from at least the seventeenth century. Its English origins were remembered: Goodman's grandfather evidently occupied in later life the living at Kemerton, Gloucestershire, which had been held by Godfrey Goodman, bishop of Gloucester (1583-1656). Goodman wrote of his family's English descent and his own Irishness as of a paradox: 'Yet I am not of the old root of the Gaels but of Saxon stock, though my ancestors settled long ago in the West of co. Kerry, where they learned the Irish language and... became, as we say, nearly 'ipsis hibernicis hiberniores'. Thus nothing was dearer to me from my youth than to be listening to the old tales of adventure and the stories of Fionn, nor any music sweeter in my ears than the surpassingly sweet music of Ireland. (trans. from O Fiannachta, 'Dionbhrollach', 222-3)' For all we know, Goodman may never have left Ireland. There he grew up speaking Irish with the ease of his Kerry neighbours and writing it with academic competence. He was, in fact, appointed professor of Irish at Trinity College, Dublin, on 21 June 1879, and thereafter spent each year partly in Dublin, while a curate had charge of his parish. The little he wrote was usually in Irish, including hymns and moral texts for the use of converts. Similarly motivated but more unusual is the long, partly published Gaelic poem in debate form (anonymous but certainly his) on the merits of the Roman Catholic and protestant religions: 'The Debate of Brian and Art'. But his interest in literature expressed itself chiefly in collecting manuscripts in older Irish, sharing their contents with others, copying them himself in elegant Gaelic script, and signing this scribal work Seamus Gudman[n]. An Irish manuscript tradition still existed in his day: in December 1848 it was to a local scribe he turned, Patrick Landers, to get the written words of a song, 'An buachaill caol dubh' ('The Slim Dark Fellow'). 
Goodman compiled four volumes of musical fair copies -- his chief legacy -- between 1860 (or somewhat earlier) and 1866. They make up Trinity College, Dublin, MSS 3194-3197, and contain some 2300 tunes -- all monophonic -- in his hand. He identifies over 500 as his own notations from 'Munster pipers &c.'. A local piper was his major source: Tom Kennedy, a convert to protestantism whom he must have known well and met often. Goodman, moreover, was himself an uilleann piper: his notations sometimes suit the pipes better than other instruments, or, if song airs, better than the voice. Of his remaining tunes many come from unknown manuscripts or oral sources, others from manuscripts or published texts identified or conjectured. The second category displays the breadth of his interests, not only in traditional Irish but in other musical varieties, including popular urban, operatic, military, classical, Scottish, and English. 
Of greatest intrinsic value is Goodman's orally transmitted Irish music. Dance tunes -- jigs, reels, and hornpipes -- with marches and the two unusual descriptive pieces, 'The Fox Hunt' and 'Allisdrum's March', comprise the best of the instrumental items. The airs -- of songs in Irish or English -- were noted from singing or playing, chiefly in ornate versions. The best of them are lyrical, including love songs and laments. It is unfortunate that Goodman, despite his apparent claim to have copied words of the songs, did not include them with his melodies. But his linguistic, instrumental, and vocal talents undoubtedly gave his notations idiomatic quality unusual in his century. 
Goodman died at Skibbereen rectory on 18 January 1896, and was buried nearby at Creagh on the 21st. His collection long remained in manuscript, but the first of two volumes edited by the undersigned appeared in 1998 as 'Tunes of the Munster Pipers: Irish Traditional Music from the James Goodman Manuscripts'. 


@@@@@


doc= 58442


Larmour, John (c.1764-1807), naval officer, almost certainly had a relatively humble upbringing and background before entering the navy as an ordinary seaman; no details are known of his parentage or upbringing. Larmour (nicknamed Jack) had a life and career that would have remained obscure had it not been for his influence on another younger officer, Thomas Cochrane (later tenth earl of Dundonald), whom he encountered in 1793. For Cochrane, Larmour was 'one of a not very numerous class, whom, for their superior seamanship, the Admiralty was glad to promote from the forecastle to the quarter-deck, in order that they might mould into shape the questionable materials supplied by a parliamentary influence. (Dundonald, 11)' Promoted to the rank of lieutenant in June 1784, Larmour possessed abilities that were sufficiently recognized for the Admiralty to employ him during the peace which followed the American War of Independence. In 1787 he was serving as fifth lieutenant of the new ship 'Colossus' (74 guns) and by 1791 he was first lieutenant of the frigate 'Hind' commanded by the Hon. Sir Alexander Cochrane. In June 1793, while the 'Hind' was refitting at Sheerness, Alexander Cochrane sent his nephew Thomas on the vessel as a midshipman, where he came under Larmour's care and instruction. Cochrane was highly impressed to find Larmour dressed in the garb of an ordinary seaman complete with marlinspike round his neck and lump of grease in his hand for treating the rigging. Contrary to the usual behaviour of the commissioned officer Larmour's 'only ideas of relaxation were to throw off the lieutenant and resume the functions of the able seaman' (Dundonald, 13). Thus Larmour provided a role model which Cochrane was himself to emulate successfully in later years. 
At the end of 1793 Larmour followed Alexander Cochrane to the frigate 'Thetis' serving on the Nova Scotia station; here he remained until July 1795, when he was promoted to the rank of commander. Although he probably remained unemployed on half pay for a short while, by 1797 he was commanding the 'Lord Hood' (14 guns), a vessel hired by the Admiralty. Stationed in the North Sea he recaptured the 'Phoenix' brig and successfully claimed salvage on a further brig, the 'John & Amy'. Having been promoted post captain on 16 April 1800, Larmour commanded successively the 'Wassanaer' (64 guns) and the frigate 'Diadem', both with reduced armament. His contact with the Hon. Sir Alexander Cochrane was renewed in March 1801, when Larmour was selected to assist Cochrane with the landing of Sir Ralph Abercromby's troops in Abu Qir Bay during the campaign to drive Napoleon's army out of Egypt. Following the success of this operation he was appointed to the frigate 'Endymion' and then, in mid-1802, the frigate 'Clyde' stationed in the North Sea. By May 1803 Larmour was commanding a small squadron responsible for the blockade of the Elbe. Towards the end of 1805 he briefly commanded the 'Temeraire' and the 'Audacious' before being appointed to another frigate, the 'Emerald'. On 16 January 1807 he died suddenly of 'the Dropsy' while in London; he may have been buried at Lambeth, London. His obituary notice described him as 'An excellent officer, who rose, by fortunate merit alone, from the humblest situation in a ship' ('Naval Chronicle', 17, 176). 


@@@@@


doc= 58443


Collier, Sir George Ralph, baronet (1774-1824), naval officer, was born in London, the second son of Ralph Collier, chief clerk of the victualling office. Educated at the Chelsea Maritime Academy, he went to sea in HMS 'Carysfort' in 1787 already a capable navigator, astronomer, surveyor, and linguist. Commissioned lieutenant on 22 January 1796, he was first lieutenant of the flagship of Admiral Mitchell at the capture of the Dutch fleet at The Helder in 1799. He brought home Mitchell's dispatches, and was promoted commander on 3 September; he was then appointed to command the 18 gun 'Victor'. After escorting a troop convoy to the Red Sea coast of Egypt, Collier engaged the French 18 gun 'Fleche' off the Seychelles on 2 September 1801 until heavy damage to his rigging allowed it to escape. Collier followed, after completing his repairs. On 5 September, the 'Fleche' was sighted entering Mahe, and after surveying the entrance at night Collier sailed into the harbour, anchored, and reduced the French ship to a beached wreck. Only two of his men were wounded. The first lord of the Admiralty, Earl St Vincent, highly approving his conduct, promoted him captain on 20 April 1802, to ensure his precedence over a large block promotion given at the peace. In addition to his well-earned naval support Collier was also a protege of Prince William of Gloucester. On 18 May 1805 Collier married Maria Lyon of Liverpool; there were no children. While on shore he proposed an operation to block the Texel, where he had been active in 1799. 
From February 1806 Collier commanded the frigate 'Minerva' on the north coast of Spain, conducting cutting-out attacks on Spanish privateers and forts. In April 1807 he moved into HMS 'Surveillante'. In the same year he brought home Admiral Gambier's dispatches from the Copenhagen expedition, and was knighted. Collier returned to the Bay of Biscay, capturing a French corvette and four privateers, and harassing French coastal shipping. In 1812 Collier operated on the north coast of Spain, under Admiral Sir Home Popham, supporting the Spanish guerrillas. On 1 August he captured the castle at Santander, but was wounded and forced to withdraw. Two days later the French evacuated the vital position. In 1813 Collier was a commodore with twelve vessels, supporting the Spanish along the coast. He also co-operated with General Sir Thomas Graham at the capture of San Sebastian in August. 
In November 1813 Collier was moved into the new 50 gun 'Leander', specially built to counter successful American heavy frigates like the 'Constitution'. After arriving on the American coast he captured the brig USS 'Rattlesnake', on 22 June 1814, and blockaded the 'Constitution' in Boston. While Collier was taking on stores at Halifax his quarry escaped, and he pursued her across the Atlantic, taking a large privateer on passage and picking up intelligence. On 11 March 1815, two months after the treaty of Ghent had ended the Anglo-American War of 1812-14, Collier -- who did not know this -- with the 'Newcastle', another new 50 gun frigate, and the 40 gun 'Acasta', encountered the 'Constitution' beating out of Porto Praya in the Cape Verde Islands, with the prize sloops 'Cyane' and 'Levant' in company. In the fog the captains of the other two ships mistook the two smaller ships for frigates, while Collier never obtained clear sight of them. When a signal directing 'Acasta' to pursue 'Levant' fouled on hoisting, it was followed by 'Newcastle' as well. The squadron finally pursued 'Levant' back to Porto Praya, where she was recaptured. The 'Constitution' escaped, but Collier quickly moved to a position off Cayenne, where he expected to intercept her. He abandoned this position when he heard of the peace; two days later the Americans passed, as he had expected. Collier's distinguished services earned him a baronetcy on 20 September 1814, and he was created KCB on 2 January 1815. 
Between 1818 and 1821 Collier commanded the six-ship coast of Africa squadron, to suppress the slave trade. He carried out this task with the vigour of a convinced abolitionist, significantly reducing the large-scale shipment of slaves. His reports, produced for the House of Commons, were widely consulted. In 1820 his work was recognized by election to honorary life membership of the African Institution. Mortified by William James's account of his action with 'Constitution' in the 'Naval Occurrences of the War of 1812', which implied incompetence at the least, Collier requested an Admiralty rebuttal. When this was denied, 'in a fit of insanity', he cut his throat, on 24 March 1824 ('GM', 284). After his death his conduct was stoutly defended by the naval biographer John Marshall. American accounts agree with Marshall that the weather was too thick for a positive identification of the ships. 
A brave, resourceful, and effective sea officer, Collier was denied by early death the opportunity to distinguish himself in peacetime commands, and the service was deprived of one of its brightest ornaments. His baronetcy became extinct on his death, and his suicide may account for his omission from the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. 


@@@@@


doc= 58446


Tobin, James Webbe (1767-1814), slavery abolitionist, was born at Stratford-sub-Castle, outside Salisbury, on 19 October 1767. He was the first of eight children of James Tobin (1736/7-1817), a sugar planter and merchant of Nevis and Bristol, and his wife, Elizabeth Webbe (1744/5-1824). When his parents left Salisbury in 1777 to manage the family plantations on Nevis he and his brothers George Tobin and John Tobin were brought up by their maternal grandfather and sent to King Edward VI School in Southampton until their parents returned from Nevis in 1784 and settled in Bristol, where Tobin may have attended the grammar school. Immediately after graduating BA from Wadham College, Oxford, in 1791 he visited revolutionary France. However, he may have come to share his brother John's growing disillusionment with both the violence in France and the increasing repression in England. 
It seems probable that Tobin was involved in radical politics in England at this time, perhaps as a member of the London Constitutional Society, for it was suggested later that his father's partner, John Pinney, had been required to help him escape arrest by smuggling him out of the country to Philadelphia in February 1793. During this visit and before his return from Nevis in September 1794 his eyesight began to fail, a condition which plagued him for the rest of his life, ended his interest in the church as a profession, and led to the epithet 'Blind Tobin'. From at least April 1796 he shared chambers with his playwright brother, John, at the Temple in London. About this time he re-entered radical circles becoming a devout follower of William Godwin, though later he grew disillusioned with Godwinian rationalism. It was probably through Basil Montagu, or perhaps through the sons of John Pinney, that Tobin became friendly with William Wordsworth, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, and Robert Southey. Tobin may have visited the Wordsworths at Alfoxden in 1797 with Tom Wedgwood; he was certainly included by Coleridge in the original first line of 'We are Seven' as the 'little child, dear brother Jem' (Moorman, 383-5) although Tobin pleaded unsuccessfully with Wordsworth to drop the poem. About 1798 he began a lifelong friendship with Humphry Davy, who wrote an amusing account of Tobin's part in the experiments with nitrous oxide. Coleridge, meanwhile, was eager for Tobin and Davy to join him, along with Wordsworth and Southey, in a utopian colony abroad. Tobin contributed at least five poems to the second volume of Southey's 'Annual Anthology' and urged Southey to produce a third. He also corresponded regularly with Coleridge, who stayed with Tobin at Barnard's Inn, London, in early 1804. However, later that year Coleridge began to believe that Tobin was an inveterate and mischievous gossip, and they fell out on the eve of Coleridge's departure for Malta over Tobin's constant advice on the subjects of health and debts. Shortly after this Tobin suffered a terrible blow with the death of his constant companion, his brother, John, in December 1804. 
Tobin recovered some of his cheerfulness when he married Jane Mallet (died 1837) on 8 September 1807 at St Botolph without Bishopsgate, London. They had at least four children. In 1809 the family moved to his father's plantation, Stoney Grove, on Nevis. Unlike his father Tobin was a fervent critic of slavery and became an advocate for its abolition. His correspondence with the abolitionist African Institution and others was responsible for the widespread publicity given to the flogging of thirty-two slaves by the notorious Edward Huggins in the public market in Charlestown, Nevis, on 23 January 1810, and to the subsequent acquittal of Huggins by a rigged jury of planters. In his correspondence Tobin advocated the right of free black people to vote and attacked the standard of justice in the islands as well as other practices. This stance led both to threats from planters and to the publicly expressed gratitude of the African Institution. 
Tobin died on his father's plantation of a fever on 30 October 1814 and was buried a day later at St John Figtree, Nevis. His wife continued to play a role in the abolition cause since, when she left the island, she took with her to Bristol a free black man, Charles Hamilton, who had been enslaved illegally on the islands of St Barts and St Kitts and who had been freed by the courts. 


@@@@@


doc= 58447


Redlich, Josef (1869-1936), scholar and politician, was born on 18 June 1869 at Goding (Hodonin), Moravia, the second of five children and younger son of Adolf Redlich (1839-1896), sugar manufacturer, and his wife, Rosa Fanto (died 1908). Coming from a German-Jewish family background in a rural Slav area, he was sent to Vienna in 1878 to attend the Akademisches Gymnasium, one of the leading secondary schools, from which he graduated in 1886. From 1886 to 1891 he studied law, political science, and history at the universities of Vienna, Leipzig, and Tubingen. During this period he visited England for the first time. He was awarded a doctorate in law at the University of Vienna in 1891. 
After two years of administrative work at the office of the governor of Moravia, Redlich returned to Vienna to engage in scholarly research. He visited England frequently in the following years, winning the friendship of such men as F. W. Maitland, A. W. Dicey, James Bryce, R. W. Seton-Watson, and F. W. Hirst, and was deeply influenced by the political programme of the Fabian Society. In 1893 he participated in organizing a Fabian Society in Vienna and became co-founder of the weekly 'Die Zeit' (later turned into an influential liberal daily), to which he contributed articles dealing with legal, administrative, and political topics. In 1897 he was baptized as a protestant before marrying Alice, daughter of Konsul Gustav Simon from Konigsberg, with whom he had a son, Hans Ferdinand Redlich, who became a renowned musicologist. 
Entering a career as a scholar, Redlich was led by the study of Rudolf Gneist's works on English administrative and constitutional history to undertake intensive research in English administrative law. This resulted in a two-volume study, 'Local Government in England', first published in German at Vienna in 1901 and translated and edited by his friend Hirst in 1903. Based on the thesis that the English system of local administration represented the direct influence of the political and social ideas of democracy on the organization and function of government, the book established his reputation as a scholar and led to his being recognized as a leading authority on English political science. It gained him the appointment as 'Privatdozent fur Staats- und Verwaltungsrecht' at the University of Vienna in 1901. 
Redlich's next book, 'Recht und Technik des englischen Parlamentarismus' (1905) was translated into English and published in three volumes as 'The Procedure of the House of Commons' (1908). It became the standard and authoritative handbook for parliamentary procedure in England. Courtenay Ilbert, clerk of the House of Commons, who wrote an introduction to the translation, described the work as indispensable not only for the scholar but even more for the routine activities of the members of parliament. In 1910 Redlich demonstrated in his third book, 'Das Wesen der osterreichischen Kommunalverfassung', his insight into the complicated administrative system of his fatherland. 
Redlich's scholarly activities were made possible by the family agreement, which had made his beloved elder brother Fritz the manager of the factory and financial holdings of the family, while Josef was guaranteed a regular income from the family property. By this arrangement he could lead a carefree life which enabled him to buy a spacious Biedermeier-style villa in the fashionable Dobling district in Vienna even during his years as unpaid 'Privatdozent'. In 1906 he entered politics, being elected to the Moravian diet as representative of his native town, Goding. He was elected representative to the lower house of parliament in 1907, joining the Deutscher Nationalverband. In 1908 he was appointed professor of constitutional and administrative law at the Technical University of Vienna. While he was successful during these years as a scholar and in politics, his marriage broke down and in 1908 he divorced his unfaithful wife. 
The diaries which Redlich kept during the years 1908 to 1919 show how he managed to combine political engagement, scholarly activities, and a busy social life. An ebullient manner combined with his scintillating wit and brilliant conversation made him a well-liked guest in aristocratic circles as well as a close friend of leading artists and writers such as Gustav Mahler, Hermann Bahr, and Hugo von Hofmannsthal. A passionate letter writer, his correspondence with Bahr and von Hofmannsthal, along with Austrian statesmen and diplomatists, as well as with leading scholars in England and the USA is a highly valuable source for the political, social, and cultural history of the first twenty years of the twentieth century. Redlich's position in parliament was that of an outsider who was admired for his eloquent speeches, but viewed with suspicion for his nonconformist tendencies, such as maintaining contact with representatives from other parties and with representatives from non-German nationalities. He had a close relationship to T. G. Masaryk who, born in Goding on the Redlich property, was rumoured to be more than just a friend to the family. 
Redlich's scholarly reputation as an expert in Anglo-Saxon law brought him invitations to lecture in the USA. In 1910 he was invited to Harvard University as Godkin lecturer and later travelled to the United States as guest speaker at various universities. During 1913-14 he taught comparative law at the James Schouler Foundation of the Johns Hopkins University. Invited by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching to study the methods of legal studies in the USA, he published in 1914 'The Common Law and the Case Method in American University Law Schools', which gained him admiration from the American scholarly establishment. 
As an expert on administrative law Redlich was appointed head of a committee to reform and streamline the Austrian bureaucracy. His close contacts with the foreign minister, Aehrenthal, and friendship with several of the younger diplomatists in the Austro-Hungarian foreign service also led to various assignments in Balkan affairs. Redlich supported the position of the Austro-Hungarian and the German governments at the outbreak of the First World War, but he slowly became critical of German imperialism and war policy, breaking with his party of German nationalists in parliament. In July 1917 Emperor Charles briefly considered appointing him prime minister, and he was appointed minister of finance in the last cabinet of the Habsburg monarchy in October-November 1918. In that depressing period Redlich found consolation in private fulfilments. At the home of his brother he met Gertrude Flaschar (1900-1976), daughter of a Styrian lawyer; they married on 10 August 1919 and had two daughters, Lore, born in 1920 and Rosemary, born in 1922. 
After the collapse of the Habsburg monarchy Redlich withdrew from politics, though the republican government tried in 1921 to exploit his transatlantic reputation by sending him as an unofficial envoy to the USA in order to raise a loan to avert national bankruptcy. This journey brought no positive results for the Austrian government but led to the re-establishment of Redlich's contact with American universities. Redlich resumed the life of a savant, spreading his interests as well as his activities over two continents: during the war years Redlich had already begun a monumental study, 'Das osterreichische Staats- und Reichsproblem', a history of administrative and constitutional changes in Austria from Empress Maria Theresa to Emperor Franz Josef, and it was published in two volumes, in 1920 and 1926. On an assignment for the Carnegie Foundation on War and Peace he prepared a small book, 'Austrian War Government' (1929). In 1922 he was invited as Lowell lecturer at Boston to speak on problems of national self-determination at the Institute of Politics in Williamstown, Massachusetts. In 1926 he became professor of comparative public law at Harvard law school, being appointed to the Charles Stebbins Fairchild chair three years later. While living in the USA he wrote a biography of Emperor Franz Josef, published simultaneously in English and German (1929). Having been elected in 1929 deputy judge to the Permanent Court of International Justice at The Hague he returned to Austrian politics in 1931, when Karl Buresch invited him to join his government as minister of finance, hoping that Redlich's international reputation might be of help in solving the financial crisis of the republic. Once again Redlich's government engagement was of short duration for he resigned after four months, returning to his academic position in the USA. In 1934, when his physical health began to fail, he resigned his professorship at Harvard and returned to Vienna, where he died on 11 November 1936. He was buried in the Doblinger cemetery, Vienna. 


@@@@@


doc= 58450


Ponsonby, Frederick Edward Grey, first Baron Sysonby (1867-1935), courtier and author, was born on 16 September 1867 at 6 Cloisters, Windsor Castle, the fourth of five children of Sir Henry Frederick Ponsonby (1825-1895), private secretary to Queen Victoria, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth Ponsonby (1832-1916) ['see under 'Ponsonby, Sir Henry Frederick], daughter of John Crocker Bulteel, landowner and MP of Flete, Devon, and his wife, Lady Elizabeth, daughter of Charles, second Earl Grey, the prime minister. Both Ponsonby's parents came from prominent whig families and this aided their introduction to court. However, both parents had talent as well as connections. In 1870 Queen Victoria selected Henry Ponsonby to be her private secretary, and later made him keeper of the privy purse as well. Under his long tenure in office, these two posts became the most important household positions. Ponsonby's mother served as maid of honour to the queen before her marriage to Henry Ponsonby in 1861. Afterwards, she took an active interest in promoting women's education and civil rights, and was on the committee that founded and raised funds for Girton College, Cambridge. She had friends among prominent feminists and intellectuals, for example Ethel Smyth and George Eliot. Both she and her husband were Liberal in their politics. The family enjoyed a keen sense of the absurd. Their dinner table in the Norman Tower at Windsor was a disorderly mixture of argument, in-jokes, and helpless laughter. 
As a boy Fritz Ponsonby, as he was generally known, attended Hawtrey's School, Slough, and subsequently Eton College (1880-86). From there he followed in his father's footsteps from Sandhurst to a commission in the Grenadier Guards. Unlike his father, he collected gambling debts and grew to be a Conservative in politics. As a way of saving money he accepted an invitation to go to India as aide-de-camp to the viceroy, Lord Elgin, in 1893. He was there for only a short time before Queen Victoria invited him, as a mark of honour to his father, to fill a vacant equerryship in her household. He reluctantly accepted and returned to England. 
In his first waiting at court Ponsonby gave deep offence to the queen. She had asked him to enquire, while still in India, about the relatives of Abdul Karim, her munshi, or Indian secretary. She was mildly infatuated with Karim, an awkward but harmless attachment. Karim had claimed to be the son of a doctor; Ponsonby flatly denied this and told the queen, truthfully but tactlessly, that Karim's father was merely druggist to the gaol in Agra. She refused to speak to Ponsonby afterwards and arranged his waitings so as to have as little contact with him as possible. The contrast with his father's tolerance and discretion could not have been greater. 
Fritz Ponsonby survived the queen's fury, and with the increased work during the diamond jubilee (1897) she gave him his first full-time appointment at court. He became assistant private secretary to Sir Arthur Bigge and assistant keeper of the privy purse to Sir Fleetwood Edwards. He hoped ultimately to fill both his father's old offices, but failed partly because of office politics and partly because of his own obstreperousness. When Queen Victoria died, King Edward VII brought with him to the throne his own private secretary, Sir Francis Knollys. There had always been friction between the queen's staff and Knollys, in which can be found echoes of the difficult relations between Hanoverian sovereigns and their eldest sons. Knollys reduced Ponsonby's position to half pay by adding a second assistant. Ponsonby stayed on with reduced wages and responsibilities, possibly because he got on well with the new king. Both were sticklers for proper dress, liked arranging ceremonies, and enjoyed the plutocratic extravagance of their day. 
Ponsonby prided himself on not being a flatterer, and towards the king's son and heir he adopted a more hectoring stance. When King George V came to the throne he regarded Ponsonby as a perpetual critic, but put up with him from a sense of filial duty. In 1914 the king brought him back from France, where he was serving with the guards, to be keeper of the privy purse. In this office Ponsonby supervised draconian reductions in household expenditure necessitated by the First World War. The duke of Windsor recalled him as a quintessential figure of the court establishment: Ponsonby had upbraided the then prince of Wales in 1919 for making himself too accessible to the public, and would brook no argument with his assertion that 'The Monarchy must always retain an element of mystery' (Edward VIII, 132). 
In the 1920s, when his duties at court had become routine, Ponsonby had turned to writing. In 1929 he published 'Letters of the Empress Frederick' (Queen Victoria's eldest daughter, and mother of Kaiser Wilhelm II), who was Ponsonby's godmother. The papers had come to him under extraordinary circumstances. The Empress Frederick, on her deathbed and highly sedated with morphine, asked him to take them for safe keeping to England. The Kaiser regarded this as theft and tried to prevent the publication of the letters, especially as they revealed how poorly he had treated his mother. Ponsonby defied the Kaiser and ignored George V's misgivings. The book received good reviews and bolstered the evidence, as seen from England, of the Kaiser's wickedness. 
Next, from among his father's papers Ponsonby published 'Sidelights on Queen Victoria' (1930), which juxtaposed laughably trivial stories with letters illustrating the court's involvement in important questions of policy. For example, an early chapter showed the court obsessed with whether the queen's German secretary should be allowed to ride a pony at Balmoral. A later chapter examined the negotiations conducted on behalf of the queen during the passage of the third 'Reform Bill'. The book lacked the historical perspective which his younger brother, Arthur, Lord Ponsonby of Shulbrede, brought to the same subject in 'Henry Ponsonby', his 1942 biography of their father. However, it contained inside stories of court life, which tended to diminish Queen Victoria's stature as a goddess, though the odd combination of high politics and low comedy augmented the legendary aura of her court. 
Fritz Ponsonby's masterpiece was 'Recollections of Three Reigns' (1951), published posthumously. Here he deployed the family sense of the absurd to superb effect. Ponsonby arranged his 'Recollections' in a series of anecdotes suitable for after-dinner hilarity. Nancy Mitford told Evelyn Waugh there was 'a shriek on every page' ('Letters of... Mitford and... Waugh', 254). 
Ponsonby had married, on 17 May 1899, Victoria Lily (known as Ria) Hegan Kennard (died 1955), the daughter of Colonel Hegan Kennard and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Hegan. They had two children, Edward Gaspard, later second Lord Sysonby, and Loelia, who achieved notoriety by her marriage to (1930) and subsequent divorce (1947) from Hugh, second duke of Westminster. The Ponsonbys lived in St James's Palace, as well as at Great Tangley Manor, Guildford, yet they were never particularly well off. Their daughter had at one point to be withdrawn from her boarding-school because they were unable to pay her fees; Lady Sysonby had financial worries as a widow. 
Fritz Ponsonby was created Lord Sysonby of Wonersh, Surrey, on 24 June 1935, and died at a nursing home at 20 Devonshire Place, Marylebone, London, on 20 October the same year. His funeral was at the Chapel Royal, St James's, and his body was then taken to Golders Green for cremation (22 October). Although he could be punctilious and overbearing, his books were authentic and entertaining. They contain valuable lessons about the court's being at its most attractive when alive to both the dignity and ridiculousness of ceremonial, as well as when its political powers are circumscribed by democratic traditions. 


@@@@@


doc= 58453


Wills family (per. c.1786-1928), tobacco manufacturers, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 58454


Lister, Susanna (bap. 1670, d. 1738), natural history illustrator, and her sister 
In 1684 the family moved to London and, in the following year, Lister published a collection of plates depicting exotic land shells ('De cochleis', 1685). Monograms (SL and AL 'pni.') on the title page indicate that the pictures were painted by Susanna and Anne, although the plates were probably engraved by William Lodge (1649-1689), who had illustrated Lister's first book, on spiders and molluscs (Keynes, 28). None the less, plates published that year in the 'Philosophical Transactions' are signed 'SL sculp.', indicating that fifteen-year-old Susanna was already mastering the craft. Meanwhile, the family embarked on a project, to prepare an illustrated catalogue of all known shells, that was to occupy them for another ten years. Martin Lister amassed a collection, borrowed from others, and prepared a classification system. The two sisters drew and painted illustrations and engraved them on copper plates, with their father's terse Latin descriptions. The 'Historia conchyliorum' was divided into four sections, the title-pages of which bear the consecutive dates 1685 to 1688, and the footnote 'Susanna et Anna Lister figuras delinearunt' (or variations of the same). Each was continually revised and reissued, and the final version, with 1062 plates, was not complete until 1697. In 1692 Edward Lhwyd wrote to Lister 'I do not wonder your workw[omen] begin to be tired, you have held them so long to it' (Gunther, 155). 
Many of the sisters' original pencil and watercolour drawings exist (Bodl. Oxf., MS Lister 9) and some are signed, as are a few of their engravings. Their styles differ, especially in the representation of cast shadows; Anne (whether painting or engraving) used bold parallel lines of graduated thickness, while Susanna used washes or cross-hatching. 'The plates are executed with great fidelity and spirit, and bear testimony to the extraordinary talents and industry of the artists' (Davies, 308). Their father published no further descriptive works, and no later work of either woman is known. 
In 1706 or 1707 Susanna married Gilbert Knowler (1663-1730) of Herne, to become his third wife and mother of Susanna (1708-1768), her only child, who was married at Canterbury Cathedral in 1730 to William Bedford (1702-1783), rector of Bekesbourne. Susanna died at Bekesbourne on 8 March 1738, and was buried beside her husband at Herne on 15 March. Nothing more is known about Anne Lister. Only two of her brothers and sisters had died by 1695, so she was still alive when her mother's memorial tablet recorded 'six children in teares'. However, when her father made his will in 1704 he named only five, and she was not among them. 
The 'Historia conchyliorum', reprinted in 1770 and 1830, was a major reference work for which Martin Lister was renowned as 'the father of British testaceology' (Maton and Rackett, 138). These authors also bear testimony to the part played by Susanna and Anne Lister, 'whose names deserve to descend to posterity with their father's, and whose truly meritorious industry and ingenuity are patterns for their sex' (ibid., 141). 


@@@@@


doc= 58455


Adams, Henry (1713-1805), shipbuilder, was born in Deptford, the son of Anthony Adams, a shipwright at the town's royal dockyard. In 1726 he began his apprenticeship to Benjamin Slade, the foreman of the yard. Adams moved to Hampshire in 1744 and was appointed naval overseer for the building of the 'Surprise' (24 guns) in James Wyatt and Major's yard at Buckler's Hard, near Beaulieu, Hampshire. The yard was then in difficult times and, following the departure of three successive builders, Adams took it over in March 1748, with support from the duke of Montagu. In 1747 Adams had married Elizabeth Smith (died 1759) of Beaulieu; they had two children, who died in childhood. 
Adams's first ship, the 'Mermaid' (24 guns), was launched in 1749, a year after the end of the War of the Austrian Succession. Naval work dried up, and Adams built some herring busses for the British Fisheries Society; however, in 1754, upon the threat of another war with France, he signed a contract for another 24-gun ship, and this soon led to further orders for small warships. His work on the 'Coventry' (28 guns) was criticized in 1756 and it was recommended that the naval overseer, Mr Snooks, should not be employed again. Nevertheless, Adams was awarded the contract for a frigate, the 'Thames' (32 guns), in 1757. In 1760, a year after his first wife's death, Adams married Anne Warner ('c'.1738-1827), daughter of the steward of the manor of Beaulieu; they had seven children. 
Early in 1762 Adams signed the contract to build the 'Europe' (64 guns), his first ship of the line. Because of doubts about the site at Buckler's Hard, the Navy Board insisted that it be built at Lepe, near the mouth of the Beaulieu River. In 1763 he entered a partnership with William Dudman and William Barnard, who ran a private shipyard at Deptford. Naval work came to an end after the peace in 1763 and the Buckler's Hard site was for several years used mainly as a timber yard. In 1771 Adams was contracted to build a 74-gun ship at Deptford, followed by three smaller ships at Buckler's Hard. By the end of the year the Navy Board had accepted that the site was suitable for larger ships after some improvements and Adams was contracted for the 'Vigilant' (64 guns). Following the outbreak of the American War of Independence in 1775 Adams flourished as a naval contractor. Many frigates and smaller ships were built, but the most famous product of the yard was the 'Agamemnon' (64 guns), begun in 1779 and launched in April 1781. At the end of that year Adams was contracted to build an even larger ship, the 'Illustrious' (74 guns), which was not completed until 1789. 
In 1792 Adams lost a lawsuit against his former partners in Deptford and his family were forced to depend on Buckler's Hard as their sole source of income. In 1793, at the age of eighty, he retired and left the running of the business to his sons Balthazar and Edward. Adams died at Buckler's Hard in 1805, and was buried in Beaulieu church on 3 November. The yard went bankrupt in 1811. 
Adams was typical of dozens of private shipbuilders who worked for the Royal Navy in the age of sail. His name is remembered partly because the rural site at Buckler's Hard survived intact and was opened as a museum in 1963. His reputation is perhaps exaggerated because he built the 'Agamemnon', which was highly praised by Nelson when he commanded her, after five years on half pay, from 1793 to 1796. Yet Adams did not design the 'Agamemnon', but merely constructed her to a plan originally drawn by Sir Thomas Slade. 


@@@@@


doc= 58457


Wyatt, James (1690/91-1767), merchant and shipbuilder, was born in the Hythe area of Southampton and probably in that part of Hythe then in the parish of Dibden. Details of his parents are obscure; however, Wyatt is known to have had one elder brother, Joseph ('c'.1689-1757). Throughout his life James was to work closely with his brother, the two often involved in joint business enterprises. An early reference to Joseph appears in 1719 when he supplied boards for the gates of Beaulieu church, while in 1726 he supplied timber for a quay being built on Beaulieu River. This latter was part of the failed Montagu Town scheme in which John, second duke of Montagu, hoped to establish a major port to receive produce from plantations in the West Indies. 
During the War of the Austrian Succession (1740-8) the quay was put to use by the Wyatt brothers, who jointly exported timber out of the New Forest, supplying both compass oak and treenails to the naval dockyard at Portsmouth. While Joseph continued to concentrate upon the supply of timber, acquiring rights on a number of properties throughout the New Forest, James directed his attention towards the building of ships. As the war placed considerable pressures upon existing government dockyard facilities, the Admiralty increasingly turned to private shipbuilders for the construction and repair of smaller warships. Although having no direct experience of such work, Wyatt was closely connected with the most important commodity of the shipbuilding process, that of timber. In possession, also, of certain entrepreneurial skills, he used both his knowledge of the Beaulieu area and recent experience of supplying the Admiralty to secure a shipbuilding contract and a site upon which the vessel could be built. The site chosen was Buckler's Hard, this being part of the failed Montagu Town site and secured from the duke of Montagu at a rent of $5 per annum. James Wyatt was thus the first shipbuilder to make use of this historic site which remains the property of the Montagu family and is little changed since the days of Wyatt's enterprise. 
The contract secured from the Admiralty was for a 24-gun ship that was to be launched in 1745 as the 'Surprise'. Overseeing construction of this vessel, the Admiralty appointed a senior naval dockyard shipwright, Henry Adams, with Wyatt having to recruit the necessary workforce. In 1746 Wyatt acquired a second Admiralty contract, the 'Scorpion' (18 guns), also built at Buckler's Hard. Despite the success of the shipbuilding venture no further contracts were obtained, the Admiralty preferring to direct all new work to its own facilities now that exigencies of war had declined. In March 1748 the yard was taken over by Henry Adams. James Wyatt returned to the supply of timber, the will of Joseph Wyatt, read in 1757, noting that he possessed at least one messuage (in Fawley). Wyatt, who died in September 1767, left four children born to his first wife, Sarah (died 'c'.1729), and a further two children of his second wife, Hannah King (died 1786), whom he had married in Fawley parish church on 4 February 1732. James Wyatt was buried (5 September) with his brother at Dibden; the site of the grave is marked by a magnificent tomb that depicts a ship, and declares James to have been seventy-six years of age at his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 58459


Paschall, Andrew (1631?-1696), Church of England clergyman and advocate for a universal language, was born in Soper Lane, London. He matriculated at Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1647, proceeding BA in 1651, MA in 1654, and BD in 1661. A fellow of Queens' from 1653 to 1663, he was a university preacher from January 1658. He was obliged to demand readmittance to his fellowship at the Restoration, which was granted in August 1660. Three years later he resigned it when presented to the living of Chedzoy in Somerset, by Sir Francis Rolle. Here he remained until 1689 when he moved first to Bristol and thence to Wells as chancellor of the cathedral (25 March 1689), prebendary (25 December 1690), and canon residentiary (September 1693). 
At Cambridge, Paschall had connections with the Cambridge Platonists through John Smith, fellow and later dean of Queens', or John Worthington. From them he derived an insistent rationality and a commitment to learning as a way of recovering true, pre-lapsarian knowledge which would heal religious schism and its resultant social disorder. Paschall was imbued with the idea that man's duty to God meant that he must labour for moral and social improvement. His favoured tool for effecting such social reform through learning was the universal language of John Wilkins in the mastering, improving, and propagation of which he spent several decades. 
Paschall's research into a universal language was carried out in the context of group activity on the subject orchestrated by John Aubrey in a circle of correspondents that included Paschall himself, Francis Lodowick, Robert Hooke, John Ray, and Thomas Piggott. Inspired by this and by the Royal Society, Paschall, in association with Joseph Glanvill, tried to establish a 'Clubb for Philosophicall Correspondence' in Somerset. Although this functioned only briefly, in 1669-70, Paschall continued to pursue its twin aims of promoting a universal language and amassing observations for a general natural history. In the 1680s he proposed the writing of a natural history of Somerset modelled on the county natural histories produced by Robert Plot. Although nothing came of such projects, and Paschall himself published nothing, his career reveals the force of the intellectual, idealistic social reform movement of the century, in Paschall's case interestingly combined with a staunch church tory political position. Thanks to his influence Chedzoy, despite being close to the centre of the uprising sparked in the summer of 1685 by James Scott, duke of Monmouth, supplied few, if any, recruits to the duke's army. However, Paschall was sufficiently impressed by the momentous events in his neighbourhood to write two accounts of the battle of Sedgemoor. One of these, published in Samuel Heywood's 'A Vindication of Mr Fox's History of the Reign of James II' (1811), is relatively well known; the second appeared in 'Somerset and Dorset Notes and Queries' (vol. 28, 1961-7). A plan of the battlefield that he drew (preserved in Bodl. Oxf., Ballard MSS) has been much reproduced. In August 1694 Paschall was appointed steward for two years at Wells, and he died soon after the term of this office, before November 1696. 


@@@@@


doc= 58461


Headrick, James (bap. 1759, d. 1841), Church of Scotland minister, agronomist, and geologist, was baptized in the Stirlingshire parish of Logie on 25 March 1759, second of eight children of John Headrick ('b'. 'c'.1730), farmer, and Isabel, 'nee' Neilson ('b'. 'c'.1735). The family was believed to descend from two German brothers, Cromwellian soldiers settled in Scotland. Educated at the parish school and in Dunblane, Headrick matriculated at Glasgow University in 1774. He did not graduate, though he 'took many prizes' (Lowson and Young, 82), and proceeded to study for the ministry. Licensed by Hamilton presbytery on 25 April 1786, Headrick preached occasionally and evidently did some schoolteaching. He also pursued a lifelong interest in the natural sciences, joining a Glasgow chemical society in the late 1780s. In the 1790s he found employment in the atelier of Sir John Sinclair, probably working on 'The Statistical Account of Scotland' and certainly on tasks for the board of agriculture and internal improvement under Sinclair's presidency. Headrick's 'Essay on Manures' was published by the board in 1796. 
By then Headrick was embroiled, as became almost habitual with him, in controversy. Following the death, in January 1796, of John Anderson (whose student he had doubtless been), Headrick was a candidate for the Glasgow University chair of natural philosophy, with the support (he believed) of William McDowall MP, then rector of the university, and of Henry Dundas, secretary of state for war. Defeated by canvassing on behalf of a rival, Headrick (who later nursed the delusion that he had been appointed to the chair and arbitrarily ejected from it) published, pseudonymously, a scurrilous verse lampoon on the university establishment: 'A Peep into the Convent of Clutha' (1797). Having failed likewise to secure appointment as professor in the new institute set up under John Anderson's will, Headrick looked elsewhere for advancement. With the backing of Sir John Dalrymple of Cranston, he wrote to the first lord of the Admiralty (Earl Spencer) and to Dundas with elaborate accounts of weapons designed to facilitate operations (especially at sea) against France. 
Neither these (often importunate) approaches nor an attempt in 1798 to secure presentation as minister of Slamannan having borne fruit, Headrick returned to work for Sinclair and others, surveying agrarian and other resources in the Scottish highlands and islands. His travels between 1797 and 1801 took him as far north as Loch Broom on the mainland and to the island of Lewis. On this basis Headrick published an article on the advantages of what became the Caledonian Canal ('Prize Essays and Transactions of the Highland Society', 1799), and an essay on the improvement of waste lands (1801). In 1802-3 he was in Caithness, surveying mineral resources for the Scottish exchequer chamber and engaging in a somewhat Pickwickian quarrel, with assault threatened and a duel in the offing. He also pre-contracted marriage with Katharine Macbeth (1787-1856), the daughter, not yet sixteen, of a local farmer. The marriage was allegedly solemnized in Edinburgh on 3 September 1804 (though there is some dubiety as to the record of this). Still pursuing preferment, Headrick spent some time in London 'dancing attendance on my Lords of the Admiralty' (Lowson and Young, 89), but with no greater success than his letters had yielded. In the latter part of 1806 he was travelling again -- to Skye, to Fort Augustus, and especially to Arran. In 1807 his substantial 'View of the Mineralogy, Manufactures, and Fisheries of the Island of Arran', dedicated to Sir Joseph Banks, was published by Constable. 
By then Headrick was at last receiving his long-sought preferment. Through the patronage of George Dempster of Dunnichen, he obtained crown presentation to that Forfarshire parish. He was ordained on 12 August 1807 as assistant and successor to the septuagenarian minister Thomas Masson, who died two years later. Headrick's troubles, however, were far from over. Not only did he find the manse dilapidated, even his stipend was threatened by claims from his predecessor's family. Neither problem had been resolved when Headrick completed his second major work, 'A General View of the Agriculture of the County of Angus' (1813). As he neared his sixties, he still cherished hopes of further advancement: in 1817 he tried, but failed, to secure presentation to the parish of Dunblane, where he had been at school. 
Dunnichen, however, and the county town of Forfar were, for the rest of his long life, to be Headrick's sphere, or rather, perhaps, his arena. Age did not wither his taste for hot water. In 1827, his 'Lecture on geology... to shew, that the Mosaic account of creation is perfectly consistent with the best ascertained facts concerning the mineral structure of our globe' (1828), together with an earlier lecture on the physical sciences, both delivered in Forfar, evoked a vigorous complaint by the minister of the town. Two years later Headrick incurred the Forfar presbytery's censure for having made the Dunnichen pulpit available to James Hawkins, a local landowner who was 'neither a licentiate nor a member of the Church of Scotland' (Forfar presbytery minutes, 21 Oct 1829), and who became an adherent of the 'Row heresy'. Relations between the two, however, were soured when Hawkins, principal heritor of the parish, supported efforts to have an assistant to the ageing Headrick appointed. Both published pamphlets in the course of the controversy. Eventually, in 1837, Headrick was induced to accept an assistant with right of succession. His later years had brought private as well as public troubles. Two of his five sons figure in the kirk session records of the parish as a result of having fathered illegitimate children. Both predeceased their father, who died at the manse of Dunnichen on 31 March 1841, and was buried in an unmarked grave in Dunnichen churchyard. 
Headrick was a man of varied talents, though these were doubtless often misapplied. The 'vice or mole of nature' in his case seems to have been a paranoid tendency to see conspiracy rather than his own inflated expectations as the bar to his fulfilment. Yet he deserves to be remembered, not only as a notable eccentric but as a late representative of the moderate churchmanship which had been a far from negligible factor in the making of the Scottish Enlightenment. 


@@@@@


doc= 58462


Sheldon, Helen Maud (1859-1945), headmistress and educationist, was born in Handsworth, Birmingham, on 15 October 1859, the second daughter of John Sheldon (1822?-1903), at that time vicar of St James's, Handsworth, and his wife, Anne 'nee' Sharp (1830?-1907). The family consisted of five daughters and two surviving sons. When at an early age Maud, as she was known in the family, decided that she wanted above everything to teach, her father undertook to give her the best education obtainable. The daughters attended Handsworth Ladies' College and three went on to Cambridge: Sheldon herself read mathematics at Girton, and one younger sister read science at Newnham, while another read classics, again at Girton. This was a considerable sibling achievement at a time when university education for women had barely begun: Sheldon actually took the tripos in 1881 -- the year before women were formally admitted to the final examination. She was unofficially ranked two-thirds of the way down the tripos list in mathematics (which contained six women and more than ninety men). Not until 1906 was she able to obtain the MA degree she had earned, from Trinity College, Dublin. After preliminary experience (1881-4) at a school run by the Girls' Public Day School Trust (GPDST) at Kensington, west London, Sheldon returned to Girton as resident lecturer in mathematics (1884-7). However, a contemporary reports her assertion that she 'did not know enough mathematics' (Smith), and her final career choice led to a working life spent entirely at GPDST schools. In 1888 she became a mathematics mistress at Blackheath high school in south-east London, under the headship of the remarkable Miss Gadesden, until her talent for leadership was acknowledged by an appointment as headmistress at Dover high school, Kent (1898-1901). Then she was rapidly promoted to headmistress of Sydenham high school, south-east London, where she had the opportunity to realize her wider potential. This school had been founded in 1887, and Sheldon was its second headmistress. She was responsible for introducing to GPDST schools the organization into houses and the prefect system (of proven success in boys' independent schools). Her generosity was legendary and occasionally inspired: it often took the form of supplying much-needed equipment -- notably a retired tram for use as a sports pavilion. Having inherited money from her mother, she was able to indulge her munificent impulses by lending money interest-free in order to buy adjoining properties to enable the school to expand. The school orchestra was practically her creation. 
A. H. H. Maclean, a long-serving secretary to the GPDST, apparently amused himself by inventing anonymous rhymes about some headmistresses he encountered. (The collection was privately printed as 'H.M.'S.: Some of them' in 1932.) There is common consent that he was referring to Sheldon when he wrote: '
She had at times a grumpy way 

Of saying what she had to say. 

We didn't mind, because, behind, 

We knew that she was wise and kind. 

' The first couplet may have represented reaction to the abruptness of manner typical of a forthright woman. It is perhaps of greater significance that a former pupil -- with hindsight of eighty years -- remembers 'a lesson in integrity... even more important than learning' (private information). Another, from the Blackheath days, has mentioned the aptness of her initials' reinforcing her aura of authority, while recalling that 'she had an awfully nice face and a humorous twinkle' (Friends of the GPDST, 43). 
Sheldon was headmistress at Sydenham from 1901 to 1917, and her retirement (aged fifty-seven) in the middle of the disruption due to the war was somewhat unexpected. She continued to live in the area, and was elected to the borough council of Lewisham, which included Sydenham. Her service as treasurer of the Association of Headmistresses from 1905 to 1909 was recognized by her being made an honorary life member. She retained her interest in mathematical education, having contributed to the ground-breaking 1916 report of the Mathematical Association, 'Elementary Mathematics in Girls' Schools'. She served as a member of the council of Girton College in 1910-19. In the early 1920s she moved to central London and in 1931 to Richmond. She died on 16 May 1945 at the Royal Northern Hospital, Holloway, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 58463


Aitken, Edith (1861-1940), headmistress, was born at Bishophill, Bishophill Junior, York, on 16 June 1861, the third child of Henry Martin Aitken, surgical instrument manufacturer, and his wife, Elizabeth Atkinson. She and her elder siblings were baptized at St Mary Minor, Bishophill, on 8 July 1861. Their father had advanced views on the education of girls, and the eldest daughter, Rose (1849-1922), went to Girton College, then at Hitchin, in 1871, before becoming a schoolmistress. Edith was educated at Lendal House, and privately until her father's death in 1875. His wishes were respected and she was sent as a boarder, at the age of fourteen, to North London Collegiate School, under Miss Buss, and where her elder sister was already teaching classics. 
In 1879 Aitken went to Girton College, Cambridge, where she read for the natural sciences tripos and achieved first-class honours in part one in 1882, later (1904) taking her MA from Trinity College, Dublin, as Cambridge degrees remained closed to women. She was eventually able to take her Cambridge MA in 1925. She began her teaching career at Manchester Girls' High School, then moved to Nottingham Girls' High School in 1883. She joined the staff of Notting Hill high school three years later and returned to North London Collegiate School as science mistress in 1892. From 1899 to 1902 she was lecturer in chemistry at Bedford College, London. Her 'Elementary Textbook of Botany', first published in 1891, went through three editions. 
In 1902, immediately after the end of the South African War, Aitken went out to South Africa to take up a position as the first headmistress of Pretoria High School for Girls, following in the footsteps of Ellen Constance Steedman, a fellow Girtonian scientist of her year, who became headmistress of Eunice High School, Bloemfontein, in 1901. Miss Aitken inherited the buildings of a school which had closed in 1899, but little else. She was well suited to the challenge. Although she modelled the new school on the North London Collegiate, even to the point of giving it the same motto ('We work in hope'), she was alert to the need for adaptation in South Africa. She herself qualified to teach Dutch and was adamant that both English- and Dutch-speaking pupils should be taught and received on the same footing, and appointed Dutch speakers as well as English. The school opened in 1902 with 106 pupils; in 1904 there were 167 on the roll, and by December 1908 the old buildings were too small for the 194 pupils, of whom 60 were boarders. From then on 'EA', as she was affectionately known, continually badgered the director of education for new premises further out of town. As a result, the school moved to its new buildings in 1915, though it took Miss Aitken another two years of persistence before she acquired adjacent playing fields. When she retired in 1923, the school had long been known as the best of its kind in South Africa. She last visited it in 1938, when she had the satisfaction of seeing how it thrived in every way. Not least, she was able to see how the pines and jacarandas she had planted stood high around the buildings. 
Aitken's interests were wide. As well as enjoying riding, sport, music, and drama, her enthusiasm for art was a great bond with her brother Charles Aitken (1869-1936), director of the Tate collection. She was deeply saddened by his death, which left her isolated. After retiring to England she lived in a London flat, but later moved to Abbot's Holt, Tilford, Surrey. She died suddenly at the Grange Nursing Home, Wrecclesham, Farnham, Surrey, on 2 November 1940, after suffering a coronary thrombosis. 


@@@@@


doc= 58468


Rosalind Frances Mary Nash (1862-1952) was born in Kensington, London, in December 1862, the elder daughter of William Shore Smith (1831-1894), landowner, of Embley Park, Hampshire, and Lea Hurst, Derbyshire, and his wife, Louisa Eleanor (died 1922), daughter of Samuel Hutchins of Ardnagashel, co. Cork. Barbara Stephen was her younger sister. Her father took the name Shore Nightingale as the nephew and heir of William Edward Shore, later Nightingale (1794-1874), father of Florence Nightingale, by the entail placed on the Nightingale family estate. As an adolescent she moved with her family into the country house which her great-uncle had purchased in 1825 and where her great-aunt had entertained many distinguished guests from Unitarian, Quaker, and evangelical Anglican circles. Educated at Heath Brow School, Hampstead, and Girton College, Cambridge (1881-4), she became a journalist, writing on suffrage and labour questions, and was active in the Women's Co-operative Guild. In 1918 she was co-opted onto the select committee examining the imposition of taxes on luxury goods. In her early life she had frequently met her father's cousin, Florence Nightingale, and later she assisted Sir Edward Cook with his biography of Nightingale, publishing her own abridged version of that work. She guarded the memorabilia of Florence Nightingale, and assisted in setting up an exhibition at St Thomas's Hospital in July 1937, when she also gave a radio broadcast of her reminiscences, defending the memory of her second cousin against the portrait depicted by Lytton Strachey. She died on 17 October 1952 at The Cleve, Wood Green, Fordingbridge, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 58469


Dawes, Elizabeth Anna Sophia (1864-1954), classical scholar and teacher, was born on 7 November 1864 at Surbiton, Surrey, the daughter of the Revd John Samuel Dawes, of Newton House, Surbiton, and his wife, Anna Sophia Elizabeth Blasius. Her father, who held a DD degree from Trinity College, Dublin, and a PhD from the University of Jena, was a curate at Petersham, Surrey, from 1864 to 1868 but his main occupation was as a schoolmaster. Elizabeth Dawes was initially educated at home and then attended Bedford College, London, passing in the first division of both the matriculation (1881) and the intermediate examination (1882) of London University, coming first in German and obtaining honours for classics. In 1882 she followed her sister, Mary Clara Dawes (1861-1939), to Girton College, Cambridge, where she was awarded Lady Stanley's scholarship of $50 tenable for three years. In June 1885 she was placed high in the upper second class in the classical tripos, but as Cambridge degrees remained closed to women could not graduate there. In October 1885 she was placed in the first division of the final examination for the BA degree in the University of London, with honours in Greek and Latin. 
In 1886 Dawes spent six months in Greece, studying archaeology and colloquial Greek, in which she became fluent. She spent the academic year 1886-7 as professor of Greek and German at the Bryn Mawr Collegiate School, Baltimore, USA, before returning to take the London University MA examination in classics, in which she was placed fifth in June 1887. In June 1889 she completed her qualification as a candidate for the degree of DLitt (London), being placed first in the examination in medieval and modern French and German. She received her DLitt (the first to a woman) in 1895. Her doctoral thesis, published in 1889 as 'The Pronunciation of Greek with Suggestions for a Reform in Teaching that Language', represented her most important contribution to scholarship; it was followed by works on Attic Greek and Latin vocabularies (1890) and on the pronunciation of Greek aspirates (1894). 
Dawes's vigorously argued study of Greek pronunciation supported the approach of revisionist scholars such as John Stuart Blackie and was inspired by her admiration of the nineteenth-century Greek political and cultural revival. It displays a wide scholarly range, analysing Greek literary, philosophical, and theological texts and inscriptions (including discussion of cutting techniques) and shows detailed knowledge of the European classical tradition and the debates from Erasmus (1528) onwards concerning the authenticity or otherwise of traditional pronunciation. She combined assessment of crucial issues such as the pronunciation of diphthongs and the disrupting effect of Latinized approaches with awareness of provincial peculiarities and a belief in the importance of evidence from pronunciation in Greece in her own time. Her method integrated linguistics with anthropological comparisons between ancient and modern Greece. She concluded that there was an unbroken tradition of pronunciation, traceable even from Homeric epic, and that the way to approach ancient literature was therefore to learn to speak the language (as with French and German), treating it as a living language. She attacked teaching methods in the public schools (which she regarded as contributing to the threatened place of classics in the curriculum and distancing people from an understanding of modern Greece) and recommended that Greek staff should be employed to converse and read with the pupils. The book (which was reviewed in the 'Classical Review', 4, 1890, 293-6) was translated into modern Greek by her sister, Mary Dawes (1898). 
Dawes was headmistress of the Ladies' School (later Heathlands), Weybridge, from 1889 to 1917 and later taught classics and German privately. After her retirement from teaching her attention turned to translations (in contrast to her earlier scepticism about their value). Her final work, translating the biographies of three Byzantine saints (1948), was produced in co-operation with Norman Hepburn Baynes, who contributed the introduction and notes, as she was by then unable to travel to libraries from her home in Weybridge. The aim was to produce a 'faithful version'. Her life and work demonstrate how in the late nineteenth century women could achieve scholarly distinction outside the universities when the opportunities to develop an academic career within them remained very limited. She died, unmarried, in Weybridge Hospital, Surrey, on 19 August 1954. 


@@@@@


doc= 58472


Cotta, Alix von (1842-1931), promoter of women's higher education, was born in Brunswick, the eldest of three daughters of Carl Berhard von Cotta (1808-1879) and Ilsabe Ida von Orges (1812-1902). She grew up in Freiberg, Saxony, where her father was professor of geology at the internationally renowned mining academy there. Her mother was 'gifted and charming' with a 'wide range of sympathies and interests' (Newnham College Roll, 50). Alix von Cotta was fluent in several languages, including English which she spoke with her sisters. In 1870 she began a lifelong correspondence with Penelope Lawrence, the founder of Roedean School. It is not known how von Cotta came to know Lawrence, but the latter is said to have been educated partly 'overseas'. They both attended Newnham Hall, Cambridge, 1876-8, von Cotta passing two groups in the higher local examinations, gaining distinctions in English literature and composition, French, German, and Italian, and a first class in Old English. 
Bedford College, London, had been founded in 1849 as a non-denominational college for women. By 1878, when the college had an enrolment of 130, serious efforts were made to attract better-prepared students. To this end, a preparatory department was opened, and von Cotta invited to become its mistress of studies. Students studied Latin, French, English, and mathematics. She left after two years, returning to Germany, where she wrote journal articles mainly about the education and training of women. 
Following mid-century debates about teacher training and the reform of the higher girls' schools in Germany, a number of institutions were opened to offer further education to young women. The most famous of these was the Victoria Lyceum in Berlin founded by an Englishwoman, Georgina Archer, with the active support and patronage of the Crown Princess Victoria. The Berlin scheme followed closely the model drawn up by the north of England Council for the Promotion of the Higher Education of Women by Anne Jemima Clough and Josephine Butler whereby lectures were given by university men to women above school age who wanted to continue their studies. Beginning in 1869, the scheme offered lectures on a variety of subjects but did not lead to any examination or qualification. As in England, demand was soon felt for more rigorous and structured instruction, followed by examinations suitable for women wanting to improve their teaching qualifications. Part-time courses began at the Victoria Lyceum in 1874 and attracted a small amount of support from the Prussian state. Crown Princess Victoria was particularly interested in the new women's colleges in England and, following the death of Georgina Archer, chose Alix von Cotta to head the lyceum in 1884 ahead of other candidates for the post, largely because she had studied at Newnham Hall. 
Reformers wanting to gain admission for women to German universities made little headway at this time. Many women felt it was more important to compete with the overwhelming number of men who taught students in the upper grades of girls' public high schools. For this, women needed better access to better courses and university-level examinations. Such advanced courses were introduced by von Cotta at the Victoria Lyceum in 1888, first in history and German and later in English and French. Students sat a special examination supervised by the ministry of education. However, no courses in science subjects were offered since it was felt these should be left to male teachers. As late as 1905-06, 1160 men held posts as teachers for the upper grades in Prussia's 207 public high schools for girls, while the corresponding number of women teachers was 221. 
The Victoria Lyceum was the largest college training women for senior posts in girls' high schools in Prussia. Alix von Cotta remained its director for over twenty years and through her personal influence aroused 'intellectual interest among women, inspiring them with higher ideals and stimulating them to take an active part in public service' (Newnham College Roll, 51). She retired in 1911 and died in December 1931 in Hanover. 


@@@@@


doc= 58473


Crosfield, Margaret Chorley (1859-1952), geologist, was born on 7 September 1859 at Wray Park, Reigate, Surrey, the daughter of Joseph Crosfield, tea merchant, and his wife, Sarah Swatridge, 'nee' Lowe; both were members of the Society of Friends. Crosfield attended the Mount School, York, and entered Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1879. Her studies there were interrupted by ill health and after her return, from 1880 to 1883, she read only geology. 
All Crosfield's research was undertaken in a private capacity, often with friends. With Dr Ethel G. Skeat (later Woods) she surveyed a 4 mile radius round Carmarthen, and in examining the syncline discovered new aspects of stratigraphy and collected a new species of trilobite. In 1906 Professor John Marr suggested that Crosfield and Skeat should examine the little-known series of Denbighshire Grits and Flags in the Clwydians, in order to establish a sequence by means of the graptolite fauna. In 1906-9 and again in 1911 they covered an area of 72 square miles; there was then a delay until 1922, when they recorded the palaeontology. These investigations were published in the 'Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society', volumes 52 (1896) and 81 (1925) respectively. With M. S. Johnston, Crosfield surveyed the Wenlock Limestone, written up for the 'Proceedings of the Geological Association' (1914), and she provided a short account of geology in Surrey for C. E. Salmon's flora of Surrey. 
Crosfield was elected to the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1894 and attended its meetings at home and abroad. She was a member of the Palaeontological Society from 1907 to 1932 and served on its council; she was also a member of the Geological Association, serving on its council in 1919 and as librarian in 1919-23. In 1919 she was one of the first six women to be elected as fellows of the Geological Society. In Reigate she lectured to the local history society on scientific and social topics, being an ardent advocate of women's suffrage. She served on the Reigate borough educational committee from 1919 until failing memory obliged her to resign, and she was a governor of Reigate County Girls' School from 1926. Crosfield amassed a large collection of specimens, all meticulously place-marked, while her accuracy, artistry, and industry were displayed in her voluminous notebooks. She died, unmarried, at her home, 78 Doods Road, Reigate, on 13 October 1952. Her funeral took place at the Friends' meeting-house, Reigate, on 18 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 58474


Foxley, Barbara (1860-1958), educationist and campaigner for women's rights, was born on 20 August 1860 at Market Weighton in the East Riding of Yorkshire, the second daughter of the Revd Joseph Foxley (1827-1911), vicar of that parish, and his wife, Lucy Allen. She was educated privately at home, then at schools in Manchester and London, before going up to Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1879. She took a second class in the historical tripos in 1881, but this was at a time before Cambridge awarded degrees to women. She then gained a teaching certificate and later obtained an MA from Trinity College, Dublin. She did not receive her MA degree from Cambridge until 1949, following the university's decision to open its degrees to women in the previous year. 
A small, delicately featured woman, Foxley possessed an incisive intellect and was a talented linguist and an impressive public speaker. She made important contributions to education, women's rights, and public life in south Wales. She held various teaching posts and by the age of twenty-five obtained her first headship at Dewsbury church school but it was her appointment as headmistress of Queen Mary's High School, Walsall, which marked a decisive step in her career. She placed a very high value on the education of girls and in Walsall her work attracted wide attention. Her reputation led to a position in the education department at Manchester University as 'mistress of method', where she produced a translation into English of Jean Jacques Rousseau's seminal text 'Emile' for the 'Everyman's Library' edition (1911). She was appointed to a position at University College, Cardiff, in 1911, where four years later she succeeded Millicent Mackenzie as professor of education: Cardiff at this time had separate education departments for women and men students. Her forceful, but likeable, personality, her organizational ability, and her dedication to her work ensured that her years in Cardiff, where she remained until her retirement in 1925, were extremely successful. As she modestly put it, 'The College seemed to like me' ('Western Mail'). 
Professor Foxley was a dedicated campaigner for women's suffrage and an advocate of women's rights, pressing, in particular, for women to enter public life. She was a member of the executive committee of the very effective Cardiff and District Women's Suffrage Society, where she worked alongside Mary Collin, headmistress of Cardiff High School for Girls. By 1913 the Cardiff Society, which was affiliated to the moderate National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS), was the largest society outside London. In 1919, when the NUWSS was renamed the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship, following the partial enfranchisement of women in 1918, she was elected to its national executive committee. 
Foxley consistently urged women to stand for public office. Politically she was a liberal and in 1924 she stood as official Liberal candidate for the Cathays ward in a by-election to Cardiff city council. She won the seat, polling almost twice the number of votes as the Labour candidate. As a councillor she took particular interest in education, housing, and issues relating to women. In religion she was a Unitarian and was a frequent and eloquent preacher at Cardiff's Unitarian church. In later years she continued to live a very active life, travelling widely. She spent much of her retirement in Cardiff before moving to the spa town of Llandrindod Wells, Radnorshire, for health reasons, where she died at the Spa Nursing Home on 26 August 1958. 


@@@@@


doc= 58481


Pertz, Dorothea Frances Matilda (1859-1939), botanist, was born in London on 14 March 1859, the third and youngest daughter of Georg Heinrich Pertz (1795-1876), royal librarian in Berlin, and his second wife, Leonora Horner ('b'. 1818). There were three half-brothers, married with children, from her father's first marriage. Dora Pertz (as she was usually called) could claim scientifically distinguished antecedents in that her maternal grandfather was Leonard Horner, geologist, antiquary, and friend of Charles Darwin. Her aunts Mary, Katherine, and Frances Horner were married to Charles Lyell, Henry Lyell, and Charles James Fox Bunbury, respectively, and the two remaining aunts, Susan and Joanna Horner, wrote and travelled widely. All these Horner women, including her mother, had active intellectual lives, studying plants, shells and minerals, writing, translating, editing, and helping their menfolk with their researches. Her father was, moreover, a distinguished historian with a wide acquaintance among European literary scholars of the day, the author of 'Monumenta Germanica' and editor of Leibniz's papers (1843-63). Dora Pertz remembered meeting these relations and other notable figures as a girl. 
Dora Pertz's early life in Berlin was punctuated by annual visits to England. When her father died in 1876 she moved with her mother to Florence. In 1882 she entered Newnham College, Cambridge, where she sat Cambridge higher local examinations. The following year she interrupted her studies to spend time in Italy, returning to Cambridge late in 1884 for another year in which she took part one of the natural sciences tripos. When titular degrees for women were allowed she made up the required time with a final period of residence (1917-18), eventually graduating MA in 1932. At Newnham she showed great ability in botany and soon was introduced to Francis Darwin, a university reader in botany. The introduction was probably made through Ellen Wordsworth Crofts, lecturer at Newnham and Darwin's wife from 1883. Pertz subsequently settled in Cambridge and became one of a small group of women on the fringes of professional science in the early years of the twentieth century. She researched plant physiology under Francis Darwin and taught botany at Newnham, although never formally appointed either at the college or the university's botany school. Her researches mostly supplemented Francis Darwin's work on water movements in plants, and from 1892 to 1900 she published five papers jointly with him. The best known is on plant rhythms, delivered at the British Association in 1891 and published in 'Annals of Botany'. She produced two short papers in her own right, including one on gravitational effects on plants. She also worked for William Bateson for a while from 1895, a connection again facilitated through the Newnham network, and in 1900 co-authored a paper with him on the inheritance of variations. 
In 1905 Dora Pertz was elected fellow of the Linnean Society in the first group of women to be admitted, although the struggle for admittance was orchestrated by others. For this, and indeed for much of her career, she was indebted to Francis Darwin, who actively pushed for recognition of her merits. Like several of his scientific contemporaries, Darwin liked to gather intelligent female researchers around him. After Darwin's retirement, Dora Pertz continued to experiment on plants but eventually abandoned her researches. Her friend Edith Saunders said this was due to disappointing results with germinating seeds ('Proceedings of the Linnean Society', 151, 1938-9, 246), although Agnes Arber claimed instead that botany was getting too mathematical for her ('Nature', 143, 1939, 590). Either way, Frederick Blackman enlisted her services in cataloguing pamphlets held at the botany school, followed by indexing and abstracting papers from German journals. The magnitude of the task was very great and Saunders afterwards felt Pertz's achievement was insufficiently appreciated. At this time in her life Pertz also provided illustrations of floral anatomy for Saunders's important text on that topic. 
During the First World War Dora Pertz trained as a masseuse in order to work at St Chad's Roman Catholic convalescent hospital in Cambridge, and her charitable work continued quietly afterwards. She was ill for several years before her death in Cambridge on 6 March 1939. She was cremated in Cambridge on 9 March and her ashes buried in Brookwood cemetery, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 58483


Skeat, Walter William (1835-1912), philologist, was born at Mount Street, Park Lane, London, on 21 November 1835, the second son of William Skeat and his wife, Sarah Bluck. He attended King's College School, Strand, where Thomas Oswald Cockayne, one of the best Anglo-Saxon scholars of the time, was his form-master. From there he went to Sir Roger Cholmeley's School, Highgate, and in 1854 entered Christ's College, Cambridge. There C. S. Calverley, J. R. Seeley, and Walter Besant were among his friends. He studied theology and mathematics, took the mathematical tripos (fourteenth wrangler) in 1858, and was elected a fellow of his college in 1860. In the latter year he took orders, and entered on his first curacy at East Dereham, Norfolk. On 15 November 1860 he married Bertha Clara Jones (1840-1924), eldest daughter of Francis Jones, of Lewisham. They had two sons and four daughters, including Bertha Marian Skeat ['see below'] and Walter William Skeat (1866-1953), colonial administrator and ethnographer. Two years later Skeat became curate of Godalming, but a serious illness affecting his throat closed his career in the church. 
Skeat returned to Cambridge, and was appointed to a mathematical lectureship at Christ's College in 1864. The duties left him ample leisure, and he now began the serious study of Early English, which had first been roused by the extracts in the history book which he used at school; he had worked back to them through the 'Faerie Queene'. But it was Frederick James Furnivall who first set him to work as an editor. The discussion of plans for the 'New English Dictionary' (later the 'Oxford English Dictionary') had revealed a dearth of trustworthy early texts, and to supply the want Furnivall and Richard Morris formed the Early English Text Society in 1864. Skeat was pressed into service, and punctually edited 'Lancelot of the Laik' (1865). In 1866 he began his great edition of 'Piers Plowman', which was finished twenty years later. This remained the standard edition for over a hundred years, and crucially influenced twentieth-century textual scholarship on the poem; his interpretative and historical notes are still referred to by modern critics and editors. The first part of his edition of John Barbour's 'The Bruce' appeared in 1870, and by 1872 he had published the 'Treatise on the Astrolabe'. This was one of many studies preliminary to his seven-volume edition of Chaucer (1894-7), another standard work which was not superseded until the edition of Robinson in 1933, and whose interpretative and historical notes were regularly consulted by editors working on the Riverside edition of Chaucer, published in 1987. This might seem a life's work, but it is only a part of Skeat's contribution to the study of one century -- the fourteenth. He produced two standard works in Anglo-Saxon, the 'Anglo-Saxon Gospels' (1871-87) and AElfric's 'Lives of Saints' (1881-1900), and in 1873 he founded the English Dialect Society, which prepared the way for the 'English Dialect Dictionary' (edited by Joseph Wright, 1896-1905). Another important book, his 'Etymological Dictionary' (1879-82; revised and enlarged, 1910), was begun with the purpose of collecting and sifting material for the use of the 'Oxford English Dictionary'. This project was one to which he made an enormous contribution, ranging from editorial work (including supplying numerous quotations) to supporting the dictionary's editor, J. A. H. Murray, with a mortgage to purchase his house. 
Besides these larger works, Skeat found time to edit Chatterton (1871), to write many textbooks for schools and universities, to popularize philology and modernize old authors, and to contribute freely to the learned societies and journals concerned with English studies. Furthermore, in his latter years he led the way in the systematic study of place names, county by county. In 1878 he was elected to the new Elrington and Bosworth professorship of Anglo-Saxon at Cambridge. 
All Skeat's vast output is distinguished by accuracy in matter of fact, wide learning, and humanity, and most of it he produced without prospect of reward, out of devotion to his subject. His own prescription for such monuments of scholarship was enthusiasm, with unremitting application, and he wasted no time. He could also set practical limits to his curiosity: in the preface to the first edition of the 'Etymological Dictionary' he explains that he usually gave three hours to a difficult word -- 'During that time I made the best I could of it and then let it go.' This requires self-sacrifice in a scholar, but it is the secret of Skeat's great service. According to his obituary in 'The Times', Skeat was the first Cambridge professor to ride a bicycle, and was in general better known to the general public of Cambridge than were his professorial colleagues. This was partly because of the fame of his etymological dictionary, on which he conducted a vast correspondence with word enthusiasts both professional and amateur, and partly because 'in fine weather he almost invariably walked the mile and a half from his house [2 Salisbury Villas] to the Divinity Schools, where he lectured, in a peculiar ambling trot, with his silk gown caught up behind him on one arm. His white beard at once attracted attention, and it never seemed rude to watch him because he always appeared oblivious of passers-by. ('The Times', 8 Oct 1912)' Walter William Skeat died at 2 Salisbury Villas, Cambridge, on 6 October 1912, survived by his wife, two sons, and three daughters. He was buried in the grounds of the parish church of the Ascension, Huntingdon Road, Cambridge. In 1935 a commemorative stained-glass window, designed and executed by one of his grandsons, F. W. Skeat, was placed in the library of his old college. It depicts Geoffrey Chaucer on horseback, with Canterbury Cathedral in the background. 
The new school of philology that arose towards 1880, when the lines of Skeat's work were laid down and much of it done, produced men like Zupitza and Sievers in Germany, or Henry Sweet, A. S. Napier, and Henry Bradley in England, who went beyond Skeat in linguistic theory and in exact methods. But Skeat's pioneer work made such advances possible. At a critical moment in English studies he saw the wisdom of Furnivall's doctrine, that the essential thing was to attract workers, and to make available for them quickly a great quantity of materials, edited as well as possible, but always with a time limit in view rather than perfection in minutiae. And perhaps he gained as much ground for his subject by quiet sapping as Furnivall took by storm. 

Bertha Marian Skeat (1861-1948), schoolmistress, was born on 30 December 1861 at Quebec Road, East Dereham, Norfolk, the eldest child of Walter William Skeat and his wife, Bertha Clara, 'nee' Jones. She read medieval and modern languages at Newnham College, Cambridge (1882-6), and gained a first-class examination result in 1886. After obtaining a Cambridge teacher's certificate she took a PhD degree at the University of Zurich, and returned as a lecturer at the Cambridge Teaching College for Women (1890-93). Thereafter she occupied a number of teaching positions before becoming co-founder and principal of Baliol School, Sedbergh, from 1899 to 1932, when the school closed. She published a 'Word-List' illustrating the correspondence of modern English with Anglo-French vowel sounds for the English Dialect Society (1884), a primer of historical English grammar, and two anthologies of English literature for use in schools. She also wrote some pleasant but undistinguished verse in late-Victorian sentimental style, including school plays, principally concerning the relations between mothers and daughters; such publications include: 'The Lamentations of Mary Magdalene' (1897), 'Atalanta's Race' (1907), and 'The Crucifixion of Mary, and other Poems' [1924]. Bertha Marian Skeat died, unmarried, at Baliol Cottage, Sedbergh, Yorkshire, on 2 December 1948. 


@@@@@


doc= 58485


Mason, (Frances) Agnes (1849-1941), founder of the Community of the Holy Family, was born at the parsonage, Laugharne township, Carmarthenshire, on 10 August 1849, the second daughter in the family of three daughters and four sons of George William Mason (1819-1891), justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant, of Morton Hall, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Marianne Atherton, daughter of Joseph George Mitford of Laugharne. Her family was active in Church of England causes. Her eldest brother, William Henry Mason (1846-1936), was a member of the Woodard Corporation; another brother, Arthur James Mason, was a divinity professor at Cambridge; her elder sister, (Marianne) Harriet Mason, had a career in social work. Between 1876 and 1883 Agnes gained experience of social and educational work while assisting her brother (George) Edward Mason (1847-1928) in his parish at Whitwell, Derbyshire, where he was rector. In 1883 she entered Newnham College, Cambridge, taking the moral sciences tripos with second-class honours in 1886. For two years (1886-8) she was lecturer in mental and moral science at Bedford College, London, and then taught privately in London until 1892. She was secretary to the Guild of the Epiphany, founded by Canon Francis Holland for religious teaching, from 1887 until 1895 when she resigned in order to found the Anglican Community of the Holy Family. 
Agnes Mason was first called to found the community while visiting Florence. It was to be dedicated to the religious teaching of women of all ages, worldwide, and to be expressly for scholars and artists. In this calling she was helped by Frederick Temple, archbishop of Canterbury, Charles Gore, bishop of Oxford, William Collins, bishop of Gibraltar, Walter Frere, bishop of Truro, George Congreve of the Society of St John the Evangelist, Charles Lindley Wood, second Viscount Halifax, president of the English Church Union, and the Roman Catholic theologian Baron von Hugel. With the help of von Hugel she was able to study the methods of the Sisters of the Assumption in Paris and a congregation of teaching Dominicanesses at Nancy. The four novices of the Community of the Holy Family were professed on 19 October 1898, Temple being celebrant, Gore as gospeller, and Arthur Mason, her brother, as epistoler. Following her immediate election by the sisters, Agnes Mason was installed by the archbishop as their mother superior. 
Mother Agnes Mason was drawn to biblical studies in Greek and Hebrew, and also the mystics, such as St Teresa of Avila, whose 'Foundations' she translated from the Spanish in 1909, St John of the Cross, Gertrude More, and Julian of Norwich. She published essays in 'Theology' (1922-36), various devotional works, including 'The Way of Beauty' (1920), and school books for the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. Herself a fine watercolourist, Mother Agnes collected the works of Myra Luxmoore, and purchased sepia photographs of Italian art in Florence for use in teaching. Later she arranged for artist sisters to teach in the community's school in India, Naini Tal, and on their journey spend time in Florence to study its religious art. 
The community's rule drawn up by Mother Agnes is probably the best among the Anglican communities. Learned, yet joyous, it quotes Shakespeare, 'Who chooses me must give and hazard all he hath'. The rule states that 'Every Sister ought to be so systematically studying at least one subject that she makes real progress from month to month', and elsewhere affirms that 'A sin against beauty is a sin against God'. In 1911 she gained the Lambeth diploma in theology by thesis, the sisters of her community shaping, and tutoring in, that programme from its beginning. Though the community never became large, the excellent scholarship of its sisters ensured that it prospered. There were schools at London and then, from 1913, at St Leonards, and at All Saints' College, Naini Tal, India (1915-45), and houses of study at Leeds (1906-11), and then Cambridge (1911-39). The house of prayer at St Pega's Hermitage, Peakirk, Northamptonshire, was given to the community by Miss Bertha James in 1937. In 1913 the community acquired its mother house, Holmhurst St Mary, St Leonards, Sussex, where Agnes Mason, who was mother superior until 1933, died on 19 December 1941. She was buried in the community's graveyard under a cross of Sussex oak. 


@@@@@


doc= 58494


Hey, Spurley (1872-1930), educational administrator, was born on 31 March 1872 in Stocksbridge, Yorkshire, one of the eight children of Benjamin Smith Hey and Ann Birkenshaw. Family life was humble but secure, dominated by an intelligent but austere steelworker father and a strong-minded, caring mother. Hey was destined for the steelworks but went for four years ('c'.1877-1882) to a small school at Midhopestones, where the eccentric master made a strong impression on him. At ten he became a part-time worker in Fox's steelworks but disliked the job; a master at Stocksbridge elementary school persuaded his parents to allow him to become a pupil teacher there ('c'.1885-91). 
Hey gained a queen's scholarship to St John's Diocesan Training College, York, where he was educated from 1891 to 1893, and in later years reminisced that the life of the college had a major effect on his character. While there he developed a love of football, which led later to paid employment with Barnsley Football Club at weekends; this helped to support his part-time BA of London University, which was awarded in 1898. From college he was appointed to Kimberworth board school, Rotherham, where he achieved a remarkable series of promotions to become director of education in 1907. With the creation of the Rotherham local education authority in 1902, he became a co-opted member representing teachers. Single-mindedness, self-confidence, and a certain aloofness were already present and made him an unusually formidable young man. Interest in the Froebel Society for the Promotion of the Kindergarten System symbolized that keenness for children's welfare in which his passion for social justice had its origins. The idea of central schools (higher elementary schools), then a rudimentary concept, caught his imagination while at Rotherham and a start was made to extend elementary schooling for children above standard five. 
From 1911 to 1914 Hey was director of education for Newcastle upon Tyne, and comments on his service testify to a strong personality and dynamic, independent leadership. It was the early years of a new and potentially influential public office and Hey, with his contemporaries James Graham of Leeds and Percival Sharp of Sheffield, together nicknamed the 'three musketeers' for their attacks on the 'Richelieu' of the Board of Education, was determined that education would not be the poor relation of social policy. 
For sixteen years from 1914 Hey was director of education for Manchester, where his leadership of the progressive education committee greatly enhanced Manchester's prestige as an education authority. His magisterial style was well caught by the future Lady Shena Simon, a member of the Manchester education committee, who commented admiringly that 'Spurley Hey was an autocrat who made no attempt to disguise the fact' (S. Simon, 'A Century of City Government', 1938, 263). The high regard in which he was held by the radical Labour chairman of the education committee, Alderman Wright Robinson, in part accounted for his freedom of action, even extending to such overtly political statements as criticism of the Geddes financial 'axe', which was, he believed, 'a serious menace to the present generation of pupils' (Hey MSS, 'Notes on education finance and the attempt to reduce expenditure', 1922, 15). During this period a stream of documents bore the distinctive stamp of his reasoned and comprehensive attitude to education policy. The intensity with which he made the environment of children his starting point was remarkable so early in the century (see his 'Parental Neglect and Juvenile Crime', 1919). He made use of existing health and welfare provision, as well as the 1918 permissive legislation on continuation schools, which provided opportunities for working-class young people who had no opportunity to remain at school full-time. Concern for the mentally and physically handicapped, slow learners, and those who were disadvantaged by poverty and, 'during the short five years' journey from the cradle to the school, fought an almost continuous battle for mere existence', were automatically part of his inclusive approach (Hey MSS, 'Notes on the aim of education in elementary schools', 1923, 5). In order to establish positive habits of work and behaviour and to change parental attitudes he developed infant classes in elementary schools, not waiting until resources would enable primary schools to be provided. As the school was a stage in life, he tackled youth unemployment energetically and extended the jurisdiction of his department to include the juvenile employment bureaux. His determination that these be associated with education rather than the Ministry of Labour was argued in 'Juvenile Unemployment and Aftercare' (1920). He was unapologetic that this would enlarge local education authority powers and maintained that 'all questions of decision relative to the social, as well as the educational, side of the development of young people should be vested in the LEA' even if this necessitated 'compulsory measures' ('Development of the education of wage earners', 1917, Manchester Central Library, Hey MSS, 16). 
Hey's decision to maximize school building and diversify access during a time of recession was driven by a profound consciousness that existing transfer schemes to secondary schools were inadequate. He wrote of 'the deprivation from many children of a better opportunity of training for citizenship, and the condemnation of many to circumstances from which better education alone could lift them' ('The central school', 1924, Manchester Central Library, 11). A solution was to introduce selective central schools, first envisaged in Hey's 1918 blueprint for the local education authority, 'Manchester's Education Problem', and with which his reputation has been rightly but too narrowly associated. Resisted by some on the ground of cost or competition with secondary schools, central schools enabled more elementary school children to experience an education which, at its best, narrowed the gulf between elementary and secondary schools by providing a course of schooling beyond the age of eleven. Through policies for a primary stage, central and secondary schools, and post-compulsory provision Hey steered Manchester towards the recommendations of the 1926 Hadow committee on the education of the adolescent, which foreshadowed the 1944 'Education Act'. As reform depended on the quality of teachers, high priority was given to the reform of training procedures, maximum freedom for heads, and close co-operation with classroom teachers, from which evolved the possibly unique advisory committee of teachers and elected members of the education committee. Membership of the Burnham committee and two departmental inquiries, evidence to the royal commission on local government, senior positions in such professional organizations as the Association of Education Committees, and contributions to the journal 'Education' made him an increasingly influential national figure. In 1919 he received an honorary MA degree from Manchester University. 
Hey's limited leisure was spent walking and collecting antiques. His sudden death from pneumonia on 7 May 1930 at his home in Elm Road, Didsbury, Manchester, occasioned many tributes both affectionate and admiring, of which the most fitting was that he had 'never been surpassed by any of the great public servants' who had served Manchester ('Manchester Guardian'). He was buried on 10 May at Harlow Moor cemetery, Harrogate, Yorkshire, and honoured with a memorial service in Manchester Cathedral. Two schools were named after him. His wife, Ada Annie Hey, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 58496


Scotson, James (1836-1911), headmaster, was born in Manchester, the son of Robert Scotson, a working man. From the age of seven he attended the New Jerusalem School, Peter Street, Manchester (founded for boys in 1827 and opened for girls in 1844). He was apprenticed as a pupil teacher at the school, then attracting some 600 pupils, in 1849 and appointed assistant master from 1854. Having been awarded a first-class teacher's certificate, he was appointed headmaster with effect from 1 January 1858. On 14 August 1857 he married Betsey ('b'. 1836/7), daughter of John Taylor, at the New Jerusalem Church, Bolton Street, Salford. 
From 1862, under payment by results, reading, writing, and arithmetic were examined in six standards, but Scotson extended the curriculum and began to develop a specialist school for older pupils. In 1880 Peter Street was merged with the Lower Mosley Street British School as the Central School under the Manchester school board and consolidated into one of the first higher grade schools for pupils who had passed standards I-IV and wished to prolong their education. Scotson was appointed headmaster. 
In 1884 the royal commission on technical education, chaired by Bernhard Samuelson, recorded the emergence of higher grade schools where additional subjects were taught more satisfactorily than in schools containing children of all ages and all stages of progress. Scotson's school was described as remarkable (Samuelson commission second report, 1.425). There were 320 boys and 200 girls taking mathematics, science, physical geography, and French. On 7 July 1884 a four-storey building, complete with two laboratories and a machine-drawing room, was opened in Deansgate by A. J. Mundella, the minister responsible for education. Bringing together picked intellects in higher schools from great towns and cities, he said, would stimulate all the elementary schools below them ('School Board Chronicle', 41). 
In December 1886 Scotson gave evidence to the Cross commission and urged that schools similar to his own should be set up in every town of from 10,000 to 15,000 inhabitants. In his view their purpose was either to form a connecting link between the ordinary elementary school and existing secondary schools, or where the latter were either inferior or did not exist at all, to take their place. Pupils could stay until they were sixteen; fees were 9died per week. There were now 208 boys and 129 girls in standard VI, 215 boys and 103 girls in the new standard VII; also retained in the school were 300 boys and 50 girls who had passed standard VII who were assembled in a so-called organized science school under the auspices of the Department of Science and Art (South Kensington), which granted the school 10's'. a year for every pupil who attended 250 times and passed its science examination. These pupils were also taught French, arithmetic, and composition; their day began with an hour's religious instruction. Twenty-five per cent of the boys left to go into engineering, chemical laboratories or architecture. Two-thirds of recent girl leavers went into teaching. By 1891 Scotson had 1400 pupils: 1000 boys and 400 girls. His staff consisted of sixteen masters and assistants; the headmistress had a staff of six and there were special teachers for science, engineering, French, German, and cookery. Two former pupils, one male, one female, had recently been awarded a BSc from Victoria University of Manchester; another had gained a double first at Oxford. 
Though he was on the executive of the National Union of Elementary Teachers in the 1870s Scotson of Manchester, as he was known (Christian, 48), preferred not to rise further, but when twenty headmasters of higher grade and organized science schools met in Manchester on 5 November 1892 and set up an association he was elected first annual president. Two years later, answering a circular letter from the Bryce commission addressed to some twenty distinguished educationists, Scotson outlined his plans for connecting higher grade schools' boys' departments with grammar or secondary schools. Higher grade schools would have a lower part, into which former elementary pupils could enter having passed standard IV. If a boy wished to prepare for a profession he would complete standard V, then be prepared for the classical department of a secondary school. The majority would progress into the organized science school, most for a two-year course in science, mathematics, and modern languages, a few for three or four years to compete for national or county scholarships. The Bryce report, however, favoured a system in which the higher grade school would be an institution made distinct from grammar or secondary schools by the intended leaving age of its scholars. In 1897 a joint memorandum drawn up by the Association of Headmasters (representing the grammar schools) and the Association of Higher Grade Schools agreed this principle which was incorporated in the Board of Education's higher school minute of April 1900. Higher grade schools' function as a conduit by which able elementary school pupils could pass upwards without encountering a selective bar had ended: a few, including the Central School, were awarded secondary status. 
Scotson, who had been awarded an MSc in 1902 by the Victoria University of Manchester, 'honoris causa', remained in charge of his school until the change took place. He retired in July 1904. Bearded, tall, and well built, with a thunderous voice, he was a genial man of powerful intellect, forcible yet sympathetic. In 1884 Mundella had provided him with a famous epitaph: 'When I want to point to some first-rate schoolmasters in England I generally begin with Mr Scotson. Mr Scotson I consider the prince of our elementary schoolmasters' ('School Board Chronicle', 41). Scotson died at his home, 19 Wellington Road, Whalley Range, Manchester, on 4 June 1911. His remains were cremated two days later at Manchester crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 58501


Moloney, Sir (Cornelius) Alfred (1848-1913), colonial administrator, the eldest son of Captain Patrick Moloney, was born in 1848, probably in May, possibly in Ireland. He was educated at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and entered the 1st West India regiment (in which his father also served). His first posting, in 1867, was to the Quiah district of Sierra Leone, as civil commandant. He then served as aide-de-camp to the governor of the Bahamas, returning to west Africa in 1873. He was promoted captain in 1874 and served in the Second Anglo-Asante War; he was mentioned in dispatches for his services for the abolition of slavery. He continued in the Gold Coast until 1884, serving as secretary to the governor, and later as administrator of Lagos, which was then part of the Gold Coast Colony. 
On 28 December 1881 in the Roman Catholic chapel in the Vineyard, Richmond, Surrey, Moloney married Constance Thomson Knight (1860-1891), daughter of William Clifford Knight, Russian consul in the Cape of Good Hope. When on leave from west Africa in the 1880s, and until 1891, he lived in Church Road, Richmond, and while there established contact with leading botanists at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. In 1882 he was made a CMG. From 1884 to 1886 he served as administrator of the Gambia settlement. In 1886 he returned to Lagos, this time as governor of the colony, which was then separated administratively from the Gold Coast; it extended some 300 miles from long. 2 degree E to 6 degree E and was linked by fine inland waterways. The colony did not reach far inland but Governor Moloney was much involved with efforts to settle ongoing quarrels between the Yoruba kingdoms. He had a real interest in the local people and their welfare; in 1889 he spoke to a meeting of the British Association about music in west Africa and in 1890 published a major paper about Lagos and the Yoruba people generally in the 'Proceedings' of the Royal Geographical Society. In 1887 he published an important book entitled 'Sketch of the Forestry of West Africa', which was much wider in scope than forestry in the modern sense. He was deeply concerned about local agriculture, including crops for export, and in conservation and the need for replanting; in 1887 he established a botanic garden and in 1889 a forestry department in Lagos. He collected many dried plant specimens, and some living ones, which he sent to Kew. Staff at Kew assisted in the preparation of his book, which also lists birds and other animals, in which he also took an interest. He was made a KCMG in January 1890. 
Early in January 1891 Moloney left Lagos with the intention of spending three months' leave in Gran Canaria for the benefit of his health. In fact he never returned to west Africa as he was appointed governor of British Honduras. For health and other personal reasons he remained on leave in Richmond until 25 July and then travelled, via New York, to reach Belize on 17 August 1891 with his wife Constance, who died there from yellow fever on 1 September 1891. Moloney was devastated and sought permission to transfer to a more favourable climate, or to retire on pension. In fact he remained as governor of British Honduras until the end of 1896. In co-operation with the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, he established in 1892 a botanical station in the grounds of Government House, Belize; its purpose was to promote the use and cultivation of indigenous and imported plants. 
On 2 March 1897 Moloney married at Brompton Oratory, London, Frances Isabel Sophia Mary Owen-Lewis ('b'. 1873/4), daughter of Henry Owen-Lewis, and on 1 June 1897 he assumed duty as governor of the Windward Islands, based at St George's, Grenada. In 1898 he welcomed Daniel Morris, who came from Kew Gardens to be commissioner of agriculture in the West Indies. After his service in the Windward Islands Moloney was appointed governor of Trinidad and Tobago, based at Port of Spain. He served there from 4 December 1900 until his retirement in 1904. It was during this period that the water riots took place in Trinidad and, for various reasons, his active interest in agriculture and forestry diminished. He was, however, governor in Trinidad, and no doubt very supportive, when a programme to establish forest reserves was started. He died at Fiesole, near Florence, Italy, on 11 August 1913; his second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 58506


Montgomery, George (1569/70-1621), Church of Ireland bishop of Meath and Clogher, was the second son of Adam Montgomery, laird of Braidstane, Ayrshire, while his mother was a daughter (whose name is unrecorded) of John Montgomery, laird of Hazlehead. He was born in 1569 or 1570, if one may judge from an inscription on his tomb, which stated that he died at fifty-one years of age in early 1621. His brother Hugh became the laird of Braidstane and first Viscount Montgomery of the Great Ardes, in Ulster. On the eve of the accession of James VI of Scotland to the English throne George Montgomery was the rector of Chedzoy, Somerset. He had married his first wife, Susan Steynings (died 1614), a member of a local gentry family, in 1597. They were to be survived by a daughter called Jane. 
James I had not been in London long when he appointed Montgomery as one of his chaplains. It has been suggested that this promotion was a reward for his communicating news from the English royal court to his brother Adam in the Scottish royal court in Elizabeth's final days. The king also promoted him to the deanery of Norwich, in which he was installed on 7 June 1603 and which he held until his resignation therefrom on 20 September 1614. Montgomery 'resided much at court' in the first years of James's reign in England ('Montgomery Manuscripts', 20). According to later testimony from his daughter, the Church of Ireland archbishop of Armagh and some other of his colleagues in Ireland employed Montgomery as their agent at court. It seems to have been at their suggestion that James I appointed him bishop of the Ulster dioceses of Derry, Raphoe, and Clogher on 15 February 1605. 
Montgomery was sent to Ireland to survey the condition of the Catholic church in his three dioceses and to make recommendations to the king as to how it might be transformed into a protestant establishment. His work was thorough and systematic. It formed the basis for the creation of the new Church of Ireland in western and central Ulster. Montgomery was zealous in his efforts to recover the church's ancient patrimony from the local Irish nobility and English servitors alike. He had already succeeded in forcing Sir Cahir O'Doherty to recognize his title to certain church lands in Inishowen, co. Donegal, before O'Doherty rebelled in April 1608 and sacked the colonial settlement at Derry. Montgomery's house was looted and his library was destroyed by the rebels. His wife was detained as a hostage for three months by the Irish before being released. O'Doherty's failed rebellion, following the flight of the earls of Tyrone and Tyrconnell to mainland Europe, prompted James I to embark on the plantation of Ulster. 
Montgomery was given a commission to assist in the survey and demarcation of the plantation estates. This put him in a strong position to represent the church's interests in the plantation project. Crucially, he managed to secure the 'erenagh' lands, episcopal lands held by paraclerical tenants, for the Church of Ireland bishops despite attempts to classify them as 'monastic' lands forfeited to the crown. By the summer of 1610 the plans for the Ulster plantation were almost finalized. However, Montgomery's insistence on recovering the island of Derry for the church brought him into conflict with the crown, which intended to make Derry the chief British stronghold in Ulster. James I obliged the bishop to resign from Derry and Raphoe, after making a composition with the crown whereby he ceded the church's title to the island of Derry in return for a royal charter confirming his title to the remainder of the church's patrimony in Derry diocese. As a reward for his instrumental role in the establishment of the Church of Ireland in Ulster the king made him bishop of Meath, a diocese in the most Anglicized and prosperous part of Ireland. He was allowed to retain Clogher, an extensive but poor diocese, 'in commendam'. 
Montgomery built a new episcopal residence at Ardbraccan, co. Meath, the chief manor of his predecessors in Meath diocese. He re-roofed the local parish church, but it does not appear that he was an overly zealous pastor. He was often absent. The royal visitation of Meath diocese in 1622 implies that the churches there were in far worse order shortly after his death than they had been seven years earlier. He had failed, too, to increase the church's resident, let alone its preaching, ministry. 
Montgomery arranged for his daughter to marry Nicholas St Lawrence, Lord Howth and one of the leading noblemen of the pale in Ireland, in 1615. He settled $3000 sterling on her as a marriage portion -- a 'great burden', as he was to acknowledge to a brother-in-law. He married Elizabeth (died 1639), daughter of Edward Brabazon, baron of Ardee, some time after the death of his first wife. Elizabeth, in turn, remarried after the bishop's death. 
According to the late seventeenth-century Montgomery manuscripts Montgomery commended James Ussher to James I, and the king was persuaded by his 'black Ireland bishop' that Ussher should succeed him in co. Meath ('Montgomery Manuscripts', 107). Bishop George Montgomery died in Westminster on 15 January 1621. In accordance with his will his body was sent to Ireland to be interred beside his first wife in the vault he had constructed within the parish church at Ardbraccan, co. Meath. 


@@@@@


doc= 58507


Coper, Hans Joachim (1920-1981), potter, was born on 8 April 1920 in Chemnitz, Saxony, the second son of Julius Coper, a prosperous Jewish businessman, and his wife, Erna (died 1969). Coper's childhood was deeply affected by the increasing harassment of Jewish citizens throughout the 1930s, something that led to the family's moving from Chemnitz to Dresden, and subsequent difficulties in his early education. His father committed suicide in 1936, and his brother emigrated to Canada in 1937. Coper spent a short period studying textile engineering in Dresden before emigrating to England in 1939. In 1940 he was interned as an enemy alien and sent to Canada, volunteering to return to England to join the Pioneer Corps in 1941. Soon after the war Coper met the emigre Viennese potter Lucie Rie and with no prior knowledge of pottery joined her studio as an assistant to make ceramic buttons for the fashion industry. Her studio was a meeting-place for European artists and architects and Coper was greatly encouraged in this urbane atmosphere to extend both his ceramic and his drawing skills. Rie's reputation as a potter was based on her austere tableware designs of black and white glazed teapots and coffee cups, decorated with minimal cross-hatching or parallel lines, and Coper helped to throw and decorate them. The tableware stood out at this period against the more orientalist functional pots, heavily glazed in rich earth colours, that were espoused by Bernard Leach and his followers. Coper's developing abilities were recognized by Rie and many of these tableware pieces carry both their personal sealmarks on them. 
Coper also began to make less functional ceramics alongside this tableware. These pieces were distinctive and already displayed his sensibility; in particular his fascination with the archaic pots of Greece coupled with an interest in the abstract mark making of such contemporary painters as Marino Marini and Ben Nicholson. The exterior surfaces of these pots were rarely glazed; rather they have dry abraded surfaces into which lines have been scored to make abstracted designs of birds or fish, or patterns reminiscent of webs or nets. Their forms were simple, often bowls or beakers or compounds of two more shapes brought boldly together: all the component parts of his pots were thrown on the potter's wheel, something he believed strongly gave intensity and vigour to the forms. Above all these potters shared the interest in archaic ritual so current among contemporary sculptors. Coper's palette of colours was muted: ochres, browns, and black predominated in these first pots as they were to do throughout his career, their tonality highlighting their connections with more overtly sculptural materials like stone rather than with ceramics. These pots of Coper's made a considerable impact when exhibited at the Festival of Britain in 1951, and subsequently at exhibitions in London with Rie at the Berkeley Galleries in 1954 and 1956. His work began to be collected by notable patrons and it is a marker of his burgeoning reputation that in the first monograph on studio pottery by Muriel Rose published in 1955 ten of Coper's pots were illustrated. 
Coper had married Annie Penelope Karaiskos in October 1943 and had a daughter, Ingrid, in 1944. Their marriage was short-lived, a relationship with Dorothy Frances (Francesca) Zobel, formerly Nicholas, starting also in 1943, with two children, Anya and Laurens, being born in 1944 and 1948. In 1954 Coper met the photographer Jane Gate, with whom he was to live for the rest of his life. Jane Gate's photographs of Coper provide a remarkable archive of images of his work in progress in his studios. They married in 1974. 
In 1959 Hans Coper moved to a newly inaugurated arts centre at Digswell in Hertfordshire where he was given a studio and flat. Digswell was founded to strengthen connection between the arts and architecture, and in the five years that Coper lived there a substantial proportion of his work was focused on making architectural ceramics. These included cladding tiles for both the exterior and interior of buildings as well as designs for washbasins and lavatories. This kind of work revealed Coper's interest in exactitude and problem solving, as well as a rare sense of engagement with the hardware of buildings. It was during this period that Coper also received the two most significant architectural commissions of his life. The first was to make the candlesticks for the new Coventry Cathedral, designed by Basil Spence, a brief that specified that they should be 'in scale with the huge concrete altar... an ordinary design would look puny. That is the pitfall' (Whiting, 19). It was a pitfall that he avoided. Coper made them 7 feet tall, slotting multiple thrown sections together on metal rods, a technique that reflected his grasp of engineering as much as of ceramics. His handling of scale is impressive, the candlesticks retaining great presence in their positioning in front of a vast Graham Sutherland tapestry. Spence was to be behind Coper's other great commission, that of two massive candlesticks for the meeting-house at Sussex University (now installed on a Henry Moore altar in St Stephen Walbrook, London). They were conceived as a bowl form raised above a tapered drum-like foot. Glazed with a matt manganese surface, they are magisterial in their austerity. 
In 1961 Coper started teaching part-time at Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts at the suggestion of Lucie Rie, and at the Royal College of Art in London in 1966. His teaching made a considerable impression on his pupils, who included some of the most significant ceramicists of the 1970s, such as Elizabeth Fritsch, Glenys Barton, and Alison Britton, though their new school of hand-built work often vibrantly painted shared little with Coper's aesthetic. A man of considerable good looks, tall and slightly hunched through a stiffened spine, and with an almost hieratic intensity of manner, Coper inspired great loyalty among those he taught. He was not given to inanity or unnecessary pleasantry when discussing work, and many record that it was his gravitas about the making of ceramics that was so inspirational. The devotion he inspired was described by Barton: 'I suddenly felt an urgent need to have something better to show him the next time he came' (Barton, 54). 
Coper returned to London in 1963 and the subsequent four years were to prove some of the most fertile of his life. Coper's characteristic way of working was to make numerous pots in a very small series of forms, intensely revising the shapes and their decoration, and discarding much of his work. When exhibiting his work he preferred to show pots of widely differing scale and tone together to create a complex of formal resonances. His composite forms grew more complex, involving many different thrown sections and sometimes also joining a disc at the rim or at the intersection of two forms. Many of his pots were concerned with contrasting ellipses and flattened volumes, sometimes dramatically indenting or squeezing the forms. Their surfaces were subtler with a pale cream slip used in contrast with the black interiors. Function was no longer of significance (though he continued to suggest that they could be used for flowers or candles), as he developed his increasingly distinctive vocabulary of shapes and surface. 
In 1967 Coper had his most important joint European exhibition at the Boymans Museum in Rotterdam with Lucie Rie, for which he made some of the largest pieces of his career. In 1969 he showed with the weaver Peter Collingwood at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. In this exhibition he showed elongated forms mounted on very small drum-like bases for the first time. With their submerged anthropomorphism these pots became known as his 'Cycladic' pots owing to their resemblance to the archaic figures that partly inspired them. For this exhibition he wrote sparingly about his work, the only time which he did so and about which subsequently he had serious misgivings: 'My concern is with extracting essence rather than with experiment and exploration. The wheel imposes its economy, dictates limits, provides momentum and continuity. Concentrating on continuous variations of simple themes I became part of the process; I am learning to operate a sensitive instrument which may be resonant to my experience of existence now -- in this fantastic century. Practising a craft with ambiguous reference to purpose and function one has occasion to face absurdity. More than anything, somewhat like a phantom piano-tuner, one is trying to approximate a phantom pitch. (Houston, 99)' Coper moved to Somerset in 1967. His reputation, always high among a small group of collectors, had now become considerable in Europe and America. Though his work now fetched more money, the intense scrutiny under which he put his work meant that the few pieces he sold brought him no great affluence. He continued to live in an electively spartan manner. It was only after his death that his work became the most expensive of studio ceramics and the subject of fervent speculation. From 1974 there were increasing signs of physical deterioration in his co-ordination, with motor neurone disease diagnosed in 1975. Coper made fewer and fewer pots until in 1979 he ceased completely; he died in Frome, Somerset, on 16 June 1981. 
Since his death Coper's reputation among critics and ceramicists has remained steadfast: his work has continued to be perceived as having the greatest sculptural presence among studio potters. Principal collections of Coper's works include those in the Victoria and Albert Museum, and the Crafts Council, London; the Metropolitan Museum, New York; and the Boymans Museum, Rotterdam. 


@@@@@


doc= 58510


Lane, George, first Viscount Lanesborough (1620-1683), political administrator and politician, was born on 25 December 1620, the son of Sir Richard Lane, first baronet (died 1668), of Tulske, co. Roscommon, and his second wife, Mabel, daughter and sole heir of Gerald Fitzgerald of Donore, co. Kildare. His grandfather George Lane had first gone to Ireland during the wars in Queen Elizabeth I's reign. In return for his services he was granted lands in counties Longford and Roscommon which provided the nucleus of the holdings subsequently enlarged by his successors. George Lane was admitted to Trinity College, Dublin, in 1638. Four years later he waited on Charles I at Oxford. By what means he came to the notice of the duke of Ormond, the king's lord lieutenant in Ireland, is unknown. However, probably by the spring of 1643 and certainly by 1644 he was acting as Ormond's secretary. In that capacity he was privy to the tortuous negotiations with the confederate Catholics in Kilkenny, the royal court in Oxford, and the Westminster parliament. With his fortunes so firmly linked to those of Ormond, Lane followed him into continental exile in 1650. Because of his intimacy with the duke, Lane was himself regarded as influential, not least because he could introduce suitors or their petitions to his master. 
Richard Lane was connected through his mother, an O'Farrell, with a leading Catholic sept of the Irish midlands. His son, George, through his Fitzgerald mother, was part of an extensive kindred, much of which had remained Catholic. In addition, the Lanes, thanks to kinship and neighbourhood, traditionally looked to the Burkes, earls of Clanricarde, as their principal patrons in the region. In 1650 Ormond, when he quit Ireland, named the Catholic Clanricarde as his deputy. In turn, Richard Lane, mindful of his commission as sheriff of Roscommon in 1651, obeyed Clanricarde's orders and demolished his castle at Tulske. Earlier, in the 1640s, having handed Tulske to Lord Ranelagh, he had soldiered in Galway with Clanricarde. These continuing royalist affiliations meant that he was liable to forfeit much of his property. On 4 July 1656 the commissioners sitting at Loughreagh allowed him a third of what he had formerly enjoyed, but it was to be set out in a different barony of Roscommon. Somehow he eked out a penurious existence with others in similar straits. Some of the Lanes' relations, especially the O'Farrells, moved to the continent. There they entreated Secretary George Lane to intercede for them. Much of this period George spent in Paris and northern France, moving eventually with the court and Ormond to Brussels. Other than to act as a conduit through which those uprooted from the midlands could direct their requests, it is difficult to detect any distinctive stance adopted by Lane. As befitted the trusted secretary, he modestly performed the duties of amanuensis and mouthpiece. His abilities led to his employment as secretary to the king's council. In the intimate world of the exiles he built up understandings with Edward Hyde, future earl of Clarendon, and Edward Nicholas which would later prove useful. Richard Talbot, whom he first encountered in exile, would subsequently use Lane as an intermediary to overcome misunderstandings with Ormond. 
Charles II's restoration brightened Lane's prospects. First in England and then, from July 1662, in Ireland, where Ormond had reoccupied the lord lieutenancy, Lane was inundated with business. Much of it related to the general settlement of Ireland and the Ormonds' tangled affairs. However, he did not neglect the opportunities to advance himself and his own. His father's sacrifices in the Stuart cause were recognized when, on 11 February 1661, he was created a baronet. Sir Richard Lane was chosen by the gentry of Roscommon to represent what they had suffered through transplantation. He sought for himself the collectorship of crown rents in counties Galway, Mayo, and Roscommon. In August 1662 a royal letter promised to restore the elder Lane to what he had lost. The younger Lane had already been knighted by the king in 1657 and granted the prestigious posts of clerk to the English privy council (in 1656), clerk of the Irish parliament, and protonotary and clerk of the crown in Ireland towards the end of the interregnum. After 1660 he enjoyed the salary, perquisites, and status which went with these posts. In 1662 he was returned, at a by-election, to the Irish House of Commons as knight of the shire for Roscommon. In the same year the Irish parliament granted him $2000 in recognition of his recent services and past sufferings. Under his long-time master, Ormond, he thrived. 
In September 1664 Lane was permitted to surrender his clerkship in England (he sold it to another Irish protestant, Robert Southwell) so that he could concentrate on Irish business. In 1663 he was made secretary to the council of war in Ireland and keeper of the public records stored in the Bermingham Tower of Dublin Castle. The latter was a sensitive post, so much so that in 1669 Lane was accused of removing documents without proper authority. In November 1664 he was sworn of the Irish privy council. More solid still was the special provision made for him in the land settlement -- generosity which later was criticized. In addition to his estates in the midlands he acquired at least another 8615 acres scattered across five counties. At Rathcline in co. Longford he erected and furnished a mansion of considerable grandeur. Of necessity, with his official duties, much of his time was passed in Dublin. He was much concerned with framing and executing the land settlement. It gave him ample opportunity for personal profit and earned him a reputation for venality. In Dublin, too, he had added considerably to his holdings, and dwelt in a substantial house. So closely was he identified with Ormond that the latter's dismissal in 1669 reduced Lane's power. Ormond's successor sought to suppress the secretaryship of war. By 1674 the post, which some had contended was an unprecedented one, was being treated simply as secretaryship of state for Ireland. As late as 1676 Lane was bargaining over the terms on which he would lay it down. A pension for his son and a viscountcy -- of Lanesborough -- for himself were the prices. Ormond later claimed that he had bestirred himself to obtain this honour for Lane in 1676. Unfortunately the viscountcy did not satisfy his former secretary, who wanted to be advanced to an earldom. Such grandiloquent hopes were not to be fulfilled. The Lanes' revenues, notwithstanding the recent supplements, yielded no more than $2000-3000 p.a., which by conventional reckoning could not support an earldom. Ormond, in advising thus, incurred Lane's enmity. Lane was left out of the civil establishment in 1683, an affront alleged to have hastened his death later that year. In vain Ormond had sought to reassure him 'that I have all the value and affection for him that a man can have for such a friend as he would trust his life and honour with' (Ormond to Arran, 9 June 1683, 'Ormonde MSS', 7.41). 
Lane married three times. The brides indicated his progress from provincial Ireland into the noble society of Restoration England. His first wife was Dorcas, second daughter of Sir Anthony Brabazon, brother of the first earl of Meath. Possibly this match was contracted about April 1638 when Richard Lane entailed property on his heir. The Brabazons had origins in Ireland similar to those of the Lanes. Next, in March 1655, he married Susanna ('b'. 1627), a daughter of his colleague in exile the English secretary, Sir Edward Nicholas. After her death on 18 July 1671, he married Lady Frances Sackville, daughter of the earl of Dorset, with whose family the Orrerys had also recently allied. 
On his estates around Rathcline and in the nearby borough of Lanesborough, Lane endeavoured to create English and protestant communities. In 1677 he was enlarging the protestant church there. The little that he had accomplished would be largely destroyed during the Williamite wars. Through lineage and connection he remained close to the formerly dominant Irish Catholic families of the area, notably the Nangles and O'Farrells. In addition, despite his devotion to the house of Ormond, he prided himself on his relationship to the Burkes and Fitzgeralds. But such links with Catholic Ireland did not prevent Lane from being reviled for obstructing the dispossessed when they sought reinstatement in the 1660s. To other critics his own personal rewards and his intimacies in Gaelic and Catholic Ireland exemplified what was thought to be wrong with Ormond's lax Irish administration. He died at Lanesborough on 11 December 1683. 


@@@@@


doc= 58511


Maxwell, Sir Arthur (1875-1935), banker and army officer, was born in Belfast, the son of William Maxwell. He was educated in Dublin and entered the civil service in 1893, and then transferred to the Post Office. In 1901 he married Eva, younger daughter of R. W. Jones of Belfast. In 1905 he took the unusual step of becoming joint secretary of the private bankers Glyn Mills & Co., who rarely recruited to senior positions from outside. This move may well have been prompted by the bank's use of numerical calculating machinery for cheque clearing (and in its expanding corporate registrar's business), equipment with which Maxwell would have been familiar at the Post Office. 
Like many of his colleagues in the bank, Maxwell was a territorial soldier, and when war was declared in 1914 he went to France with the 8th London regiment. He was soon promoted lieutenant-colonel commanding the 8th and 23rd regiments. He was awarded the DSO in 1916 for his part in an action in which he was severely wounded. On his return to the front he was later promoted to be general officer commanding the 174th infantry brigade with the rank of brigadier-general. He served throughout the war in the trenches on the western front, being mentioned in dispatches five times, and winning a bar to his DSO in 1918; he was created CMG in 1919. He commanded the 2nd London infantry brigade, TA, from 1920 to 1924 and was honorary colonel of the 7th London regiment, the Post Office Rifles, from 1923 until his death. 
When Maxwell returned to Glyn Mills, the most able of the new generation of partners had been killed, notably Charles Mills MP in 1915. General Sir Herbert Lawrence became a managing partner in 1919 and looked to Maxwell, who was appointed general manager, to help him pilot the bank through the turbulent financial world of the early 1920s. Lawrence, who was related by marriage to the bank's owning families, provided the reassurance that was vital to the success of mergers with other long-established private banks. In 1923 Glyn Mills amalgamated with Holts, a West End bank, which acted principally as army agent. Maxwell became a managing partner in the enlarged business. Within a year he was negotiating with the executors of the earl of Jersey for the acquisition of Child's, one of the oldest private banks in the City. The two banks amalgamated in March 1924 and for the rest of his career Maxwell had to manage a large unwieldy partnership. 
As well as private clients Glyn Mills also had commercial customers, including the armaments manufacturer Vickers and the Oceanic Steam Navigation Co., owners of the White Star Line. When Vickers's capital was reduced in 1926 and the management reorganized, Lawrence was appointed chairman of the company. He immediately became deeply involved in all the problems of the armaments industry of the inter-war years, leaving Glyn Mills very much in Maxwell's hands. During 1926 Maxwell was himself plunged into the complex negotiations that eventually resulted in the sale of Oceanic Steam Navigation Co. to Lord Kylsant's Royal Mail group. When it became clear in the early summer of 1930 that the group was in serious financial difficulties, Maxwell was a natural choice to join Frederick Hyde and Sir William McLintock as a member of the committee of inquiry and a voting trustee with complete authority over the enormous enterprise. Maxwell's formidable task was to maintain close communications with leading figures in the City, including Montagu Norman, the governor of the Bank of England, informing them at every stage of the delicate negotiations to resolve the country's largest single corporate exposure. As Maxwell well knew, success was vital, as failure would have placed in jeopardy not just thousands of jobs but several financial institutions. For the next five years most of his time was taken up with Royal Mail and he was knighted in 1931 for his services. 
After the first phase of the rescue was completed in 1933, Maxwell and McLintock joined the boards of nearly all the leading companies in the group -- Royal Mail itself, Elder Dempster, Oceanic Steam Navigation Co., Coast Lines, Shaw Savill, and many others. Helped and encouraged by Norman they were charged with realizing the group's assets on behalf of the creditors. This was a hugely complicated undertaking, which at any moment could have been jeopardized by the hasty action of any one of the very large number of small creditors, many of whom were unsecured. Between 1933 and 1935 a succession of schemes were drafted and tested on City opinion by Maxwell, McLintock, and Norman; this involved hundreds of meetings and the skilful handling of the press and the courts. There is no doubt that this frantic activity, coupled with the day-to-day management of what was still the largest shipping combine in the world, contributed to Maxwell's sudden death on 20 January 1935 at 16 Cumberland Terrace, Regent's Park, London. He was survived by his wife. He was buried at St Mary's, Finchley. 
As someone who had come to the City from an unusual background, Maxwell was convinced of the importance of evening classes and of professional training. He was appointed a governor of the City of London College in 1911, and he chaired the general purposes committee from 1922 and became chairman of the governors in 1934. He also served as a member of the advisory committee on commercial education of the Regent Street Polytechnic and as a member of the Board of Education's committee on examinations for part-time students, and on the London county council's advisory committee on banking education. He was president of the Institute of Bankers from 1931 to 1932. Maxwell and his wife had a daughter and a son, Arthur Terence Maxwell (1905-1991), who became a partner in Glyn Mills and helped with the Royal Mail reconstruction; he himself had a distinguished career as a banker and industrialist. 
Along with many of his contemporaries in the City, Maxwell of necessity worked discreetly behind the scenes, shunning the limelight; yet without such commitment the experience of the inter-war years would have been even more catastrophic. The financial problems they sought to resolve were so great that the simple panacea of devaluing sterling advocated by Keynes would have made little impact. 


@@@@@


doc= 58513


Mendes da Costa, Benjamin (1704-1764), philanthropist and merchant, was born in Amsterdam, the son of Luis (Abraham) Henriques Mendes da Costa (1652-1724), merchant, and his wife, Theresa (Judith) Salazar. His parents were the descendants of Iberian Jews who had converted to Christianity in the late middle ages and later found refuge from inquisitorial persecution in St Esprit de Bayonne in south-western France. About 1700 they migrated to Amsterdam, then the hub of the western Sephardi diaspora. Benjamin later moved to London, becoming an endenizened citizen in 1725. His first wife was Judith (died 1736), the daughter of Raphael Mendes da Costa, with whom he had two sons, Abraham and Raphael, both of whom predeceased him. After Judith died in 1736, he married Rebecca Alvares Pereira. 
A successful overseas merchant, Mendes da Costa was a leader of the Spanish and Portuguese Jewish community of London in the mid-eighteenth century. He was elected to the 'mahamad' (council) of the synagogue in Bevis Marks five times between 1730 and 1762. In 1746, following the defeat of a Jewish naturalization bill in the Irish parliament in two consecutive years (1745 and 1746), the 'mahamad' appointed a five member 'committee of diligence' to monitor legislative efforts to regulate the legal status of Jews in Great Britain; the committee, in turn, made Mendes da Costa its president. When George III ascended the throne in 1760, the congregation chose seven members, including Mendes da Costa, to offer its congratulations and to request a continuation of the Hanoverian policy of toleration. The 'deputados', as they were known, drafted a congratulatory address, which Mendes da Costa and three other members of the committee presented in November 1760. The committee did not disband afterwards but, with the addition of delegates from the Ashkenazi synagogues, evolved slowly into a permanent representative body, the Board of Deputies of British Jews. 
In addition to serving as a communal leader, Mendes da Costa was also a generous benefactor, primarily but not exclusively of the Spanish and Portuguese Jewish community. He established two funds to support students at the congregational school, one in memory of his deceased son Raphael. He supported the establishment of Jewish communities in British North America, promoting the settlement of Jews in South Carolina and contributing to the erection of a new synagogue building in New York. In 1747 he purchased and donated to his own congregation the remainder of the lease on the congregation's building. Toward the end of his life, his annual benefactions totalled $3000. In his will he left bequests to Sephardi and Ashkenazi charities as well as to the Christian poor of St Katharine Cree. 
Mendes da Costa was a member of a far-flung, complex clan of New Christian origin whose various branches used either or both of the surnames da Costa and Mendes. Its most prominent English members included the wealthy widow Catherine Mendes da Costa, who married into the landed gentry; the rake Philip Mendes da Costa; and the mineralogist and conchologist Emanuel Mendes da Costa, a brother of Philip. 
Benjamin died on 28 March 1764 at his home in Bury Street, St Mary Axe, London, and was buried in the city's Spanish and Portuguese Jewish cemetery on Mile End Road. 


