@@@@@


doc= 58518


Herford, William Henry (1820-1908), educationist, was born at Coventry on 20 October 1820, the third surviving son in a family of six sons and three daughters of John Herford and his first wife, Sarah (died 1831), daughter of Edward Smith of Birmingham, uncle of Joshua Toulmin Smith. Edward Herford, coroner for Manchester, was his elder brother; Brooke Herford was a younger brother. Two other brothers, Charles and William, were active in local public life promoting liberal causes. His youngest sister was Anne LauraHerford. His father, who was throughout life a strong Liberal and convinced Unitarian, became a wine merchant in Manchester in 1822, and sat on the Manchester town council from 1838 to 1846. He lived at Altrincham, where his wife, a woman of cultivation and an accomplished artist, conducted a successful girls' school. 
After attending a school kept by Charles Wallace, Unitarian minister at Hale Barns, Cheshire, Herford was from 1831 to 1834 a day-boy at Shrewsbury School under Samuel Butler. From 1834 to 1836 he was at Manchester grammar school. Then, being destined for the Unitarian ministry, he was prepared for entry at the ministerial college at York by John Relly Beard, from whom he 'first learned by experience that lessons might be made interesting to scholars' (Herford, 6). From 1837 to 1840 he studied at Manchester College in York, during the principalship of John Kenrick, and there came into contact with German philosophy and theology. He removed with the college from York to Manchester in the summer of 1840, and thus came under the influence of three new professors, Francis Newman, James Martineau, and John James Tayler, the last of whom he regarded as his spiritual father. Graduating BA of London University in the autumn of 1840, he began to preach in Unitarian pulpits, but declined a permanent engagement as minister at Lancaster in order to accept a scholarship for three years' study in Germany. In 1842 he went to Bonn, where he attended the courses of E. M. Arndt, A. W. Schlegel, and F. C. Dahlmann, and formed a close friendship with his contemporary, Wilhelm Ihne. After two years at Bonn he spent eight months in Berlin, where he was admitted to the family circles of the church historian Neander and the microscopist Ehrenberg. After a brief period as preacher to the Unitarian congregation at Edinburgh, he accepted in the summer of 1845 an invitation from a Unitarian congregation at Lancaster, where he remained for a year. In 1846 Lady Noel Byron, widow of the poet, invited him, on James Martineau's recommendation, to undertake the tuition of Ralph King, younger son of her daughter, Ada, countess of Lovelace. Early in 1847 he accompanied the boy to Wilhelm von Fellenberg's Pestalozzian school at Hofwyl, near Bern. Herford developed a close association with Wilhelm von Fellenberg, becoming a temporary teacher on the staff, and accepting with enthusiasm Pestalozzi's and Froebel's educational ideas. 
In February 1848 Herford resumed his pastorate at Lancaster, marrying in September 1848 Elizabeth Anne (died 1880), daughter of Timothy Davis, minister of the Presbyterian chapel at Evesham. Meanwhile he resolved to work out in a systematic way the ideas which he had developed at Hofwyl. In January 1850 Herford, while retaining his ministerial duties, opened at Lancaster a school for boys on Pestalozzian principles. There were no prizes or merit marks, and much stress was laid on self-government by the pupils. Fresh air and physical exercise were essential elements of the regime. Prosperous on the whole, but never large, the school continued with some distinction for eleven years, when a decline in its numbers caused him to transfer it to his brother-in-law, David Davis (1821-1897), a Unitarian minister, under whom the school was later renamed Castle Howell School. 
Resigning his pastorate at the same time, Herford with his wife and five children went for eighteen months to Zurich in charge of a pupil. On his return in September 1863 he filled the pulpit of the free church in Manchester until 1869, acquiring increasing reputation as a teacher and lecturer, especially to women and girls, teaching at the Ladies' College, Victoria Park. Some of his teaching was given at Brook House School, Knutsford, whose headmistress, Louisa Carbutt (later to become Herford's second wife), was educating girls on principles very similar to his own. Herford and his wife formed a plan of a co-educational school for younger children. In April 1873 they opened their co-educational school for pupils aged between seven and thirteen at Fallowfield, Manchester, and afterwards moved it to Lady Barn House, Withington. For twelve years it was run with an individuality of method which had an important local influence. The regime at the school was in opposition to the contemporary emphasis on learning by rote; handwork and physical exercise were part of the curriculum. A supporter of training for kindergarten teachers, Herford was a founder in 1872 of the Manchester Kindergarten Association. At the 1885 conference on education under healthy conditions, he criticized overpressure on elementary school pupils. He was also a prominent supporter of the opening of universities to women, making a courageous speech during the debates in 1878 on allowing women to take London degrees, replying to opposition from the medical faculty with an attack on the double standard in relations between the sexes. 
In 1886, following the death of his first wife and his marriage in 1884 to Louisa Carbutt, Herford resigned the school to his second daughter, Caroline Herford ['see below']. In retirement Herford devoted his time to authorship and to travel, publishing in 1889 his chief work, 'The School: an Essay towards Humane Education', a masterpiece of English educational writing, which he described as 'the fruits of more than forty years of teaching; various in the sex, age, class and nation of its objects'. In 1893 he published 'The Student's Froebel', adapted from 'Die Menschenerziehung' of F. Froebel (1893; revised edn, posthumous, with memoir by C. H. Herford, 1911). This was the best English account of the educational doctrine which it summarized and expounded. In 1890 he settled at Paignton in south Devon. In 1902 he published 'Passages from the Life of an Educational Free Lance', a translation of the 'Aus dem Leben eines freien Padagogen' of Dr Ewald Haufe. He died at Torbay Lodge, Paignton, on 27 April 1908, and was buried at Paignton. 
Herford spoke of himself as having been for the first quarter of a century of his teaching an unconscious follower of F. Froebel, and for the following fifteen years his professed disciple. With Pestalozzi he urged the teacher never to deprive the child of 'the sacred right of discovery', and to seek to bring things, both abstract and concrete, into actual contact with the pupil's senses and mind, putting words and names, 'those importunate pretenders', into a subordinate place. Moral training, 'practised not by preaching and as little as possible by punishment, but mainly by example and by atmosphere', he held to be of supreme importance, and its primary purpose to be 'an intellectual clearing and purifying of the moral sense'. To physical training (including play, gymnastics, singing, and handwork) he attached importance only less than that which was assigned to moral culture. Himself a teacher of genius, he disdained any compromise with educational principles or conventions of which he disapproved. 

Caroline Herford (1860-1945), subsequently Caroline Herford Blake, was born on 1 November 1860 at 19 Queen Square, Lancaster, and educated at various schools in Manchester, including Lady Barn House, before attending the women's college at Brunswick Street, Manchester, which provided higher education for women before Owens College was opened to them. Resident in 1885 at Newnham College, Cambridge, she later graduated MA at Manchester University. As headmistress of Lady Barn from 1886, she was notable as a pioneer of lacrosse as a school sport. She resigned in 1907 to look after her father following the death of his second wife. After his death, she was briefly a lecturer at University College, Reading, and then lecturer in education at Manchester University from 1910 to 1918. She was a founding member of the Manchester University branch of the British Federation of University Women. Following the family tradition of public service, she was a member of Manchester city council, where she exercised a progressive influence on the education committee until her defeat by a Conservative candidate in 1923. During the war she was a Red Cross commandant in Lancashire, and was appointed MBE in 1919. Leaving Manchester in 1924 on her marriage to Robert Blake (died 1931), JP, of Yeabridge House, South Petherton, Somerset, husband of her deceased sister, she became a member of Somerset education committee. After her husband's death Caroline Herford Blake lived with a Manchester friend and colleague, Julia Sharpe, at St Martins, Grimms Hill, Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire, where she died on 16 March 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 58519


Legge, Augusta, countess of Dartmouth (1822-1900), philanthropist, was born on 18 February 1822, eldest of the two sons and two daughters of Heneage Finch, fifth earl of Aylesford (1786-1859), and his wife, 'nee' Lady Augusta Greville (died 1845). She grew up at the family home at Packington in Warwickshire, and was educated by a governess of strong religious principles. She early became a devoted churchwoman, to the consternation of her family: 'I was not confirmed till I was nineteen', she later recalled, 'and my mother very much wished me to go to a ball the night before, and I was thought strange for not going' (How, 204). On 9 June 1846 at St James's, Westminster, she married a childhood friend, William Walter Legge, Viscount Lewisham (1823-1891), who in 1853 succeeded his father as fifth earl of Dartmouth. It was a happy marriage, although one of her daughters was to comment that 'When I first remember her she was always ill. She had a very large family though only five of us [two sons and three daughters] grew up' (How, 212). 
The family lived at Sandwell, near Birmingham, until 1853, when they took over the main Dartmouth family residence, Patshull Hall, near Wolverhampton. Unwilling to see Sandwell let to tenants, Lady Dartmouth persuaded her husband to use the house for a charitable purpose of benefit to the people of the Black Country. After a false start as a school for training girls for domestic service, the institution eventually settled down as a school for girls 'who, more or less gently born, were in needy circumstances' (How, 209). The first head of the school was Laetitia Frances Selwyn, sister of the bishop of Lichfield, and it remained open until the death of Lord Dartmouth in 1891. Lady Dartmouth was also active at a local level in the Girls' Friendly Society, in the Ladies' Home Mission Association, the Mothers' Union, and the Church of England Waifs and Strays Society. She also formed clothing clubs and lending libraries for her tenants and poor neighbours, and supplied the largest of the local villages with the services of a parish nurse. 
After her husband's death in 1891, Lady Dartmouth retired to Woodsome Hall, another of the family houses, near Huddersfield. She had previously spent time in the area, and was known to the local independent loom-workers, whom she had assisted by selling their linsey when they were under great pressure of competition from factories. Now based in the newly formed diocese of Wakefield, she was instrumental in the formation of the Mothers' Union there, of which she served as diocesan president. Moreover, in 1892 she established the All Saints' Home for orphaned baby boys, under the auspices of the Church of England Waifs and Strays Society, in the neighbouring parish of Almondbury. She supervised this home personally, keeping the accounts and managing its affairs; she had a highly regarded capacity for business, and a motherly relationship with the boys. 
Brought up in the country, Lady Dartmouth was an active agriculturalist. She took charge of the poultry yards at Patshull, and originated (by cross-breeding) the Andalusian bantam. She was particularly proud of the fact that she supplied all the birds for her elder son's twenty-first birthday celebrations. Until late in life she was to be found walking her grounds accompanied by her terriers, occasionally indulging in a surreptitious rat hunt. Lady Dartmouth died from a fall at Woodsome Hall on 1 December 1900, and was buried three days later at Patshull. 


@@@@@


doc= 58521


Freeman, Flora Lucy (bap. 1869, d. 1960), philanthropist and writer, was baptized on 20 May 1869 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, the daughter of William Henry Freeman, a general medical practitioner, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Carrack. She had at least four older brothers. She founded and organized clubs for working-class girls and a pioneering Roman Catholic Girl Guide company, and wrote advice manuals about these activities. She was also the author of three moral tales, three devotional books, and three moral advice books for girls. Her childhood memories included hating needlework but also 'the joy' of reading Scott's novels aloud to her old nurse (Freeman, 'God's Golden Gifts', 58). Her books, notably 'A Chain of Thought for the Church's Year' (1905), which cites authors as diverse as Isaac Williams, Jeremy Taylor, Matthew Arnold, and Cardinal Newman, indicate that she was well read, if not well educated, and had travelled in Europe. Unmarried, she dedicated 'A Chain of Thought' to her 'dear mother', and wrote of the 'gift of friendship' (Freeman, 'God's Golden Gifts', 65-79). 
Freeman, who had been brought up a high-church Anglican, started her work with clubs for working-class girls when aged twenty-one, in London, where she was living. By 1901 she had also run clubs for 'rough girls' and laundry workers in a 'large seaside town', as well as an 'Evening Home for Rough Girls' in London for many years (Freeman, 'Religious and Social Work', 70-85, 90-93). In 1903 she dedicated 'The Sunshine of Everyday Life' 'to my many girl friends, especially those belonging to St Saviour's Pimlico, and St Barnabas' Hove'. 
In 'Religious and Social Work Amongst Girls' (1901) Freeman drew on her own extensive experience to give practical advice to girls of the 'upper and leisured classes' as to how to run working-girls' clubs. In her view, their primary aim was religious, and her advice about how to introduce the subject, and give religious instruction (in the Anglo-Catholic tradition), suggests that she was a gifted teacher. She also advised on how to find a suitable room, organize enjoyable activities, and finance such clubs, noting that 'Our (annual) London Club sale' (staffed by club committee girls) 'is always most successful' (p. 142). The sections on visiting indicate that Freeman took a personal interest in her club members. She referred to district visiting in south London slums, in 'one of the poorest of our London riverside parishes' (p. 90), to visiting a south London women's settlement, and to working in the East End, besides helping with church missions. 
Freeman urged upper- and middle-class girls that it would bring them real happiness to use their talents and energy for the good of the poor. The dedication of the semi-autobiographical 'Polly: a Study of Girl Life' (1904) to 'S. A. D. In Remembrance of Many Happy days spent together in the East End' suggests she did find this herself, although she described her virtual 'agony of shyness' when beginning conversations about religion (Freeman, 'Religious and Social Work', 28). While she believed that working-class girls would benefit from the refining influence of the upper classes, the latter were admonished as to the need for understanding, tact, and sensitivity and reminded how much they could learn. A review of 'Religious and Social Work' in 1909 by 'E. E. O' stated that 'Every page is a record of living experience. No detail is too insignificant for careful and deliberate attention, and we can well believe this is the secret of Miss Freeman's wonderful success in being a friend to working girls' ('Girls' Club Journal', 1/1, 1909, 21). 

'Our Working Girls and How to Help Them' (1908), written after seven more years of work with girls' clubs, was also favourably reviewed. In it, Freeman admitted that experience had tempered her optimism, but she reiterated the value of such clubs as a place to give working girls recreation after a hard day's work, and to prevent them from 'falling', through having nowhere to go in their time off. Club workers were advised to help girls find the best kind of work available and to assist those who were being exploited in service. This book discussed issues such as possible difficulties with other club workers and ways to encourage purity, including how to teach the facts of life. Her article 'Notes for a lesson on purity' was printed in the 'Girls' Club Journal' of 1912. 
Freeman clearly had links with extensive networks of voluntary organizations, such as the Factory Girls' Country Holiday Fund, preventive homes and penitentiaries, and the National Vigilance Association. 'The Patience of Perla' (1906) was dedicated to 'my dear friend, Grace Valentine Stephenson', club leader of St Mary's girls' club, Southwark, in 1913, and of the Girls' Guild, Kingsway Hall, from 1913 to 1916. In 1917 and 1921 Stephenson was secretary of the London Girls' Club Union, founded by the Hon. Maude Stanley in 1880. 
In 1906 Freeman established the Brighton Girls' Club Union, a non-denominational association, initiated by approaching the vicar of each parish, and also the local rabbi. The aim was to bring together those working with girls in the area for mutual support, and to raise the standard of club work by holding annual competitions. Her account of this was printed in the 'Girls' Club Journal' of October 1909, presumably as a model for others. She was still secretary in 1917 (but not in 1921). By 1917, with eleven other regional unions, the Brighton union was affiliated to the Federation of Working Girls' Clubs, founded as the Factory Helpers' Union in 1886. 
Freeman's books note the influence of Maria Havergal, the daughter of an evangelical clergyman, but primarily of (often controversial) ritualist slum parsons. 'Religious and Social Work' was dedicated to 'The Revd Father Black, to whom I owe so much in my Endeavours to Serve my Sisters', almost certainly William Black, curate of St Saviour's, Pimlico, from 1892 to 1910, who had been a Cowley Father. The preface was by the Revd R. R. Dolling, vicar of St Saviour's, Poplar, from 1898 to 1902, previously at St Agatha's, Portsea, whose sermons and retreats she had attended, and who was clearly in sympathy with Freeman's work. While slightly poking fun at inexperienced curates, Freeman paid tribute to the effective ministry and 'faithful friendship' of some experienced 'Priests' (Freeman, 'God's Golden Gifts', 70, 72; 'Religious and Social Work', 74, 113, 130). 'The Clouds of Life' (1911) was dedicated 'by special permission' to another controversial London Anglo-Catholic, the Revd Arthur Stanton. 

'The Sunshine of Everyday Life' (1903) and 'The Clouds of Life' were addressed to the girls themselves, and contained rigorous advice about religious practice and moral behaviour. Like 'Polly', they were enthusiastically prefaced by the Revd C. H. Sharpe, Anglican diocesan missioner in Gloucester from 1893, who became a Roman Catholic in 1916. 'A Chain of Thought for the Church's Year' (1905) and 'The Patience of Perla' (1906), a tale of an exemplary working-class girl, set in a seaside town, were prefaced by Anglo-Catholic Brighton clergy, including the Revd Arthur Cocks, who by 1913 was the Roman Catholic priest of Hove. In 1911 and 1917 Freeman's address was 10 Cromwell Road, and in 1923, 3 Ranelagh Villas, both in Hove. 
By 1916, when 'Spiritual Papers' and 'God's Golden Gifts' were published, Freeman had clearly become a Roman Catholic. She wrote of the 'gift' of conversion, and compared the chaotic state of the Anglican church with the certainties offered by the Church of Rome. The preface to the latter work was by Monsignor Hugh Benson (1871-1914), another convert. 
In 1916 Freeman initiated Roman Catholic guiding in the Brighton area, and she remained captain of the 6th Hove company until March 1923. Like the 11th and 23rd Brighton guide companies, this was one of the eight companies already affiliated to the Catholic Women's League Girl Guides, affiliated to the guide movement, when the league's standing committee of guide leaders was launched in 1920. It was clearly an active and successful company. In February 1921 the Brighton Catholic Women's League branch (founded in December 1908) reported, 'It is very gratifying to learn that the splendid work done by Miss Freeman in connection with the Girl Guides has been publicly recognized by the local Commissioner' ('Catholic Women's League Magazine', no. 112, 1921, 4). 

'On the Right Trail: Friendly Counsel for Catholic Girl Guides' (1921) was very favourably reviewed in the 'Girl Guides Gazette' and in the 'Catholic Women's League Magazine' of January 1922. It was prefaced and recommended by Cardinal Bourne, archbishop of Westminster, who had taken a particular interest in promoting Catholic Girl Guides. Although it was the first book to incorporate the moral principles of guiding within a Roman Catholic devotional context, it was apparently considered as helpful for all guides. Like 'God's Golden Gifts' (dedicated to Monsignor Connelly), this work was dedicated to the current Roman Catholic parish priest of Hove -- another convert, the 'Right Rev Monsignor Canon Thomas Ottley, to whose ever-ready help and sympathy I owe so much'. 
In April 1919 the Brighton Catholic Women's League branch reported 'with pleasure' the reopening of the girls' club (founded in 1909) 'under Miss Freeman -- who is so well known for her good work among girls' ('Catholic Women's League Magazine', no. 90, 1919, 7). Club members' activities (like those of Freeman's guides) included drilling, first aid, gardening, ethnic dancing, and the production of plays and an operetta, which were so successful financially that the club often presented cheques to the Catholic Women's League branch. The girls' club also successfully entered the competitions of the Brighton and Hove Girls' Club Union. 
By 1925 Freeman was a member of the third order of St Francis, a Roman Catholic lay order, affiliated to the mainstream order for monks. 'Thoughts from St Francis of Assisi' (1925), the third of a series published by Burns, Oates, and Washbourne, was also well reviewed in the 'Catholic Women's League Magazine'. This work had a foreword by Father Cuthbert of the order of St Francis Capuchin, who was superior of the Capuchin house in Oxford. By contrast with Freeman's earlier works, all the commentaries were by Roman Catholics. 
Through practical action and writing, Freeman made an important contribution to the creation of a nationwide organization, the National Organization of Girls' Clubs (founded in 1911), which was renamed the National Association of Girls' Clubs and Mixed Clubs in 1945. That Freeman's club and guide work was appreciated by contemporaries is indicated by the comments of clergy and frequent references and advertisements in the 'Girls' Club Journal' from 1909 to 1914 and the 'Catholic Women's League Magazine' from 1919 to 1925. The case studies cited by Freeman indicate that at least some working-class girls did enjoy and benefit from her clubs and her personal care for them. 
Apart from dedications to her mother, 'S. A. D.', 'my girl friends', and Grace Stephenson, Freeman's books suggest that some of her most important relationships were with clergy, both Anglo-Catholic and Roman Catholic. She was one of a number of Roman Catholic women writers around the turn of the century and is listed in 'The Guide to Catholic Literature'. Her places of residence and contacts reflect the strength of Anglo-Catholicism and Roman Catholicism in London and Brighton and on the south coast. She died at Lee House, 61 Dyke Road, Brighton, on 23 May 1960 and, after a requiem mass, was buried in Hove cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 58522


Wright, Lucy Olivia (1845-1896), philanthropist, was born on 3 November 1845 at Foulksrath Castle, co. Kilkenny, Ireland, the eighth of the nine children of Thomas Wright (died 1854), agent to Lord Carrick, and his wife, formerly a Miss Ball (died 1869), who came from an old Dublin and Drogheda family with Huguenot links. She had seven brothers and a sister; her younger brother, William, to whom she was close, became a clergyman. Mrs Wright was a religious and philanthropic woman who gave her children a Christian upbringing. Lucy Wright gained both her religious convictions and her musical taste from her mother, and her good looks, wit, and humour from her father. 
After Thomas Wright's death, his widow and her family moved firstly to Palmerstown, near Kilkenny city, in 1856, then to Blackrock, near Dublin, in 1863, during which time Lucy Wright went to school at Rhyl in north Wales. Her elder and only sister had married a cousin, the Revd Arthur Wright, who was vicar of St Anne's, Birkenhead; in 1868 Lucy and her mother went to live with them. After Mrs Wright's death nearly a year later, Lucy Wright remained with her sister and brother-in-law and moved with them to Tilston, Cheshire, at Christmas 1869. It was here that she began Sunday school teaching and other parish work. 
Lucy Wright first became interested in the Girls' Friendly Society while staying with a former school friend in north Wales in 1878, at which time a branch was being started in the St Asaph diocese. The society had been founded in 1875 by Mary Elizabeth Townsend 'To unite for the Glory of God in one Fellowship of Prayer and Service the Girls and Women of the Empire, to uphold Purity in Thought, Word and Deed'. Membership consisted of middle- and upper-class associates, paying at least 2's'. 6died a year, who were members of the Church of England, and working-class members of 'virtuous character', paying at least 6died a year, with no religious restriction. In June 1879 Lucy Wright attended the branch secretaries' conference at King's College, London, and at the end of the year she became secretary of the council on probation. The title was changed to secretary of the society in October 1880. Although the society had been founded in 1875 it was not until May 1880 that the constitution was finally passed, and the next decade was to be a time of considerable expansion, with the formation of diocesan councils, councils for Gibraltar and northern and central Europe, and branches and similar societies in Scotland, Ireland, and America. Lucy Wright was closely involved in all this activity, besides attending the meetings of the central committees, arranging conferences, and other secretarial duties. During her sixteen years in office the membership increased from 52,000 to over 200,000. She worked closely with Mrs Townsend, who remained the president, and a lasting friendship was forged. 
At first Lucy Wright travelled around the country on society business, but increasing frailty confined her to the London office, where she welcomed all. Towards the end of 1895 her health deteriorated and she went to Bordighera in Italy as the guest of Mr and Mrs Townsend, who owned a villa there. She became much worse during February 1896, and one of her nieces went to stay with her. She died there quite suddenly on 26 March 1896 and was buried in the cemetery at Bordighera. 
Lucy Wright was not only a very efficient central secretary, but also a very popular one. Townsend, in her obituary in the 'Girls' Quarterly', dwelt on her attractive personality: 'Everything interested her; no one ever enjoyed the society of friends, or the opportunities of culture that London life affords, or the relaxation of a holiday more than she did, and her own bright manner and winning personality made her attractive to all.... She was always such good company, so full of fun and so susceptible to the real joy of humour'. She emphasized the personal, rather than the administrative, success of Lucy Wright's work: 'To welcome all, to listen to all, to solve problems, to sympathise with the trials of workers, to encourage the faint-hearted, to receive confidences while betraying none, to interpret people to each other in the best way, to inspire others to go forward while keeping herself in the background, this was her true sphere of personal work'. The weekly church newspaper 'The Guardian' concluded its tribute by noting that 'Few women have been personally known to so large a circle; few certainly have been more beloved'. 


@@@@@


doc= 58523


Aveling, James Hobson (1828-1892), obstetric physician, was born in Cambridgeshire, the son of a local landowner. He studied medicine at Aberdeen University, where he graduated MB in 1856 and MD in 1857. He had settled in Sheffield in general practice soon after qualifying MRCS in 1851 and in a very short time managed to gain a prominent position in the profession locally. Having devoted himself especially to the treatment of the surgical diseases of women, in 1863 he founded the Sheffield (later Jessop) Hospital for Women, one of the first of its kind in England. In 1868 he decided to leave Sheffield, apparently on account of his wife, Charlotte Jane's, ill health; such was his reputation that, on leaving the town, he was presented by the mayor with a public testimonial, at a special dinner held in his honour. After a period of residence in the country, Aveling moved to London and in 1868, with the help of Robert Barnes and Thomas Chambers, he established the Chelsea Hospital for Women. He was senior physician to that hospital for many years, and on retiring from his post he was made consulting physician. In 1891 he took a prominent role in the opening of the convalescent home at St Leonards, Sussex. 
Aveling was an inventive and innovative practitioner. He devised a midwifery forceps and an appliance for the treatment of uterine inversion, as well as pioneering the use of chloroform in childbirth; a firm believer in the treatment of uterine tumours by electricity, he adopted Georges Apostoli's method for dealing with them. Aveling was a founding member of the Obstetrical Society of London (1859) and of the British Gynaecological Society (1884). He was for many years the editor of the 'Obstetrical Journal' and contributed numerous original articles to medical literature. His most important monographs include 'Memorials of Harvey' (1875), 'The Influence of Posture on Women in Gynecic and Obstetric Practice' (1878), 'The Chemberlens and the Midwifery Forceps' (1882), and 'On the Inversion of the Uterus' (1886). 
Aveling was greatly interested in the question of midwives, and devoted much time and attention to the improvement and regulation of their practice. He believed that suitably trained midwives, who at that time were still subservient to the male medical practitioner, could do useful work both in the hospital and the wider community. One of his main reasons for establishing a women's hospital in Sheffield was the desire to avoid the suffering caused by untrained midwives. He considered that as it was working-class women who were most in need of trained midwives it was important to encourage poorer women to become midwives, rather than rely on middle-class women, who would be in a position to compete with general practitioners for middle-class confinements. He embodied his views in 'English Midwives: their History and Prospects' (1872), which he characterized as 'A sad story of indifference and neglect, of petty jealousies and sordid interests, of murdered innocents, lost mothers and bereaved families' ('English Midwives', 168). He was for some time chairman of the board for examining midwives of the Obstetrical Society of London. 
Aveling was a cultured and well-educated man, who took a considerable interest in antiquarian matters. He was an active member of the Literary and Philosophical Society and wrote a 'History of Roche Abbey (Yorkshire) from its Foundation to its Dissolution' (1870), which was highly regarded at the time. His book 'Fables', published in 1886, was dedicated to Princess Frederica. Aveling died at his home, 1 Upper Wimpole Street, London, on 12 December 1892, of enteric fever, survived by his wife, and was cremated at Woking on 15 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 58524


Parr, Sir William (1434-1483), knight, was the eldest son of Sir Thomas Parr of Kendal, Westmorland, and Alice, daughter of Sir Thomas Tunstall of Thurland, Lancashire. William succeeded at his father's death late in November 1461. Thomas Parr had been a follower of Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury, and in the 1460s William maintained the link with the Nevilles, now headed by Salisbury's son Richard, earl of Warwick. Knighted in 1462, he became an increasingly important figure in north-west England, where he was appointed to numerous commissions, and in 1463 was granted (with his brother John) $100 per annum from the forfeited lands of the Lancastrian Sir Henry Bellingham. Having played an important part in Warwick's victory over a royal army at Edgecote in 1469, Parr accompanied the earl during the following year's Lincolnshire rising, and was sent by him to the king on 19 March with a request for safe conduct and guaranteed pardon. Edward IV refused, and charged Parr on his allegiance to leave Warwick and Clarence if they refused to surrender, and to urge his fellows to do the same. 
Parr appears to have acted on the command. On 6 May the king appointed him lieutenant of Carlisle and of the western march, where Warwick had been captain and warden since 1465, and he does not appear in the list of the earl's adherents drawn up after Warwick's flight. During the readeption of Henry VI, Parr was dropped from the commissions of the peace for Cumberland and Westmorland. On Edward's return from exile in 1471 he joined him at Nottingham. Both his brothers were also in the Yorkist camp and the youngest, Thomas, was killed fighting for the duke of Gloucester at Barnet. Parr became a knight of the king's body, and in July 1471 was rewarded with an extensive land grant, including the castles of Burgh, Pendragon, and Appleby, and with control of a third part of the crown share in the barony of Kendal. He was controller of the royal household from 1471 to 1475, and a royal councillor from July 1471. He also regularly served on embassies to Scotland. He was made a knight of the Garter in 1474. In 1475 he accompanied the king on his French campaign, and was one of the executors of the will Edward made before his departure. In 1481 his closeness to the king was further recognized when he once more became controller of the household, in succession to Sir Robert Wingfield. Like many of Edward's northern servants he also built up links with the duke of Gloucester, who had succeeded to the Nevilles' northern lands and to their pre-eminence in the north-west. Having long been a member of Gloucester's council, he was one of the commissioners to whom the duke's office of constable was committed in 1482. 
In April 1483 Parr played a leading role in the burial of Edward IV at Windsor. It was intended that he and his second wife, Elizabeth, should be no less prominent at the coronation of Richard III on 6 July following: she as a gentlewoman of Queen Anne, he as one of the knights who held the canopy over the king during his anointing. But Parr did not live long enough to benefit from the accession of his patron. He was dead by 3 December 1483. His first wife was Joan Trusbut, the widow of Thomas Colt, esquire. Colt died late in 1467 and Joan had married William by July 1468. The marriage was probably arranged under the aegis of Parr's lord the earl of Warwick, for Colt (whose father had come from Carlisle) was also a Neville associate, and Warwick headed the feoffees for the marriage settlement. Joan was a considerable heiress in her own right and brought her husband, among other land, the manor of Netherhall in Roydon, Essex. She died in 1473, and William initially enjoyed the custody of her lands and those of her son by Colt, but in February 1476 they were transferred to John Elrington, the treasurer of the king's household. By June 1475 Parr had married Elizabeth (1462- 'c'.1505), one of the daughters of Henry, Lord Fitzhugh, and Alice Neville, daughter of the Parrs' former patron, the earl of Salisbury. She was the mother of all William's children: Sir Thomas Parr (1478-1517) ['see under 'Parr family]; William Parr, Baron Parr of Horton; John; and Anne. 
William Parr worked closely with his younger brother Sir John Parr (d. 1475). The two brothers shared all Edward IV's land grants and John Parr strengthened the family influence in Westmorland by his appointment (in May 1462) as hereditary sheriff of the county. Both combined their northern interests with a place in the king's household, but the emphasis was different, with John much more of a courtier than his brother. John was a king's esquire by December 1461 when he was appointed steward of the forfeited Clifford lands in Westmorland. He was with the court in East Anglia in 1469, when the news broke of disaffection in the north, and he remained loyal to Edward IV throughout the crisis which followed. He was knighted by Edward on the field at Tewkesbury and became a knight of the king's body. By March 1475 he was the king's master of horse, perhaps partly in tribute to his tourneying skills: he had been among the courtiers who had jousted at Eltham in 1467. He had then been in the team of William, Lord Hastings, with whom he shared several grants of ecclesiastical patronage. He was much involved in preparations for the war with France. In March 1474 he was appointed to muster troops being sent to Burgundy, and in January 1475 he travelled to Flanders to buy horses and armour. He was among those retained for the campaign, and was paid the first instalment of his wages, but he was dead by 1 June 1475 when William Parr succeeded him as sheriff of Westmorland. 
In the redistribution of local authority which followed Edward IV's return in 1471, John Parr was apparently cast for a role in Warwickshire. He was constable of Kenilworth from June 1471 to May 1474, and was named to the Warwickshire commissions of the peace from 1471 until his death. His southern base seems, however, to have been the Colt manor of Netherhall and it was only after John's death that William surrendered the Colt lands. John Parr married a daughter of Sir John Young or Yonge, mayor of London. To judge by a jocular reference in a letter from John (III) Paston, the marriage was still recent in June 1472. Paston then wrote to his brother: 'I prey yow recomand me to Syr John Parre wyth all my seruys, and tell hym by my trouthe I longyd neuer sorer to se my lady then I do to se hys mastershepe. And I prey God that he aryse neuer a mornyng fro my lady his wyff wyth-owght it be ageyn her wyll tyll syche tyme as he bryng hyr to Ouyr Lady of Walsyngham. (Davis, 1.574)' 



@@@@@


doc= 58525


Bell, William Blair- (1871-1936), gynaecologist, was born on 28 September 1871 at Rutland House, New Brighton, Cheshire, the second of eight children of William Bell JP, general practitioner, and his wife, Helen Barbara, daughter of General Butcher. In 1931 he added his second forename to his surname by means of a hyphen; at the height of his career he thought that Blair-Bell would be a more distinguished name by which to be known and remembered. He was educated at Rossall School, Lancashire (1885-90), and at King's College Hospital and medical school, London (1890-96). He won distinction in a number of sports, including hurdling, and showed a precocious bent for research, carrying out interesting anatomical dissections and publishing a paper in the 'King's College Hospital Reports' while still a student. After qualifying in 1896 he returned to Cheshire, set up in general practice in Wallasey, and on 7 June 1898 married his cousin Florence Bell (died 1929), daughter of his uncle John Bell, a solicitor in Surbiton, Surrey. 
In 1905 Bell was appointed honorary assistant consulting gynaecologist to the Liverpool Royal Infirmary. While still a general practitioner he published more than a dozen papers on a wide variety of subjects, the beginning of a series of no fewer than 130 major contributions to medical literature made over the next thirty years. His 'Principles of Gynaecology' was published in 1910. In 1921 he succeeded Henry Briggs as professor of midwifery and gynaecology at Liverpool University, a post he retained until 1931. In 1916 he published 'The Sex Complex', and in 1919 'The Pituitary', both of which were recognized as classics and which contained much new material; they described a series of laboratory and animal experiments which he had undertaken himself. At that time knowledge of endocrinology was very elementary and it was the acknowledged belief that the sex of an individual depended solely upon the gonads (ovary and testis). Blair-Bell's original research, both laboratory and clinical, broadened the concept of the interaction of the numerous ductless glands between one and the other, the subject of his Arris and Gale lecture at the Royal College of Surgeons in 1913, which was published in 'The Lancet' in the same year. 
During the next ten years Bell carried out major research, in collaboration with colleagues at London University, on the causes and nature of cancer; 'Cancer and Cancer Research' was published in 1928, and 'Some Aspects of the Causes of the Cancer Problem' in 1930. 566 patients were treated with a compound of lead as an adjunct to surgery; this was one of the first uses of a chemotherapeutic agent in the treatment of cancer. Although this particular agent failed the foundation was laid for the development of other, more successful, ones in future years. In 1929 the British (later Royal) College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists was founded, after several years of planning by Bell and his colleagues. This was a milestone in medical history because it established the principle of giving recognition to a specialism previously included in the wider field of medicine and surgery. Bell became the college's first president; his benefactions to the college after his death included a house in Queen Anne Street, London, which became the first home of the college, as well as funds for lectures and research. 
Blair-Bell was an outstanding teacher, clinician, and surgeon. He was universally regarded as the most distinguished gynaecologist of his era, noted not only for his original clinical and scientific researches but also for the administrative abilities and the legalistic knowledge which he displayed in drawing up the final constitution of the new college which he had founded. His achievements were remarkable and were recognized by the many honours and distinctions conferred upon him. He was awarded honorary fellowships of the Royal College of Surgeons and of the American College of Surgeons, as well as of many obstetric and gynaecological societies in Great Britain and overseas. He was awarded the LLD of both Glasgow and Liverpool universities. He became a commander of the royal order of the Star of Romania. Yet in spite of his great distinctions he was a complex character in many ways. He was an outspoken autocrat, who resented criticism and who enjoyed a fight with anyone who opposed his views; this brought him enemies as well as admirers and friends. Although childless himself he was fond of children, and his spaniel, Rogue, was his constant companion when he was at home. Lord Dawson best summarized his character: 'He was a torch bearer who never forgot -- or allowed anyone else to forget -- that he was carrying a torch'. His portrait, which hangs in the president's room at the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, portrays a man with a dynamic personality, upright stance, and determined features. 
Blair-Bell died of a coronary thrombosis, on 25 January 1936, while on a train carrying him from London to Shrewsbury. He was buried at St Chad's parish church, West Felton, Shropshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 58526


Lankester, Phebe (1825-1900), writer on botany and health, was born on 10 April 1825 in Manchester, the eldest daughter of Samuel Pope, a former mill owner, and his wife, Phebe, 'nee' Rushton. She grew up in middle-class Highbury, a residential suburb of London, attended a dissenting ladies' academy in Mill Hill, and later received private instruction in Manchester. On 3 July 1845 she married Dr Edwin Lankester (1814-1874), medical reformer, popular science lecturer, and writer, who was coroner for central Middlesex from 1862 until his death. They lived for many years at 8 Savile Row, London, and had eleven children, seven of whom survived; one was Sir (Edwin) Ray Lankester (1847-1929), biologist, teacher, and later director of the British Museum (Natural History). 
Phebe Lankester worked with her husband in 1846-7 on articles for the 'Penny Cyclopaedia' (1833-58), and on articles for the natural history section of the 'National Cyclopaedia' (1854-5). In 1859, after her last child was born, she embarked on her own writing. 'A Plain and Easy Account of British Ferns' (1860) describes more than forty indigenous ferns with information on varieties, localities, and medicinal and other uses. The book, a revision of Edwin Bosanquet's manual from the 1850s, reflects the Victorian fern craze. Lankester enthusiastically promotes collecting and cultivating ferns, particularly by the use of Wardian cases, as the way 'to bring something of the verdure of a country lane into the close atmosphere of a city' ('A Plain and Easy Account of British Ferns', ix). While acknowledging the harmful effects of the rapacity of collectors, she recommends digging up ferns found in the countryside. Her book was advertised in conjunction with a descriptive folio album into which fern collectors could paste specimens. It continued in print into the 1890s under the title 'British Ferns'. Her next book, 'Wild Flowers Worth Notice' (1861), published as a companion volume, had illustrations by the botanical artist J. E. Sowerby. Lankester features about a hundred native plants, such as the buttercup, and discusses botanical aspects and uses of wild flowers, and legends associated with them. She celebrates the benefits of botany for people of all ages and social classes, and her preface contains a ringing call for science education in schools. 
As a writer, Lankester benefited from Victorian interest in making science accessible and inviting. She contributed articles between 1861 and 1864 to the periodical 'Popular Science Review'. She was conversant with botany in its technical and applied aspects, and contributed substantially to J. T. Boswell Syme's 'English Botany' (1863-86), the third edition of a foundational work of botanical classification and description. This important new edition sharply distinguished between technical material and 'popular' or 'literary' information. Phebe Lankester wrote nearly 400 entries for the 'popular portion'; her entries offered historical and poetic remarks about English plants as well as general information on their uses and properties. 
Phebe Lankester was widowed in 1874, aged forty-nine. She continued her writing career and cultivated a juvenile audience with 'Botany for Elementary Schools' (1875), in 'Allman's Penny School Series', and 'Talks about Plants' (1879). Her writing repertory also included books on health. 'Talks about Health' (1874) features a mother and son discussing such topics as fresh air, digestion, and proper exercise. 'Domestic Economy for Young Girls' (1875), another title in 'Allman's Penny School Series', emphasizes the importance of women's role in home management and teaches about food preparation, clothing, and household cleanliness. This book addresses daughters who will enter into domestic service, later to become wives and mothers, and encourages them to keep a penny account book and deposit money into the Post Office Savings Bank. 'The National Thrift Reader, with Directions for Possessing and Preserving Health' (1880), a reading book for schools (with vocabulary lists), consists of short chapters on topics such as 'What to do with money', 'Life insurance', and 'Health is wealth'. Recurrent themes throughout Lankester's books on health topics are the tyranny of female fashion (such as high-heeled shoes) and concerns about sanitary conditions in houses, especially drainage and sanitary arrangements. 
Issues of women's health, education, and social circumstances also featured in Phebe Lankester's magazine writing for 'The Queen', 'Chambers's Journal', and 'Magazine of the Arts'. For twenty years after her husband's death she wrote a popular syndicated weekly column in East Anglian and other provincial newspapers under the pseudonym Penelope. Addressing women of all social classes, she discussed such topics as increasing female employment, women's welfare, female emigration, and the importance of placing women on local poor-law boards. 
As a widow she lived for many years at 5 Wimpole Street, London, with her youngest son and two of her unmarried daughters. She died there on 9 April 1900, and was buried two days later beside her husband in the churchyard of the Hampstead parish church. The 'Times' obituary commented on her 'wonderful energy'. A portrait of her by Sir Hubert von Herkomer shows a kind face, strength of character, and a calm, steady gaze. 


@@@@@


doc= 58527


Hertz, Mathilde Carmen (1891-1975), animal psychologist and sensory physiologist, was born on 14 January 1891 at Quantiusstrasse 13, Bonn, Germany, the second of two daughters of physicist Heinrich Rudolf Hertz (1857-1894), famous for discovering electromagnetic waves, and his wife, Elisabeth (1864-1942?), daughter of geodesy professor Max Doll of Karlsruhe. Following her father's death her mother, to supplement meagre resources, kept boarders, among whom was Maria Grafin von Linden. One of the first women to hold a senior scientific research post in a German university von Linden strongly influenced the Hertz daughters. 
Mathilde Hertz attended the state Realgymnasium (high school) in Bonn until Easter 1910, then studied art in Weimar, Karlsruhe, and Berlin. She became a sculptor, but from 1918 until 1923 also worked in the Deutsches Museum in Munich. When assisting palaeontologist Ludwig Doderlein in modelling fossil teeth she became interested in zoology, and in 1921 enrolled at Munich University. She was awarded a doctorate 'summa cum laude' in 1925, following research on primitive mammalian teeth. 
Mathilde Hertz remained in Munich working on zoological classification until 1927, when, having become increasingly interested in animal psychology, she moved to the Kaiser-Wilhelm Institute for Biology in Berlin-Dahlem as visiting scientist. She became a permanent assistant in 1929 following publication of several notable papers on shape perception and memory in crows and jays. Work on perception capabilities in a variety of animals followed, including outstanding studies on contour and colour recognition in bees. At the German Zoological Society's 1929 Marburg Congress she set out her approach, in which she used the gestalt psychology concept of the learned organized whole in understanding sensory development; her theories de-emphasized the role of instinct. Now prominent nationally she was appointed lecturer at Berlin University in 1930, one of few women to hold such a post. Her programme of lectures and seminars in animal psychology and sensory physiology ended in 1933 when her teaching licence was withdrawn because of National Socialist government regulations restricting the employment of women and Jews. One quarter Jewish by ancestry (although protestant by baptism and upbringing), she nevertheless succeeded in keeping her research position at the Kaiser-Wilhelm Institute until 1935 when she emigrated to Britain. 
With help from her father's friend, physicist J. J. Thomson, and from biologist A. D. Imms, Mathilde Hertz settled in Cambridge, supported by an Academic Assistance Council grant. Further financial aid came from the radio industry in recognition of her father's pioneering work. In 1936 her mother and sister joined her. Although she never held a formal position at Cambridge University, for a time she collaborated with Imms at the zoological laboratory in investigations on migratory locusts, while also continuing her own studies on bees. In 1939, however, after ten years of productive work and more than thirty notable publications, she gave up research. Poor health and shortage of money were hindrances, but also her field was changing; the work of Konrad Lorenz and other continental ethologists, which emphasized the role of instinct, was largely displacing the gestalt theoretical approach she had followed. Fifty years were to lapse before neurophysiologists rediscovered her studies on optical perception in bees. 
Throughout the Second World War Mathilde Hertz remained committed to Germany and kept her German citizenship, although her stubbornly held views in these matters caused a serious family quarrel. Some financial assistance continued, and she had at least occasional meetings with Cambridge biologists. In 1956 she was contacted by physicist Max von Laue, then organizing the Heinrich Hertz centenary celebrations. He found her partly blind and too proud to ask for help, barely subsisting on an income more suited to the 1930s. He arranged a German government pension for her plus additional support channelled through the Max Planck Society. 
During her last twenty years Mathilde Hertz rarely left Cambridge except for occasional visits to Hamburg relatives, who knew her as 'Crow-auntie'. At the time of her death from heart failure, at her home, 3 St Margaret's Road, Girton, Cambridge, on 20 November 1975, she was co-editing a second edition of memoirs of her father. She was buried in the Hertz family plot in Olsdorfer cemetery, Hamburg. 


@@@@@


doc= 58528


Parr, William, Baron Parr of Horton (c.1480-1547), soldier and courtier, was the second of four children of Sir William Parr of Kendal (1434-1483) and his second wife, Elizabeth (1462- 'c'.1505), daughter of Henry, Lord Fitzhugh of Ravensworth, and his wife, Alice Neville. Although his family's lands lay in Westmorland, Parr was raised in the Northamptonshire household of his stepfather, Sir Nicholas Vaux of Harrowden. In 1505 he married Mary (1484-1555), daughter of William Salisbury and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Wylde of Bromham, Bedfordshire, who brought him Horton manor in Northamptonshire. The couple had four daughters: Matilda, or Maud (married Ralph Lane) ['see 'Lane, Maud]; Anne (married Sir Thomas Tresham); Mary (married first John Digby and then Henry Brooke); Elizabeth (married Nicholas Woodhull). 
Parr succeeded to much of his stepfather's influence in Northamptonshire, serving on numerous commissions, as knight of the shire in parliament from 1529 to 1540, and as sheriff (1517, 1522, 1533, and 1537). An avid hunter, between 1505 and 1523 he secured royal grants for the keeping of the great and little parks at Brigstock, the park at King's Cliffe, and the forest and castle of Rockingham, as well as the stewardship of all royal lands in Pembrokeshire. In 1537 he was granted one-quarter of the manor of Kendal in Westmorland, part of a parcel of lands he received from the late duke of Richmond's northern holdings. 
Parr began his court career in Henry VII's household as one of the king's spears and as squire for the body (by 1506), an office he retained under Henry VIII until March 1512. He fought in the vanguard of the English army during Henry VIII's expedition to France in the summer of 1513, and on 25 September was knighted in the cathedral at Tournai. An excellent soldier, between April and June 1523 he fought in several skirmishes along the Scottish border under the earl of Surrey, who mentioned Parr's courage in battle in several letters to the king. During the 1536 Pilgrimage of Grace, Parr, swearing he would 'put the offenders in despair and dread' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/107/115), led a company of men into Lincolnshire to pacify the rebels, helping to secure and hold Stamford. 
A bluff, proud, quarrelsome man, Parr was happier on the battlefield than at court, but quickly realized that there was more profit in court politics than in storming castles. In 1515 he was briefly appointed chamberlain to the household of Margaret Tudor, dowager queen of Scots. In 1520 he attended the king at the lavish ceremonies of the Field of Cloth of Gold in France. Through Wolsey's influence Parr was in July 1525 made chamberlain for the newly formed household of the king's illegitimate son, the duke of Richmond, established at Sheriff Hutton in Yorkshire. To Parr this looked like a golden opportunity for advancement, but he quickly discovered that the office was neither as lucrative nor as powerful as he had hoped. Bitter quarrels with one of Richmond's tutors, Richard Croke, did much to increase Parr's disenchantment. By 1530 he had resigned and returned to Horton, although he held a place on the duke's council until Richmond's death in 1536. 
An avid supporter of the new religion, albeit probably more for political than spiritual reasons, Parr became Cromwell's chief agent for the dissolution of the monasteries in Northamptonshire which led to several virulent quarrels with disaffected churchmen, particularly the abbot of Peterborough. In 1538 he received as reward a parcel of six lucrative rectories from dissolved religious foundations and the former monastery of Pipewell. After Cromwell's death, he found a new patron in his niece, Katherine or Kateryn, the daughter of his brother Sir Thomas Parr (1478-1517) ['see under 'Parr family (per. c.1370-1517)]. When she married the king on 12 July 1543, he became chamberlain of her household. On 23 December following he was created Baron Parr of Horton and in February 1544 received a substantial grant of lands in Bedfordshire and Northamptonshire, including Kettering and Pytchley manors. 
During the summer of 1544, at the queen's request, Parr was named to her regency council while Henry VIII was in France. In failing health, Parr apparently retired instead to Horton, as his name does not appear in the council minutes. He nevertheless remained an important adviser to the queen and messages passed between them regularly. In the summer of 1546, during the plot by religious conservatives against the queen, Parr returned to court and helped to foil the conspiracy by smuggling proscribed books out of her garderobe. He died at Horton the following year, probably on 10 September, and was buried in Horton church, where he is commemorated by a marble effigy. 


@@@@@


doc= 58529


Longe, Francis Davy (1831-1910), civil servant, was born at Coombs, Suffolk, on 25 September 1831, the second son in the family of three sons and one daughter of Robert Longe (1800-1890) of Spixworth Park, Norfolk, vicar of Coddenham-cum-Crowfield, and his wife, Margaret Douglas (died 1873), daughter of Charles Davy, rector of Barking, Suffolk. Educated from 1845 to 1850 at Harrow School, where he was captain of the cricket eleven, he matriculated as a commoner at Oriel College, Oxford, in 1850, and went on to take third-class honours in classics in 1854, and to represent Oxford against Cambridge at cricket. George Goschen was a college contemporary and lifelong friend. After graduating BA in 1854, Longe was admitted to the Inner Temple in April 1855 and called to the bar in April 1858. On 27 September 1864 he married Sara Rose (died 1905), daughter of the Revd Thomas Patteson, rector of Hambledon, Hampshire; they had no children. 
Longe was a member of the Social Science Association committee which produced the important report on trade unionism 'Trades' Societies and Strikes' (1860). His own contribution to the contemporary debate on unionism was a pamphlet, 'An Inquiry into the Law of 'Strikes'' (1860), which advanced the novel, and subsequently influential, contention that the common-law doctrines against trade combinations rested on extremely shaky foundations. He also observed the historic tendency of the statute law to favour the interests of the consumer and employer over those of the labourer. From 1862 to 1867 he was an assistant commissioner on the children's employment commission, and prepared reports on the employment conditions of women and children ranging across several industries and regions, including the Staffordshire potteries (1863), the Yorkshire textile trades (1863), the midlands iron trades (1864), copperworks in south Wales (1865), and the agricultural gangs of the East Anglian fens (1866). 
Longe's observation of the damaging moral and social effects of low wages, and a practical interest in social reform, informed his most significant work, 'A refutation of the wage-fund theory of modern political economy as enunciated by Mr Mill, M.P. and Mr Fawcett, M.P.' (1866). The first systematic critique of the theory that wages were paid from a predetermined sum of capital, Longe's pamphlet contended that the existing orthodoxy obstructed attempts to improve the position of the most depressed groups of workers by popularizing the idea that the aggregate rate of wages could not be raised. His arguments were not immediately noticed by political economists, and it was another writer, W. T. Thornton, who drew a recantation from Mill in 1869, but the significance of Longe's pioneering work was later more widely recognized. It was reprinted in 1903 in the series of economic tracts edited by the American labour economist Jacob Harry Hollander, to whom Longe supplied details of its publishing history (Vint, 179-80 n.). His work was, moreover, acknowledged in contemporary official circles, as were the implications of his comparative researches into the law of trade unions and strikes in France, published in the 'Fortnightly Review' (1867). 
In 1868 Goschen appointed Longe to be his private secretary at the poor-law board. He was made a general inspector at the successor department, the Local Government Board, in 1871, and had responsibility for supervising the administration of poor relief in the Gloucestershire district. His last annual report was dated 1 May 1896. His official career in a department whose routine work was described by his colleague Herbert Preston-Thomas in 'The Work and Play of a Government Inspector' (1909) seems to have been unremarkable. In retirement he was a prominent member of the Norfolk Naturalists' Society, and published the results of some antiquarian researches, 'Lowestoft in Olden Times' (1898; 2nd edn, 1905). Longe died at his home in Ipswich, Suffolk, on 20 February 1910. 


@@@@@


doc= 58530


Perfect, William (1731/2-1809), physician specializing in the treatment of the insane, was the son of the Revd William Perfect (died 1757), from 1745 vicar of East Malling, Kent, and his wife, Sarah (died 1769). He was probably born in Oxfordshire. In 1749 he was apprenticed to William Everred, a London surgeon. During his apprenticeship he attended lectures by Colin Mackenzie, a Scot specializing in obstetrics, and many years later published his correspondence with Mackenzie, relating to various difficult births at which he had assisted. Three editions of this, entitled 'Cases in Midwifery', appeared between 1781(?) and 1787. 
In 1754 Perfect was working in Dartford, probably as assistant to a surgeon, having married the previous year Elizabeth Shrimpton (1730/31-1764), descended from a Penn, Buckinghamshire, family. The Perfects moved permanently to West Malling, Kent, in 1756, where William took over an established practice in the High Street. On his wife's early death in 1764 Perfect was left a widower with five children: Elizabeth, Sarah, William, Huntley, and George -- a sixth, Daniel, had died shortly after his mother. One of his daughters married the artist Silvester Harding (1745x51-1809); George Perfect Harding was their son. 
Grief at the loss of Elizabeth seems to have resulted in Perfect's becoming a freemason about 1765, and it was in freemasonry that he obtained his greatest social distinctions. He was promoted to the office of provincial grand orator in 1787, and eight years later became provincial grand master of the county of Kent, an office which he retained until his death. 
During the 1760s Perfect threw himself into what was becoming virtually a crusade throughout the country to eliminate smallpox through the introduction of inoculation. Working with another local doctor he undertook the general inoculation of whole parishes in Kent and elsewhere, and appears to have travelled widely for this purpose until about 1769. 
Perfect had already become interested in what was then termed lunacy, and now began to specialize in this, accommodating patients in his own house. Gentleness and common sense seem to have characterized his approach, whether dealing with women in childbirth or the insane. A keen believer in the value of advertising, he frequently publicized his medical services in the newspapers. An account of various mental afflictions which he had treated successfully, 'Methods of Cure, in some Particular Cases of Insanity', which was probably written originally for the purpose of advertisement and first published about 1778, was later expanded and, under various titles, including 'Annals of Insanity', had reached some seven editions by 1809. The book helped to establish his reputation in this field. Perfect obtained his MD from St Andrews University in 1783. Perfect's lunatic asylum remained the principal private asylum in Kent for many years, although it does not appear to have been very large. On Perfect's death his son George, who had worked alongside his father for some years, continued to run it, although with less success, becoming insolvent in 1815. As a result it was sold, the new owner, Robert Rix, soon transferring to the larger premises of Malling Place. The asylum begun by William Perfect remained in existence until the end of the twentieth century. 
Perfect always enjoyed writing, both prose and verse: friends often received letters couched in rhyme. In the 1750s and 1760s he seems to have been one of a coterie of young scribblers who styled themselves Parnassians. These included William Woty, a Chatham friend Folly Streeter, and John Nichols, the future printer and writer, a few of whose poems appeared in Perfect's two-volume collection, 'The Laurel Wreath' (1766). This was the second of his literary publications. The first was 'A Bavin of Bays' (1763). Both books contained poems which had first appeared in one of several London magazines to which Perfect was a contributor, particularly the 'General Magazine of Arts and Sciences', the 'Political Chronicle', and the 'Westminster Journal'. Perfect's work continued to appear in the London press for many years, most of it signed with one of his numerous pseudonyms. In September 1795 the 'Freemasons' Magazine' carried the 'Memoirs of William Perfect, M.D., member of the London Medical Society', which are useful for extending our knowledge of Perfect's medical output, though one or two items are now no longer traceable, and others were never completed. 
After his marriage about 1768 to a second wife, Henrietta (1745/6-1804), Perfect's family increased by four more children: Folliott Augusta, Lucy, Thomas, and Almeria. Following Henrietta's death, at the age of fifty-eight, Perfect married again, about 1805, his third wife being almost certainly Elizabeth Selby (1767-1851), of West Malling. He became ill in that year, however, and although able to officiate as provincial grand master in 1806, his health deteriorated from then on. Perfect died at home, in High Street, West Malling, on 5 June 1809, and was buried on 17 June with masonic rites in the vault in East Malling churchyard which he had had built some years earlier to commemorate his father and grandfather, both buried in East Malling church. 


@@@@@


doc= 58532


Mary Homfray (d. 1758)]. He had four sons and five daughters. After his death on 1 March 1737, the business was carried on by Mary Homfray. Various members of the family were now working mills and forges along the River Stour and around Kidderminster. 
Francis Homfray's sons followed their father into the iron industry. His fourth son, John Homfray (1731-1760), of Wollaston Hall, died leaving one son, John Homfray [


@@@@@


doc= 58533


Fairbairn, Sir Nicholas Hardwick (1933-1995), lawyer and politician, was born on 24 December 1933 at 18 Lansdowne Crescent, Edinburgh, the third surviving child and younger son of (William) Ronald Dodds Fairbairn (1889-1964), psychotherapist and psychoanalyst, and his wife, Mary Ann (died 1952), daughter of Henry More Gordon of Charleton and Kinnaber, Angus. His father was a psychoanalyst of international repute, but the life of the family became overshadowed by his strained relations with his wife. Fairbairn was educated at Loretto School (1941-51) and the University of Edinburgh (1951-4), where he first followed his father in studying medicine, but switched to classics. He then read for the bar, being admitted in 1957. He early developed interests in conservation and in culture. He founded the Society for the Preservation of Duddingston Village, a picturesque suburb of Edinburgh where his family lived. He began painting and sold his first picture as a student. He overcame the penury of devilling by putting on a one-man exhibition which earned $2000. 
Fairbairn's career did not take off until 1960, when he was instructed as junior counsel for the defence in a celebrated trial for the 'Calton murder'; he made a flamboyant appearance which did not quite save his client, and this became a frequent experience. His most famous defence was of Patrick Meehan, wrongly sentenced for murder in 1969 but pardoned in 1976 after a long campaign in which Fairbairn also took a leading role. Exposure to the seamy side of Scotland seemed to be making a social liberal of him. He became an active campaigner for birth-control, a subject still 'risque' in staid Edinburgh. The city's bourgeoisie was also regularly shocked by avant-garde productions in the annual festival of the arts, which Fairbairn loved. One year, after a 'happening' featured a nude young lady being pushed across a stage in a trolley, the procurator fiscal decided to prosecute the offenders, but Fairbairn defended them successfully. On 29 September 1962 he married Elizabeth Mary ('b'. 1938), daughter of Aeneas Alexander Mackay, thirteenth Lord Reay and chief of the clan Mackay (1905-1963), and his wife, Charlotte Mary, 'nee' Younger (died 1963). The Fairbairns bought and restored the ruined castle of Fordell in Fife. They had a son and four daughters, of whom the son and a daughter died in infancy, before the marriage was dissolved in 1979. 
Fairbairn became a queen's counsel in 1972, and entered parliament after Sir Alec Douglas-Home stood down from his seat of Kinross and West Perthshire at the general election of October 1974. In a traditional Conservative constituency, Fairbairn, known as a maverick dandy, won nomination against the odds. This came during an upsurge of Scottish nationalism, and he held the seat by just fifty-three votes. In later polls he raised his majorities. At Westminster he surprised many by aligning himself with the right. He supported Margaret Thatcher's bid for the Conservative leadership in 1975. His reward came with the post of solicitor-general for Scotland in her first ministry in 1979. But office did not suit him. Now divorced, he was at the centre of a scandal in 1981: there were allegations that he had had an affair with a secretary at the House of Commons and that she was later found trying to hang herself from a lamp-post outside his home in London. Responsible for prosecutions by the crown, in 1982 he exercised his powers not to arraign a gang of men who had raped a woman in Glasgow. This ugly case ended in a successful private prosecution by her, a rarity in Scotland. Fairbairn compounded his misjudgement by announcing to the press, not to parliament, that he had lacked evidence to indict. On 28 January 1982 he was obliged to resign. 
On 28 May 1983 Fairbairn married Suzanne Mary MacInnes ('b'. 1942), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Hilary George Wheeler of the Baluch regiment. For the wedding at Fordell Castle, Fairbairn designed clothes for both bride and groom in styles of princely India. This ceremony set the tone for the colourful remainder, which was also the prime, of his life. His ministerial career never resumed and he was hardly, except in his own eyes, taken seriously as a politician. But he found his 'metier' as an independent back-bencher. His appearance at Westminster in bizarre, often tartan, costumes signalled his resolve to act and speak in his own way. He did not hesitate to rebel over such matters as saving Scottish regiments, and later over Europe. He also did sterling work in causes close to his heart, as in his chairmanship of the Historic Buildings Council for Scotland from 1988, in which year he was also knighted. He gave a great impression of zest for life, summed up in his entries in 'Who's Who', changed for every edition: 'drawing ships, making quips, confounding Whips, scuttling drips' was the last ('WW', 1995, 174). He became, in short, a popular eccentric. Much of his humour, as of his acerbity, was unfortunately fuelled by drink. He contracted cirrhosis of the liver and died at Queen Margaret Hospital, Dunfermline, on 19 February 1995. He was buried on 22 February in the crypt of the chapel at Fordell Castle. A memorial service was held at St John's Kirk, Perth, on 3 March, at which Baroness Thatcher read from Kahlil Gibran's 'The Prophet'. Fairbairn was survived by both wives and by three daughters of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 58538


Gardner, (Leslie) James (1907-1995), designer and graphic artist, was born on 29 December 1907 at 26 Stacey Road, Hendon, Middlesex, the son of Frederick James Gardner, a commercial traveller, and his wife, Flora May, formerly Jarvis. He was brought up in somewhat unhappy family circumstances in suburban London. Awarded a council scholarship to Westminster School of Art, where his teachers included Randolph Schwabe and E. McKnight Kauffer, he was taken on in 1923 as an apprentice at Cartiers the jeweller of Bond Street, London, where he remained for six years. After a period travelling abroad for much of the 1930s he was employed at Carlton Studios, a leading London-based commercial design consultancy. On 20 February 1935 he married (Violet) Mary, daughter of William John Williams, at Brentford, Middlesex. During the 1930s he came into contact with Jack Beddington of Shell, for whom he carried out poster production and early work in exhibition design, the field in which he was to become a defining practitioner. 
Gardner established his reputation after the Second World War, during which he had been involved with the Camouflage Training School, working alongside the couturier Victor Stiebel and the set designer Oliver Messel. He was appointed as chief designer for the landmark 'Britain Can Make It' exhibition of 1946, the first of a series of commissions for the Council of Industrial Design; these included the 'Enterprise Scotland' exhibition of 1947 and the 'Festival of Britain' of 1951. For the latter he served as a design panel member and the design co-ordinator of the whimsical Battersea pleasure gardens. A number of other important official commissions followed, including the British government pavilion at the Brussels World Fair of 1958 and the British contribution to the Montreal World Fair of 1967. In the latter he portrayed the dynamic, creative side of life in Britain in the 1960s, including in his display Carnaby Street fashions and an Austin Mini decorated with the union flag. One of his most significant achievements in museum design was the Evoluon Museum (1966) for Philips in Eindhoven. His pioneering work on museum displays was remarkable in the ways in which the complexities of science, technology, and history were made accessible without being patronizing. As well as working on a series of important commissions including the Pilkington Glass Museum (1965), the 'Story of the Earth' exhibition (1972), and the 'Britain before Man' exhibition (1977) at the Geological Museum, London, in 1972, Gardner was involved in mainstream industrial design and interior design commissions. These included a prestigious commission from Cunard to design the superstructure and interior for their ocean liner 'QE 2', for which he supervised work in 1966. 
For much of the rest of his productive life Gardner worked on a wide range of significant national and international projects, such as the Museum of the Diaspora in Tel Aviv (1978), though for a while the recession of the 1980s constrained his prolific output. None the less, with the assistance of Martin Pyant and Eve Harrison he won further important commissions, including the Museum of Natural Science in Taiwan (1988) and the Museum of Intolerance, Los Angeles (1993). In 1989 he was awarded the medal of the Chartered Society of Designers for outstanding achievement in industrial design. 
Although never self-consciously stylish in his dress in the manner of many designers in the later twentieth century, Gardner's appearance in later life perhaps singled him out as 'arty'. He was a pipe-smoker who often looked out quizzically over his black, thick-rimmed glasses, his brushed-back hair longer than that of many of his contemporaries. He also often sported a polo-neck sweater beneath a corduroy jacket with pens, emblematic of his profession, visible in its breast pocket. His autobiographical writings, 'Elephants in the Attic' (1983) and 'James Gardner, the ARTful Designer: Ideas off the Drawing Board' (1993), reveal both his strengths and his weaknesses. Evident in both is a complete belief in his own professional abilities as a designer, together with an absolute reluctance to 'suffer fools'. An air of irreverence and, at times, flippancy pervaded the prose that G (as he was known to many fellow designers) produced. Its somewhat raffish, casual, and throwaway style made light of the genuine importance of his contribution to design, though the many drawings that accompanied the text revealed the eloquence and facility of his draughtsmanship. These books also reveal his general sense of self-containment, a strong sense of living for his work, and a reluctance to give away significant details about his private life. Similarly, his sketches and designs have not been systematically preserved since, after completing work, Gardner was prone to give them -- or even throw them -- away, their immediate purpose having been fulfilled. Gardner was also capable of writing a very good book about the profession itself, as in 'Exhibition and Display' (1960), which he co-wrote with Caroline Heller. 
James Gardner died in the Middlesex Hospital, London, on 25 March 1995. It was within the museum and exhibition design profession that he was best known and where the true originality of his design solutions has been recognized. He was considered by Hugh Casson as 'perhaps the most inventive, versatile and prolific designer in the UK' for more than half of the twentieth century. Although a highly significant figure in the history of design, unlike an increasing number of designers in the latter half of the twentieth century he rejected the cult of personality and devoted himself to his work. 


@@@@@


doc= 58542


Warren, Edward Perry (1860-1928), art collector, was born at Waltham, Massachusetts, on 8 June 1860. He was one of five children of Samuel Dennis Warren (1817-1888) and his wife, Susan Cornelia, 'nee' Clarke (1825-1901). Samuel Warren, a descendant of modest farmers who came from England in the seventeenth century, worked his way from office boy to partner in a Boston paper making firm. Later he acquired his own company, and by the time Edward Perry Warren was born he was well on his way to becoming a millionaire. 
After attending Phillips grammar school and Hopkinson School, both in Boston, Warren, known to friends as Ned, followed his oldest brother, Sam, to Harvard but was not happy there. From childhood he was introverted and his mother maintained that he was 'more nervous than the other children' (Sox, 3). On receiving his AB from Harvard (1883), he determined to spend the rest of his life abroad. In 1883 he matriculated at New College, Oxford, where he obtained a first class in classical moderations in 1885 but was prevented by ill health from taking the final honour school. However, he graduated BA with a pass degree in 1888. 
Warren thrived in the environment of Oxford, where unlike Harvard he 'found people who did not damn my ideas as incorrect, but, on the contrary, found them interesting' (Sox, 15). At New College he met his lifelong partner, John Marshall (1862-1928), who was from Liverpool. He also met a number of like-minded young men who became friends and associates in collecting antiquities. Among them was Bernard Berenson, who was visiting Europe; Warren gave him financial assistance, making it possible for Berenson to begin his long career as an art connoisseur. Later, in 1911, Warren was made an honorary fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in recognition of his intention to bequeath to the college an endowment to revive its praelectorship of Greek. As a result, the college's first E. P. Warren praelectorship in classics, with a specific commitment to teaching Greek, was appointed in 1954, and has strengthened the college's classical resources ever since. 
In 1890, two years after the death of his father, Warren was able to lease Lewes House, a large Georgian residence in the Sussex market town of Lewes which became the focal point of his enterprises. There with Warren lived Marshall and six other young men. It was described by William Rothenstein, a frequent visitor, as 'a monkish establishment where women were not welcomed. But Warren, who believed that scholars should live nobly, kept an ample table and a well-stocked wine-cellar...' (W. Rothenstein, 'Men and Memories: Recollections, 1872-1900', 1931, 1.343, quoted in Sox, 45). Rothenstein also added that a 'secrecy seemed to permeate the rooms and corridors, to exhaust the air of the house. The social relations, too, were often strained...'. 
Everything at Lewes House was shared, be it a walking stick, or the tub, where guests bathed 'a l'antique' after an afternoon on horseback. Warren managed the establishment like a tiny German court: he took upon himself all the concerns of both his companions and his household staff. Matthew Stewart Prichard, the most able -- and eccentric -- of his friends, said that Warren was 'a sort of Buddha to consult upon everything' (Sox, 47). There was little interest in the outside world: newspapers were rarely read; neighbours never called -- not even the vicar. Prichard's brother-in-law, T. H. Lyon, commented that it was 'an attempt to live again under a paganism long since dead... charged with something very like make-believe' (ibid., 172). 
The great collecting centred at Lewes House was at its height in the 1890s. It was so successful that Alexander Murray of the British Museum complained that there was 'nothing to be got nowadays' as the Lewes House collectors were 'always on the spot first' (Burdett and Goddard, 79). The Boston Museum of Fine Arts received the lion's share of treasures, including the celebrated Chios head which Rodin coveted. Rodin was to create a version of 'The Kiss' to suit Warren's specific requirements. It came later to the Tate. At the Ashmolean in Oxford is a treasure of Warren's, what has been described as one of the most perfect fifth-century BC bronze heads. An 'Adam and Eve' by Cranach and a large tondo by Filippino Lippi, both of which used to grace the dining-room of Lewes House, are now respectively at the Courtauld Institute in London and the Cleveland Museum. In 1999 one of his most prized -- and unusual -- treasures surfaced from a private collection: a first-century AD Roman silver cup displaying homosexual love-making. It was purchased by the British Museum for $1.8 million. 
After twelve years the Lewes House brotherhood started to break up. As John Fothergill, one of the companions -- later famous as an innkeeping diarist -- wrote: 'The whole thing was too comfortable and all-providing... When any of us went to London which we never did save on business, there was the petty cash box in an open drawer in the bureau. We had only to dip into a heap of sovereigns... I confess I thought this proceeding too horribly heavenly... Yet... we never felt secure at home against sudden departures to Italy and Greece. (Sox, 153)' Prichard was the first to leave; in 1901 he went to Boston to work at the museum. The most devastating blow came in November 1907 when Marshall married Warren's spinster cousin, Mary Bliss, and they moved to Rome. For long Marshall had been stationed there alone and the marriage was more an act of spite than of romance. Warren was left alone in Lewes with a boy he had mysteriously adopted. 
Despite the rejection, Warren made it possible for the Marshalls to live in a sumptuous flat overlooking the Spanish Steps. Marshall became associated with the Metropolitan Museum in New York and purchased a number of antiquities for them. However, among the treasures were some spectacular fakes; most notably three 'Etruscan' warriors which were not formally recognized as fakes until 1961. 
Mary Marshall died in 1925, and for the remaining three years of their lives Warren and Marshall were re-united. Marshall exhausted himself trying to track down the creator of several archaic Greek forgeries. In Frankfurt he became seriously ill and he died within two days of returning to Rome. Warren, who was with him, willed himself to die. His death, later in the same year, on 28 December 1928, at the Cambridge House Nursing Home, 4 Dorset Square, London, followed an abdominal operation in London. 
Warren was cremated on 1 January 1929 and his ashes were taken to Bagni di Lucca in Italy where they were placed with Marshall's remains. At the English cemetery a simple monument was created topped appropriately with a Grecian urn. 
Under the 'nom de plume' Arthur Lyon Raile, Warren wrote a number of works, most notably 'The Defence of Uranian Love' (3 vols., 1928-30), and a collection of poems, 'The Wild Rose' (1910). But his most lasting achievements were the extraordinary antiquities and works of art which today can be seen as far afield as London, Oxford, Leipzig, Boston, and Bowdoin College in Maine. 


@@@@@


doc= 58543


Gernsheim, Helmut Erich Robert (1913-1995), photographer and historian, was born in Munich on 1 March 1913, the third son of Karl Gernsheim, a historian of literature at Munich University, and his wife, Hermine, 'nee' Scholz. He was educated at St Anne's College, Augsburg, and began a degree course in art history at Munich University in 1933, but soon realized he was unlikely to complete it in the prevailing political climate: he feared being drafted into Hitler's army, and in any case he was partly Jewish. He decided to move to London, where his brother ran an art gallery, but the latter advised him to acquire a practical skill first (on the grounds that he would make no living as an art historian in Britain). So in 1934 he enrolled in the Bavarian State School of Photography in Munich, where he studied for two years, emerging with a first-class diploma. In 1937 he moved to London and set up as a freelance photographer; he became a British citizen in 1946. 
Gernsheim's outlook on photography and his own practice as a photographer were influenced by 'Neue Sachlichkeit' (new objectivity), which characterized much radical German art and design in the 1920s. 'Neue Sachlichkeit' was suppressed in Nazi Germany (Gernsheim became properly conscious of it only from books he bought in London during the war), but by the 1930s its influence on German photography was irrevocable. This is evident in Gernsheim's photographs of the details and surfaces of objects, often in close-up and isolated from their usual contexts. 
Gernsheim was a man of strong opinions and a justified faith in his own taste and judgement, and his criticisms could be trenchant (the British, he declared 'are not a visually minded nation'). However, they were rarely groundless. He pronounced the generality of 1930s British photography 'antiquated, fuzzy, sentimental, sugary... an artificial world one associates with chocolate and soap boxes' (Hill and Cooper, 166). It is certainly true that British taste and practice were at odds with Gernsheim's 'Neue Sachlichkeit' approach. Many British photographers remained influenced by the pictorialism of Victorian and Edwardian photography, drawing their aesthetic from painting, and employing printing techniques to impart a more 'painterly' quality to their work. Gernsheim saw the Royal Photographic Society (RPS) as a bastion of this approach, and felt frustrated in his attempts to convert the society to his views, eventually resigning his RPS fellowship in 1952. 
In 1940 Gernsheim was interned as an enemy alien, and he ended up in a camp in Australia. His photographic training came to his rescue, and in 1941 he was permitted to return to Britain to work for the National Buildings Record, photographing buildings of national importance ahead of anticipated war damage. While waiting for clearance to undertake this work, Gernsheim revised some lectures he had given during his internment in Australia, and in 1942 they were published as his first book, 'New Photo Vision'. The book lays down 'a challenge to those photographers for whom photographic means are not 'artistic' enough' ('New Photo Vision', 3), illustrating the point with his own photographs. 

'New Photo Vision' also initiated Gernsheim's friendship with Beaumont Newhall, the American photo-historian. It was Newhall who persuaded Gernsheim of the need for a photo-historian also to be a collector. Gernsheim recounts finding his first Julia Margaret Cameron prints 'more or less by accident', at a dealer where they were in danger of being used for packing 'because of their stout cardboard' (Hill and Cooper, 182). He amassed a collection of great importance, and made two especially significant discoveries. He rediscovered Charles Dodgson (Lewis Carroll) as a photographer, and found what is considered the earliest extant photograph, Niepce's image of a view from a window, taken in 1826 or 1827 with an exposure of eight hours. 
Gernsheim collaborated closely with his wife, Alison, 'nee' Eames ('c'.1911-1969), whom he met in 1942 and married in 1946; indeed, his most significant work was produced during their marriage. He published prolifically, adopting an approach whereby research and writing were closely dependent on the fruits of his collecting. Alison, a historian by training, undertook the historical research, and she is named as his collaborator in a number of his publications. He wrote more than twenty monographs on subjects including Julia Margaret Cameron (1948), Lewis Carroll (1949), and Roger Fenton (1954). In 1955 he published 'The History of Photography', a monumental work of photo-history which appeared in an enlarged edition in 1969, and out of which came the very popular 'Concise History of Photography' (1965). 
The Gernsheims selected works from their collection for a ground-breaking exhibition held in 1951 at the Victoria and Albert Museum, entitled 'Masterpieces of Victorian Photography'. They envisaged their collection forming the basis of a British national collection of photography, with Gernsheim as director. However, a suitable home was not forthcoming, partly due to widespread ignorance about the need for such a museum, but also on account of Gernsheim's very particular specifications. The collection (33,000 photographs, together with cameras and Gernsheim's library) was ultimately sold to the University of Texas in 1963, though the Gernsheims finally decided against moving to Texas with it. They moved instead to Castagnola, Lugano, Switzerland, from where Gernsheim continued to work, though his output decreased after Alison's death on 27 March 1969. In 1971 he married Irene Guenin of Geneva. Gernsheim died in Switzerland on 20 July 1995, survived by his second wife. 
Gernsheim's importance to photography cannot be overstated. The Gernsheim collection immeasurably enriches our photographic inheritance, and the scholarship that he built upon the collection was instrumental in establishing the academic credibility of photo-history. 


@@@@@


doc= 58544


Gibson, Sir Alexander Drummond (1926-1995), conductor, was born in Motherwell maternity home, Lanarkshire, on 11 February 1926, the son of James McClure Gibson, a butcher, and his wife, Williamina Williams. Educated at Dalziel High School, he was taken at the age of twelve to his first opera, 'Madama Butterfly', performed by the Carl Rosa company at the Theatre Royal, Glasgow. At fourteen he sang the Major-General in 'The Pirates of Penzance'. He studied the piano at the Royal Scottish Academy of Music, where he was a prizewinner. 
Gibson served in the Royal Corps of Signals (1944-8), and joined the Royal Signals band as solo pianist. Demobbed in 1948, he won a scholarship to the Royal College of Music in London. While there he conducted Mozart's 'Cosi fan tutte' (1950) for the opera school, and won the Tagore gold medal. He also studied conducting at the Salzburg Mozarteum with Igor Markevich and in Siena at the Accademia Chirigiana with Paul van Kempen. In 1951 he entered an international conducting competition at Besancon, and won the Georges Enescu prize. He joined Sadler's Wells Opera as a repetiteur in that year, and conducted his first opera there, 'The Bartered Bride', in 1952. He then returned to Glasgow to become assistant conductor to Ian Whyte at the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra, and in 1954 conducted the Scottish National Orchestra in Gounod's 'Faust' and Wolf-Ferrari's 'The Jewels of the Madonna' for Glasgow Grand Opera Society. In the same year he returned to Sadler's Wells as a staff conductor, and during the next three seasons conducted 'Tosca', 'Pagliacci', 'La traviata', Menotti's 'The Consul', 'La boheme', 'Die Fledermaus', and other operas. 
In 1957 Gibson became music director of Sadler's Wells, and conducted the world premiere of John Gardner's 'The Moon and Sixpence', based on the novel by Somerset Maugham. He also made his debut at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, conducting 'Tosca'. Other operas he conducted at Sadler's Wells included 'Eugene Onegin', 'Gianni Schicchi', 'Falstaff', 'The Flying Dutchman', and 'Bluebeard's Castle'. He also conducted the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, a connection that continued throughout his career, and recorded Sibelius's fifth symphony with the London Symphony Orchestra. 
Leaving Sadler's Wells in 1959, Gibson became the first Scottish-born principal conductor of the Scottish National Orchestra (SNO), gaining particular praise for a cycle of Sibelius symphonies. In that year, on 21 February, he married (Ann) Veronica Waggett, a ballet dancer. There were three sons and a daughter from the marriage. In 1961 he was one of a group of four -- which also included Richard Telfer, an Edinburgh music teacher, Ainslie Millar, a chartered surveyor, and Ian Rodgers, a solicitor -- who planned to give a week's season of opera at the King's Theatre, Glasgow, with the SNO in the pit and funded by Scottish Television and the Scottish Committee of the Arts Council of Great Britain. The first season had to be postponed, but on 5 June 1962 Scottish Opera (SO) was born. There were three performances of 'Madama Butterfly' and three of 'Pelleas et Melisande' (it was the centenary of Debussy's birth). Gibson conducted all performances but one 'Butterfly'. That autumn Peter Hemmings, then in charge of repertory and planning at Sadler's Wells, joined Scottish Opera as part-time administrator, later becoming full-time general manager. In 1963 there was a week in Edinburgh, at the King's Theatre, as well as the week in Glasgow. Gibson conducted a much admired production of Verdi's 'Otello', as well as the British premiere of Luigi Dallapiccola's 'Night Flight'. 
Over the next few years SO expanded its repertory as well as the length of the season and the number of places it visited: Aberdeen, Perth, Stirling, and later Newcastle upon Tyne were added to the tour. Mussorgsky's 'Boris Godunov', conducted by Gibson in 1965, was a major landmark, while 'Die Walkure' in 1966 heralded the beginning of a cycle of Wagner's 'Der Ring des Nibelungen'. In 1967, the year in which Gibson was appointed CBE, SO appeared for the first time at the Edinburgh Festival, with Stravinsky's 'The Rake's Progress'. In October that year Gibson and the SNO played in Vienna. The soloists were the cellist Jacqueline du Pre and the mezzo-soprano Janet Baker. In 1969 Baker sang Dido in 'The Trojans' by Berlioz, one of SO's greatest successes and also a personal triumph for Gibson. 
The year 1970 brought a second appearance for SO at the Edinburgh Festival, with Hans Werner Henze's 'Elegy for Young Lovers'. 'Der Rosenkavalier' in 1971 scored another success, while a complete cycle of 'Der Ring' was given in December, Gibson's finest achievement to date. Gibson continued to conduct at least two operas a year. In 1972 they were 'Tristan und Isolde' and 'The Merry Widow'; in 1974 the world premiere of Iain Hamilton's 'Catiline Conspiracy' and Gluck's 'Alceste'; in 1975 Verdi's 'Un ballo in maschera' and Rimsky-Korsakov's 'The Golden Cockerel'. 

'The Golden Cockerel' was given not in the King's Theatre, Glasgow, but at the Theatre Royal, recently acquired and restored by SO, which finally achieved its own home. In 1976 Gibson conducted Verdi's 'Macbeth' and Wagner's 'Die Meistersinger von Nurnberg'. He was knighted in 1977 and a year later was awarded the Sibelius medal by the Finnish government. He demonstrated his versatility once again in 1980 with Berg's 'Wozzeck' and 'Tosca'. Gibson was principal guest conductor of the Houston Symphony Orchestra from 1981 to 1983, and retired from his position as chief conductor of the SNO, which no longer played in the pit for Scottish Opera, in 1984. He continued as music director of SO until 1987, then left to become a freelance. 
Gibson's twenty-five years at SO had been very rewarding artistically, but he had not been able to take up many of the offers to conduct that flooded in from Europe and America. That now changed. He visited Los Angeles, where Peter Hemmings had become general manager of Music Center Opera. In 1988 he made the first of several guest appearances at Kentucky Opera in Louisville (where Thomson Smillie, once SO's press officer, was administrator), after which he returned annually until 1992. He visited the Bruckner Festival in Linz, where he conducted a concert performance of 'Tristan und Isolde'. In 1993 he conducted Britten's 'Peter Grimes' in Copenhagen. 
Gibson was widely respected for his devotion to Scottish and English music, received six honorary doctorates, and was an honorary fellow of the major British musical institutions. He returned on several occasions to SO, and was president of the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama in Glasgow from 1991 to 1995. In September 1994 he renewed his connection with English National Opera, as Sadler's Wells Opera had become known, conducting a new production of 'Tosca' at the London Coliseum. Then on 14 January 1995 he died in St Mary's Hospital, Praed Street, London, following a heart attack. His funeral took place on 21 January in Glasgow. His wife, Veronica, survived him. 
It is impossible to overstate the importance of Gibson's work in establishing in Scotland a home of international status for opera which at the same time encouraged local talent. He did not live to see the establishment of a new opera school at the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Dance, which eventually opened in 1998; it was a fitting tribute that it should bear his name. 


@@@@@


doc= 58545


Gilchrist, (Andrew) Rae (1899-1995), physician and cardiologist, was born on 7 July 1899 at the manse, Holywood, co. Down, Northern Ireland, the only son of Andrew Gilchrist (1871-1954), Presbyterian minister, and his wife, Catherine Hill, 'nee' Witherow (1879-1955). His parents were Scottish. He was educated at George Watson's Boys' College in Edinburgh, Campbell College in Belfast (1913-16), and the University of Edinburgh (1917-21), where he qualified in medicine. He became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh when only thirty, and received a gold medal for his MD thesis in 1933. 
After junior appointments at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, the Princess Elizabeth Hospital for Children, London, and a year at the Rockefeller Hospital in New York, Gilchrist was appointed to the consultant staff of the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh in 1930 at the early age of thirty-one. In those days this was the ultimate aim for an ambitious young clinician. Gilchrist always said that he was lucky because three more senior physicians had died before the age of fifty. This early security permitted him to develop his lifelong interest in heart disease, leading to the establishment of a dedicated department of cardiology in the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh in 1953. His particular interest was in cardiac arrhythmias, heart block, paediatric cardiology, and cardiac problems associated with pregnancy. He published many papers on these subjects. 
In 1930 Gilchrist reported in the 'Edinburgh Medical Journal' the first seven cases of coronary thrombosis recorded in Europe. As an alert young physician, working in acute medical wards of the Royal Infirmary, this was his total experience of the previous four years. It was a seminal report, ignored by almost all his seniors -- most of whom had not heard of the condition or did not believe that it was compatible with survival. Recognizing that his contemporaries were excellent physicians and that it was unlikely that they would fail to make the correct diagnosis, Gilchrist was firmly of the view years later that coronary heart attacks (first described in 1911) were a new disease. 
Gilchrist was the founder of cardiology in Scotland. During and after the Second World War, the Edinburgh clinical school of medicine was particularly strong, and possibly the leading teaching centre in Britain. Together with Sir Stanley Davidson, professor of medicine, and Sir Derrick Dunlop, professor of therapeutics, Gilchrist influenced the learning and clinical judgement of medical students and young graduates for more than thirty years. As a teacher he would brook no equivocation. An ambiguous answer, even if it concealed real doubt, to one of his commanding bedside questions would be met by scorn. This bred a discipline and orderliness of mind in his students, undergraduate or postgraduate, that few other teachers achieved. It also bred an extraordinary loyalty and respect from all who worked closely with him. He was a large and formidable figure, but magnanimity and humour were never far away. 
Gilchrist was a founder member in 1959 of the British Heart Foundation. He recognized that the amount of money available for research into heart and circulatory diseases from official sources was very limited -- the Medical Research Council budget totalled about two-thirds of one per cent of the whole cost of the National Health Service, and the amount spent on heart and vascular disease did not exceed about $50,000 a year. For these reasons the British Heart Foundation made an appeal directly to the public, and in the 1990s the sums accumulated allowed the expenditure of up to $50 million per year on support for research into heart disease, with most directed towards coronary disease. One outcome of this was the establishment in 1986, with the University of Edinburgh, of the Duke of Edinburgh chair of cardiology. 
Gilchrist welcomed new advances, though always with appropriate critical appraisal, and always with the question, 'Will this help my patients?' He encouraged his young staff to develop new ideas, while strict in his assessments of their contributions: to be prolix was fatal, to vacillate was nearly as bad, and to dissemble in any way was unacceptable. However, when new ideas were being developed he was excited and gave all his considerable influence to their study. Although clinically oriented, Gilchrist recognized the need to encourage studies of clinical physiology and biochemistry, particularly into the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease. 
Gilchrist was president of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh from 1957 to 1960 and was made an honorary fellow in 1990. He was also a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, London, from 1944. He was appointed CBE in 1961 and received many other honours worldwide. He retired in 1964, ironically after a major coronary thrombosis, but survived another thirty years -- an unusually long survival, which Gilchrist himself had thought impossible when he was in active consultant service. He was married twice: first, on 16 September 1931, to Emily Faulds Slater (1906-1967), younger daughter of W. Work Slater, of Edinburgh and Innerleithen, Peeblesshire, with whom he had one son and one daughter; and secondly, on 27 September 1975, to Elspeth Martin Wightman, 'nee' Scott (1904-1995), widow of his colleague Arthur Wightman. He died at his home, 16 Winton Terrace, Fairmilehead, Edinburgh, on 1 March 1995, and was cremated at Mortonhall crematorium, Edinburgh, on 4 March. He was survived by his son and daughter, and by his second wife, who died on 27 June 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 58547


Golombek, Harry (1911-1995), chess player and writer on chess, was born on 1 March 1911 at 200 Railton Road, Herne Hill, London, the younger son in the family of two sons and three daughters of Barnet Golombek (1877/8-1943), a successful grocer, and his wife, Emma Sendak (died 1967). All Golombek's grandparents came from a small Jewish community near Warsaw, migrating to England about 1903. Golombek won a scholarship to Wilson's Grammar School, Camberwell, where his ability at chess (first taught to him by his brother) became evident, as did a strong facility at languages and mathematics. His school won the London schools' team championship and in 1929 Golombek won the second London boys' championship (after finishing last the previous year). Golombek also began, but did not complete, a general degree at King's College, London, leaving in 1932. 
For many decades Golombek was a fixture on the British chess scene. He played for England at nine chess olympiads (three times before the Second World War -- Warsaw 1935, Stockholm 1937, and Buenos Aires 1939) down to 1962, and captained the English team five times between 1952 and 1962. He became British champion three times, in 1947, 1949, and 1955, the last occasion at the relatively late age (for a chess champion) of forty-four. He lost the 1959 championship following a play-off. He also won a number of small international tournaments both before and after the war, such as Antwerp 1938, and Baarn 1948. In international chess, his greatest moment probably came with his very creditable result in the Bad Pyrmont zonal tournament of 1951, making him the first British player to qualify for the inter-zonal phase of the world championship round. He continued to play in chess tournaments until his seventies, tying for first place in the British veterans' championship in 1984. At the very highest level of international grandmaster play, however, it is clear that he could seldom successfully compete, although on a good day he could beat almost anyone. 
Golombek's chess career was interrupted by the Second World War. Joining the Royal Artillery, with his linguistic and analytical gifts he (like other leading British chess players) was a natural candidate for Bletchley Park and the efforts by Britain's top code-breakers to crack the German military code with Enigma. At Bletchley he often played chess against Alan Turing, giving him queen odds but still beating him comfortably. 
In 1945 Golombek again became a full-time chess player and writer, and in the latter capacity was for over thirty years probably the best-known writer on chess in the country. British chess at this time was in a paradoxical state. Britain had not produced a world championship contender for sixty years nor, indeed, many players of true international stature. Yet a flourishing chess scene existed, with many clubs, an excellent chess press, and a record of hosting some of the most notable chess tournaments of the previous half-century. The failure to produce many top-flight players was due, as much as anything, to the meagre rewards attainable in chess, and to the unfortunate image of chess in the popular mind as a game for prodigies and elderly eccentric savants. In the 1970s, however, a 'British chess explosion' occurred, with England producing large numbers of highly talented younger players second to few countries in the world. Golombek's efforts as a chess writer and activist in popularizing chess and raising its visibility were responsible in significant measure for this improvement. 
In 1945 Golombek became 'The Times''s chess correspondent, holding that position until his resignation in 1985, following a stroke the previous year. In addition, he wrote a weekly chess column for 'The Observer' between 1955 and 1979, and was closely connected with the 'British Chess Magazine', briefly serving as its editor in 1938-40. From 1949 until 1967 he was the magazine's games and overseas editor. An excellent and often memorable prose stylist, he wrote, edited, or translated more than thirty books on chess, ranging from the enormously popular 'The Game of Chess' (1954), for novices, to an 'Encyclopedia of Chess' (1977). In contrast to accounts of more recent world championship matches by later writers, often pot-boilers which appeared as soon as the contest ended, Golombek's books on the 1948, 1954, and 1957 championship events were careful works of lasting value. Arguably his best works were his biographical games collections of the great Cuban world champion, 'Capablanca's Hundred Best Games of Chess' (1947), which was widely praised, and 'Reti's Best Games of Chess' (1954), the only English-language account of the seminal Czech player and theorist, which Golombek regarded as his favourite book. He was also a regular contributor, between 1958 and 1964, to the BBC's 'Radio Chess Magazine', broadcasting on personalities of modern chess, a series which made the history and lore of chess known to thousands of listeners. 
Golombek also enjoyed a distinguished career as a chess official and administrator. From 1952 until 1985 he served on the rules commission of FIDE, the international chess federation, which is responsible for the rules of chess, and was the British delegate to FIDE's annual conferences for most of this period. He served as official arbiter at many international tournaments and at six world championship matches in the 1950s and 1960s. All these matches took place in the Soviet Union between Soviet grandmasters, and Golombek's appointment, at the height of the cold war, was a remarkable one, and a tribute to his reputation for integrity. He was awarded the title of international master by FIDE in 1950 and of international arbiter in 1954. At the end of his career, in 1985, he was also given the title of international grandmaster emeritus. In 1966 he was appointed OBE, the first such appointment for 'services to chess'. 
With a prominent nose and ears, Golombek was instantly recognizable. Apart from chess, he had a wide range of interests, especially in music, theatre, opera, and ballet. He collected a large and diverse library, and his important holding of chess books went, after his death, to form the nucleus of the National Chess Library at the University Centre, Hastings. Many spoke highly of the kindness and encouragement he showed to younger players, and he left nearly two-fifths of his estate to further the encouragement of chess in Britain. While some critics regarded his writings as egocentric and opinionated, no one questioned his important role in the development of British chess. From 1944 he lived in Chalfont St Giles, Buckinghamshire. He died on 7 January 1995 in Dawn House residential home, South Park Crescent, Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire. Hitherto a lifelong bachelor, he quickly separated after a brief marriage contracted in the late 1980s. 


@@@@@


doc= 58551


Gowland, William (1842-1922), metallurgist and archaeologist, was born in South Durham Street, Sunderland, co. Durham, on 16 December 1842, the elder of two sons of George Thompson Gowland (1800/01-1847), shipowner and innkeeper, and his wife, Catherine, formerly Ovington, 'nee' Kelly (1805-1891). He was intended to enter medicine and spent two years preparing for the profession with a doctor in Sheffield, but his scientific interests led him to enrol in 1868 as a student at the Royal College of Chemistry. He then studied metallurgy at the Royal School of Mines, and qualified as an associate of the school. From 1870 to 1872 he was employed at the Broughton Copper Co., Salford, Lancashire. He became a fellow of the Chemical Society in 1871. 
In 1872 Gowland went to Japan as one of the foreigners employed by the Meiji government to assist in its programme of modernization. As chemist and metallurgist to the imperial mint at Osaka, whose director was Thomas Kinder, he had responsibility for the purity of the copper coinage. In 1875, when the running of the mint was placed under Japanese management, and the employment of most of the foreign employees was terminated, he was retained as a technical adviser. In 1878 he became chief metallurgist at the mint. He was also an assayer to the imperial war department of the Japanese government. He remained in the imperial service in Japan until the end of October 1888. A keen oarsman, he introduced the sport of rowing among the staff employed at the mint. In 1884 the emperor of Japan awarded him the fourth class of the order of the Rising Sun, and he was promoted to the third class at the end of his employment. 
Gowland travelled widely in Japan, and made expeditions into the mountains, probably with a view to sourcing metal deposits for the mint. His time in Japan coincided with growing interest in the country's prehistory, and the adoption in 1876 by the Meiji government of measures to protect ancient sites, notably imperial tombs. Gowland himself undertook an investigation of tombs of the kofun period while visiting Tondabayashi in Osaka prefecture in 1876. During the remainder of his stay in Japan he went on to survey 406 earth-mounded tombs, dating from the third to seventh centuries AD. He examined over 130 of them in detail, using flash photography to record the interiors of the stone burial chambers. Through his official contacts in Japan he was able to bring back to Britain considerable quantities of objects, which were acquired for the British Museum by Augustus Wollaston Franks. The collection comprises 'perhaps the finest collection of kofun-period material outside Japan' (Kaner, 279). 
Despite the comprehensive and pioneering nature of his archaeological investigations in Japan, Gowland did not publish his results until some years after his return to Britain, and did so only in English, in the 'Journal of the Anthropological Institute' (1895), 'Archaeologia' (1897), and the 'Proceedings of the Japan Society' (1898). This delay was probably dictated by prudence, as some of his findings would have been unwelcome to his Meiji hosts. He questioned the restored dynasty's recent identification of the Misanzai kofun as the mausoleum of the legendary founding emperor Jimmu; while his evidence of the power of local rulers in the early kofun period undermined the received chronology of imperial sovereignty. His influence in Japan was as a result limited. Moreover, as other contemporary researchers, such as Romyn Hitchcock of the Smithsonian Institute and the American zoologist Edward Sylvester Morse, reported their Japanese researches earlier, their contribution became better known, though Gowland's findings were cited in 'Prehistoric Japan' (1911) by Neil Gordon Munro. In later literature Gowland's use of the term 'dolmens', by analogy with burial tombs in European prehistory, was regarded as anachronistic, though his interest in the question of whether Japan, too, had a stone age suggested a wide intellectual curiosity, which he pursued through meticulous investigation (Kaner, 279). His contribution to Japanese archaeology was reappraised in a monograph published in 2003, which reproduced many photographs from his surviving glass plates. 
Gowland's careful archaeological method was also applied in Britain when, in 1901, he supervised the restoration of part of Stonehenge. Stone 56 was tilting dangerously and, following representations by the Society of Antiquaries (of which Gowland was a fellow), by the Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural History Society, and by the Society for the Protection of Ancient Monuments, the site's owner, Sir Edmund Antrobus, permitted the re-erection of the stone, set in concrete. During the operation, over four days in September 1901, Gowland undertook careful archaeological excavations in an area of 18 square yards around the base of the stone, removing the soil in six-inch sections, sieving it through meshes of varying sizes (a technique he had used at the Shibamura tomb as early as 1878), and recording three-dimensionally the position of each object found. He discovered the sarsen hammerstones with which the stones had been shaped, and other tools used in the monument's construction, which had been used to wedge the stone in place. His report of the excavations, published in 'Archaeologia' (1902), set out for the first time precise evidence of how Stonehenge was constructed, and the stones raised, while also offering a possible dating (1800 BC) based on material evidence. He also found traces of the early use of copper. Since his findings refuted some of the more sensational theories about the origins and purposes of Stonehenge, Gowland's work did not receive wide public attention, but it was later admired for its precision, and is regarded as a landmark in archaeological investigation (Atkinson, 193). 
On his return to Britain Gowland had resumed employment at the Broughton Copper Co. as chief metallurgist. He married, on 2 September 1890, Joanna (1859/60-1909), youngest daughter of Murdoch Macaulay, of Linshador, Stornoway, Isle of Lewis; they had a daughter. In 1894 he became examiner in metallurgy to the Board of Education. He settled in London, where he became a prominent figure in the world of learned societies, serving on the councils of the Japan Society, the Anthropological Institute, and the Society of Antiquaries. His extensive publications in their journals mainly related to the metallurgy of artefacts from early periods, but also included a study of the Maruyama Shijo school of Japanese painters. 
In 1902 Gowland succeeded Sir William Roberts-Austen as professor of metallurgy in the Royal School of Mines, which became a constituent part of Imperial College in 1907. His reputation as a metallurgist was mainly based on his practical experience. His principal work involved methods of examining steel alloys, in which he continued the work of his predecessor; he also promoted the use of microscopes in metallurgy. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1903, later serving on the council of the society, and was president of the Institution of Mining and Engineering in 1907. After his retirement from Imperial College in 1909 he wrote 'The Metallurgy of Non-Ferrous Metals' (1914; second edn, 1918). 
After the death of his first wife Gowland married, on 31 March 1910, Maude Margaret (1868-1949), a schoolteacher, daughter of Duncan James Connacher, dentist. Gowland died at his home, 13 Russell Road, Kensington, London, on 10 June 1922, and was buried in Marylebone cemetery. His antiquarian interests were incidental to his principal occupation (as early as 1871 he was described as a professional chemist), but his excavations in Japan and at Stonehenge have proved to be his enduring legacy. 


@@@@@


doc= 58552


Cramb, John Adam (1861-1913), historian and defence publicist, was born at Denny in Stirlingshire on 4 May 1861, the fourth child and second son of David Cram, who after failing in a photography and lithographic printing business worked as a carpenter, and of his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Marshall. The family moved to Bonnybridge, Stirlingshire, and after leaving school Cram worked in a pattern factory near his home, an unhappy episode he afterwards seldom mentioned. He read and was lastingly influenced by Carlyle. In October 1879 he went to Glasgow University to prepare for the ministry. He studied under Sir William Thomson (later Lord Kelvin) and others, went as a 'supply' preacher to various parishes, and changed the spelling of his name to Cramb. In 1886 he graduated with first-class honours in classics and was appointed Luke fellow in English literature. He studied in Bonn and attended lectures by Treitschke, whose Anglophobia and glorification of war made a lasting impression and led to Cramb's 'Germany and England' (1914). He acquired a wide knowledge of German history and literature, and continued to be influenced by Treitschke, Nietzsche, and other German writers. Suffering religious doubts, he decided against entering the ministry. 
Cramb worked unhappily as a schoolmaster at Melrose, then in 1887 travelled on the continent. On 4 October 1887 he married Lucy 
(died 26 Sept 1918, aged seventy-two)
, third daughter of Edward W. Selby Lowndes, JP and deputy lieutenant, of Winslow House, Winslow, Buckinghamshire; they had one son, Meyrick. From 1887 to 1890 Cramb was lecturer in modern history at Queen Margaret College, Glasgow, a new women's college. In 1890, to advance his career, he moved to London, and from then on lived in the Notting Hill and Kensington area. He wrote for the press, including the 'Daily News' and 'St James's Gazette', and contributed ten articles to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. From 1891 he was a modern history examiner for the civil service commissioners. From January 1892, after the committee's Cantabrigian first choice declined the post, Cramb was lecturer in modern history at Queen's College, Harley Street, London: a unique institution, never part of London University but providing university-style education to girls of senior secondary-school age and to adult lady part-time students. From May 1893 he was professor of modern history there. Walrus-moustached, multilingual, erudite, and enthusiastic, he was an ardent, judgemental, and wide-ranging lecturer, without notes. 'An arresting and dominating personality... with much of Thomas Carlyle's turn of phrase' ('Queen's College Magazine', Dec 1913, 139), he much impressed his students. Katherine Mansfield wrote, 'Cramb, wonderful Cramb!... ageless and fiery... I couldn't write down Cramb's thunder. I simply wanted to sit and hear him' ('Journal', 104). Another admiring student, Lilian M. Rigby (later Mrs C. E. B. Russell), daughter of Major-General C. P. Rigby (1820-1885), attended Cramb's lectures for ten years and later wrote his biography. He also gave short courses of lectures on history, literature, and philosophy at private houses. However he apparently did no primary research and he never published a work of academic history. 
In 1903 Cramb met at the Queen's Hall, London, Lady Ottoline Morrell. In 1904 they had a close relationship, with Cramb apparently romantically besotted with her, but she ended it. He based his novel 'Cuthbert Learmont' on it. After his death she wrote, 'He was as brilliant -- & wonderful as anyone I ever met' (Darroch, 52). 
In 1900, responding to the South African War, Cramb published his first book, 'The Origins and Destiny of Imperial Britain', originally lectures: fervent imperialist propaganda justifying the South African War, glorifying war and its sacrifice, and warning of the foreign, especially German, threat to Britain and the empire. The book's reception disappointed Cramb, not bringing the hoped-for recognition. In the book he favoured compulsory military training, and he supported the campaign by Lord Roberts and the revived National Service League. In 1906 he met Roberts, and in 1907 he lectured for the league. In 1910 Ian Hamilton's 'Compulsory Service' attacked the compulsionist case. Roberts replied with 'Fallacies and Facts' (1911). Cramb assisted Roberts in writing its first part, and himself wrote its anonymous third part, 'The argument from history': Lady Roberts wrote that the latter 'made mincemeat' of Hamilton's historical allusions. In the following years Cramb was Roberts's speech-writer for his 'national service' campaign. He was paid by Roberts from his private account. Through his friendship with Roberts and other officers Cramb became an occasional lecturer at the Staff College and military centres. 
Cramb devoted much time to writing novels. He published, under the pseudonym J. A. Revermont, three: 'Lucius Scarfield' (1908), 'Cuthbert Learmont' (1910), and 'The Marrying of Hester Rainsbrook' (1913). According to his biographer 'none was a popular success... seeing that the mental effort required in reading them is greater than their entertainment value' (Russell, 157). Yet D. H. Lawrence considered 'Hester Rainsbrook' 'rather good'. 'Schonbrunn', partly autobiographical but largely about Bonaparte, who fascinated Cramb, was published posthumously in 1918. 
Himself German-influenced, Cramb in early 1913 delivered at Queen's College a series of lectures warning against German Anglophobia, aggression, and threat to Britain, asserting the 'ideal element' in war, and arguing against pacifism. They were published posthumously in June 1914 as 'Germany and England', which was extensively reprinted during the war. In the summer of 1913 Cramb's health much deteriorated, and he died of 'malignant disease of the duodenum' at his home, 55 Edith Road, West Kensington, on 7 October. His body was cremated at Golders Green, and the urn interred at Ightham churchyard, near Sevenoaks. Cramb contributed to shaping British attitudes before and during the First World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 58553


Miles Ashworth (1792-1868), whose wartime service as a marine included escort duty on Napoleon's voyage into exile on St Helena. George Healey ('c'.1817-1899) spent time in America as a young man in the late 1830s. 
Details of the pioneers' education are few. Most must have possessed basic literacy and numeracy, and many were actively interested in intellectual and political debate. Bent was reputedly educated at Chetham's School in Manchester. Among the leading pioneers, Daly, Smithies, and Charles Howarth (1814-1868) were particularly identified for their intelligence and business knowledge. 
The three youngest pioneers, 


@@@@@


doc= 58554


John Holt (1777/8-1852) by some margin the oldest. 
The pioneers were drawn from several different trades, mostly skilled and semi-skilled. Although poor, they were not the destitute or unemployed men portrayed in romanticized accounts of the Rochdale store's foundation. The failure of a strike to secure wage increases for the town's flannel weavers early in 1844 contributed to renewed interest in co-operation as an alternative means of self-help. Ten of the pioneers were recorded as weavers in the society's original membership list. Other textile trades were also represented, including wool-sorters, a block-printer, and a mill engineer. The wider economy of the town was reflected in the inclusion among the pioneers of woodworkers, shoemakers and cloggers, hawkers, a tailor, and a collier. Healey, the most prosperous of the pioneers in his own business life, was a silk manufacturer whose firm employed fourteen hands in 1851. 
Many of these individuals already knew each other prior to the establishment of the pioneers' society. They had previously been involved in political and reform movements in Rochdale, providing a foundation of mutual confidence and schooling in organizational skills. During the early 1830s Howarth and James Standring ('c'.1804-1872) were part of the first phase of Owenite socialist interest in co-operation. This led to the establishment of a co-operative manufacturing society and two co-operative stores in Rochdale. Although these initiatives had failed by 1835, the leading pioneers must have known that their later efforts represented the refinement of existing co-operative forms, rather than an entirely new development. 
A revival of Owenism brought other pioneers into association. The Rochdale Socialist Institute was founded in 1838, becoming branch 24 of the national Owenite organization, the Universal Community Society of Rational Religionists. Daly and Garside both served as branch secretary. Daly was particularly active, as a correspondent to the 'New Moral World', a teacher in the local Owenite school, and, with Bent, a public lecturer. In 1841 Garside and Healey each subscribed some $20 to support the projected Owenite community at Queenwood in Hampshire, with smaller contributions from Collier, Mallalieu, and Smithies. Other Owenites among the pioneers were the father and son Miles and Samuel Ashworth, William Cooper, Holt, Howarth, Benjamin Rudman (1814-1876), Smith, Standring, Robert Taylor ('c'.1800-1877), 


@@@@@


doc= 58555


James Daly (1811/12-1849) was born in the north of Ireland. A few, while Rochdale born, had travelled widely outside the town, particularly 


@@@@@


doc= 58556


Samuel Ashworth (1825-1871), James Bamford ('c'.1825-1879), and Benjamin Jordan ('c'.1825-1904), were in their late teens when the new co-operative was founded in 1844. They, together with Bent and Joseph Smith ('c'.1823-1886), were certainly single at the time. Most others are known to have been married men, many with children to support. Only four of the pioneers were over fifty in 1844, with 


@@@@@


doc= 58557


William Taylor (1813/14-1854), James Tweedale (1818-1886), and Samuel Tweedale ('b'. 'c'.1811). 
Some socialists were also committed secularists; Daly wrote passionately on the subject to the 'New Moral World'. It is difficult to credit, therefore, any close identification between the pioneers as a group and a local strand of Unitarian Methodism. James Wilkinson (1787-1858), a part-time Unitarian minister, was among the pioneers, and his congregation may have contained as many as nine of his co-operative fellows. However, the principle of religious neutrality subsequently proclaimed by the pioneers probably reflected their own divisions on the subject. 
Chartism was another cause adopted by several pioneers -- including Brooks, Jordan, John Kershaw ('c'.1818-1893), James Maden ('c'.1803-1873), James Manock ('c'.1798-1877), and Rudman -- sometimes in parallel with continued support for Owenism. Indeed, Daly wrote in the 'New Moral World' (15 May 1841) that socialists and Chartists were divided only 'as to the means of attaining the object sought by both parties'. In 1843 Howarth -- not himself a Chartist -- supported by Smithies and Daly, used a Chartist meeting to advocate co-operative storekeeping as an alternative means of social progress. Although many Chartists dismissed co-operation as a distraction from their political goals, the pioneers included John Holt, the local Chartist secretary. Samuel Ashworth was a particular admirer of the Chartist leader Feargus O'Connor, who visited Rochdale in 1843. Ashworth and Cooper both became subscribers to O'Connor's Chartist Land Company, founded in 1845. In 1848 Ashworth received a 2 acre allotment on the land company's settlement at Charterville, near Minster Lovell in Oxfordshire. In an abortive attempt to start a new life he moved to Charterville, with his father, Miles, during the summer of 1848. Neither, however, was to stay more than a few months, as the legal basis of the land company was quickly thrown into question. 
Such episodes indicate a continuing adherence to Chartist and socialist principles among the pioneers. However, the establishment of their co-operative store was born of frustration with grandiose national plans that did little to benefit working people. Socialists, including Howarth, were also convinced that local action was necessary to preserve the democratic spirit that was threatened by controversy dogging more prominent projects, particularly the Queenwood community. 
Discussion of practical measures to relieve social distress led to a series of meetings during August 1844 that established the Rochdale Equitable Pioneers' Society and appointed its first officers. Miles Ashworth was elected president, Daly secretary, and John Holt treasurer. Bamford, James Holt ('b'. 'c'.1789), Smithies, William Taylor, and James Tweedale were appointed directors. Bent and Smith were elected as auditors, and George Ashworth ('c'.1819-1847), Howarth, Mallalieu, and William Walker as trustees. November 1844 saw the appointment of five arbitrators who were, at least initially, not purchasing members of the co-operative. The contribution of four of these -- Garside, Healey, John Lord, and Wilkinson -- to the society's subsequent development was, however, such that they may be counted among the pioneers. Garside, Lord, and Wilkinson held these same offices as late as 1858, when Wilkinson died. 
By contrast, some other responsibilities were held only briefly, as individuals withdrew from the society. Walker's tenure as a trustee lasted only until October 1844. James Holt was also less involved than his fellow directors, selling his shares in the society in September 1845. But changes also reflected the pioneers' democratic commitment to the circulation of responsibility throughout the group. Hence, Howarth replaced Ashworth as president in January 1845. Smithies, Kershaw, and James Tweedale all held this office in succeeding years. The duties associated with particular titles are not identified in the pioneers' records. Ultimately, individual contributions to the society's establishment are better judged through practical action. 
The pioneers funded their store with capital collected through weekly subscriptions. Miles Ashworth, Howarth, and Smithies were deputed in September 1844 to calculate the amount required to begin business. Ashworth and Howarth, together with Daly, John Hill ('c'.1814-1899), Maden, and Mallalieu, also led the search for suitable premises. After other sites had been rejected as too expensive, George Ashworth and James Tweedale negotiated a rental agreement for 31 Toad Lane, Rochdale. The deal concluded on 25 November secured ground-floor accommodation at an annual rent of $10 for a three-year term. Under the supervision of Miles Ashworth, Daly, and James Tweedale the premises were cleaned and fitted with shelves and other basic fixtures, some of which were made by Daly. Howarth, in collaboration with Daly, drew up the society's rules, which also carried the names of John Holt, Rudman, and Standring. These rules were partly based upon those of the Rational Association Sick and Burial Society of Manchester, but they also reflected a broader adherence to Owenite ideals. The store was initially intended not as an end in itself, but as a means to fund production, self-employment, and a co-operative community. 
On 12 December 1844 John Holt and Brooks were deputed to purchase a small initial stock, and the store opened for business on 21 December. Samuel Ashworth became shopman and Cooper cashier, both unpaid posts for the first three months. Initially, the store opened only on Monday and Saturday evenings. From early 1845 this was extended to include every evening except Tuesday and Sunday, with Smithies and James Tweedale both serving as superintendent of the store during that year. After the initial effort of establishing the Toad Lane store, it was Howarth, Cooper, and Smithies who played the greatest role in laying the long-term foundations for co-operative success (see their separate entries). Samuel Ashworth also contributed significantly to the growth of the pioneers' society and the wider development of co-operation. From shopman, Ashworth was promoted to buyer and manager of the store. He was vital to the society's subsequent expansion and involved in the establishment of other local co-operative ventures, including the Corn Mill Society of 1850, and the Land and Building Company and the Bacup and Wardle Manufacturing Society founded during the early 1860s. Ashworth's business skills led to an approach in 1863 to become the buyer for the newly established North of England Co-operative Wholesale Society (CWS) in Manchester. Ashworth declined this first offer, but joined the CWS in 1866. He served as CWS buyer and manager during an important period of expansion until his early death in 1871. 
By the middle of the century co-operative leadership in Rochdale increasingly involved individuals, particularly Abraham Greenwood and John Thomas Whitehead Mitchell, who were not founding members. But several pioneers continued to work for their society. Kershaw served a second term as president in 1851. Daly retained the post of secretary until 1849, when Cooper replaced him. During these years Daly applied his skills as a joiner in co-operative service. When, in 1849, the society obtained full possession of the Toad Lane premises, Daly refronted and refitted the shop at a cost of $200. The work created space for the drapery business that the society had established in 1847. This new initiative began by selling a spoiled piece of calico printed by Brooks but rejected by his employer. Brooks was subsequently deputed to obtain more cloth and briefly acted as drapery buyer and salesman. He was also involved in the society's establishment of a tailoring business in 1849. Bent managed this new department for eighteen months, returning later as a journeyman tailor after the failure of his own business. Standring was taken on as a shopman in 1851 when the Toad Lane store first began full-time opening. In 1875 James Tweedale was appointed as the money-counter in the branch store at Wardleworth Brow. 
In 1848 the committee appointed to establish a trade in periodicals to fund a co-operative library included Hill and Robert Taylor. Bent supported the society's educational work, as a mathematics tutor in its Sunday school. Robert Taylor was a signatory to the rules of the Corn Mill Society published in 1850. Healey and Lord were involved in the foundation of the Rochdale Co-operative Manufacturing Society in 1854, which Lord subsequently managed. The pioneers' society established a wholesale department during the 1850s, and Manock served on the supervising committee. Wholesaling, however, proved problematic, and a special committee appointed in 1856 to inquire into the department's operations included James Tweedale among its seven members. 
Few of the pioneers sought any wider role in public life. Smithies was a town councillor in Rochdale from 1862 to 1868. Healey was the most prominent of the pioneers in this respect, but more by virtue of his business success than his co-operative connections. During 1856 and 1857 he was joint proprietor of the local paper, the 'Rochdale Observer'. Healey served as a JP and, after 1858, as a Liberal alderman. He was thus involved in the building of Rochdale town hall in 1870-71. In later life Jordan also achieved a measure of status as a publican at Clitheroe, serving as a magistrate and chairman of the local Conservative association. 
By the 1880s the handful of original pioneers who remained were accorded occasional celebrity as the founders of modern co-operation. During the late 1880s Collier, Smith, and James Tweedale received obituary notices in the 'Rochdale Observer' and 'Co-operative News', which reflected their status as pioneers. Bent was applauded at the national Co-operative Congress held in Rochdale in 1892 in the mistaken belief that he was the last surviving pioneer. However, those who died earlier passed largely unremarked, even in the local press. George Ashworth was the first to die, on 6 August 1847, succumbing to pulmonary tuberculosis aged twenty-eight. On 29 December 1849 Daly died from cholera on board the SS 'Transit', while sailing with his family to a planned Owenite colony in Texas. Even the death of Miles Ashworth, the pioneers' first president, from a bowel condition on 13 April 1868 received no special attention in the 'Rochdale Observer'. 
George Ashworth and Daly were not the only pioneers to die young. Samuel Ashworth, who had a heart condition, Cooper, Howarth, Smithies, and William Taylor were all dead before the age of fifty-five. Arguably the first four of these, as dedicated co-operators, gave their lives to the movement. By contrast, both Hill (died 23 Dec 1899) and Scowcroft (died 11 March 1870) lived to be eighty-five. Eighteen of the pioneers were buried in Rochdale, chiefly in the town's cemetery. These include Bent and Jordan, who left the town in their later years yet had their bodies returned for burial. Several others were interred locally, including Brooks at Milnrow and Bamford at Smallbridge. Of the remainder, Healey was buried at Bowness-on-Windermere, Westmorland; Kershaw at Normanton, Yorkshire; and Smith at Nantwich, Cheshire. Daly was buried at sea and Samuel Tweedale, who had emigrated, is presumed to have died in Australia. Few pioneers acquired any great personal wealth. Healey was again the exception; his business success generated an estate valued at $15,341. Garside, who was a cabinetmaker, and Rudman, who established himself latterly as a draper, also had their own businesses, each leaving several thousand pounds. Samuel Ashworth's effects were valued at under $803, and Cooper, Jordan, Mallalieu, Smith, Smithies, and Robert Taylor also left estates of a few hundred pounds. The others seem to have left little. 
The store established by the Rochdale Pioneers was not the first consumers' co-operative, nor did they invent the system of dividend on purchases that proved a foundation for co-operative success. However, their example was vital to the development of the modern co-operative movement. During its first decade the pioneers' society established itself as the leading co-operative in Britain. This partly reflected the failure of a local savings bank in 1849 and the consequent channelling of support to co-operation as a more secure alternative. However, the sound aims and management structure of the pioneers' society enabled them to capitalize on such opportunities. The scale of the business, which had 600 members and an annual turnover of $13,180 by the middle of the century, attracted attention far beyond Rochdale. 
The pioneers' society came to exemplify the potential of working-class association. It attracted increasing numbers of visitors, including co-operators, middle-class liberals, and social reformers. The society also featured in the 'Christian Socialist' and the general press, such as 'Chambers' Edinburgh Journal', at least as early as 1850. The publication of George Jacob Holyoake's history of the society in 1857 consolidated its position as the inspiration for co-operation, both nationally and internationally. Holyoake, while cavalier with historical detail, told an affecting story of triumph in adversity, investing the pioneers' efforts with a powerful symbolic significance. Yet, he conveyed little of the character of individual co-operators. Leading pioneers, including Samuel Ashworth, Cooper, Howarth, and Smithies, were marked out for their commitment, honesty, judgement, and, in Smithies' case, good humour. But of the others we know virtually nothing. They themselves, however, might not be entirely surprised by their continuing fame. Smithies, at least, must have had a sense of history when he organized a group photograph of fourteen of the surviving pioneers in 1865. 
The store on Toad Lane has become a special place for co-operators. In 1931 the Co-operative Union refitted it as a museum, while its iconic status for international co-operation was confirmed by the construction of a replica at Kobe, Japan, in 1991. Other commemorations of the pioneers include the restoration of their graves in Rochdale cemetery in 1994, marking the 150th anniversary of their society's foundation. 


@@@@@


doc= 58559


May, Francis (1803-1885), grocer and match manufacturer, was born at Alton, Hampshire, on 17 July 1803, the third son and fourth child of Samuel May, a prosperous merchant belonging to an old Quaker family, and his wife, Anne Curtis of Alton. His older brother Charles (1801-1860), an engineer, was partner in the Quaker agricultural machinery firm Ransome and May and later became an inventor of distinction and a fellow of the Royal Society. 
After leaving school Francis May was apprenticed for three years to a grocer in Epping. He then set himself up in Bishopsgate, London, as a tea dealer and grocer. In 1825 he married Jane Holmes (died 1872), of Ampthill, Bedfordshire. They had two sons and five daughters. His nature was so gentle that he once wrote to his son's headmaster to protest against a caning. 
About 1840 May became the retail agent of William Bryant of Plymouth, a tallow and lubricating oil producer and sugar refiner. Their agency links developed and in 1844 they went into partnership as Bryant and May, provision merchants, in Fenchurch Street and Tooley Street, London. In 1850 they began importing matches from Carl Lundstrom of Sweden, and five years later bought from him the patent rights for a type of safety match. This they produced in a factory at Fairfield Road, Bow, from 1861 onwards. Bryant's eldest son, Wilberforce Bryant, then twenty-four, was appointed manager. May's stake in the partnership is not known, but he and William Bryant combined their mercantile activities with an overall supervision of the match factory. 
May was not included in Wilberforce Bryant's ambitious plans to become the leader of Britain's match-making industry. In the early 1850s he moved to Reigate, Surrey; once a year the girls from the Bow factory came on the firm's outing to his house, West View, at the foot of Reigate Hill. From his garden he sent acorns to relatives in Australia. 
From 1864 onwards William Bryant and his four sons, who were all partners in 1868, strove to ease May out. When he objected two Quaker arbitrators were appointed, but the Bryants disagreed with their findings and blackmailed them by threatening to take the matter to court, something abhorrent to Quakers. The quarterly meeting then pleaded with May to give in, it being far more blessed to suffer a wrong than to do a wrong. May left the firm about 1875. 
May was already much involved in Quaker affairs in Reigate, where he had campaigned to make the town into a municipal borough (achieved in 1863). He helped finance the rebuilding of the meeting-house, and set up a British School there. His wife died in 1872. May was a tall, bewhiskered man of imposing appearance, even in his old age a commanding figure in the ministers' gallery of the meeting-house. Once when he rose to give testimony he began with the words, 'We of the opulent classes...' Thereafter the youngsters in the meeting nicknamed him Old Opulence. He died at his home, West View, Reigate, on 1 December 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 58560


Wigram, Sir Robert, first baronet (1744-1830), merchant and shipbuilder, was born on 30 January 1744 in Wexford, Ireland, son of John Wigram (died 1746) of Wexford, merchant and master of the privateer 'Boyne', and his wife and cousin Mary, daughter of Robert Clifford of Wexford. His father drowned at sea when he was two, and he was brought up in Wexford by his maternal uncle, a doctor, before going to London in 1762. After two years' apprenticeship to a Dr Allen of Dulwich he qualified as a surgeon in 1764, joined the East India Company as a surgeon's mate, and sailed to India. He worked as a ship's surgeon until 1772, when he had to stop practising: an eye infection he developed in China had permanently damaged his eyesight. In 1772 he married Catherine (died 1786), daughter of John Broadhurst of Mansfield, Nottinghamshire, a Unitarian, and under her influence he became a Unitarian. They had four sons and two daughters. In 1787 he married Eleanor ['see 'Wigram, Eleanor, Lady Wigram (1767-1841)], widow of Captain Agnew and daughter of John Watts of Southampton, secretary to the victualling office, and they went on to have thirteen sons and four daughters. 
Wigram opened a drug business in 1774 at 4 White Lion Court, Cornhill, London, and became one of the leading drug importers in the country, putting into practice his knowledge of the trade of India and China. He moved the business nearby to 3 Crosby Square, Bishopsgate, in 1782, and bought Walthamstow House in Essex. 
As his fortune grew Wigram began to buy shares in East India Company ships. The first was the 'General Goddard', in 1788, and in 1790 he bought the 'True Briton', built by the Wellses of Rotherhithe. As well as owning several ships Wigram became one of the leading ship's husbands in the port of London. At the same time he was acquiring land, part of the Orchard House estate, belonging to the East India Company, on the Thames near Blackwall Yard. He was also a partner in Reid's Brewery, which supplied beer to the Indiamen, and in Huddart's Rope Works, at Limehouse. Wigram was a leader of the group of shipowners who pressed the government to establish the East India Dock Company in 1803 and build docks at Blackwall, on the Thames, for East India Company ships; he was also one of the original subscribers to the company. A member of the committee for constructing the docks, he chaired the East India Dock Company from 1810 and became a director in 1815, at the time when he was buying the freehold of several parts of the Orchard House estate. 
Wigram was elected MP for Fowey in 1802 and held this seat until 1806, when he became MP for Wexford. He was a strong supporter of William Pitt and was rewarded with a baronetcy in 1805, for which he himself had applied, mentioning the expense to which he had gone as lieutenant-colonel of the 6th Loyal London volunteers and in fitting out ships for the navy. He left parliament in 1807. 
In 1805 Wigram bought a large share in Blackwall Yard from John Perry and the Wells brothers. The first shipyard to be built on the left bank of the Thames, Blackwall Yard was originally created by the East India Company for the building and repair of its ships, but it was sold in 1650 and developed in the eighteenth century into one of the largest shipyards on the Thames. During the Napoleonic wars it was the place of embarkation for regiments going overseas, and ships were built there for the navy: in 1813 alone, ten frigates were built there. Part of the yard was sold to the East India Company in 1803 for the new docks, which opened in 1806. When Perry retired in 1810, the Wells brothers sold the property to Wigram, with John Wells retaining a quarter share, but with no active role, until he sold it to Wigram in 1813. Wigram ran the yard with the help of two of his sons, Money and Loftus. He retired from active control at Blackwall Yard in 1819 and sold the yard to Money and Loftus Wigram, and George Green, the son-in-law of John Perry, former owner of the yard. The firm became Wigrams and Green, and in 1821 it launched the first steam vessel to be built at Blackwall Yard. Sir Robert Wigram died at Walthamstow, Essex, on 6 November 1830. 
Wigram was a man of great energy. According to the diarist Joseph Farington, occupation was essential to him, and he 'should be miserable if in a morning he should not awake with his head full of ideas of business for the day' ('Farington Diary', ed. Greig, 6 Oct 1811). Several of his sons were successful, including his eldest son, Sir Robert Wigram (knighted in 1818), a director of the Bank of England and an MP for many years; George Vicesimus Wigram (1805-1879) ['see under 'Wigram, Joseph Cotton], a writer and a member of the Plymouth Brethren; Sir James Wigram (1793-1866), barrister and author of legal works; and Joseph Cotton Wigram (1798-1867), bishop of Rochester. 


@@@@@


doc= 58563


Gilmore, Isabella (1842-1923), philanthropist and Church of England deaconess, was born on 17 July 1842 at Woodford Hall, Essex, the eighth of the ten children of William Morris (1797-1847), City billbroker with Messrs Sanderson & Co., and his wife, Emma (1805-1894), daughter of Joseph Shelton. Her siblings included, most famously, William Morris (1834-1896), artist, poet, and designer, but also Emma (1829-1895), who in 1850 married Joseph Oldham, a former curate of Walthamstow, and Henrietta (1833-1902), who was converted to Catholicism about 1870. 
After the death of William Morris senior in 1847, the family moved to Water House, Walthamstow, in 1848, then to Leyton House, Leyton, Essex, in 1856. The Morris children were described as being 'most simply brought up' regarding food and clothes but as having a 'happy healthy childhood', ideal 'for children with healthy outdoor tastes' ('Deaconess Gilmore', 1-2). 'Issy's' brother Edgar (1844-1924) recalled her as 'a bit of a tomboy' (Edgar Morris to Ada Morris, 1923, Morris family letters, Church of England Record Centre, CWMC/IG/2). By contrast with William Morris's later disparaging remarks about his 'bourgeois' home and family religion, Archbishop Randall Davidson claimed in Isabella's memorial sermon that her love for the poor could be traced to 'that constant personal communion with our Lord from her early life outward to its close' and to 'the unconscious influence of her early days, among what were then regarded as socialistic surroundings' ('Deaconess Gilmore', 54). 
Isabella was educated at home by a governess, went to a private school in Brighton, and then a finishing school in Clifton until the age of seventeen. She 'came out' in 1860, and reputedly met her future husband, Lieutenant Arthur Hamilton (Archy) Gilmore RN (1832-1882), at the Beacontree Assembly Rooms, Wanstead. They were married at St Mary's Church, Leyton, on 18 September 1860. On 1 November 1882 Commander Archy Gilmore died of tubercular meningitis at Lyme Regis. They had no children. 
In spite of the opposition of her family (except for William and Emma), Isabella trained as a nurse from 1882 to 1886 at Guy's Hospital, where she worked as a ward sister and recalled being 'extremely happy' ('Reminiscences', 1). After the death of her brother Thomas Rendall (1839-1884) she took on financial and other responsibility for his eight children, aged two upwards, who called her mother, and spent holidays with them where possible. 
Victoria Jones, matron of Guy's, who in 1923 described Gilmore as 'a very capable nurse and a first-rate sister' ('Deaconess Gilmore', 6), recommended her in 1886 to Bishop Thorold of Rochester as a suitable person to found a deaconess order in his diocese. Initially reluctant, Gilmore 'received the call' on holiday that year. She subsequently worked closely with Thorold to revive the ancient order of deaconesses which existed in the early church, and which had its parallel in the male order of deacons. By contrast to the practice in Anglican sisterhoods and existing deaconess houses, Gilmore believed that the deaconess, once trained, should 'owe obedience' only to the bishop and the priest of the parish in which she worked, but could regard the head deaconess as an adviser or friend. Randall Davidson, bishop of Rochester from 1890 to 1896, later recalled that she had been 'a trusted counsellor and attached friend' to three successive bishops ('Deaconess Gilmore', 53): Thorold, himself, and Edward Stuart Talbot. 
To oversee the affairs of the institution, Bishop Thorold formed a council, of which he was head, with a warden, secretary, and treasurer. The first deaconess house, where Gilmore was ordained by Bishop Thorold on 16 April 1887, was at 11 Park Hill, Clapham; the second, The Sisters, 83 North Side, Clapham Common, taken in 1891, was extended and altered in 1896 to include a new chapel designed by Philip Webb. The trouble Gilmore expended on the decoration of this and the other two chapels illustrates her love of 'gorgeous colour' and fine craftsmanship (Stirling, 139). 
Gilmore was described as 'handsome', when young; when older as having the same pronounced features as her brother William, and an expression both 'stern and benevolent' (Stirling, 139). Although she later recalled how happy she was in her work, she encountered initial opposition, from some clergy, and also from her mother. She considered she was only 'lent to the work' until her mother's death in 1894 ('Reminiscences', 9). 
Gilmore wished her deaconesses to be 'well-educated gentlewomen', 'widows or virgins', preferably the former, but not married (Gilmore, 'Deaconesses', 2). Deaconesses and probationers wore a special (blue) dress, so they could be instantly recognizable, and as a sign of dedication. Trainees had to live in the deaconess institution for three months as visitors, then for one year (later two) as probationers. Finding suitable women was difficult initially, but by the autumn of 1889 there were three, and by 1890, seven. Five were ordained in Southwark Cathedral in 1892, and by 1906 forty-five had been ordained. Although unused to public speaking, Gilmore addressed numerous meetings throughout the diocese explaining the aims of the institution, and recruiting associates, Anglican communicants who were pledged to support the institution through prayer and financially. 
Gilmore obtained a reputation for 'standing no nonsense' ('Reminiscences', 50), which she believed was necessary to deter the wrong kind of applicant. In her view, the essential quality was 'absolute devotion to Christ' (Deaconess Institution, '11th Annual Report, 1897', LPL, 3). Worship, with chapel services, usually taken by Gilmore, held five times daily, was central to the life of the institution. Theological training initially consisted of 'Bible' study, prayer book, and church history, including written papers, then 'Elementary Dogmatics', added in 1893. From 1898 instruction was given by specialist lectures, with classes in Greek for those who wished. 
Gilmore emphasized the importance of visiting the poor in a spirit of friendship, and of offering immediate practical help. Probationers therefore had to become proficient in housework, cooking, and plain sewing, and attend a course of nursing, some of them at Guy's for six months. Parochial visiting with a trained deaconess took place most days in the poorest districts of the Battersea parishes of St Mary's and St John's with St Paul's, then St Peter's. Besides visiting homes and nursing the sick, the deaconesses established a Sunday ragged school, taught in Sunday (and later, day) schools, and took mothers' meetings. Gilmore's practice was to talk about religion where opportunity presented itself, not to try to force the poor to go to church. She arranged baptism services on weekday evenings (the first was attended by ninety-four children) and cottage meetings in poor districts, which deaconesses had to learn to address. Deaconesses also had to liaise with different agencies: the relieving officer, the school attendance officer, the local doctor, local hospitals, and charities. 
William Morris reputedly said to Gilmore 'I preach socialism -- you practise it' ('Deaconess Gilmore', 37), and other contemporaries were impressed by Gilmore's skill and sympathy in visiting. She recalled that 'the people soon became very dear to me and it was agony to find how terrible their condition was' ('Reminiscences', 27). She was a member of the first executive of the National Union of Women Workers, established in 1895. However, her concern was with the spiritual as much as the material needs of the poor. While recording that the question of relief was extremely difficult, she established many heavily subsidized forms of philanthropic organization, such as the provision of clothing for small loans, provident clubs, an industrial society, and girls' preventive home (founded in 1893). Deaconesses had to learn simple bookkeeping, and she regarded club-collecting as a useful means of entry into poor homes. She hated alcohol and deaconesses were expected to break up fights. 
From 1901 deaconesses had to be over thirty but a system of licensed lay workers, who had the same training, was established. By Gilmore's retirement in 1906 there were many Rochester-trained deaconesses working both overseas and in Britain, such as Helen Barnes, working with the navy, who was based on HMS 'Pembroke' at Chatham from 1895 to 1916. Katherine Beynon did a year's training (1895-6) and then founded St Hilda's Deaconess House, Lahore. 
After retiring Gilmore lived with her nieces Ada and (from 1920) Effie at Reigate (until 1914), Kew (until 1921), then Parkstone, Dorset. At the archbishop's request, she wrote a pamphlet called 'The deaconess', which she revised in 1908. She kept in close contact with deaconesses she had trained, addressed numerous conferences, including the women's committee of the Pan-Anglican Congress in 1908, and was consulted by the Association of Head Deaconesses, founded that year. The status of the deaconess order was enshrined in the statutes of the Lambeth conferences of 1920 and 1930. 
Isabella Gilmore made a valuable contribution to the work of the Church of England by establishing, in principle and practice, that trained deaconesses and lay workers could work with a parish priest, licensed by the bishop, but independent of any religious community. The Sisters, known as Gilmore House after 1934, remained a training institution until 1970. Arguably, the acceptance of the ordained ministry of deaconesses was an important step towards the eventual admission of women to the Anglican priesthood in November 1992. Gilmore's insistence on rigorous standards in training, and on the independent status of ordained deaconesses, who were paid (her own services were given free), had important implications for the professionalization of women's work from 'c'.1890. 
Gilmore died at her home, Kingston, Sandecotes Road, Parkstone, Dorset, on 15 March 1923, of myocardial degeneration and heart failure. Her memorial service, addressed by Randall Davidson, archbishop of Canterbury, was held on 20 March 1923 at Lambeth parish church, and she was buried at St Michael's Church, Lyme Regis, beside her husband, on 21 March. A memorial fund paid for a bas-relief portrait of her in white marble in Southwark Cathedral in 1924; the remainder went towards bursaries for deaconesses. 


@@@@@


doc= 58565


Gower, Sir Thomas, first baronet (1584-1651), local politician, was born in Stittenham, Yorkshire, the son of Thomas Gower and Mary, daughter of Gabriel Fairfax of Steeton. Stittenham had been the family estate since the twelfth century. Gower married Anne, daughter of John D'Oyley, on 28 May 1604, and the couple had five sons, Thomas Gower (1604/5-1672), D'Oyley, Howard, William, and Edward, and one daughter, Margaret. In 1620 Gower was high sheriff of Yorkshire, and he was created baronet on 2 June 1620. Anne, Lady Gower, died on 28 October 1633, and he later married Mary, a widow with a daughter and a granddaughter, both also called Mary. 
In the decade of unrest before the civil war the Gower family appeared to be co-operating with the king's opponents. In 1629 Sir Thomas was fined $50 in the court of Star Chamber. In 1632 he made some critical remarks about Sir George Radcliffe, the king's attorney for the council of the north and a friend of Thomas Wentworth, the lord president. Wentworth attempted to cite Gower for contempt but Gower fled with his family to London and established himself in Holborn. Wentworth's officers attempted to arrest him but he claimed that the council of the north had no authority to arrest him outside its jurisdiction. Gower became somewhat of a hero in Holborn for his defiance of the king's prerogative court. Wentworth appealed to the privy council in December, accusing Gower of 'many contempts' and 'scandalous words' to Radcliffe, and claiming that the council could not rule in the north without 'coercive power... to compel the parties to an answer' ('CSP dom.', '1631', 450-51). Gower was returned to York by the privy council and he spent several months in confinement. In 1640 he and his son Thomas signed a petition drawn up by Yorkshire gentry requesting the king to cease billeting soldiers in citizens' homes without their consent. The document cited the petition of right as justification for the protest. 
Despite their previous activities Gower, with his five sons, joined the royalist forces in June 1642. He also lent the king $1500. During the confusion of the war that year Sir Thomas Gower and Lord Thomas Savile were arrested by the earl of Newcastle on suspicion of complicity in a plot to seize Queen Henrietta Maria on her journey from the coast to York, and to deliver her to parliament as a hostage. Savile was confined in Newark Castle for six months, but he later refuted the charge before the king at Oxford. Savile was repudiated, and Newcastle publicly apologized for arresting him. Gower was not convicted or punished, and there is general doubt concerning the validity of the charges. The 'Journal of the House of Lords' recorded in 1647 an order in parliament that the treasurers of Weavers' Hall were to repay Thomas Gower $6000 'for the payment of private soldiers' ('CSP dom.', 'addenda', '1625-49', 707). In the latter years of the conflict the elder Gower served in Newark garrison for the king. 
During the interregnum both Gower and his son were declared delinquent and were forced to compound, the father paying a $200 fine. On 13 June 1651 Gower's wife, Mary, at that point in good health, following the agreement in their marriage settlement, made a will leaving her estate to her daughter, Mary, wife of Francis Topham of Upper Bradley, Yorkshire, and giving substantial bequests to five great-granddaughters, daughters of Mary and George Spencer. She died within a few weeks, however, and the will was proved on 13 August. Gower himself died on 20 October that year and was buried at St Margaret of Huttons Ambo, North Riding of Yorkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 58572


Dacres, James Richard (1749-1810), naval officer, was the son of Richard Dacres, one-time secretary to the garrison at Gibraltar, and his wife, Mary ('nee' Bateman). He entered the navy in 1762 on the frigate 'Active', commanded by Captain Herbert Sawyer. On 21 May 1762 the 'Active', in company with the sloop 'Favourite' cruising off the Algarve, captured the Spanish register ship 'Hermione', which had sailed from the Caribbean before Britain had declared war on Spain and was thus unaware of the state of hostilities. The 'Hermione' was carrying an enormously rich cargo of dollars, gold coin, ingots of gold and silver, cocoa, and blocks of tin, to the total of $519,705 10's'. 0died This was sufficient to make every man on the two British ships relatively wealthy, and even the able seamen received the equivalent of approximately thirty-five years' pay. On arrival at Portsmouth the treasure was conveyed to London in twenty wagons, each decorated with flags and accompanied by a party of sailors. 
From the frigate 'Active' Dacres was transferred to the frigate 'Aeolus', commanded by Captain William Hotham. Cruising in the channel, the 'Aeolus' captured a number of privateers and other enemy vessels. The 'Aeolus' also recaptured a British merchantman from Jamaica which was said to be of considerable value. Subsequently Dacres served in the frigate 'Thames', commanded by Captain John Eliot and, after 1766, the 'Jersey' (60 guns), carrying the pendant of Commodore Sir Richard Spry, commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean. Shortly afterwards Spry appointed Dacres lieutenant of the frigate 'Montreal' (32 guns), commanded by Captain Phillips Cosby. He continued in the 'Montreal' until 1774, when Cosby returned to England. 
At the commencement of the American War of Independence Dacres was appointed second lieutenant of the frigate 'Blonde', commanded by Captain Philemon Pownoll. The 'Blonde' was ordered to escort troop transports carrying General Burgoyne's army to Canada. Upon arrival in Quebec in June 1776 Pownoll received a request from Commodore Douglas, commanding British naval forces on the Great Lakes, for the loan of officers and men to assist with the fitting out and manning of ships for service there. Dacres appears to have been selected to lead this party, and upon arrival was given command of the schooner 'Carleton' armed with twelve 6-pounder guns. 
Dacres distinguished himself in two actions against American naval forces on Lake Champlain. Of these, the more notable was an attack on 11 October 1776 commanded by Captain Pringle on an American force drawn up to defend the passage between the island of Valicour and the mainland. Because the enemy were to windward only the 'Carleton' and twenty gunboats were able to engage them, which they did for several hours, destroying the largest American schooner and a gondola. At nightfall Pringle recalled the 'Carleton' and the gunboats, and during the hours of darkness the American force withdrew. On the following morning Pringle set off in pursuit and at noon on 13 October he came up with the American force near Crown Point. 
After an engagement lasting two hours the American force broke up in disarray. The galley 'Washington', with General Waterburgh on board, was captured and several other vessels destroyed. Dacres was sent home with dispatches and a recommendation for promotion. Upon arrival he was promoted commander (25 November 1776) and given the sloop 'Sylph' (14 guns). Soon after he was given command of the slightly larger sloop 'Ceres', serving on the Leeward Islands station. On 1 August 1777 he married Eleanor Blandford Pearce at Totnes, Devon. In March 1778 the 'Ceres', accompanied by the 'Ariadne' (20 guns), chased two American frigates off Barbados, catching one, the 'Alfred', on 9 March. 
At the end of 1778 the 'Ceres' was captured by the French frigate 'Iphigenie' (36 guns), after a chase of 48 hours, during which Dacres successfully drew the enemy frigate away from the convoy of troop transports which he was escorting. Dacres's commander-in-chief wrote to the Admiralty: 'I cannot help regretting the loss of this sloop, not only as she sailed remarkably well, but as Captain Dacres is an officer of infinite merit' ('Naval Chronicle', 26.273). On his being exchanged by the French, Dacres was appointed briefly acting captain of the 'Sultan' (74 guns) before being given command of the frigate 'Maidstone' (28 guns). His promotion to post captain does not seem to have been confirmed by the Admiralty until November 1780 when he was given the frigate 'Perseus' stationed at the Downs. Towards the end of the war he commanded the frigates 'Orpheus' and 'Aurora' before being paid off in 1783. 
At the outbreak of war against revolutionary France in 1793 Dacres was given command of the 'Sceptre' (64 guns) and, as part of Admiral Howe's fleet, was employed blockading Brest and the Bay of Biscay. In July the fleet was sent to engage a French force under the command of Vice-Admiral Morard de Galles off Belle Ile; however, owing to unreliable winds, the French ships successfully avoided an action. 
In the following year the 'Sceptre' was sent to join Commodore Ford's squadron in the West Indies and on 1 June was actively involved in the bombardment and capture of Fort Bizothen at Port-au-Prince. In the West Indies the crew of the 'Sceptre' suffered heavily from yellow fever and the ship was subsequently ordered home as escort to a convoy. On his return to England Dacres was transferred to command of the 'Barfleur' (98 guns) attached to Lord Bridport's fleet in the channel, and he was present when Bridport defeated a French fleet off the southern coast of Brittany in June 1795, though the 'Barfleur' was not involved in the action. At the end of the year the 'Barfleur' became the flagship of Vice-Admiral Waldegrave and was sent to the Mediterranean. In spring 1796 Waldegrave was sent with five sail of the line to recover the British frigate 'Nemesis' which had been captured by the French and was being held at Tunis. On the night of 9 March the boats of the squadron successfully cut out the 'Nemesis' and one of her captors, the French corvette 'Sardine'. The 'Barfleur' was present at the battle of Cape St Vincent in February 1797, where she suffered relatively few casualties, before in April Dacres returned to England in the frigate 'Flora'. He was next given command of the new 'Foudroyant' (80 guns) which he retained until February 1799 when he was promoted rear-admiral of the blue. 
During the peace of Amiens, Dacres served as commander-in-chief at Plymouth and, on the resumption of war in 1803 he hoisted his flag in the frigate 'Franchise'. He then became second-in-command of the Jamaica station, under Sir John Duckworth, which proved a very lucrative position as some eighty vessels were taken as prizes during this period. 
On 23 April 1804 Dacres was raised to rear-admiral of the red, and a year later he succeeded Duckworth as commander-in-chief at Jamaica. He remained at Jamaica until 1809 when, his health having deteriorated, he asked to be recalled. He returned to England, where he died on 6 January 1810. 


@@@@@


doc= 58574


Brand, Sir David (1837-1908), advocate and local politician, was born in Glasgow on 27 December 1837, the eldest son of Robert Brand, a linen merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Thomson. He was educated at Glasgow Academy and the universities of Glasgow and Edinburgh before studying at Heidelberg where he graduated doctor of jurisprudence. He was admitted a member of the Faculty of Advocates in 1864. In 1877 he married Elizabeth Findlay, daughter of Robert Findlay Dalziel of Paisley. A Liberal in politics, Brand was active in the registration courts in the interest of that party. He was involved in Gladstone's successful Midlothian election campaign (1880) and was rewarded with a position of advocate-depute in the Liberal government from 1880 to 1885. In 1885 he was appointed sheriff of the county of Ayr. 
Brand was appointed chairman of the Crofters' Commission established by the 'Crofters' Holdings (Scotland) Act' of 1886. The commission -- consisting of Brand and two colleagues -- was established to review rents and arrears, evaluate compensation for improvements, and administer common grazings regulations in the seven crofting counties of the north of Scotland. The first two years of the commission's work were a period of intense land agitation in the highlands. The commission acted as a peripatetic land court and its presence in the areas of unrest, its uncomplicated procedure, willingness to hear evidence in Gaelic, and a quickly established reputation for fairness, played a major role in helping to quell the agitation. Brand's part in this achievement was crucial. The fact that he assumed the chairmanship of the commission without any previous involvement in highland affairs worked in his favour, as he was able to approach issues with an open mind and an unblemished reputation. The workload of the commission in its early years was massive: between 1886 and 1893 the commission made decisions on the rents of over 14,000 crofts. On average they reduced crofting rents by about one third and cancelled about two thirds of the arrears which had arisen during the years of agitation since 1882. 
Brand's legal expertise was important in the work of the commission, which was, essentially, a court of law. The difficulties were enormous; crofting was an entirely novel legal code and a radical departure from established land law in Scotland. The commission had to establish a body of precedence in this difficult area; the fact that very few of its decisions were the subjects of appeals is testimony to Brand's sure touch. 
In the early 1890s the workload of the commission was decreasing and Brand chaired the royal commission (highlands and islands) in 1892. This body had the remit of identifying land being used for grazing or sport which could be transferred to crofters. Brand's political skills were taxed by the job of chairing a fractious and unpopular royal commission. The commission's report was greeted with derision and the government showed no signs of wishing to implement its recommendations before losing office in 1895. 
Brand was also a member of the congested districts board, established in 1897 to implement the Conservative policy of land purchase in the highlands. This body was underfunded and found highland crofters to be lukewarm towards the notion of land purchase. Brand was one of the authors of the report of the Crofters' Commission 'on the social condition of the people of Lewis in 1901, as compared with twenty years ago', published as a parliamentary paper in 1902 and retaining a permanent value as a survey of crofting life in the Hebrides. In June 1907 he was knighted. By then his health was failing and for the last two years of his life he played little active role in the Crofters' Commission or on the congested districts board. Brand died at his home, 42 Coates Gardens, Edinburgh, on 22 January 1908 and was buried at Dean cemetery, Edinburgh on 25 January. He was survived by his wife, son, and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 58576


Meyer, Adele, Lady Meyer (1862/3-1930), campaigner for social reform, was the eldest daughter of Julius Levis of 35 Belsize Park Gardens, London. Her family was Jewish and her father was a merchant, but nothing is known about her early life. On 14 March 1883 she married Carl Ferdinand Meyer (1851-1922), a financier whose connection with the merchant banking house of Rothschilds brought them both into touch with the prominent financial and political personalities of the time. The couple had a son and a daughter. Her husband was created a baronet in 1910. 
Adele Meyer played a prominent role in the social life of the 'fin de siecle'; and it was later noted that she 'always recalled with pleasure the admiration her delicate colouring and prematurely grey hair and her quick intelligence provoked' ('The Times', 21 Jan 1930). However, the life of a socialite was not sufficient for her, and she became associated with a number of campaigns to improve the position of women in society, the first of which was the St Pancras School for Mothers. In order to improve the physical state of the poor, she organized cooking lessons for women in their own homes. This development was so successful that it was adopted elsewhere in the United Kingdom and overseas. She acted as chair of this organization until 1928, when she was forced to resign through ill health. 
Adele Meyer's concern for health and diet motivated her to establish, in 1910, the first rural health centre in Britain, which was based near Shortgrove, her country home at Newport, Essex. The centre included a school for mothers, a welfare club, a girls' club, and a dental clinic, and penny dinners were organized for schoolchildren. As with the St Pancras School for Mothers, this was a model that was followed in other parts of the country. It remained open until the outbreak of the First World War. In addition, Meyer was among the founders of Queen Mary's Hostel for Women, a branch of King's College, London, known for the study of social and domestic science. According to one of her obituaries, this 'claimed much of her thought during the latter period of her life' ('Manchester Guardian', 20 Jan 1930). Unlike many of her social circle, she was a supporter of the movement to extend voting rights to women. 
Adele Meyer's concern for women also extended to the abuses many of them suffered in their jobs. From 1906 she became involved, with Clementina Black, in a detailed investigation into the work of women in London in the unregulated tailoring, dressmaking, and underclothing trades. The resulting publication, 'Makers of our clothes, being the results of a year's investigation into the work of women in London in the tailoring, dressmaking and underclothing trades', written by Meyer and Black, appeared in 1909. The conclusion of the investigation was that: 'If there is any immediate means by which legislation might diminish the evil of underpayment, it is the highest time that legislation should intervene in aid of a law-abiding, industrious, and greatly oppressed, class of citizens' (p. 18). 
Adele Meyer continued to act as a hostess, both in London and in the splendid Queen Anne home in Essex beside the River Cam. The banker Charles Addis recorded a visit to the country home in 1909. He was impressed, but rather patronizingly described her as agreeable but 'not deep or learned with good impulses in her fashionable way'. He added that 'She ripples along about higher education and vocation schools and health culture and music' (Kynaston, 2.331-2). In appearance she was 'A short plump blonde, [with] wavy grey hair, very dark eyebrows and eyelashes, beautiful white teeth' (ibid., 331). Both she and her husband were enthusiastic patrons of the opera and discriminating buyers of paintings. After her husband's death in 1922 she served on the committee of the Shakespeare Memorial National Theatre (established in 1963 as the National Theatre, London). 
A memorable portrait of Adele Meyer, depicting her and her two children, was painted in 1897 by John Singer Sargent and hung in the dining-room at Shortgrove during her lifetime. It was exhibited at the Royal Academy and has been described as a consummation of 'fin de siecle' opulence. Henry James praised its 'wonderful rendering of life, of manners, of aspects, of types, of textures, of everything' (Kynaston, 2.332). After his visit Addis agreed that it was a superb portrait. 
Despite all Adele Meyer's involvements with social reform, the writer of her obituary in 'The Times' felt that 'her chief interests... lay with those near to her', namely her children and grandchildren, 'concerning whose welfare she was vigilant and active' ('The Times', 21 Jan 1930). Lady Meyer died of heart failure on 17 January 1930 at her home in Kent, Chipstead Place, Chevening. 


@@@@@


doc= 58577


Shepherd, Pamela (1836-1930), evangelist, was born on 19 March 1836 in Tal-y-waun, near Newport, Monmouthshire. She was the eldest of the four surviving children of Benjamin Morgan ('b'. 1806), a blacksmith active in Chartist politics, and Margaret Evans ('b'. 1811), a Welsh Baptist and daughter of Hugh Evans, a Cardiganshire farmer. Her father's political activities made his position in south Wales increasingly difficult, and the family moved to London in 1845 as Benjamin Morgan sought work on the Great Western Railway. As the fortunes of Chartism waned Pamela's father took to drink, and her mother took in washing to support her family. Pamela Morgan married William (Bill) Shepherd, a carter, about 1860 and moved to Poplar. Her parents and siblings returned to Wales in 1861. Deprived of her close relations and faced with a feckless and irregular husband, Pamela Shepherd had to rely on the charity of her in-laws in the early years of her marriage to support herself and her young daughters. Although a self-confessed 'drunkard' she worked hard for her children, first as a laundress, then as a rag sorter. Conscious of her own lack of education (she admitted at the age of forty-two that she could read but not write), she arranged for her older daughters to receive some schooling. 
Pamela Shepherd encountered the Salvation Army, or the Christian Mission as it was then known, in 1867 and was eventually converted by the preaching of James Dowdle. Dubbed the 'Hallelujah Washerwoman' she was soon employed on mission business, giving her testimony around London. In 1868 she was employed for a time in the household of William and Catherine Booth, the mission's founders, and from 1869 she assisted at the mission's Limehouse centre, a converted music-hall renamed the Penny Gaff. It was around this time that she became known as Mother Shepherd, the title which would remain with her for the rest of her life. A dedicated and enthusiastic worker, she was appointed hallkeeper and cook at the mission's Whitechapel headquarters in 1876. 
In 1878 Mother Shepherd, as a native speaker of Welsh, was sent to begin work in Aberdar, Glamorgan; her two eldest daughters served as her assistants. The period from 1878 to 1883 was one of unprecedented growth for the Salvation Army, and during that time Shepherd opened seven new stations. About 1883 she retired from full-time evangelism, but was later recalled to London by Florence Booth to superintend one of the army's rescue homes. Around 1891 she was given charge of the new Cardiff rescue home (housed in a building donated by Richard Cory). Aged fifty-seven, she retired from the Salvation Army, but continued to play an active part in Aberdar philanthropic and moral reform causes. She was for fourteen years (1893-1907) a police court missionary, and after the introduction of the 'Probation of Offenders Act' in 1907 she became the first probation officer in her area. Mother Shepherd was the founder and head of two missions: Cwm ('c'.1894-1908) and Pentwyn Bach at Trecynon (1908-25), which became known as Mother Shepherd's Mission. She died at her home, The Nook, at 7 East Avenue, Aberdar, on 24 February 1930, and was buried on St David's day in Aberdar old cemetery. She was accorded a public funeral, with members of the south Wales constabulary as her pallbearers, and Salvation Army officers and eminent Aberdar ministers conducting the services. 


@@@@@


doc= 58579


Watson, Rosamund Marriott (1860-1911), poet and journalist, was born on 6 October 1860 at Homerton Row, Homerton, Hackney, London, youngest of the five children of Benjamin Williams Ball (1818-1883), bank clerk and bibliophile, and his wife, Sylvia Good (1818-1874). Educated at home, and prevented by family opposition from attending art school (Marriott Watson to Chesson, 2 March 1905), she produced six volumes of poems, including 'The Bird-Bride: a Volume of Ballads and Sonnets' (1889), 'A Summer Night, and other Poems' (1891), 'Vespertilia, and other Verses' (1895), and a volume of posthumous collected poems (1912). She was the author of books on interior decoration (1897) and gardening (1906), edited border ballads (1888) and 'Selections from the Greek Anthology' (1889), headed a woman's magazine ('Sylvia's Journal', 1893-4), and contributed articles on fashion, art, interiors, gardens, and literature (as well as signed poems) to prominent journals such as the 'Yellow Book', W. E. Henley's 'Scots Observer', the 'Pall Mall Gazette' and 'The Athenaeum'. Her contemporaries praised her for impeccable poetic technique and refined diction; equally notable are her female perspective on aestheticism and her anticipation of twentieth-century themes such as troubled (or serial) marriage and divorce. 
On 9 September 1879 Rosamund married George Francis Armytage (1853-1921), an affluent colonial from Australia who attended Jesus College, Cambridge; their daughters Eulalie and Daphne were born in 1882 and 1884. In 1884 she also published anonymously her first volume of poems, 'Tares'. At this time marital discord surfaced, allegedly because of Rosamund's flirtations with other men ('News of the World', 1) -- a charge not unrelated to her remarkable beauty. 'Tall, willowy', with expressive brown eyes crowned by masses of black hair (Pennell, 157-8), she captivated others through her physical grace, beautiful attire, and exceptional intelligence and wit. Several contemporaries testified to the effect, from Elizabeth Pennell to Richard Le Gallienne, Oscar Wilde -- who inscribed a portrait, 'For a Poet and a Poem' ('Oscar Wilde', 2.302) -- and Thomas Hardy. Years after her death Hardy wrote 'An Old Likeness (Recalling R. T.)', and Mrs Pine-Avon in 'The Well-Beloved' may be a partial portrait (Millgate, 'Thomas Hardy and Rosamund Tomson', 254-5). 
Following her separation from Armytage (and adoption of the publishing name 'R. Armytage') Rosamund eloped in 1886 with the painter Arthur Graham Tomson (1859-1905), a member of the New English Art Club. Her divorce from Armytage was finalized on 9 August 1887, and he took custody of their daughters; Arthur Tomson and Rosamund married on 21 September 1887, a month before their son Graham was born. As 'Graham R. Tomson' she was 'discovered' by Andrew Lang; became friends with William Sharp, Austin Dobson, and Alice Meynell, and entertained other notables such as G. B. Shaw; and quickly rose in prominence as one of the era's finest women poets. In 1892 she was elected president of the 'Literary Ladies', a group formed in 1889 to promote women writers. 
As the 'Scots Observer' contributor and 'patroness' to J. M. Barrie's Allahakbarries (Pennell, 214), Rosamund met Australian-born Henry Brereton (H. B.) Marriott Watson (1863-1921), the atheist son of an Anglican clergyman, co-author with Barrie of 'Richard Savage' (1889), and a handsome member of Henley's 'regatta'. By 1894 they were lovers, leading Tomson to divorce her on 17 February 1896. Although she adopted H. B.'s two surnames, they never married, but expressed devotion to each other and to their son Richard, born in 1895 on his mother's birthday. Rosamund's decision to change her publishing name a third time compromised her visibility as well as reputation, and she gradually lapsed into obscurity despite William Archer's inclusion of her among genuine (if minor) poets in 1902. In 1903 she suffered a nervous breakdown (Marriott Watson to Paine, 31 March 1903) and moved with H. B. and their son to Shere, Surrey; she died of uterine cancer on 29 December 1911 at Vachery, her home in Shere. She was buried on 2 January 1912 in the churchyard of St James's in Shere; the grave marker of Eulalie Armytage Brown-Hovelt, four years old when her mother eloped with Tomson, was later placed upon that of her mother. 


@@@@@


doc= 58581


Slater, Oscar Joseph (1872-1948), victim of miscarriage of justice, was born in Oppeln, Upper Silesia, Germany, on 8 January 1872, the son of Adolph Leschziner (died 1916), a baker, and his wife, Paula Zweig (died 1917). The family, which was Jewish, consisted of at least four (and probably six) children. Oscar Leschziner attended the 'Gymnasium' in Beuthen, the town where his father had his bakery. At fifteen he was apprenticed to Schuttenberg, a timber merchant in Beuthen. He parted from Schuttenberg on good terms and left Beuthen to work in Hamburg. His attraction to gambling and prostitutes, and to the buying and selling of jewellery, may have started in Hamburg. In 1893 or 1894 he travelled to London, to evade military service, and later worked as a bookmaker. Once in England, and later in Scotland, Leschziner used various names, such as George, Anderson, Sando, Schmidt, and Slater; and it was the latter he now used for official purposes. In 1896 he was prosecuted at north London sessions for malicious wounding. He was acquitted. In 1897 he was prosecuted for assault. He was discharged by the magistrate at Clerkenwell police court. 
By 1899 Slater had moved to Edinburgh. He variously claimed to be a gymnastics instructor, a dentist, and (more realistically) a dealer in precious stones. He was known to the Edinburgh police as a notorious gambler and a 'low class foreign bully', although, in fact, he was always dapper in his attire. In November 1899 he was fined by Edinburgh police court for disorderly conduct. By 1901 he was living in Glasgow, but was constantly changing his address. He walked around with a large dog (which he claimed to be a performing circus dog) and he was known to the police as the associate of prostitutes, thieves, burglars, and 'resetters' (the receivers of stolen goods). On 12 July 1901 Slater married in Glasgow Mary Curtis Pryor ('b'. 1878/9) of Norfolk, the daughter of James Pryor, a farmer. After resettling in London and occasionally visiting the USA (where he had an interest in gaming clubs), Slater returned to Glasgow in 1908. 
On 21 December 1908 Marion Gilchrist, a rich but reclusive spinster aged eighty-three, was beaten to death at 15 Queen's Terrace, West Princes Street, Glasgow. Her flat had previously been watched by loiterers, including one man who used the pretext of asking for 'Anderson'. This was the name being used by Slater for the purpose of renting premises (a suspected brothel) near by. The motive for the crime, resembling, as it seemed to do, the murder in Dostoyevsky's 'Crime and Punishment', was assumed to be robbery. Slater was suspected because he had been trying to sell a pawn ticket to a brooch. A brooch was the only item that appeared to have been stolen from the victim's flat. He had also left Liverpool for New York on 26 December 1908. The police subsequently admitted that the pawn ticket had been a false lead. They nevertheless persisted in identifying Slater as the prime suspect, interpreting Slater's journey as a 'flight from justice'. The police travelled to New York to apply for Slater's extradition. Slater's lawyer advised him that this application would probably fail. In the event, Slater decided to return to Scotland voluntarily. 
Slater was tried for murder at the High Court in Edinburgh on 3-6 May 1909. He did not give evidence in his own defence. The prosecution made much of the 'flight from justice'. They also relied on identification evidence, all of it of a fleeting glimpse nature. Much of it was unreliable, prejudiced, tainted, or coached. Slater's identification parade had consisted of placing Slater (a man of obviously foreign appearance) in a line of nine off-duty policemen and two Scottish railway workers. Many criticisms of the trial were subsequently made by William Roughead in his introduction to 'The Trial of Oscar Slater' in the 'Notable British Trials' series (1910): the prison authorities removed these pages from the book before they allowed Slater to borrow it from the prison library. But the transcript alone showed that the trial had transgressed the rule that a defendant should not be brought to a criminal court to answer for his entire past life. The jury's verdict was a majority of nine votes to six (five being in favour of the Scottish verdict of 'not proven' and one in favour of 'not guilty'). 
There was no court of criminal appeal in Scotland in 1909. The secretary for Scotland, Lord Pentland, disregarded the advice of his under-secretary, J. M. Dodds, who advised that the death penalty should be carried out. By means of a conditional pardon Slater's sentence was commuted to one of penal servitude for life. Lord Pentland's recorded reasons included the advice of the trial judge (Lord Guthrie), the prejudice caused by publicity in the press, and the jury's knowledge of Slater's 'very abandoned' character. During his imprisonment Slater was recorded to have committed some sixty offences against prison discipline, including idleness, insolence, and destroying library books. Yet during this time Roughead's book continued to impress all who read it. Among those who agitated for Slater's release were his solicitor (Ewing Speirs), Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, Sir Edward Marshall Hall, James Ramsay MacDonald, and (in 1927) Viscount Buckmaster. 
In 1914 the secretary of state for Scotland, Thomas MacKinnon Wood, encouraged one of the detectives in the case, John Thompson Trench, to transmit information which had allegedly been concealed by the Glasgow police and which implicated one of Miss Gilchrist's relatives as a suspect. Wood then set up an inquiry but failed to protect Trench from the consequences of his actions. He was dismissed from the police and prosecuted on a trumped-up charge, but was acquitted. If Slater's trial exemplified all the criticisms which can be made of the adversarial system, the inquiry which was set up by Wood exemplified all the disadvantages of the inquisitorial system. The inquiry led to the publication of expurgated witness statements in June 1914, but Wood decided that there was no reason to interfere with Slater's sentence. This only inspired Roughead to bring out a second edition of his book (1915), including his criticisms of 'the secret inquiry'. 
In 1927 William Park published his book 'The Truth about Oscar Slater'. This proved decisive. The solicitor-general for Scotland, A. M. MacRobert, reported to the secretary of state for Scotland, Sir John Gilmour, that it was no longer proven that Slater had committed the murder. In November 1927 the government secured the passing of a bill to enable the recently established Scottish court of criminal appeal to hear appeals relating to convictions before the original shut-off date of 1 November 1926. Slater was then released from Peterhead prison, on licence, and into the care of Rabbi E. P. Phillips of Glasgow. In July 1928 the Scottish court of criminal appeal quashed Slater's conviction, on the ground that the trial judge had failed to direct the jury, in sufficiently unambiguous terms, about the irrelevance of Slater's supposed character as a pimp. Slater accepted $6000 compensation from the government in August 1928. He lived the remainder of his life in Scotland quietly and respectably, no longer characterized as a 'low-class foreign bully', but resembling a retired army officer. 
Slater was 5 feet 71/2 inches tall, strongly built, with an apparently distorted nose, memorable to all who saw it. He was briefly interned at the beginning of the Second World War. He had separated from his first wife long before his arrest, and in 1936 he married Lina Wilhelmina Schad ('b'. 'c'.1902), who was also interned as an enemy alien. There were no children of either marriage. Slater died at 25 St Phillan's Avenue, Ayr, on 31 January 1948, after three years' invalidity from phlebitis, and was cremated. On his death certificate he was described as a retired baker. His second wife survived him. 
Slater's wrongful conviction rankled with the Scottish legal system for nearly twenty years and eventually led to a reform of the appellate courts. Slater liked to call himself 'the Scottish Dreyfus'. It is more accurate to evaluate Detective-Lieutenant Trench as the Scottish Colonel Picquart. But Trench, who died in 1919, aged fifty, never lived to see the success of his efforts. 


@@@@@


doc= 58582


Goodden, Frank Widenham (1889-1917), aviator, was born on 3 October 1889 at Green Mead House, Pembroke, the second son of Harry Francis Goodden, a photographer, of Eastbourne, and his wife, Emma Margaret Gould. His first appearance in aviation was as an exhibition balloonist and parachute jumper, and later he was the mechanic on a small airship during a flight from London to Paris. Some time afterwards he arrived as a pupil at the Hendon aerodrome and he later became an instructor at the Caudron School there. He developed into 'a very clever aerial acrobat' at Hendon and took part in the great flying displays staged by Claude Grahame-White ('Aeroplane', 31 Jan 1917, 347). 
During Easter 1914, flying a Caudron biplane, he was one of a number of airmen who performed the crowd-pleasing 'loop the loop' manoeuvre, and on 5 May he signed a six-month contract with Grahame-White Aviation. His payment for exhibition flying was $5 per week, plus prize money. The arrangement was short-lived, though, as on 2 June Goodden left to begin performing on his own account. He later claimed that he walked out on Grahame-White Aviation because the planes he was given to fly were unsafe. At the end of July the company won an interim injunction to prevent Goodden from performing in breach of his contract. 
On the advent of war Goodden joined the royal aircraft factory as a test pilot, where his exceptional flying skills were applied to getting the optimum performance from the factory's output. He was given a commission in the Royal Flying Corps (RFC) special reserve; a short time later he was promoted captain. From August 1914 until his death he made an impressive number of first flights of royal aircraft factory designs. He test-flew the RE-5 in weight-carrying and dropping experiments in October 1914, and on two occasions had to contend with fuselage fires while in flight. He was also employed in testing innovations such as the anti-Zeppelin explosive grapnel, which was designed to be towed across the path of a coming airship. When the winch failed to wind the wire back up during the test flight Goodden was obliged to snag the grapnel on an unhappy farmer's barn. 
On 15 October 1915 Goodden made the first flight in the FE-8 fighter and on 19 December he flew a model to France for evaluation. It was welcomed by pilots of the RFC as a potential counter to the Fokker monoplanes, which had become 'a serious menace on the western front' (Bruce, 432). The early FE-8s, though, had a tendency to spin uncontrollably and at Farnborough on 23 August 1916 Goodden 'performed the remarkable series of tests that established the standard method of spin recovery'. It took 'cold analytical courage' deliberately to spin the plane, but, having once recovered, Goodden had proved his theory, and was ready to teach it. He encapsulated his ideas in a written report (ibid., 435). He was not, however, the only pilot to discover the solution, as at the same time Sopwith's chief test pilot, H. G. Hawker, was coming to the same conclusion. But the impact of the discovery was immediate and before long pilots on the western front were using the manoeuvre as an escape tactic. 
Gooden made the first flight of the FE-4 twin-engined bomber on 12 March 1916 and later flew the plane at Farnborough before George V. On 23 October he took up Brigadier-General W. Sefton Brancker as a passenger: Brancker was then director of air organization and centrally concerned with the aircraft proposed for operational use in the RFC. On 2 November 1916 Goodden became one of the youngest to hold the rank of major in the Royal Flying Corps, even though he had not flown on real active service, nor spent any very long time in France. The promotion enabled him to argue on equal military terms with squadron commanders of considerable operational experience, and he was thus better placed to promote royal aircraft factory planes. He could, though, be critical of these, and in 1916 wrote a lengthy report on the prototype of the RE-8, criticizing many of its design features. That year he also designed a single-seater fighter. His plans were turned over to H. P. Folland, resulting in the production of the SE-5, one of the most successful fighters of the war. 
Goodden test-flew an SE-5 on 22 November 1916 and on 4 December he flew the second prototype. The plane subsequently underwent considerable modification and on 24 December 1916 he flew it to France for evaluation by the RFC. The aircraft returned to Farnborough on 4 January 1917, and presumably underwent further modification, as it did not fly again until late January. On the morning of 28 January 1917 Goodden flew the plane to test its general stability and loss of height in turns. At 1500 feet the port wings suddenly collapsed and the plane fell to the ground on Farnborough Common. Goodden was killed on impact and a verdict of 'death by accident' was later recorded. After an exhaustive investigation, modifications were made to the wing structure. 
C. G. Grey, editor of 'The Aeroplane', who had a strong prejudice against the royal aircraft factory, published a denigratory obituary of Goodden, implying that he owed his advance to his ability to show the factory's output in 'the very best possible' light. He even speculated that Goodden, a 'trick flier', was killed by taking 'needless risks' ('Aeroplane', 31 Jan 1917). The article was in 'such monstrously offensive bad taste', though, that it shocked the aviation world (Bruce, xv). Goodden was an intrepid airman, but he was also an outstanding test pilot, who risked, and ultimately gave, his life so that others would not jeopardize theirs. 


@@@@@


doc= 58583


Dallas, George (1878-1961), trade unionist and politician, was born in Glasgow on 6 August 1878, the son of George Dallas, a shoemaker, and Mary Hay. He grew up in Kilmaurs, Ayrshire, and worked at a coalmine after leaving elementary school before resuming his formal education at the Glasgow and West of Scotland Technical College and, later, at the London School of Economics. His interest in politics began early, and he joined the Socialist League in Glasgow when he was sixteen. He worked briefly in London as a clerk for a coal merchant, and participated in pro-Boer demonstrations. On returning to Glasgow he became involved in the trade union movement, as district secretary for the shop assistants' union. For a time he ran his own men's outfitting shop in Motherwell. He stood as a socialist candidate in the municipal elections of 1907, and was organizing secretary for the Independent Labour Party in Scotland from 1908 to 1912. He was prominent in early attempts to organize factory girls in Scotland, in particular through exposing appalling working conditions in the dyeing industry and through his involvement in the strikes by thread-workers at Neilston in Renfrewshire in 1910. One of the strikers at Neilston, Agnes Brown (1888?-1916), went on to become a trade union official and organizer for the Women's Labour League; she and Dallas were married in 1913. 
Dallas left Scotland in 1912 to become chief organizer for the National Federation of Women Workers in London, but in the following year he went to work for the Workers' Union as organizer in London and the home counties. He assisted in a rapid expansion of membership before and during the First World War, being associated particularly with the union's organization of agricultural workers. He was appointed to the Agricultural Wages Board established under the legislation of 1917 and acted as secretary for the workers' representatives. His first wife died in 1916, and he married her younger sister, Mary (died 1973), in 1920; they had two sons, Kenneth and Roland. Dallas was one of the first residents of Welwyn Garden City, where he moved in 1922, and he became a JP for Hertfordshire. He stood unsuccessfully for parliament as the Labour candidate for Maldon in 1918 and 1922, and for Roxborough and Selkirk in 1923. He was elected as MP for Wellingborough in 1929, but lost the seat in 1931 and never sat in parliament again; he narrowly failed to regain the Wellingborough seat in 1935 and was later selected as Labour's prospective candidate for Belper, but he gave it up before the general election of 1945. 
Dallas had an active role within the Labour Party at a national level, notably in the party's rural campaigning in the 1920s and 1930s, and in developing its agricultural policy. He chaired Labour's advisory committee on agricultural and rural problems, and was one of the party's chief spokesmen on rural issues. He gained wide respect as an expert on the agricultural industry and served on the executive committee of the Agricultural Economics Society (1930-37). He was a member of the 1919 royal commission on agriculture and signatory of the resulting minority report, and sat on the council of agriculture for England, which he chaired in 1933. In 1930 he was one of the major figures involved in non-party demonstrations to publicize the crisis in arable farming. He was a member of the national executive committee of the Labour Party from 1930 to 1944, vice-chairman in 1936-7, and chairman in 1937-9. He sat on the party's international sub-committee from 1931 (as chairman from 1940), and travelled abroad to attend conferences organized by European socialist parties in the 1930s. 
Dallas settled in Northamptonshire in 1929 and was involved in local public life, helping to found the county's rural community council, chairing his local parish council at Great Doddington and sitting as a JP (from 1938). He was chairman of the River Nene catchment board throughout its existence (1930-51), which contemporaries regarded as one of his most important contributions. During the Second World War he chaired the timber control board, overseeing the expansion of domestic timber production. He was appointed CBE in 1946. He was staunchly anti-communist, and in 1956 helped to found the Friends of Free China Association, of which he became president. He spent his last years in Bishop's Stortford, where he died in hospital on 4 January 1961; he was cremated three days later in Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 58584


Cato Street conspirators (act. 1820) plotted the mass assassination of the British cabinet from a loft in Cato Street, Marylebone, London, in 1820. Of the ten tried for high treason, five were transported and five executed. The latter comprised the leader, Arthur Thistlewood, and four impoverished tradesmen: 


@@@@@


doc= 58585


Ganzoni, (Francis) John Childs, first Baron Belstead (1882-1958), politician, was born at The Cottage, Clapham Common, on 19 January 1882, the only son of Julius Charles Ganzoni (died 1949), a colonial broker and later chairman of C. Czarnikow Ltd, and his wife, Mary Frances Childs, daughter of Major James Childs of the 3rd Royal Fusiliers. John Ganzoni, as he was known, had the opportunity to see the world in his youth as his grandfather, who was Swiss but became a naturalized British subject, was in the sugar trade. His travels instilled in him the ambition to bond the dominions and the United Kingdom, and in later life he travelled widely to this end, becoming a fellow of the Royal Geographic Society. These overseas trips interrupted his formal education; he never attended in the spring term when at Tonbridge School, and did so only from his second year at Christ Church, Oxford, where, as an undergraduate from 1900 to 1904, he was more interested in sport than in public speaking. After graduating with a third in modern history in 1904, he was called to the bar (Inner Temple) in 1906, and joined the south-eastern circuit, but came to dislike legal practice. 
In 1911 Ganzoni was adopted as the Unionist parliamentary candidate for Ipswich, which traditionally had been a Liberal seat and with which he had no connection. In May 1914 a by-election was called, following the death of Charles Silvester Horne, one of the sitting Liberal members; C. F. G. Masterman was 'carpet-bagged' into Ipswich by the Liberals, but Ganzoni won, to his own surprise. It was during this campaign that he earned the name Union Jack Ganzoni. He had been in the Commons for only three months when the First World War began, and he was commissioned in the 4th battalion of the Suffolk regiment, serving in France from 1914 to 1916 with the rank of captain, then at the quartermaster-general's services in York in 1917, returning to the British expeditionary force in 1918 as a staff officer. He was gassed twice, but was at home on account of frostbite when many of his relatives died at the Somme. He claimed that the tin helmet that he wore was responsible for his early baldness; a more significant result of his experiences in the trenches was to generate a genuine interest in people, which assisted him in his political career. 
In the general election of 1918 Ganzoni won with almost twice the number of votes as his long-standing opponent from the Labour Party, Robert Frederick Jackson. For the next three contests Ipswich followed the 'Right, left, right' swings of government that knocked out the Liberal Party. He retained the seat in 1922, lost it in the unexpected election of 1923, when protection was rejected in both country districts and the cities, but recovered it in 1924 as a result of one of several Unionist-Liberal pacts in East Anglia. Ganzoni himself spoke out for co-operation between opponents of socialism. From 1924 until 1929 he was unpaid parliamentary private secretary to the postmaster-general. Knighted in 1921, he was created a baronet in March 1929. 
Ganzoni married, on 31 May 1930, Gwendoline (Gwen) Gertrude (1893/4-1962), the elder daughter of Arthur Turner, a partner in an Ipswich leather manufacturing firm. She became president of the Royal Midwives' Society. After their late marriage both devoted much time to their son, John, and daughter, Jill. 
Ganzoni's majority of 12,292 in 1931 was the biggest in Ipswich during the twentieth century. His final victory, with Jackson still the opponent, was in 1935, and he remained an MP until December 1937. He encapsulated the successful Conservative adaptation to a democratic electorate: like Baldwin, he was moderate, charming, and an unpolitical animal, and at ease with MPs of all parties. 
In his late fifties Ganzoni said that he would not fight another election, and accepted a peerage as Baron Belstead of Ipswich in January 1938, forcing MPs to find a new chairman for the kitchen committee of the Commons, a post that he had enjoyed for six years, and for which MPs would remember him. A gourmet who later possessed a large figure, he introduced MPs to exotic dishes, and was proud that they began to drink more empire wine; in 1932, when asked if the Tabasco pepper sauce might be obtained from Yorkshire rather than the United States, Ganzoni replied, amid much laughter, that no more would be purchased after the present supply was exhausted. The dining rooms were often called Chez Ganzoni. 
From 1939 to 1942 Belstead was a local army welfare officer (AWO) in Ipswich, and his organization of activities for army camps meant that his house was full of dartboards; he continued as the county AWO until 1949, with rank of lieutenant-colonel. From 1940 he served as the chairman of the private bills committee in the Lords, having carried out the same duties in the Commons from 1923 until 1937. He also became a magistrate and deputy lieutenant for Suffolk. 
Ultimately Ganzoni's interests were local, and he was active in every branch of Ipswich life. He indulged his main sporting interests as the president of Suffolk County Cricket Club and a founder director of Ipswich Town Football Club. But the sport at which he excelled was tennis, and he was president of the Suffolk Lawn Tennis Association from 1929; he had been a member of the Lawn Tennis Association Council from 1910 until 1923, and a member of the House of Commons team. In his later days, he was frequently an umpire at local tournaments, and his enthusiasm lives on in the many trophies that were donated to clubs and schools in his name. 
Ganzoni was not disappointed that he never held higher office: he lived according to his motto, 'Fidelitas vincit' ('faithfulness conquers') by loyally serving the constituents of Ipswich, where he died at Ipswich Nursing Home, 57 Fonnereau Road, on 15 August 1958. He was succeeded as second Baron Belstead by his son, John Julian Ganzoni ('b'. 1932), who held office in Conservative governments between 1970 and 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 58587


Fitch, Sir Joshua Girling (1824-1903), educationist, was born in Southwark, London, on 13 February 1824, the second son in a family of six sons and two daughters of Thomas Fitch ('b'. 1796), a clerk at Somerset House, and his wife, Sarah Tucker Hodges ('b'. 1794), both from Colchester. After attending a local school in Southwark he learned to teach in the model school of the Borough Road training college, under J. T. Crossley. This was followed by a brief period as master of a school in Kingsland Road, Dalston, before he joined the college staff in 1852. For some years an external student of London University, he graduated BA in classics in 1850 and MA in 1852. His outstanding teaching and administrative ability were recognized by rapid promotion to vice-principal and, in 1856, principal, on the retirement of James Cornwell, with whom he had collaborated on 'The Science of Arithmetic' (1855; new edn, 1878), an innovative textbook. In 1856 Fitch married Emma ['see below'], the daughter of Joseph Barber Wilks, treasurer of the East India Company, and sister of the physician Sir Samuel Wilks. Without a family of their own, they adopted Mary Pickton, a niece of Emma Fitch. 
Fitch rigorously criticized Robert Lowe's revised code of 1861, but in such measured terms that it did not inhibit his appointment as her majesty's inspector in 1863, on Matthew Arnold's recommendation. From 1863 to 1870 his district was the West Riding of Yorkshire and, from 1877, Lambeth. In 1883 he became chief inspector for the eastern division, and from 1885 inspector of women's training colleges until his retirement in 1894, after a rare extension of five years. He was detached from normal duties from 1865 to 1867 and from 1870 to 1877, to act as an assistant commissioner for the schools inquiry commission (the Taunton commission) and the implementation of the subsequent legislation. This chronology gives no insight into Fitch's impact on the evolving education system in England. Michael Sadler judged that he 'rendered, during a time of rapid growth in governmental influence in English education, a service far greater than that accomplished by many men of greater ability, profounder learning and greater insight into the trend of English thought and affairs' (Sadler). 
Fitch possessed an urbane and self-confident personality and the unusual ability to link technical mastery with vision. He was fortunate that his profound interest in teaching coincided with a national interest in pedagogical skills for the first time, and he tirelessly exploited opportunities provided by his office to make contacts with prominent people, publish extensively, and debate the educational issues of the day. His active liberalism, as well as a convivial disposition, led him to join the Savile Club and the Century Club, and in 1888 he was elected to the Athenaeum. As a broad churchman he found the ecumenical Churchmen's Union and the Christian Conference congenial. He had an impressive number of influential friends and acquaintances and as his reputation grew he was called to give evidence to royal commissions on technical and secondary education (1884), the working of the Elementary Education Acts (1888), and London University (1892), and to select committees on the 'Endowed Schools Act' (1886), teacher registration (1892), and secondary education (1895). Attendance at meetings of educational bodies ranged from the Society of Arts to small, local, teachers' self-help associations. He was at various times an examiner for London University, the Indian Civil Service, Girton College, and a number of training colleges, as well as a governor of secondary schools, at that time influential roles. 
Membership of the London Teachers' Association, of which he was president in 1858, attendance at the Social Science Association, articles for many educational and other journals, as well as acting as secretary to the education section of the 1862 International Exhibition, enhanced his reputation. As principal of the distinguished Borough Road College, Fitch influenced the future leaders of the profession and his addresses to students reveal a dimension which he greatly valued: the teacher as a cultured individual with many interests. As an inspector Fitch could affect classroom practice in a very direct way and his reports reveal critiques of classroom competence, which, while rigorous, were analytical and supportive, and treated teachers with a respect unusual in the harsh days of payment by results. This more complex understanding of their work contributed slowly to a new self-respect and professionalism among teachers which was strengthened by Fitch's natural courtesy and hatred of class distinction and pretentiousness in the profession, as is clear from a memorable address to the College of Preceptors in 1882, 'True and false ideals in education'. This approach gained Fitch a fellowship from the Educational Institute of Scotland in 1894, the first English educationist to be honoured. He disliked unionization, however, and distrusted the National Union of Elementary Teachers, preferring the Teachers' Guild, of which he was a founder and president in 1895. 
Fitch's first published work on teaching methods in the 1850s was for Sunday school teachers on matters connected with memory, securing attention, and questioning. In 1877 he taught a pioneering course on school management and method, notable for its range and depth, at the College of Preceptors. During the same period he attended meetings of the Education Society, formed in 1875, which shared his belief that teaching could be studied scientifically and would in due course be shown to rest upon a body of theory. In 1881 'Lectures on Teaching' was published, written with clarity and elegance, and destined to become one of the most significant books on teaching methods produced in the nineteenth century. The book grew out of lectures given to Cambridge University teacher training syndicate and continued in print until 1955. Influential in the United States and other parts of the world, it set the pattern for a new analytical style of pedagogical writing which replaced the earlier prescriptive manuals of method. 
Fitch advocated links between elementary and secondary schools and was unique in his knowledge of both systems. He was also ahead of his time in championing the training of secondary school teachers, signalled by a prophetic article in the 'Contemporary Review' of 1876, 'The universities and the training of teachers'. As an assistant commissioner to reform the endowed grammar schools after the 1869 legislation he played a distinguished part in creating a publicly accountable, academically rigorous, and managerially competent secondary education system. In 1869 'Educational endowments', in 'Fraser's Magazine', set out what the challenge was and 'Secondary education in England -- a retrospect and a prospect', in the 'Educational Times' of 1891, evaluated what had been achieved. 
Fitch's judgement, discretion, and detachment made him increasingly the trusted agent of senior politicians. In 1869 W. E. Forster selected him, with a colleague, to supply data on educational deprivation from four industrial cities, to support his interventionist policy preliminary to the 1870 'Elementary Education Act'. An article in 'Macmillan's Magazine' for 1875, 'An economic experiment in the communal schools of Ghent', on school savings banks, demonstrated his conviction that future security rested on inculcating habits of thrift at a young age. Forster had already met Fitch on the Taunton commission and recognized the outstanding quality of his report on the Yorkshire endowed schools which, more than any other contribution, communicated to the public the decayed state of provision, and the need for decisive government action. While convinced that the transfer of funds from charitable uses to secondary education was beneficial, and sharing the government's collectivist attitude to the public oversight of education, Fitch resisted policies which he regarded as socialist. He only reluctantly came to accept free elementary education. He prepared a 'Memorandum on the Working of the Free School System in America, France and Belgium' for the education department in 1891. Fitch came nearest to participating in policy-making at the highest level -- a rare experience for an inspector -- from 1880 to 1885, when A. J. Mundella was at the education department. Fitch was instrumental in introducing the controversial merit grant, modifying the restrictive curriculum of elementary schools, and gaining some sympathy for Froebelian approaches which were slowly permeating infant education. 
Fitch provides an admirable example of an open-minded and progressive man with strong traditionalist roots seeking to realign himself to a changing society; a pace-setter in some radical initiatives, but reaching the limits of acceptance in others. Growing national interest in the social aspects of elementary education led to controversy with a senior neurologist, leading to an official report, the 'Memorandum on Over-Pressure in Elementary Schools' (1884), in which Fitch revealed the limit of his tolerance for state intervention in education: 'To enforce, in regard to any human duty, a legal obligation, is to weaken in some degree the sense of moral obligation... the responsibility of caring for the food and health of young children belongs properly to the parent.' The role of government in education was reviewed historically in a 'Contemporary Review' article, 'Education and the state', in 1895, and the system as a whole was analysed in a magisterial article, the 'Education' entry in the 10th edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. In two other areas Fitch represented one strand of national response to complex policy decisions, the local government of education and religion in school. He was a convinced exponent of 'ad hoc', directly elected, school boards and in the 'Nineteenth Century' (1901) welcomed their initiative for 'The higher grade board schools'. In his retirement he argued strongly through letters to 'The Times' and elsewhere, against the 1902 'Education Bill', intended to subsume education into general local government. Although a devout Anglican, Fitch was greatly influenced by his early experience with the undenominational British and Foreign School Society Borough Road College, and was a powerful apologist for the conscience clause and non-sectarian religious teaching. In his balanced and sensitive articles on religion at a time of intense sectarian divisions, he strengthened middle-ground opinion. 
In 1903 Emily Davies wrote to 'The Times' to redress the omission from its obituary of Fitch of a sufficient acknowledgement of his importance to the cause of women's education. He had read a paper for Davies at an early Social Science Association conference; he was a founder member of the North of England Council for the Higher Education of Women in 1866; and supported Frances Buss in attempts to get funds from the Charity Commission for girls' secondary education. He was involved in the foundation of the Girls' Public Day School Company in 1874, and was a member of the governing bodies of Girton College, Cambridge, Cheltenham Ladies' College, and St Paul's Girls' School. In 1890, with A. J. Mundella and Anna Swanwick, he was entrusted with the distribution of the Pfeiffer bequest of $60,000 to support women's education. As inspector of women's training colleges he was able to ensure high standards and the introduction of good practice and began to free them from the narrow studies and monastic-like tradition which set them apart from mainstream teacher training. In addition to many professional links with the women's movement, he was part of a web of men and women (for example, the influential sisters Maria Grey and Emily Shirreff) which often arose from personal friendship and social interaction. Sometimes the link was through Emma Fitch's interests, as with the Kensington Society and Octavia Hill's social work, but extending to support for the National Society for Women's Suffrage and the Hospital for Women. Through the involvement of his wife and adopted daughter in the Charity Organization Society, Fitch became an active member on his retirement, finding its work reflected his belief in co-ordinated and efficient, but not state promoted, social welfare. He became the chairman of its council in 1898. 
From early in his career Fitch had been convinced of the desirability of adult education. He lectured to mechanics' institutes, working men's and women's colleges, and, later in the century, to Toynbee Hall. A visit to the United States in 1888 resulted in 'Notes on American Schools and Colleges' (1890), and he returned excited by the educational and social vitality and the strong interest in self-improvement among adults. The Chautauqua summer school and the idea of reading circles greatly attracted him and his article on 'The Chautauqua reading circles' in the 1888 'Nineteenth Century' stimulated J. B. Paton to begin a similar movement. Fitch worked to bring rigour and coherence to the unco-ordinated teaching and organization of university extension classes and, while welcoming provincial colleges of university status, he preferred continued affiliation to London University to independence, fearing a narrowing of access, for example, to part-time students. As a governor of University College and a convocation member of the university senate from 1875, he was involved in the tortuous negotiations to create a teaching university in London. An assiduous attender, he influenced the senate to support proposals for the training of teachers and in 1878 helped to secure the new charter which placed women students on equal terms with men. From early in his career he was in the vanguard of the increasingly accepted view that a liberal education was the indispensable complement to professional training for teachers. 
After his retirement in 1895 Fitch continued to write extensively, including his important 1897 study of 'Thomas and Matthew Arnold' as educators, a collection of papers, 'Educational Aims and Methods' (1900), and a stream of trenchant articles in a period of profound change in educational administration. He spoke at conferences, occasionally undertook work for government, as when he inspected dockyard schools, or acted as a private consultant, surveying technical education for Newcastle upon Tyne in 1897. In 1885 St Andrews University conferred on him the degree of LLD and in 1889 he was made a member of the Legion d'honneur by the French government for support to educational visitors to England. A knighthood in 1896 was a unique honour for an inspector, and reinforces Sadler's assessment that, 'no writings record so accurately as his the normal judgment of cultivated educational reformers in England during the years 1865 to 1895' (Sadler). Fitch died on 14 July 1903 at his home, 13 Leinster Square, Bayswater, London, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on the 18th. He was survived by Emma Fitch, Lady Fitch (1831/2-1909), who played a significant part in the women's movement. Described as taking 'a keen interest in all questions relating to the education and employment of women', she supported the Society for Promoting the Employment of Women, the College for Working Women, and the Charity Organization Society. Joshua Fitch shared a number of these interests and their home was certainly a meeting place for men and women who were part of the feminist network. In 1904 she received a civil-list pension of $100. Emma Fitch died at her home, 54 Abingdon Court, Kensington, London, on 1 April 1909. 


@@@@@


doc= 58590


Fraser, Catherine (1786-1868), penal reformer, was born on 26 June 1786 at the High Street, Wapping, the only surviving child of James Fraser (1749-1825), merchant, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Thatcher. James Fraser had premises in Wapping and later became a biscuit baker. In August 1794 Ann died and James remarried, having another eight children. Not long after moving his family to North Terrace, Camberwell (1823), James Fraser died, on 11 September 1825, leaving trust funds for all his children to finance good education and comfortable lifestyles. Catherine Fraser and her half-sisters, Harriet and Elizabeth, remained spinsters and continued to live in North Terrace. 
On 19 March 1832 Catherine Fraser joined Elizabeth Fry's British Ladies Society for promoting the reformation of female prisoners, although she was not a Quaker, but a member of the Church of England. By September of that year she was an active member; a frequent visitor to Newgate prison, she was appointed with three other women to confer with Robert Fowler on the ignorant and neglected state of female prisoners awaiting trial in Newgate. In 1834 she was appointed, with four others, to visit all the convict ships and to distribute useful articles, including sewing materials and reading matter, to the women prisoners. Later that year she was asked to visit Tothill Fields prison as well as Newgate. From 16 September 1838 until October 1854 she kept a diary of her prison visiting. 
In 1836 a prison inspectors' report argued that the lady visitors were well-meaning but easily exploited and inclined to regard themselves as being in charge of the women's side of Newgate prison. Catherine Fraser was part of the subcommittee called to look at several material points which had been raised. The British Ladies took the report seriously and tried very hard to remedy the situation so they could continue visiting the prison. Newgate was never lost to them, but from then on Elizabeth Fry transferred her attentions to crusades abroad, especially in France. 
After Elizabeth Fry's death in 1845 Catherine Fraser became one of the most prominent members of the British Ladies Society. Her main interest was in the convict ships, which she continued to visit until transportation was abolished in the 1850s. Subsequently she became a member of her local emigration society and was keen to help any of the convicts emigrate after their sentences. She also visited several women who were sentenced to death, the most notorious being Maria Manning, who with her husband, Frederick Manning, was convicted of, and executed for, the murder of Patrick O'Connor in 1849. 
After her diaries end in October 1854 it is known that Catherine Fraser continued her work with the British Ladies, encouraging her half-sister Elizabeth to join the society. By October 1856 one side of Newgate had been closed to female prisoners so Catherine Fraser began to visit Millbank prison. In 1857 she brought up the subject of individual patronage to discharged prisoners, as Sir Joshua Jebb, surveyor-general of convict-prisons, and Lady Jebb had brought it to her attention that not enough was being done to assist women with employment or accommodation on their discharge from prison. In 1859, at the age of seventy-two, Catherine Fraser was still visiting Newgate, and in 1861 she was appointed to visit Horsemonger Lane prison. By December 1867 she had ceased the monthly meetings of the British Ladies, although they were still in contact with her, relying on her expertise. 
Catherine Fraser died at her home, 6 North Terrace, Camberwell, London, on 3 December 1868, following a stroke. She asked for her remains to be placed in the family vault in St Giles, Camberwell. At their meeting on 21 December the British Ladies Society recorded her passing, praising her 'indefatigable labours of love' and 'her ready pen, her clear head, her good judgement and her Christian piety' (British Ladies Society meeting minutes, 21 Dec 1868). 


@@@@@


doc= 58591


Irving, Lydia (1797-1893), philanthropist, was born on 15 May 1797 in Wellbury, Yorkshire, the eldest daughter of Hannah and John Irving; her father was clerk to W. Fry & Co., Tea Dealers and Poultry, London. She was brought up by her grandparents, who were both strict Quakers, until their deaths, when she returned to her parents' home. 
In July 1825 Lydia Irving joined the British Ladies Society for promoting the reformation of female prisoners, which had been founded in 1821 by Elizabeth Fry as an expansion of her Newgate committee. Lydia immediately began to visit White Cross Street prison. From January 1826 she helped audit the society's accounts and in December 1836 she became sub-treasurer of the society. In 1828 she was instrumental in gaining funding from the Navy Board to purchase the gifts given to each woman on board the transport ships, which prior to this had been funded entirely by the British Ladies. Subsequently, she became a member of the convict ship subcommittee, visiting most of the ships to distribute the gifts of useful articles -- which included aprons, a knife and fork, and needlework implements and materials -- before they sailed. 
A Quaker herself, Lydia Irving was regarded by Elizabeth Fry as one of her closest friends and helpers. In 1838 Lydia accompanied Elizabeth and Joseph Fry to France with Josiah Forster and William Allen, in the service of the Friends, although she and Elizabeth Fry also visited women's prisons there. Irving was also an overseer at the Ratcliff and Barking monthly meetings of the Society of Friends and later at Devonshire House. 
After the death of Elizabeth Fry in October 1845 the British Ladies Society carried on with its reform work. In her memory the Elizabeth Fry Refuge was founded, for penitent females of the servant classes. It was run by a subcommittee of the British Ladies Society which Lydia Irving joined on 1 April 1850; by 1852 she was the assistant secretary to the refuge. She resigned from the society in 1877, when the onset of blindness made prison visiting impossible. A member for more than fifty years, she was held in high esteem by other members, who relied on her administrative skills and long experience, and her retirement was marked by the presentation of a 'Bible'. In 1881, by way of appreciation for all her hard work, the British Ladies presented Lydia with $40; a further $20 was promised annually. 
Lydia Irving had lived at 9 Hardwich Place, Commercial Road, London, but towards the end of her life she resided with her niece, Louisa Dodshon, also a member of the British Ladies Society, at 11 Victoria Grove, Stoke Newington, London, maintaining her strict adherence to the principles and dress of the Society of Friends to the end. Two years before her death at Stoke Newington on 22 February 1893, the British Ladies Society amalgamated with the Elizabeth Fry Refuge. 


@@@@@


doc= 58606


Rocker, Rudolf (1873-1958), political activist and author, was born in Mainz, on 25 March 1873, the son of Georg Philip Rocker, a typographer, and his wife, Anna Margarita Naumann. Rhinelanders were at that time opposed to Prussian expansionism and Rocker's father was in the forefront of the struggle against an alien authoritarianism imposed by Berlin. His libertarian activism was not lost on the young Rudolf. 
Orphaned at the age of ten Rudolf Rocker was confined to an orphanage in Mainz, which proved anathema to a sensitive boy who had absorbed the free enquiring spirit of his environment. This had been reinforced by the influence of his radical uncle, Rudolf Naumann, who had also inculcated in him the pursuit of knowledge and intellectual discourse. A harsh discipline imposed by the Catholic fathers in the orphanage led to his frequent absconding which eventually meant a forcible transfer to a reformatory. Here his luck changed. A liberal-minded administrator recognized a more creative potential in this clever young offender, and obtained him his freedom to become a bookbinder's apprentice -- a craft notorious for attracting to its ranks a large group of wandering revolutionaries. In 1890 Rocker joined the Fachverein fur Buchbinder and was inducted into the local German Social Democratic Party (SPD) by his uncle. He soon perceived the party's intolerance of dissent imposed by a rigid bureaucracy and consequently, with the party's restoration to legal status in June 1891, he became a member of the young left-wing oppositionists, the Jungen, and with them, was expelled from the SPD in October 1891. His ideological direction was now set towards a form of libertarian socialism. His creed was finalized at the Brussels Congress of the Second International in August 1891 as a result of the opposition proffered by Domela Nieuwenhuis, pioneer leader of the Dutch socialist movement (who was already veering towards anarchism) against the stolid authoritarianism of Wilhelm Liebnecht, leader of the SPD. Rocker recognized that his own route lay through the former, and, henceforth, he devoted his activities to the underground movement led by the German anarchist Johann Most. 
Rocker's European education was enlarged by his travels as a journeyman across the borders of Germany into Austria, Switzerland, Italy, France, and Spain. Not only did this reinforce his belief that individual freedom, in all its aspects, was the ultimate test of the 'good' society, but it also led to wider ranging interests, especially in the language and culture of other nations: an experience that kept him free from the disease of chauvinism that had already infected many of the older SPD rank and file. It would provide him with an easy entree into, and acceptance by, other ethnic groups, a sound preparation for his future role among the universal 'outcasts' -- the Jews. 
In late 1892 the German police discovered that Rocker had been smuggling illegal propaganda into Germany. He escaped into France and thus began his long exile from the homeland which would last for twenty-five years. It was in Paris, in a rented room on top of a coffee house in the boulevard Barbes, that Rocker was first introduced to a group of Jewish anarchists. In the villages around Mainz he had first come across peasant antisemitism, encouraged by the priests who preached the 'gospel' that the socialists were the servants of Jews, but here he was confronted by a different picture. In a small chamber about fifty to sixty 'comrades' of both sexes were freely involved in lively intellectual discussion. A few were absorbed in reading journals printed in Hebrew, which he later recalled as the Yiddish anarchist papers the 'Arbeter Fraint' ('worker's friend') and 'Freie Arbeter Stimme' ('free worker's voice'). He was struck by the absence of the gentile caricature of the Jew, and all spoke a German-like patois, Yiddish, which Rocker would soon master as his own. What struck him was the active participation of women as equals and accepted as such in accordance with libertarian principles, in all operations within the circle. This, however, he noted with approval, did not detract from their femininity. The Jews' warmth and hospitality, and their high-powered thrust in debate, appealed to Rocker. He returned often and such was their respect for him that he was invited regularly to lecture on kindred themes. The foundation of a mutual regard was laid; a sound preparation for his golden years of leadership among the immigrant Jewish poor of London's East End and beyond. 
Rocker's first visit to London resulted from an invitation by the West End 'Autonomie' libertarian group in 1894, for the purpose of enlisting his aid in smuggling literature over the Belgian border. It came to nothing, and increased anti-anarchist police operations in Paris forced Rocker to return to London on new year's day (1895). An attempted trip to Germany from there also proved abortive when he was ordered by his consulate first to undergo compulsory medical examination. Rocker got the message. Return would mean instant imprisonment. Although reluctant to stay, his election to the post of librarian of the first section of the Communist Workers Educational Union meant a job and a secure base. It was here that he first met the legendary anarchists Louise Michel and Errico Malatesta, who induced him to remain in London. 
Rocker's readings on the East End, especially those of John Henry McKay, attracted him to the locale, universally regarded as a 'city of dreadful night' harbouring the dregs of humanity. With a fellow emigre, Otto Schreiber, he began to explore the insalubrious rookeries and cobbled alleyways that constituted the worst slums in the metropolis. It was a traumatic experience but it revealed to him that 'worse conditions mean better' prospects for revolution was a dangerous illusion. Into these slums swarmed the Jewish exiles, fleeing from tsarist persecution. For Rocker, it was east London's one redeeming feature. Here he rediscovered those kindred spirits he had first encountered in Paris. Rocker's emergence from voluntary partisanship to leadership of these people is a remarkable tale. Before doing so he had to win the confidence of a folk who through bitter experience had reason to shun the gentile. As in Paris, it was not long before he began to command their trust and deep respect. 
Most of the newcomers, men and women, were involved in the cheap tailoring trade, which operated in dozens of small home-based workrooms engaged in sweated labour. It was the leadership of Rocker among his Jewish anarchist field workers that was to register a powerful defeat on the sweatshop 'bosses' in the London clothing trade. He dedicated himself to a threefold task: to organize and improve conditions among the immigrant Jewish workers; to implement more positive social and political relations between English and foreign Jewish labour within the trade union movement; and, finally, to undertake the broader aim of educating all workers in the libertarian socialist creed that would lead them towards the anarchist goal. 
Induction into the East End Jewish group was facilitated through Rocker's friend, Millie Witkop (1877-1955), who became his wife in 1924. He became a welcome guest among the Jewish anarchists who met in the Sugar Loaf public house in Whitechapel's Hanbury Street. He was struck by the contrast between the Parisian Jews and those in the East End. The former were mostly skilled artisans, well fed and clothed, while the latter looked 'sad, worn and half starved', who, none the less, followed with rapt attention the speakers and discussions that opened up to them the vision of the new society. They soon surrendered to this young burly German who exuded warmth and generosity; and were overjoyed when he spoke to them in their own language, Yiddish. He had only recently mastered this, and it led to the extraordinary phenomenon of a gentile being offered the post of editor of the Yiddish political journal, the new 'Arbeter Fraint', in October 1898. The revived publication achieved an international reputation in both libertarian and social-democratic circles. 
The years 1898-1914 were lean ones for the children of the ghetto. The Kishinyov pogrom in 1903 and the 1905 Russian Revolution brought new waves of immigrants and their incumbent problems. They also, not unnaturally, evoked a high peak of social and political agitation. Rocker was resolved on the parallel duties of teaching and organizing his people and saw the need for a permanent educational institution in order to implement this. In Jubilee Street, in the heart of the Jewish quarter, an old Salvation Army depot was taken over and transformed. The project was financed by the accumulated pennies of the slaves of the sweatshops, many of whom contributed most of their weekly pittance. On a Jewish sabbath, 3 February 1906, the anarchist club was opened by the doyen of all anarchists, Prince Peter Kropotkin, who, although seriously ill, felt compelled to give this unique venture his personal blessing. The Jubilee Street Club was a large building containing two halls; one on the ground floor supported a gallery that could hold 800 people; the other on the second floor housed a library and reading-room with classroom accommodation in side chambers. Rocker emerged as one of the pioneers of London adult education. The institute was thrown open to all workers, whatever their creed or gender. Courses included English for the new immigrant, history, sociology, and public speakers' classes, and on Sundays, Rocker conducted groups to the British Museum. Meanwhile a small adjoining building housed the presses of the 'Arbeter Fraint'. It was here that Rocker mobilized his immigrant forces for the assault on the tailoring sweatshops. 
The complications inherent in the domestic-based sweatshops became clear to Rocker. Hundreds of small master tailors were subcontractors for large city firms, and in order to obtain a contract, underbid each other mercilessly. Their workers, consequently, were poorly paid, particularly the new and relatively unskilled immigrants. Before the First World War immigration swelled the numbers seeking employment, ensuring a steady supply of cheap labour for the masters. The more enterprising workers, on learning their craft, aspired to become 'meisters' themselves, and a jungle of cut-throat competition for jobs and outwork perpetuated the system. 
A growing militancy among the tailors culminated in the strike of 1906, with the employers conceding a ten and a half hour working day and the abolition of piece-work to be substituted by a daily wage rate. It proved a false victory for the employees. The use of blackleg labour, easily obtained, and an inadequate strike fund meant a rapid return to pre-strike conditions, but the causes of failure were not lost on Rocker. In May 1912 came his moment of opportunity. The London Society of Tailors was backing a strike of 1500 West End tailors, a highly skilled and internationally reputed labour elite. Rocker knew that the East End workshops would be used to produce the work left idle, and if the strike failed, the East End tailors would, rightfully, stand accused as enemies of trade unionism. Antisemitism lay beneath the surface ready to erupt. Rocker was resolved that it was his moral duty to smash the system there and then, and on 10 May he opened his attack in the 'Arbeter Fraint', explaining the situation to the immigrant tailors, calling on them to back the strikers. His personal plea evoked an immediate response. A meeting held in the old assembly hall in Mile End was packed to overflowing -- over 11,000 workers awaited the word from their leaders. James MacDonald, chairman of the London Trades Council, demanded that it was imperative that they act immediately. It was Rocker, however, speaking in their native Yiddish, who convinced them. The vote was taken in tense silence. The impossible happened. Not one voted against strike action. 
In two days 13,000 workmen quit their workshops. They faced starvation and it was the task of the strike committee to collect funds to sustain them. Rocker was appointed chairman of the finance committee and expended his herculean energy day and night to raise money. The East End rallied to aid the strikers: higher-grade workers refused strike pay and lived on their savings; the Jewish Bakers' Union and the cigarette makers provided free supplies. Strike funds were enhanced by a voluntary levy placed on other Jewish trade unionists. Special performances by the Yiddish theatre and an inflow of contributions from outside sympathizers enabled Rocker to pay the strikers a few shillings each during the first week. The master tailors, assured that there was no permanent strike fund, answered with a three-week lock-out. They were convinced that hunger would quickly bring the workers back on any terms, but under Rocker's leadership they held fast. A parallel struggle helped maintain their morale, as their docker neighbours were involved in the great London dock strike. Suffering made strange bedfellows and Rocker was quick to use the opportunity to bring Jewish and gentile workers together. He addressed joint strike meetings and was the inspiring force in organizing vast joint demonstrations in the Whitechapel Waste and at Tower Hill. Their resources almost gone, their families facing the realities of hunger, the tailors still held out, but only just. In the third week the West End tailors reached a settlement. The employers acquiesced in their main demands: no piece-work, reduced hours of employment limited to union members only. 
This was a psychological blow at the right time for the cause as a whole. The concept of a negotiated settlement was now accepted by both sides in the women's garment industry, since both were getting desperate. The Masters Association was facing the fact that its seasonal trade was almost ruined; the workers had no funds left. The masters agreed to meet their demands on working hours and pay, but refused to consider a unionized closed-shop. To Rocker the last was the point of the conflict. Union recognition was top priority for the workers' security, their strongest weapon in future disputes. A final meeting was called in the Pavilion Theatre, Whitechapel Road, to settle the question. Facing a mass of 'pinched, hungry faces', it was Rocker's powerful plea that decided the issue. There was a burst of applause and from all sides came the cry 'The strike goes on!' 
The next morning the master tailors capitulated. All the workers' terms were agreed to. Rocker and his immigrants had dealt a severe blow to the sweatshop system, which no act of parliament could have rendered. Moreover, he had brought about a more congenial relationship between Jewish and gentile workers. The incidence of the contemporary dock strike by Anglo-Irish dockers, which persisted after the tailors' settlement, helped cement the new relationship. The view associating the immigrants with strike breaking was now invalidated. At their hour of victory they rallied to help the dockers' families. A trade union committee of aid was set up and the 'Arbeter Fraint' enjoined its readers to succour the children. Offers of accommodation and gifts poured in from Jewish people, many of whom could hardly feed themselves. Rocker and his partner Millie personally collected children from the docks, and local retailers subscribed clothing and shoes. Dockers, trade unionists, and social workers spoke of the warmth and hospitality accorded to their unfortunate charges by the East End Jews. Over 300 children were taken into their homes while the strike endured, laying the foundation of enduring friendships. The 'hungry thirties' registered its fulfilment. It was the dockers of Wapping and St George's who were part of the militant vanguard which, on 4 October 1936, forcibly prevented the Mosleyite incursion into east London. 
Perhaps 1914 proved the high-water mark in Rocker's London years. That year registered the climax of anarchist intercession which, thenceforth, rapidly declined. In 1915 the 'Arbeter Fraint' was suppressed and the anarchist club closed by police. Rocker himself was interned as an 'enemy alien' on 2 December 1914. His removal from the scene was a decisive blow to the London movement from which it never recovered. 
In March 1918 Rocker was released under a prisoner exchange agreement and together with his partner, Millie, and son, Fermin, after a short stay in Holland, settled in Berlin. The next fifteen years would see him as activist and writer involved in a marginalized syndicalist group. He was arrested for a short period in January 1920 by orders from Noske, Social Democratic minister of defence, then engaged in incarcerating left-wing revolutionaries and closing their presses. Here his libertarian ideas came to maturity. These encapsulated anti-statism and nationalism; the latter redefined as a state religion which inevitably perpetuated a violent authoritarianism. Rocker himself eschewed violence substituting direct action through a collectivity of workers in trade unions whose ultimate weapon was the general strike. 
During the 1920s he contributed many articles to the 'Syndikalist' and this period was marked by conflict in print and on the streets, first with the communists (Rocker early presaged the totalitarian dangers inherent in the Bolshevik takeover in Russia), and later with the Nazis. At the same time he embarked on writing his great classic 'Nationalism and Culture', in which he analysed the concept of the state and its prime aid, religion ('All politics are, in the last resort, religion'). When, in September 1930, the Nazis had gained over 6 million votes and 107 seats in the Reichstag, Rocker realized that the Nazis would achieve power and informed his comrades that 'We'll all go the way of Landauer and Eisner', both of whom had been assassinated by the Nazis' forebears. His prophecies were soon validated. On 4 March 1933 he and Millie, warned of his imminent arrest by the Gestapo, crossed the Swiss frontier with their son to freedom. After a short stay with the doyenne anarchist Emma Goldman, the Rockers went to London, where Rocker received a rapturous welcome especially by his old Jewish comrades as well as by other trade union and labour organizations. By then he had come to accept the fact that he was at the end of his own physical efforts to combat the Nazi-fascist takeover in Europe. 
On 27 August 1933 the Rockers emigrated to New York. Here Rudolf embarked on a final career both as a writer and coast-to-coast lecturer across the USA and Canada, addressing vast audiences on the dangers of racialism and especially of political authoritarianism be it from the left or right. It was a time to complete his major philosophical tome, 'Nationalism and Culture', first published in 1937 in New York. It was immediately accepted by diverse critics as an original contribution to political philosophy in the context of the first libertarian analysis of the development of nationalism and its relationship to the growth of the western state. As the original translator from the German (Professor Roy E. Chase, Los Angeles, March 1937) noted: 'It is at once a scholarly survey and analysis of human culture and human institutions throughout the range of known history and an eloquent political, often passionate expression of the writer about all of the contents of the realm he surveys.' Bertrand Russell praised it as a masterpiece in the genre, and it was followed in 1938 by his second classic, 'Anarcho-Syndicalism', published in London. The latter was a synthesis of anarchism and syndicalism. A recent biographer of Rocker regards this contribution as providing 'syndicalism with a theoretical foundation which it previously lacked' and, above all, it 'turned syndicalism into a philosophy and way of life' (Graur, 12). 
Rocker's last years found him settled in a colony, set up by old comrades at Lake Mohegan, ensconced in a bungalow bought for him by his main admirers, the Jewish tailoring workers in New York. Rocker continued with his lectures and contributions to various anarchist journals, mainly written in German and Yiddish, to the end. He died on 10 September 1958 at his son's home at 258 Riverside Drive, New York, and his ashes were scattered in the woods behind Lake Mohegan. He was mourned especially by those Jewish immigrants among whom he was already a legend. As Herbert Read suggests, for them his was a case of 'sympathetic identification' and shows 'that where love and humanity prevail divisions of race and creed are of no significance. If only as a demonstration of this great truth, Rocker's books will always live' (Rocker, 'London Years', foreword, 14). 


@@@@@


doc= 58609


Malatesta, Errico (1853-1932), anarchist, was born in Santa Maria Capua Vetere, Caserta province, Italy, on 14 December 1853, the son of Federico Malatesta, a landowner, and his wife, Lazzarina, 'nee' Rostoia. He attended school in Santa Maria and then at the Scolopian college in Naples. Inspired by contemporary republican ideals and the actions of Mazzini and Garibaldi, he displayed revolutionary tendencies from an early age. At fourteen he was arrested for writing an insolent letter to the king, Victor Emmanuel II. His interest in social justice soon led him from republicanism to socialism, and by 1870 he adopted the ideas of the International, which, under the influence of Michael Bakunin, had acquired an anarchist slant. He abandoned his medical studies at Naples University after three years and devoted himself to his work as an agitator and propagandist for libertarian socialism. Arrested in July 1873, he was imprisoned for six months. 
After his release Malatesta, along with fellow radicals Bakunin, Carlo Cafiero, and Andrea Costa, developed a plan for a nationwide revolt. The authorities were forewarned of their rising, in Bologna in August 1874, and acted quickly to suppress the rebels. Acquitted of any wrongdoing, Malatesta travelled in Italy, Spain, and the Ottoman empire. In accordance with his theory of propaganda by deed -- which envisaged acts of insurrection, attacks on institutions, and acts of appropriation -- Malatesta and an armed band of conspirators next set out to foment insurrection in the hills of Benevento province in April 1877. In the village of Letino they proclaimed the social revolution, distributed money and arms, and destroyed government records -- and received a sympathetic response from the villagers. The band was captured by troops, and Malatesta imprisoned for more than a year for his part in the revolt. After the attempted assassination of King Umberto I in November 1878, opponents of the Italian government faced harsh repressive measures and Malatesta escaped to Alexandria before moving to Geneva, where he helped Peter Kropotkin to produce the anarchist communist newspaper 'Le Revolte'. Having renounced his family inheritance, he trained in Paris as a mechanic in order to be able to support himself. Expelled from France, he travelled through various countries, briefly visiting London, and endured spells of imprisonment in Lugano, Paris, and Brussels. 
In March 1881 Malatesta took up residence in London. At first he found it difficult to earn a living, and was obliged to sell pasta and ice-cream until he could establish himself as a mechanic. He quickly made the acquaintance of anarchists and socialists in the city, and attended the Rose Street Club along with Frank Kitz and Kropotkin. He helped to arrange the congress of the International in London in June 1881, where he urged the different revolutionary groups to aim for greater organization and unity. For a time after the congress he worked for a bureau established in London to organize communications between European revolutionary groups. In August 1882 he left England for Egypt to join the revolt of 'Urabi against the European powers. 
In 1883 Malatesta returned clandestinely to Italy with the aim of unifying the diverse groups of libertarian socialists there and halting any drift on their part towards engagement in the parliamentary process. His pamphlet 'Fra contadini' (1884), which took the form of a dialogue in which a young peasant outlines to a sceptical older worker reasons for adopting the anarchist cause, became one of his most popular works. Sentenced in 1884 to three years' imprisonment for belonging to a 'criminal association', he skipped bail and sailed to Argentina. After four years in South America he left Argentina in 1889 for Europe, and after being unmasked by a police spy in Nice, he again sought refuge in Britain. 
For the next seven years Malatesta based himself in London, and made further friends in radical circles, including William Morris and the anarchist writer Max Nettlau. Although he occasionally travelled to the continent to observe or take part in insurrections, he lived for much of this period at 112 High Street, Islington, and rented a workshop where he worked as a mechanic. In his spare hours he produced numbers of 'L'Associazione' with the aim of promoting unity among the disparate libertarian revolutionary groups. In 1891 he published a pamphlet entitled 'L'Anarchia', which provides one of his clearest summaries of his anarchist communist beliefs. From 1894 to 1896, when the severest repression of anarchists on the continent took place, numbers of exiles arrived in London, and Malatesta offered sanctuary to those he could at his lodgings in Islington. At the London congress of the Second International in summer 1896, which Malatesta helped to organize, libertarian socialists came into conflict with the Marxist majority. In spite of Malatesta's efforts to unify the different anti-authoritarian groups, the anarchists were expelled from the organization. 
In 1897 Malatesta returned to Italy, and secretly from his rooms at 24 via Podesta, Ancona, produced the influential anarchist journal 'L'Agitazione'. In his writings he endorsed a move towards syndicalism (which brought him into direct conflict with Kropotkin) and recommended the formation of an organized anarchist 'party'. The police eventually arrested Malatesta, and imprisoned him on the mainland and later on the island of Lampedusa -- from where he escaped by boat, and travelled on to London and then to the United States, where he lived in New Jersey. His life was threatened at an anarchist meeting at West Hoboken in that state when an outraged opponent drew a revolver and shot at him, slightly injuring him. He later toured Cuba and addressed crowds there before returning to London in April 1900. 
Malatesta resided in London for the next thirteen years, and earned his living as a mechanic and an electrician. He also attended anarchist conferences and meetings, and wrote essays for a broad range of British and continental anarchist journals. He reiterated his belief in the importance of revolutionary actions -- defending, for example, the anarchist assassins of King Umberto I and President McKinley, but he also began to express growing disillusionment with syndicalism. He was accused of complicity in the Houndsditch raid of December 1910, which culminated in the Sidney Street siege, after an oxygen cylinder used by the criminal gang was traced back to his workshop in Duncan Terrace, Islington. Malatesta managed to demonstrate that this connection was purely innocent. In May 1912 he again faced gaol. Having accused an Italian called Ennio Belleli of being a police spy, Malatesta was found guilty of defamation, sentenced to three months in prison, and recommended for expulsion as an 'undesirable alien'. His supporters organized a rally in Trafalgar Square, addressed by R. B. Cunninghame Graham, George Lansbury, and Josiah Clement Wedgwood, and published articles in his defence in the 'Manchester Guardian' and 'The Nation'. The Independent Labour Party conference passed a resolution against his expulsion as contrary to the principle of asylum for political refugees, as no crime by him was involved, and Labour MPs raised his case in parliament. In June 1912 the Liberal home secretary, Reginald McKenna, announced his decision not to carry out the deportation. 
Scenting revolutionary possibilities in Italy, Malatesta returned there in 1913 and participated in the insurrections of 'red week' in June 1914, after which a warrant was issued for his arrest. He fled and lived for the duration of the First World War in London. Adopting an anti-militarist position in accordance with anarchist principles, he was highly critical of Kropotkin and other anarchists who supported the allied cause. In 1919 Malatesta returned to Italy, where he edited the anarchist daily newspaper 'Umanita Nova'. Facing strikes and insurrection, the government imprisoned him without charge for nine months from October 1920. When the fascists seized power in 1922, they set about suppressing the independent press, and Malatesta was forced again to earn his living as a mechanic. He spent the last ten years of his life in Rome, with his partner, Elena Melli, and her daughter Gemma. In spite of his age and international renown, the fascist authorities imposed increasing restrictions on his freedom. Latterly a police post was set up in the corridor leading to the doorway of his apartment, at 8 via Andrea Doria, where he died of bronchial pneumonia on 22 July 1932; he was survived by Elena. Under police instruction, Italian newspapers were silent about his death, and only a small group of his family and friends were permitted to attend his burial at the Campo Verano cemetery, Rome, two days later. 
According to the testimony of a police captain, Malatesta was an 'intelligent, combative speaker, who [sought] to persuade with calm, and never with violent, language' (Richards, 215). He drew praise from his associates for his qualities of warmth, sincerity, courage, and resolve, and -- as the outcry over his threatened deportation from Britain illustrated -- won the admiration of many outside revolutionary circles. 


@@@@@


doc= 58610


Witcop, Rose Lillian (1890-1932), anarchist and feminist, was born on 9 April 1890 near Kiev, Ukraine, the youngest daughter of Simon Witcop (Shimon Vitkopski), and his wife, Freda Grill. In 1895 her Jewish family left Russia and settled in England. All the members of the family earned their living in the garment trade in the East End of London, and she worked as a milliner. Witcop and two of her elder sisters soon broke away from the religious and political views of their parents, and became involved in the anarcho-syndicalist movement which flourished among the Jewish workers. Witcop's sister Milly became the companion of the leading figure in the movement, Rudolf Rocker, and she herself became the companion of the young English anarchist Guy Aldred (1886-1963), despite the opposition of both their families. They refused to marry, and set up house together in Shepherd's Bush when she was only seventeen years old. She appropriately went into labour during the May day demonstration of 1909, and their only child, Guy Annesley, was born the next day. 
Witcop began her public career at sixteen, opposing the campaign for women's suffrage for feminist reasons in a letter to the anarcho-syndicalist paper 'Voice of Labour' (2 March 1907). She was assistant editor of Aldred's anarchist papers 'Herald of Revolt' (1910-14) and 'The Spur' (1914-21), and acting editor while he was imprisoned for resisting conscription during the First World War (1916-19). She always opposed the oppression of women, and she also opposed the war effort. After the war she was for a time involved with Aldred in the negotiations to form a united Communist Party of Great Britain, and she travelled to Russia in 1921 in a vain attempt to get support for their small organization. 
However, from 1921 Rose Witcop concentrated her attention on birth control. She was associated with Margaret Sanger, the American birth control leader, from 1914, acting as her host in her visits to Britain, joining her in a trip to Germany in 1920, and publishing several British editions of her books. This led to one of the last attempts by the authorities to suppress the publication of birth control material by legal action. In December 1922 her premises were searched, copies of an illustrated edition of 'Family Limitation' were seized, and a destruction order was made. Witcop and Aldred lost the ensuing trial at the magistrates' court and an appeal to the London sessions in January and February 1923. The resulting publicity was generally unfavourable to the authorities, and Witcop soon published with impunity a new edition without illustrations. At the same time she was involved with birth control propagandists in the Labour Party, and became associated with several leading figures in the labour and feminist movements. 
Witcop had always practised as well as preached the doctrine of free love, taking several lovers while she lived with Guy Aldred. From 1921 they lived apart, and he spent most of his time in Glasgow; but in response to an official threat of deportation as an alien, they were married at the Glasgow register office on 2 February 1926. Witcop had by then put into practice her propaganda for birth control. On 11 May 1925 she opened her own People's Clinic for Birth Control and Social Welfare which she maintained first in Fulham and then in Shepherd's Bush until her death. Witcop died unexpectedly of peritonitis following an operation for appendicitis on 4 July 1932 at St George's Hospital, London. She was cremated at Golders Green on 6 July, and was mourned by a large number of political associates as well as personal acquaintances. 
Rose Witcop made important contributions to three areas of radical activity in her adopted country: as an active anarcho-syndicalist before the First World War, as an active anti-militarist during the First World War, and as an active proponent and practitioner of birth control after the First World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 58612


Galway, Mary (1864/5-1928), trade unionist, was born in Moira, co. Down, the daughter of a linen weaving family. Nothing else is known about her early life, but the family moved to Belfast about the 1870s and Mary Galway worked as a machinist in the city's linen industry for at least eleven years. 
Mary Galway became involved in trade unionism from the 1890s and by the summer of 1897 she was appointed general secretary of the Textile Operatives' Society of Ireland (1893), a position she held until her death. In 1894 the Irish Trade Union Congress (ITUC) was formed in Dublin. Mary Galway first attended the congress in 1898 and was the only woman delegate consistently to attend the congress in its first two decades. From 1907 Galway was elected annually to the parliamentary committee, which was also the congress executive. She became vice-president of the ITUC in 1910, the only vice-president never to become the president the following year. 
Through the Textile Operatives' Union Mary Galway attempted to organize linen workers, the majority of whom were women, often the main breadwinners for their families. This was an extremely difficult task owing to the nature of the relationship between employers and employees in the north. Often employers were paternalistic, providing houses and other services for their workers, expecting absolute loyalty in return. Linen strikes tended to result in a lock-out or the replacement of workers by machinery or by other workers from the area. Mary Galway became the sole organizer for women linen workers in the city of Belfast. It was a demanding role, as only about five per cent of linen workers had joined the union by 1910. Her greatest success was in organizing skilled weavers rather than the unskilled workers in the linen mills. The fact that Galway targeted the more skilled linen weavers led to lack of support for her among the unskilled women workers, who eventually asked James Connolly (1868-1916) to organize them, much to Mary Galway's anger. 
Mary Galway was regarded as a moderate in trade union circles and she strongly opposed the radical trade unionism of James Larkin (1876-1947) and James Connolly. She was a close political ally of the Belfast trade unionist William Walker (1871-1918). Her union was strong in some small Belfast factories and succeeded in improving working conditions. However, in the larger factories, where the union was weak, threatened strike action produced lock-outs. 
When Connolly arrived in Belfast in 1910 as an organizer for Larkin's Transport Union, Mary Galway, along with Walker and a number of other Belfast trade unionists, was suspicious of the political agenda which lay behind the union's activities. Galway and Connolly became embroiled in an inter-union dispute during the linen strike of 1911. Those unskilled workers who did not belong to Galway's union had approached Connolly to organize them. Connolly told the girls to seek Galway's advice but she showed little sympathy for their cause. Connolly therefore began to organize them, which led to the formation of a rival union for women in Belfast. Mary Galway believed this to be detrimental to the workers' cause and, accusing Connolly of poaching, she took her case to the trades council. The debate in council exposed the political differences between the Belfast trade unionists and Connolly. Galway called Connolly 'an adventurer... coming to a city to wreck a trade union that has done incalculable good' (Belfast Trades Council minutes, 2 Nov 1911). The council came to no decision on the dispute. 
Mary Galway was a well-known figure in Belfast and acted as a negotiator during the 1906 linen strike and also in the campaign to improve home workers' pay and conditions in 1910-11. Between 1908 and 1912 she contributed to a number of parliamentary committees investigating the linen trade, most notably the inquiries into truck payments (1908) and conditions in the linen industry (1912) which resulted in the setting up in 1915 of a trade board for outworkers or home workers. She was also instrumental in having the first woman factory inspector appointed to Ireland. 
After 1913 Mary Galway ceased to hold a prominent position in the Irish TUC, although she remained general secretary of the Textile Operatives' Union. She died at 31 Crocus Street, Belfast on 26 September 1928. 


@@@@@


doc= 58613


Duffy, George Gavan (1882-1951), politician and judge, was born at Rose Cottage, Rock Ferry, Cheshire, on 21 October 1882, the eldest of the four children of Sir Charles Gavan Duffy (1816-1903), the Irish nationalist who became prime minister of Victoria, Australia, and his third wife, Louise Hall ('c'.1860-1889). He received his early education at the Petit Seminaire in Nice, and at Stonyhurst College. In 1907 he qualified as a solicitor in London. On 23 December 1908 he married, in Paris, Margaret (1876-1967), the daughter of Alexander Martin Sullivan, journalist and Irish nationalist MP. There were two children of the marriage, Colum and Maire. His papers in the National Library of Ireland show that he was in regular correspondence with leaders of Irish opinion, both Unionist and nationalist, from as early as 1906. He was associated with societies exploring separatist and cultural ideas (his wife was secretary to the Irish Literary Society in London), and his interest and goodwill were actively solicited by a wide spectrum of prominent persons. 
Duffy was forced out of legal practice in London by his partners when he acted as solicitor to Roger Casement in his trial for treason in 1916. He moved to Dublin with his family and was called to the Irish bar in 1917. In December 1918 he was elected Sinn Fein MP for South Dublin, taking his seat in the secessionist Dail Eireann, which opened as a constituent assembly in Dublin on 21 January 1919. He went as Dail representative to Paris, where the peace congress was being held, but was expelled from France. Fluent in Italian, as well as in French and Irish, he continued his propaganda work for Irish independence in Rome. Appointed a member of the five-man delegation to the London peace talks in October 1921, he signed the Anglo-Irish treaty two months later but made no secret of his disappointment that only dominion status had been achieved. He pleaded, without success, that the constitution of the Irish Free State be drafted to minimize the position of the crown in Irish affairs. 
Duffy was foreign minister in the Dail cabinet from January 1922 but six months later, when the government abruptly closed the separatist Dail courts to prevent the hearing of habeas corpus applications, he resigned in protest. An unswerving advocate of human rights and the rule of law, he proposed a series of amendments in Dail Eireann to limit the army's emergency powers, although his efforts aroused the unremitting hostility of his kinsman Kevin O'Higgins, minister for home affairs. 
When he lost his seat in the 1923 election Duffy devoted himself to his law practice, taking silk in 1929. He appeared in several leading cases and was appointed to the High Court in 1936, becoming its president in 1946. He was a dark-haired man with a pointed beard, well-dressed and of a decidedly continental appearance; he spoke in a precise, beautifully modulated voice with an English accent. A Roman Catholic of conviction, he possessed a strong religious sense. He had considerable personal charm but, socially shy, he spent the brief time he spared from work and study with his family. He died of lung cancer at St Vincent's Hospital, 96 Lower Leeson Street, Dublin, on 10 June 1951 and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery two days later. 
Duffy's influence on the development of Irish jurisprudence, particularly in judicial review, is widely acknowledged. He roundly defended the liberty of the individual and the concept of the rule of law against undue interference by government in cases such as 'The State (Burke) v. Lennon' (1940) and 'Buckley & Ors. v. Attorney-General' (1950). The forceful language of these judgments mirrors the conviction of his Dail speeches in 1922-3 opposing the draconian application of emergency powers, and his principled resignation from the cabinet in July 1922. In actions arising from charitable bequests he regularly and insistently expressed the belief, almost to the point of a crusade, that Irish law should evolve with some independence from common law precedent and look instead to pre-Reformation common law in construing testamentary gifts of a religious nature; he felt this particularly to be so in the light of the 1937 constitution. Modern commentators find his trenchant Catholicism -- although explicable by his background and times -- uncomfortable, and are undecided how inherent a part it played in his reasoning. No one, however, doubts the impact he has had on Irish judicial development, his remarkable intellectual energy, and his role as a champion of human rights. Professor Osborough, the legal historian, ranks him as 'the first judge to appreciate the significance of the Constitution for the Irish legal system. Scholarly and with an interest in law reform, Duffy demonstrated an approach to pre-1922 English and Irish case law... that was critical and heterodox' (Osborough, 160). 
Duffy's only sister, Louise Gavan Duffy (1884-1969), was born at Cimiez, Nice, France, on 17 July 1884, and left Nice for Dublin in 1907. After being educated at home she attended University College, Dublin, where she graduated BA in 1911 (MA 1916), and the teachers' training college at Eccles Street, Dublin. She was joint secretary of the nationalist women's organization, Cumann na mBan, and worked in the kitchens of the General Post Office during the Easter rising. In 1917 she founded Scoil Bhride, an Irish-speaking girls' school which enjoyed a considerable cultural and academic reputation. She died at 1 Kenilworth Square, Rathgar, Dublin, on 12 October 1969, and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 58614


Czira, Sidney (1889-1974), journalist and Irish republican activist, was born at 8 Temple Villas, Palmerston Road, Rathmines, Dublin, on 3 August 1889, the youngest daughter and youngest of the twelve children (six boys and six girls) of Frederick Gifford (died 1917), solicitor, and his wife, Isabella Julia Burton (died 1932). The boys were raised as Catholics, the religion of their father, while the girls were raised as protestants, the religion of their mother. Both parents were unionist in their politics. Sidney was educated at Alexandra School and College, Dublin, and took music lessons in the Leinster School of Music. She is incorrectly reputed to have written for Arthur Griffith's newspaper 'Sinn Fein' from the age of sixteen: her first published article did not appear until May 1908. The Gifford sisters were well-known activists in nationalist circles: Grace Gifford, a gifted artist and caricaturist, married the poet Joseph Mary Plunkett, one of the leaders of the 1916 rising, hours before his execution; Muriel Gifford married the poet Thomas MacDonagh, who was also executed for his part in the rising. 
In 1908 Sidney Gifford joined the women's nationalist organization Inghinidhe na hEireann, was active in the suffrage cause through her work in the Irish Women's Franchise League, and was elected to the executive council of Sinn Fein in 1911 and 1912. She published a number of articles in 'Bean na hEireann', the journal of Inghinidhe na hEireann, and in the 'Irish Citizen', the suffrage paper. She was employed as a journalist for 'Irish Freedom' from 1910 to 1914. Gifford travelled to the United States in June 1914 in an attempt to make a career in journalism. She published articles in the 'New York Sun', the 'Irish World', and the 'Irish Press' in Philadelphia. She also became involved in propaganda work and collecting money for the cause of Irish nationalism. She worked with Clan na nGael and the Irish Progressive League, and organized a branch of Cumann na mBan in New York. 
In America Sidney Gifford married a Hungarian emigre, Arpad Czira, in 1916. The couple had a son, Finian, born in 1917, but they separated soon after. She had attempted to go back to Ireland in 1916 but the British authorities prevented her return. She finally arrived in Ireland in 1922 under a false passport. She found it difficult to find work in Ireland in the 1920s, but contributed to a number of newspapers and journals on a freelance basis. Her work was published in the 'Irish Statesman', 'The Kerryman', the 'Dublin Magazine', and particularly in 'An Phoblacht'. She also found work with the new Irish broadcasting station 2RN. In 1927, having published a letter in the 'Irish Times' castigating an Irish senator for commenting on the shooting of Kevin O'Higgins and prejudicing the case of the men accused of the crime, she was told she would be offered no more work with the station. She was not re-employed in broadcasting until 1932. She remained politically active and was involved with the Women's Prisoners Defence League and in the 1930s was prominent in the anti-Blueshirts protests and in the Indian-Irish Independence League, established in 1932. 
After the Second World War Czira engaged in work with German refugee children, 400 of whom she placed in homes around Ireland. She also began, with her son Finian, her own newspaper, 'News and Views', published between 1942 and 1949, essentially a news-sheet which reprinted news items from different countries. She was a successful radio broadcaster from the 1950s, presenting programmes on Irish history and music. She appeared in a number of television programmes in Ireland from 1961. A collection of her articles and reminiscences was published as 'The Years Flew By' (1974). She appears to have been a difficult person to work with, one commentator noting that she could be 'explosively irate' and that her 'displeasure was deadly' (quoted in 'The Years Flew By', 2000, xlv). She died in Dublin on 15 September 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 58616


Lynch, Patricia Nora (c.1894-1972), children's writer and journalist, was born in Cork on 4 June about 1894. (There is some uncertainty as to the year of her birth.) Her mother, Nora, had been reared by a story-teller from Bantry and Patricia grew up in an atmosphere of folklore and story-telling. The family lived in Sunday's Well and the Fair Hill areas of Cork city. Her father died when she was young and her mother moved with Patricia and her brother to London. She was educated in Ireland, England, and Bruges in Belgium. 
Lynch noted in later life that 'I was brought up to think that the best thing I could ever do would be to die for 'the cause'' (cutting from 'Irish Press', 1957, NL Ire., Fox-Lynch MSS) and she remained an Irish nationalist throughout her life. In London she became a friend of Sylvia Pankhurst and was a supporter of the suffrage movement, and it was Pankhurst who sent Lynch to Dublin in the aftermath of the 1916 Easter rising to report on the event for the 'Worker's Dreadnought'. She travelled alone to Dublin and wrote the first eyewitness account of the rising from an Irish viewpoint. Her piece in the 'Worker's Dreadnought' was later reprinted as part of a pamphlet entitled 'Rebel Ireland' published by the Workers' Socialist Federation. 
On the 4 October 1922 Lynch married the journalist and writer Richard Michael Fox (1891-1969). Fox had been born in Leeds and had been a conscientious objector during the First World War, spending three years in prison for his stance. The couple, who had no children, lived for a short time in Tottenham but soon moved to Dublin, where they resided in Glasnevin. In Ireland they became involved in the Irish labour and nationalist movements and were ardent theatregoers. They held regular get-togethers on Wednesdays at their home, attended by literary and other figures, and became friends with such people as Sean O'Casey, Peadar O'Donnell, Liam O'Flaherty and Maud Gonne MacBride. Fox, who became an Irish citizen, worked as a sub-editor for the 'Irish Press' for a number of years and Lynch also worked for the same paper. 
Lynch's first children's book, 'The Cobbler's Apprentice' (1933), won the prestigious Tailteann medal. She was a prolific author and published over fifty books and two hundred stories, many of which were translated into other languages. Her work appeared under her maiden name, and almost all of it was for children, although also appreciated by adults -- one example of her ability to cross audiences in this way can be seen in her account of her early years, 'A Storyteller's Childhood' (1947), which reads very much like a fairy tale. Her stories generally are simple, mingling fact and fantasy, and containing elements of Irish folklore, such as fairies, leprechauns, and talking animals. They were illustrated by artists such as Sean Keating, Jack B. Yeats and George Altendorf. Among the most famous were 'The Turf Cutter's Donkey' (1934), which was chosen as a Junior Book Club Selection, and 'The Grey Goose of Kilnevin' (1939), which was selected by the Cardinal Hayes literature committee in America as one of the best one hundred books published there in 1941. Other honours included the Irish Women Writers' Club award for 'Fiddler's Quest' (1941), and the Eugene Field Society of America certificate of service to literature. In 1967 Lynch was elected to the Irish Academy of Letters, and a number of her books were adapted for Radio Telefis Eireann, the Irish national radio station. 
Lynch and her husband were extremely close, and after his death in 1969, unable to manage alone, she lived with the family of Eugene Lambert, the puppeteer. Lynch died on 1 September 1972 in a nursing home in Monkstown, Dublin, and she was buried with her husband in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 58617


Milligan, Alice Letitia (1866-1953), author and Irish nationalist, was born on 14 September 1866 at Gortmore, Omagh, co. Tyrone, the third of the thirteen children of Seaton Forest Milligan (1836-1916), managing director, and his wife, Charlotte, 'nee' Burns (died 1916). Her parents were both Irish Methodists, and she had distant Scottish connections on her mother's side. 
Alice Milligan's early education at home, followed by secondary instruction at Methodist College, Belfast (1879-86), and a year at the ladies' department of King's College, London, revealed an enquiring mind. Her first published work, 'Glimpses of Erin' (1888) was written in collaboration with her father, who was a fellow of both the Royal Irish Academy and the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland. Part travelogue, part philosophical reflection on Ireland and the Irish, 'Glimpses' was well received, and marked the beginning of her lifelong preoccupation with Irish politics and literature. While in Dublin in 1888 to learn Irish she began to take an active interest in politics and was deeply impressed by Charles Stewart Parnell. Parnell's denunciation by the Catholic church following the O'Shea divorce scandal caused Milligan to champion the right of protestants to participate in the national movement, a concern reflected in her novel 'A Royal Democrat' (1892). 
In 1893 Milligan joined the Irish Literary Society and came into contact with key figures of the Gaelic revival. William Butler Yeats encouraged her to write plays and poetry, although he was more enthusiastic of her efforts as a dramatist than as a poet. The years between 1893 and 1916 were Milligan's most productive, in a political and literary sense. In 1895 she and Anna Johnston (whose pseudonym was Ethna Carbery) became founding editors first of the 'Northern Patriot', and in 1896 of the 'Shan Van Vocht', a seminal newspaper which provided a forum for the varied strands within the Irish nationalist movement. Ostensibly a literary publication, it addressed issues such as the morality of armed resistance, organized socialism, and the use of literature in politics. The final issue appeared in March 1899, when she and Johnston voluntarily halted publication in order to make way for Arthur Griffith's new journal, the 'United Irishman'. Although she was not enthusiastic about the decision, her growing political commitments filled the void. 
From 1895 Milligan had been involved in the establishment of the Henry Joy McCracken Literary Society in Belfast, being elected vice-president in August of that year. She was appointed organizing secretary for the 1798 centenary celebrations, and became a member of the Gaelic League, for whom she travelled the country, lecturing and recruiting. 1898 saw the publication of her 'Life of Theobald Wolfe Tone'. In 1900 her play 'The Last Feast of Fianna' was produced at the Abbey Theatre, although Yeats rated her 'Red Hugh' more highly, citing it as the model for his own 'Cathleen ni Houlihan' in terms of literary propaganda. Her collection of poetry, 'Hero Lays', appeared in 1908, and in the years leading up to the war she continued her work for the Gaelic League, despite increasing family disapproval of her political activities, and the family's pressure on her, as the unmarried daughter, to care for her elderly parents. The year 1916 marked a turning point, bringing the death of both her parents and her elder sister, and the trial and execution of Sir Roger Casement, the friend for whom she wrote the eulogistic poem 'The Ash Tree of Uisneach'. 
Milligan's life after 1916 was one of increasing financial dependence upon her brothers Ernest and William, and she moved between England and Ireland, acting as governess and housekeeper in their homes. In 1932 she returned permanently to Ireland, where she lived in increasing poverty. Despite being awarded an honorary doctorate by the National University of Ireland in 1941, she remained in precarious circumstances. The intervention of friends and family, however, eased the final two years of her life, and she died at Tyrcur, Omagh, co. Tyrone, close to her birthplace, on 13 April 1953. She was buried in Drumragh, Omagh, two days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 58619


Molony, Helena Mary (1883-1967), actress and Irish nationalist, was born at 8 Coles Lane, Dublin, on 15 January 1883, the daughter of Michael Molony, a grocer, and his wife, Catherine McGrath. The family were Catholic, and Helena was educated locally. She first became involved in the Irish nationalist movement at the age of nineteen. After attending a public meeting at the Custom House in Dublin at which Maud Gonne spoke, she joined Inghinidhe na hEireann (daughters of Ireland), founded by Gonne and others in 1900 to mobilize women nationalists who were barred from membership of men's political organizations. In 1908 Molony co-founded and assumed the editorship of 'Bean na hEireann' ('Women of Ireland'), a radical journal which advocated militancy, separatism, and feminism. She wrote much of the journal herself, although it attracted support from established writers such as Katherine Tynan and James Stephens, and public figures including Roger Casement, Arthur Griffith, and Constance Markievicz. 'Bean' also became a vehicle for Molony's socialist beliefs, and she wrote the labour notes for the journal under the pseudonym A Worker. Molony's support for the labour cause, and her belief in the right of workers to organize, had a significant influence upon the political development of Constance Markievicz, and the two were to work together on a range of political movements. 
From 1909 Molony trained under Dudley Digges as an actress in the Abbey Theatre, and she played there regularly until 1913. Her political development continued apace, and in 1911 she was arrested as a result of her protest at the visit of George V to Dublin, in the course of which she had broken a window containing images of the royal party. After her release she was again imprisoned for a seditious speech, but was bailed out by Anna Parnell, sister of Charles Stewart, who wished her to edit her (Parnell's) scathing account of the Land League years. 
Between 1909 and 1916 Molony worked closely with James Connolly, the trades union organizer. Molony believed that nationalism and democracy were inextricably linked, a position to which Connolly was eventually to move. In 1913 she was active in the support of those workers taking part in the Dublin lock-out for the right to join trade unions, and she was subsequently asked by Connolly to assist in the organization of women workers, becoming the secretary of the Irish Women Workers' Union (IWWU) in 1915. Her journalistic experience made her an obvious choice as co-worker on Connolly's 'Worker's Republic', although Connolly's request that she be registered as the proprietor made her personally responsible, under the 'Defence of the Realm Act', for anything published in it. She was one of the founder members of the Irish Citizen Army, the militant workers' group in which women enjoyed equal membership, and fought with them in the 1916 Easter rising. After the surrender of the City Hall garrison, of which she was a part, she was deported to England, one of only six women to be interned. She returned to Dublin in December 1916, and immediately resumed her political work. She joined Cumann na mBan (Society of Women), despite some reservations about its commitment to radical labour and feminist politics, and played a key role in the organization's opposition to the treaty settlement of 1921. 
After the civil war of 1922-3 Molony devoted herself full time to the labour cause, having become honorary president of the IWWU in 1917, while still retaining an active role in nationalist politics. In the 1920s and 1930s she opposed attempts to restrict women workers' rights. She fought against the 'Conditions of Employment Bill' of 1935, which sought to limit female industrial workers, as well as the 1937 constitution which implied, through articles 41 and 45, that women should have a restricted public role. 
Although Molony continued to actively pursue workers' rights in the inter-war years, serving as president of the Congress of Trade Unions until 1945, she suffered from increasing ill health, and was forced to limit her activities after 1946. She never married, and faced increasing financial hardship in her later years, receiving a pension from the IWWU only after a long struggle. She died at Lungamore, Strand Road, Sutton, Dublin, on 29 January 1967. She was buried in the republican plot, Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin, on 31 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 58623


Woodlock, Ellen (1811-1884), philanthropist, was born on 27 January 1811 in Cork, the daughter of a wealthy woollen merchant, Martin Mahony, and his wife, Mary Reynolds. The family were strong financial supporters of the newly emerging Roman Catholic religious communities of women during the early nineteenth century. It seems likely that Ellen was educated in France, as was her brother Francis Mahony (1804-1866), who later became famous as a writer under the pseudonym Father Prout. Little is known of her early life or of her marriage in 1830 to Thomas Woodlock, which ended when she was widowed about 1834. The couple had one son, Timothy, born shortly after the death of Thomas. 
It appears that Ellen Woodlock spent the years following her husband's death in France and played some role in establishing the congregation of Les Dames de Saint Louis in 1842. By 1843 she was herself living as a sister in its convent at Juilly, her name in religion being Soeur Helene; her son was educated by the sisters in a school nearby. She returned to Cork on three occasions to recruit members for the newly formed congregation. By 1851, however, she had been dispensed from her vows: it appears that she was considered 'eccentric' by members of the community. She herself was no longer attracted to the teaching mission of the St Louis congregation and wished to engage in a more active form of philanthropy; her interest was primarily in the care of children. 
On returning to Cork, Woodlock established an industrial school in the city in 1851. She became an important figure in the Irish industrial and reformatory school movement. In 1852 she moved to Dublin, where she became a close friend of the writer and philanthropist Sarah Atkinson (1823-1893), and organized St Joseph's Industrial Institute in 1856. Here she took girls from the workhouse and attempted to provide them with skills to earn an independent living. She was a close friend of John Lentaigne, then director of government prisons in Ireland, and was strongly supported by him in her attempts to encourage the spread of industrial and reformatory schools. In 1858 she was instrumental in bringing members of the St Louis congregation to Monaghan to open a reformatory school, and in 1861 she gave evidence before a House of Commons select committee on poor relief in Ireland, where she spoke of the need to have children removed from the contaminating influences of the workhouse. She also took part in the Social Science Congress meeting held in Dublin in 1861, and with Sarah Atkinson spoke on the condition of children in the workhouses. 
Together with other Catholic philanthropists Woodlock formed a children's hospital in Dublin in 1873; it was handed over to the Sisters of Charity in 1876 and was later known as Temple Street Children's Hospital. Woodlock was part of a small group of lay Catholic philanthropists who supported the work of convents through raising funds and initiating enterprises which were later given to the care of nuns. Her friendship with Charles Bianconi (1786-1875), the successful promoter of the Irish car system, for example, encouraged him to give $12,000 to the St Louis sisters in Monaghan to purchase buildings for their reformatory. Woodlock was also among the first group of lay Catholics to engage in workhouse visiting in the 1860s. She died after a short illness at the home of her son, 8 Sydney Place, Cork, on 13 July 1884, and was buried in St Joseph's cemetery in the city. 


@@@@@


doc= 58624


MacManus, Anna Isabel (1866-1902), poet and journalist, was born in Ballymena, co. Antrim, on 3 December 1866, the elder daughter of the two daughters and one son of Robert Johnston (1836-1937), a wealthy timber merchant and prominent member of the Irish Republican Brotherhood. The family later lived in Donegall Park, Belfast. Anna Johnston had begun to publish poetry under her own name by 1886, contributing to nationalist journals and newspapers including the 'Irish Monthly' and 'United Ireland'. She also established contacts with literary and nationalist circles in Dublin, in particular the circle around Katharine Tynan. In October 1895 she co-founded a radical journal, the 'Northern Patriot', with her friend the poet and nationalist Alice Milligan (1866-1953); however they lost editorial control in December 1895 after a disagreement with the Belfast Workingmen's Club, the journal's sponsor. The friends then founded a rival journal, the republican 'Shan Van Vocht', which ran from January 1896 to April 1899. The editors supplied much as Iris Olkyrn and Ethna Carbery (Anna Johnston contributed over forty signed poems and stories) and they were also responsible for production and distribution. The 'Shan Van Vocht' provided a digest of Irish radical and cultural nationalist activities in the period; it published early writings by James Connolly. The literary content was also impressive, including poetry by Lionel Johnson, Douglas Hyde, and Nora Hopper. 
Anna Johnston was a sincere nationalist, but, unlike Alice Milligan, was opposed to amnesty for dynamitards. She had links with the Irish National Alliance, a revolutionary movement, and was a member of the Ulster '98 Centenary Committee: in 1899 Dublin Castle linked her to anti-recruiting groups in Ireland. Anna Johnston's most conspicuous contribution to Irish cultural nationalism was in 1899, when she played Princess Eithne in the first Irish-language play performed in Ireland. At the time of her death she was vice-president of Inghinidhe n hEireann, the Irish women's organization. 
An early and regular contributor to the 'Shan Van Vocht' was Seamus MacManus (1869-1960), a Donegal schoolmaster from a farming background, who, as Mac of Glen Ainey, had begun to publish verse and folk sketches in the 'Donegal Vindicator'. MacManus rapidly became a friend of both women and his aggressive nationalism gave him easy entry to Anna Johnston's home. In early September 1899 she went on a political-cultural propaganda tour of Donegal with Alice Milligan and other nationalists, including MacManus, with whom she had fallen in love. She was profoundly shocked to discover that he was about to emigrate to the United States. MacManus left Ireland in late September 1898, and subsequently claimed that he had been financed by the French government to raise Irish-American support for a war against Great Britain. MacManus made good use of his time in the United States, placing his folk tales and Donegal anecdotes in magazines and securing book contracts. He returned to Ireland in spring 1899 and by then was probably aware of Anna Johnston's feelings, already expressed in 'Paistin Fionn', published by 'E. D. M.' in the 'Shan Van Vocht' on 7 November 1898. They married in spring 1901 and lived at Mount Revelinn House, Revlin, co. Donegal, where Anna MacManus died of gastritis on 2 April 1902; she was buried two days later in the Catholic churchyard at Frosses, co. Donegal. Her death was deemed to be 'almost a national calamity' (Ryan, 181) and nationalist papers printed lengthy eulogies of Ethna Carbery. 
Anna MacManus's writing focused on the Irish past, on folklore and mythology, although she also published political verse, such as 'The Suppliant', an attack on Queen Victoria's visit to Ireland, published in the 'United Irishman' in April 1900. Her verse is most successful when she works within a folk tradition; her love poems addressed to Seamus MacManus, such as 'Mo Bhuachaill Cael-Dubh' and 'Paistin Fionn' follow folk-song models, but infuse them with fresh emotion. Her mythological-historical poems influenced by Sir Samuel Ferguson, such as 'Niall Glondubh to Gormlai', and her historical-patriotic poems influenced by Thomas Davis, such as 'The Erin's Hope', are less compelling. Seamus Macmanus collected her poems as 'The Four Winds of Eirinn' in 1902. The volume was remarkably successful, going through ten editions in 1902 and fifteen editions by 1905 -- Anna MacManus's melancholy looks and her early death enhanced her stature. MacManus skilfully managed her reputation, enlarging the volume, adding a highly charged memoir to the 1918 edition and family photographs to the 1934 edition. MacManus collected his wife's historical and legendary fictions as 'In the Celtic Past' (1904) and her love stories, influenced by 'Fiona MacLeod', as 'The Passionate Hearts' (1903). 
MacManus's assertion that 'Ethna Carbery' was ''the' Irish poet of... the Revival period... she reached the Irish heart as it has not been reached by any Irish poet in a century' ('Four Winds', 158-9) is not just a widower's piety. Mary Colum summed up Anna MacManus's popularity: 'Every one of the numerous mothers who had a son or daughter in America was pierced to the heart by her ['Paistin Fionn']... she was probably the most widely read poet in Ireland, and I should not be surprised if her death was not more mourned throughout the country than the death of Yeats. (Colum, 115-16)' 



@@@@@


doc= 58627


Day, Susanne Rouviere (1875/6-1964), suffragist and writer, was born in Cork city into a family of prosperous merchants; little is known of her early life. She described herself as being 'five-foot seven', and of 'ample proportions... a wild Irishwoman with all the native and national love of a row boiling in my veins' (Day, 'Round about Bar-le-Duc', 205, 218). She was a formative force in organizing a branch of the suffrage organization, the Irish Women's Franchise League (IWFL), in Cork city in 1910. Susanne Day herself did not approve of militant activity and believed originally that the IWFL could remain non-militant. She eventually left the IWFL and formed the Munster Women's Franchise League in 1911, which declared itself to be non-militant. She organized and spoke at meetings on suffrage throughout Munster. Day acknowledged that her suffrage work had raised her awareness of social problems. She stood for election as a poor-law guardian in 1911 and topped the poll in the north-east ward of Cork city. She later wrote a novel based on her experiences as a poor-law guardian, 'The Amazing Philanthropists' (1916), a satire on the workhouse system. She described the workhouse as a 'colossal business run by amateurs' (Day, 'Amazing Philanthropists', 89). She believed that the workhouse system 'breeds and perpetuates the very evil it was designed to kill' (ibid., 93). Considered an excellent public speaker, Susanne Day was encouraged by her work as a poor-law guardian to stand as a candidate for the Cork municipal elections in January 1914, but she failed to be elected by six votes. 
Susanne Day became involved in relief work during the First World War. She spent fifteen months in northern France with a Society of Friends relief scheme providing aid to refugees in the months surrounding the battle of Verdun. Her experiences are recounted in 'Round about Bar-le-Duc' (1918). She also wrote a number of articles on topics such as white slavery, and women and war for the 'Irish Citizen', a suffrage newspaper. Her literary work included co-writing two plays, 'Broken Faith', and 'Fox and Geese' with Geraldine Cummins, which were produced in the Abbey Theatre, Dublin, in 1914 and 1917. Her last book, 'Where the Mistral Blows', a travel book about Provence, France, appeared in 1933. Little is known of her life after 1918. She did not marry and is reputed to have worked for the London fire service during the Second World War. A resident of Kensington, London, Susanne Day died on 26 May 1964 in the Cromer and District Hospital, Norfolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 58628


Parker, Dame Dehra (1882-1963), politician, was born on 13 August 1882 in the military hospital at Dehra Dun, north of Delhi, India, the only child of James Kerr-Fisher (1827-1891) of Kilrea, co. Londonderry, and Annie Kerr-Forsythe. Educated in the United States, where her father had extensive property holdings, and Germany, she was twice married: first, on 11 December 1901, to Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Peel Dawson Spencer Chichester, a Unionist MP, who died in 1921, with whom she had a son and daughter. On 4 June 1928 she married Henry Wise Parker (1875-1940). Before entering parliament her first husband, a native of co. Londonderry, served with the Central African Rifles 1897-9 and in South Africa in 1899 and 1900. He commanded the 6th battalion (the duke of Cambridge's own) Middlesex regiment from 1904 to 1913, in which capacity he commanded combined escorts to the Anglo-German boundary commission, Nyasa, and Tanganyika in 1908. Latterly, he commanded the 14th service battalion, Royal Irish Rifles, and served as a captain in the Irish Guards. Her second husband, Parker (CB 1916, CMG 1924), spent his career in the Royal Navy, becoming an admiral in 1933. In 1916 he commanded HMS 'Benbow' at the battle of Jutland Bank. Shortly after their marriage he was rear-admiral commanding 1st cruiser squadron, Mediterranean Fleet (1928-30). He retired the list in 1934. 
Throughout her life Dehra Parker was a staunch and unapologetic unionist. This stance was signalled early in her political career by her involvement in the formation of the Ulster Women's Unionist Council in 1911, and in 1912 when she acted as an organizer of the nursing units for the Ulster Volunteer Force created by Sir Edward Carson to resist the introduction of home rule. During the First World War she worked under the aegis of the Soldiers' and Sailors' Families Association, for which services she was to become an OBE in 1918. In 1949 she was created DBE and in 1957 GBE. 
Chichester was one of only two women to be elected to the first Northern Ireland parliament in 1921, and in 1924 moved the loyal address to the king's speech, the first woman to do so in the empire. She remained in parliament as the Ulster Unionist member for Londonderry until 1929, when she resigned her seat shortly after her second marriage. In 1933 she returned to the Northern Ireland parliament as Ulster Unionist member for South Londonderry, a seat she held continuously until her retirement in 1960, when she was succeeded by her grandson, Major James Chichester-Clark (Lord Moyola), who was to serve as Northern Ireland's penultimate prime minister between 1969 and 1971. Her loyalty to Ulster and to successive administrations in Northern Ireland was unflinching. Never to vote against any Unionist government throughout her parliamentary career, she found some reward when in 1937 she was appointed to the junior ministerial post of parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Education. In 1944 she resigned from the post for 'personal reasons' (Northern Ireland parliament, 'Official Report and Debates', vol. 27, col. 321, 29 Feb 1944), although her relationship with the minister for education, Professor William Corkey -- who was himself sacked for neglecting his duties -- had been acrimonious, a fact widely acknowledged in parliamentary circles. Passed over as Corkey's successor, she returned to the back benches until 1949, when she was appointed minister for health and local government by the Northern Ireland prime minister, Sir Basil Brooke. Her appointment represented a triple achievement: not only was she one of the first women elected to the Northern Ireland parliament, but she was the first to hold a junior ministerial post in the province, and she was also the only woman appointed to the Northern Ireland cabinet and thus its sole female privy councillor. 
During her tenure as minister Parker oversaw the implementation of the National Health Service in Northern Ireland and piloted a number of housing bills through parliament, including one that decontrolled rents in the private rented sector and as such was at variance with housing legislation in Great Britain. The bill, which she described in characteristically egotistical terms as 'a monument to me' (Paisley, 80), aroused enormous controversy, occasioning the resignation of the attorney-general, Edmund Warnock, who considered it 'unjust' (Northern Ireland parliament, 'Official Report and Debates', vol. 35, col. 733, 18 April 1956). Parker was forced to concede a number of critical amendments and, following a stroke, stood down as minister in 1957 and returned to the back benches until her retirement from parliament in 1960. 
In parliament Parker was a controversial figure, seldom missing an opportunity to chide Irish nationalists and her particular 'betes noires', independent unionists, for 'disloyalty' to Ulster, and fundamentalist protestants, for whom she had a withering disregard. As a minister she was described by one of her senior officials as 'capricious, an adroit politician and a most formidable operator' (Oliver, 224) and acquired a reputation as a 'kingmaker' in Unionist political circles (Paisley). Beyond parliament Parker was a long-serving local councillor on Magherafelt rural district council, president of both the Northern Ireland Physical Training Association and the Girls' Training Corps, chairman of the ancient monuments advisory committee, and chairman and later president of the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts in the province. She died at her home, Shanemullagh House, Castledawson, co. Londonderry, on 28 November 1963 and was buried two days later in the grounds of Christ Church, Castledawson. 


@@@@@


doc= 58629


McMordie, Julia (1860-1942), politician and philanthropist, was born on 30 March 1860 at Cliff Terrace, Hartlepool, co. Durham, the fifth daughter of Sir William Gray (1823-1898), shipbuilder and shipowner, and his wife, Dorothy (died 1906), daughter of Captain John Hall RN. A Presbyterian, she was educated at Chislehurst, Kent, but moved to Belfast following her marriage to Robert James McMordie (1849-1914) on 21 May 1886. He was a solicitor in Belfast and also served as Unionist MP for East Belfast and as lord mayor of Belfast from 1910 until his death in 1914. On 23 January 1914, two months before his death, the McMordies were awarded the freedom of the city of Belfast in recognition of their public service. Their children, John Andrew and Elsie Gray, were born on 8 July 1887 and 30 November 1888 respectively. 
After her husband's death McMordie's interest in philanthropy and politics continued. She was involved with an array of local organizations in Belfast, including the Samaritan Hospital, the Ulster Hospital for Women and Children, the Girls' Help Society, the Presbyterian Women's and Girls' Union, the Young Women's Christian Association, and the Cripples' Institute. During the First World War she was president of the St John's Women's Voluntary Aid Detachment for Belfast. She was also an active member of the Ulster Women's Unionist Council, serving as an executive committee member and a vice-chairman from 1911 to 1919 and as vice-president from 1919 to 1942. 
On 2 September 1918 McMordie became the first female councillor on Belfast corporation, and she served as an alderman from 1920 to 1930. She summed up her interest in municipal affairs in her 1926 electoral manifesto: 'I have tried to do all I could for the best interests of the Ratepayers... I am very much interested in the Health and well being of the Citizens, more especially of the children,... I love the work' (PRONI, D.1327/16/1/5). 
In 1921 McMordie was one of two women elected to the first parliament of Northern Ireland, standing as a Unionist candidate in South Belfast. Although McMordie had not supported the suffrage movement, much of her parliamentary debate focused on issues relating to women and children. In her maiden speech of 5 April 1922, for instance, she called for an increase in the number of women police officers. She was also anxious to improve educational provisions in Northern Ireland -- stressing the importance of employing specially trained teachers for disabled children and of having female school inspectors. Although a staunch unionist and a capable orator, she did not stand for re-election in 1925. 
In 1935 McMordie left Belfast, taking up residence in East Cliff, Budleigh Salterton, Devon, in order to be near her family. Various accolades were bestowed on McMordie throughout her life. In 1919 she was appointed CBE and in 1928 she was appointed high sheriff of Belfast, the first woman in Ireland to hold this position. She was a lady of grace of the order of St John of Jerusalem, and was one of the first three women in Ireland to be appointed to the magistracy. In 1936 she was given the honorary degree of LLD from the Queen's University of Belfast. 
McMordie died at her daughter's home in King's Cliffe, Oundle, Northamptonshire, on 12 April 1942. She was described as possessing 'gentle dignity, strong courage, and an ever ready will to help' ('Belfast Telegraph', 12 May 1921). Perhaps a fitting maxim for her career, which had been dedicated to alleviating 'suffering, and to better the conditions of her fellow beings, the poor, the sick and the children' ('Belfast Telegraph', 23 Jan 1928), was one which she used when describing her life: 'I think I can say I have not spared myself' ('Belfast News-Letter', 30 April 1930). 


@@@@@


doc= 58631


Smithson, Annie Mary Patricia (1873-1948), author and nurse, was born on 26 September 1873 at 22 Claremont Road, Sandymount, Dublin, the only child of Samuel Raynor Smithson, barrister, and his wife, Margaret Louisa Carpenter (died 1917). Baptized Margaret Anne Jane, on her conversion to Catholicism in 1907 Smithson took instead the names Anne Mary Patricia. Her mother and father were first cousins and her father died when she was young. About 1881 her mother married her second husband, Peter Longshaw, who owned a chemical factory in Warrington in Lancashire. Smithson disliked her stepfather and referred to him always as Mr Longshaw. There were five children of the second marriage. 
Smithson spent the first few years of her life living with her mother and her grandparents in Sandymount, Dublin. On her mother's remarriage the family moved first of all to Warrington, and when her stepfather's business failed they returned to live in Dublin. At this time the family were poor and rented flats at various locations around the city. They also rented a house in Bray in co. Wicklow. After her stepfather's death the family moved to Dalkey, co. Dublin. Smithson believed herself to be poorly educated. She had sporadically attended various day schools in Dublin, Warrington, and Bray, and for a brief period was also a boarder at a girls' boarding-school in West Derby. She was removed from school in Bray at the age of fifteen to take care of the children in the family. 
Smithson had wanted to become a journalist. Her maternal aunt Susan Carpenter (died 1929) had been one of the few women journalists working on London newspapers in the first decades of the twentieth century. However, Smithson instead trained as a nurse. She spent fifteen months in the Chelsea Hospital for Women in London and went to Edinburgh in October 1898 to train as a Queen Victoria jubilee nurse. She spent two years at the Royal Infirmary in Edinburgh and returned to Dublin in December 1900 for six months' training as a district nurse. Her first appointment was in Portadown but she moved to the village of Millton in co. Down in September 1901 to take up duty there. Here she worked with Dr James Manton in the local dispensary. She fell in love with Manton, a married man. Deciding they had no future together, she left Millton in January 1906. Smithson remained deeply attached to Manton but, while he continued to write to her, they did not meet again. On her conversion to Catholicism Smithson burnt all of Manton's letters. 
Smithson returned to the Royal Infirmary in Edinburgh to continue her training and also worked as a night nurse in a women's hospital in Glasgow. It was while Smithson was in Glasgow that she began to attend Catholic church services. Although brought up in the Church of Ireland, she had attended services of the Plymouth Brethren in Dublin in the late 1880s. On her return to Dublin in January 1907 she continued to receive instruction in the Catholic faith from a Sister of Charity, and in March of that year she was received into the church. While Smithson gives no reason for her conversion, she appears to have been quite unhappy for a time -- particularly after the ending of her relationship with Manton. 
Smithson's work as a district nurse took her to many different parts of Ireland. For a brief spell in 1913 she suffered from tuberculosis and spent some time in Peamount Hospital. She was sympathetic to the cause of Irish nationalism: she canvassed for Sinn Fein in the 1918 general election and became a member of Cumann na mBan, the women's auxiliary to the Irish Volunteers, to which group she gave lectures on first aid. She supported the republican side during the civil war and acted as a nurse to the republicans in the besieged Moran's Hotel in Dublin at the outbreak of the civil war. She was arrested and imprisoned in Mullingar for about a week while travelling to the west of Ireland to help the republicans there. Her republican sympathies led to a request that she resign from the queen's nurses committee, which she did, and she took up private nursing as a consequence. Smithson's stepsister and her family moved to Dublin in 1932 and she shared a house with them in Rathmines in Dublin until her death. 
Smithson was elected a member of the General Nursing Council in 1924. In July 1929 she became the secretary of the Irish Nurses' Union (later the Irish Nurses' Organization). Smithson became a member of the Central Midwives' Board in 1934, and was also active on the National Council of Trained Nurses. She wrote regularly for the 'Irish Nurses' Magazine' and edited the 'Irish Nurses Union Gazette'. In circumstances that remain mysterious, Smithson was forced to resign from her post as secretary of the Irish Nurses' Union in 1942. 
It is as a novelist that Smithson is best remembered. Her first book, 'Her Irish Heritage', was published in Dublin in 1917 and dedicated 'To the memory of the men who died, Easter 1916'. In all Smithson was to publish twenty novels and two collections of short stories. Most of her novels, which are strongly nationalist, were best-sellers. Contrasts are made between Irish and English characters, with the English usually coming out worse. There are often conflicts between Catholic and protestant characters, and conversion to Catholicism is a regular feature. The plots are highly romantic and include many incidents taken from Smithson's own experiences. 'Carmen Cavanagh' (1921), for instance, is the story of a district nurse in Donegal. 'Sheila of the O'Beirnes' (1929) is narrated by a young girl who runs away from her mother and from her school after her mother's second marriage. In 'The Walk of a Queen' (1922), a title echoing a phrase from Yeats' play 'Cathleen ni Houlihan', set in the years 1917-21, the hero, who has unwittingly betrayed the cause of Ireland, substitutes himself for his twin brother and suffers the death penalty. In a number of the works children are orphaned and mothers often appear as selfish, worldly women. Her autobiography, 'Myself and Others', appeared in 1944. Smithson died of heart failure at 12 Richmond Hill, Dublin, on 21 February 1948 and was buried in Rathfarnham cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 58632


Mulally, Teresa (1728-1803), educationist, was born in October 1728 in Pill Lane, Dublin, and baptized on 17 October, the only child of Daniel Mulally, a provision dealer, and his wife, Elizabeth. The Mulallys' circumstances were apparently comfortable, and Teresa evidently received a good education. When she was seventeen, however, the family suffered a financial and social reverse which forced Teresa to assume responsibility for her own livelihood. About 1748 she moved to Chester at the invitation of an elderly relative, who died a few years later, leaving her a legacy of $70. With this she returned to Dublin, where she set herself up as a milliner. She was astute and industrious, and her considerable savings were augmented by a win of a few hundred pounds in a state lottery. At the same time, she gained a reputation for piety and charitable activities: 'she made ointments and other medicines for the poor, and dressed their sores; and [she] was always, while able, attentive to her sick friends and neighbours, be they rich or poor' (Savage, 56). 
By about 1762 Mulally's parents were dead, and she was in a position to retire from business and to devote herself to her philanthropic interests. In an 'Address to the charitable of St Michan's parish' (MS, 1766, St George's Hill archives, Dublin) she indicated the cause to which she intended to address herself: 'There are none whose necessities require more to be considered than the poor children of the female sex... many of them orphans, and the rest, by the helpless condition of their parents, scarce better than orphans.... [These girls] suffer all the hardships of extreme poverty, but... their chief misfortune is to be without any means of instruction, for want of which they grow up in such habits of ignorance, idleness and vice, as render them for ever after not only useless, but highly pernicious to themselves and the public. (Mulally, 'Address')' In 1766 Mulally set up a charity school for girls in an outhouse in Mary's Lane. As the first Roman Catholic institution of its kind in Dublin, the school placed a heavy emphasis on religious instruction. Pupils were also given some academic schooling and were instructed in such skills as dressmaking and housework, 'whereby they may be rendered useful to society and capable of earning honest bread for themselves' (Mulally, 'Address'). In 1771 she established a boarding-school and orphanage which, like the day school, was funded by donations and by the sale of work produced by the pupils. 
As a devout Roman Catholic Mulally was anxious to secure the future of her projects by placing them in the hands of a religious congregation. Aware of the similar work on which Nano Nagle was engaged in Cork, Mulally embarked on a correspondence with her and during a number of visits to Cork discussed the possibility of establishing in Dublin a community of Nagle's Presentation Order (then known as the Society of Charitable Instruction). However, shortage of funds and lack of suitable recruits made such an initiative impracticable before Nagle's death in 1784. 
By 1787 Mulally had raised enough money to purchase a site at George's Hill, on which she began to build a school and convent. Meanwhile she sought suitable candidates for the proposed Dublin community and, at her urging, a number of postulants entered the novitiate at the mother house of the Presentation Sisters in Cork. In April 1794 the first two sisters were professed for the Dublin convent. In August Mulally travelled to Cork to meet them and accompanied them back to George's Hill, where they established the first house of the Presentation Sisters in Dublin. 
With the arrival of the sisters, Mulally handed over the management of the schools and moved from the convent in which she had been living to the orphanage next door. However, although she did not herself take religious vows, she continued to be closely involved in the affairs of the convent and schools. Described by a friend as 'a very keen woman' with 'a cool head, and a masculine understanding which forecasted for ages' (Savage, 181), her shrewdness and knowledge of business helped to establish the foundation on a firm basis during its early years: in 1798, for instance, she successfully applied to the privy council for the relief of the school, as a charitable institution, from parochial taxes. 
Mulally's health was never robust, and her correspondence with Nagle mentions a number of illnesses. In late 1802 her health worsened; she died on 9 February 1803 at George's Hill orphanage and was buried in the convent chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 58633


Blachford, Theodosia (c.1745-c.1817), philanthropist, was the only daughter of four children born to William Tighe MP and his first wife, Lady Mary Bligh, granddaughter of the first earl of Darnley, of Rosanna, co. Wicklow, Ireland. Her mother died while she was young, and Theodosia spent her youth looking after her father, who suffered from gout. It was through reading to him from his library that she educated herself. In 1770 Theodosia married William Blachford ('c'.1730-1773), a landowner, clergyman of the Church of Ireland, and the librarian of St Patrick's Library in Dublin. She was widowed in 1773, the mother of two children, a boy and a girl. She believed that the education of children was the primary duty of women, and educated her children at home before sending her son to Eton College when he was twelve years old. Her daughter, the poet Mary Tighe (1772-1810), was the author of 'Psyche' (1805). 
About 1761, when Theodosia was almost seventeen, she experienced what she regarded as a spiritual awakening from which she resolved to 'renounce the world, leave all' (Wicklow MS 4810). About 1775 she became interested in Methodism and corresponded with Agnes Smith. John Wesley was to note in correspondence to the Revd Henry Moore in June 1788 that, 'Mrs. Blachford is one of our jewels, I love her much' (Crookshank, 142). Blachford educated poor girls and penned a number of tracts. She translated the 'Life' of Jeanne de Chantal, founder of the Visitation order, into English. She was influenced by the author and religious mystic William Law, who about 1740 had established a small community in Northamptonshire which was dedicated to pious reflection and to charitable works. For Theodosia philanthropy and faith were inextricably linked. She was associated with a number of charities in Dublin, and was instrumental in establishing the Female Orphan House in 1790 and founding the House of Refuge in Baggot Street, Dublin, in 1802. Theodosia died about 1817, and her burial place remains unrecorded. 


@@@@@


doc= 58634


Sayers, Peig (1873-1958), storyteller, was born in Vicarstown, co. Kerry, in 1873 (she was baptized on 29 March 1873), one of thirteen children born to Tomas Sayers, small farmer and labourer, and his wife, Peig Ni Bhrosnachain, only four of whom survived to adulthood. From the age of six she was educated in the national school at Dunquin, co. Kerry, but left school early to go into domestic service with a shopkeeper's family in Dingle, where she remained for four years until health problems forced her to return home. She then thought to emigrate to America and in order to secure the funds for such a journey she went into service for a second time. She was very unhappy with her position in this second household and again returned home. Her brother made a match for her with a man from the Blasket Islands, Padraig 'Flint' O Gaoithin ('c'.1862- 'c'.1920), a farmer and fisherman. The couple married on 13 February 1892 and went to live on Great Blasket Island, initially with O Gaoithin's parents. By 1911 Peig had given birth to ten children, of whom seven survived into adulthood. Of the adult children one died tragically in a fall from a cliff, and five emigrated to America. 
Peig Sayers was the most renowned storyteller from west Kerry. Robin Flower, the noted scholar, wrote that Peig: 'is one of the finest speakers on the Island... she is wont to illustrate her talks with tales, long and short, which come in naturally along the flow of conversation, and lighten up all our discourse of the present with the wit and wisdom and folly and vivid incident of the past. ('The Western Island, or, The Great Blasket', 1944)' Peig told her stories in her home, to neighbours and visitors; with the ability to remember and reinterpret folk-tales, legends, and local history, her stories included references to proverbs, folk practices and beliefs, and traditional prayers and blessings. A collection of her stories and anecdotes about life on the Great Blasket was published as 'Machtnamh seana-mhna' (1939) and translated into English by Sean Ennis as 'An Old Woman's Reflections' (1962). In the introduction to the translation, W. R. Rogers noted some features of Peig's storytelling prowess: 'Great artist and wise woman that she was, Peig would at once switch from gravity to gaiety, for she was a light-hearted woman, and her changes of mood and face were like the changes of running water. As she talked her hands would be moving too; a little clap of the palms to cap a phrase, a flash of the thumb over the shoulder to mark a mystery, a hand hushed to mouth for mischief or whispered secrecy.' While Peig could neither read nor write Irish she dictated her autobiography in Irish to her son, with the encouragement of the scholar Maire Ni Chinneide. Published as 'Peig' in 1936, it was awarded the Chraoibhin prize in 1937. A mine of information about life on the Great Blasket, 'Peig' was a set school text for Irish school children from 1936 until it was removed from the secondary school syllabus in 1995. The writer Bryan MacMahon translated the book into English in 1973. 
In 1942 Peig Sayers moved back to the mainland to live with her son in Vicarstown. She died in Dingle Hospital on 8 December 1958 and was buried in the cemetery at Dunquin. 


@@@@@


doc= 58635


Mullen, Madeleine ffrench- (1880-1944), medical officer and hospital administrator, was born in Malta in 1880, the eldest of three children, one son and two daughters, of fleet surgeon St Laurence ffrench-Mullen RN and his wife. Her mother suffered ill health for a number of years after her birth and Madeleine was placed in the care of her maternal grandmother in Ireland. When her father retired the family returned to Ireland. Madeleine's father was an ardent Parnellite and local elections were run from the family home at Dundrum in co. Dublin. After his death in the 1890s the family travelled on the continent, living in Germany and Belgium. ffrench-Mullen, who had been living in Brussels at the outbreak of the First World War, returned to Dublin in 1914. 
In Dublin ffrench-Mullen looked after Belgian refugees and became active in the Irish nationalist movement. She became acquainted with Dr Kathleen Lynn and the two women soon became firm friends. In 1915 ffrench-Mullen went to live with Lynn at her home in Rathmines in Dublin. She remained there until her death. Lynn and ffrench-Mullen were introduced by the writer, actress, and nationalist, Helena Molony, to the Irish Citizen Army which had been formed by the socialist and trade unionist James Connolly during the 1913 lock-out in Dublin. Both women became active in the army. ffrench-Mullen became a sergeant and Lynn was appointed its chief medical officer. In the 1916 rising ffrench-Mullen was in the St Stephen's Green garrison where she was in command of the first aid station. She was arrested after the rising and spent a number of weeks in Arbour Hill and Kilmainham gaols and then in Mountjoy prison. On her release from prison she helped to establish the Connolly Co-operative Society in Liberty Hall, Dublin. Its purpose was to give employment to workers whose livelihoods had been lost in consequence of their role in the rising. In 1919 she was returned as a Sinn Fein candidate to the Rathmines urban district council. She was also active in Cumann na dTeachtaire (League of Women Delegates), a group interested in political affairs and the health issues of women and children. 
During the influenza epidemic she, along with others, organized an emergency hospital in Charlemont Street, Dublin. In 1919 she also helped to establish St Ultan's Hospital in the city. Originally it was proposed that a hospital be established to treat children who suffered from venereal diseases, the fear being that venereal disease would become rife on the return of soldiers from the front. The committee of the hospital was part of a group known as Slainte na nGaedeal (Irish Health) which was concerned with the health of the nation. However, the hospital was organized as a general one for children, although it was also concerned with the health of mothers, who were encouraged to attend lectures at the hospital. ffrench-Mullen acted as secretary to the hospital for twenty-five years before her death. She drew up its annual reports, planned its housing schemes, and visited the United States on fund-raising trips. She was secretary to the Ultan Utility Society, which built homes for the people whose tenement lodgings were demolished for the enlargement of the hospital. 
ffrench-Mullen died suddenly in a Dublin nursing home, on 26 May 1944, and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery in the city four days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 58637


Cummins, Geraldine Dorothy (1890-1969), writer and medium, was born on 24 January 1890 at 17 St Patrick's Place, Cork city, the fifth of eleven children of Dr (William E.) Ashley Cummins, physician, and his wife, Jane Constable, 'nee' Hall (died 1944). She was educated by a governess. She became active in the suffrage movement, and was appointed honorary treasurer of the Munster Women's Franchise League in 1911. She made a number of public speeches in favour of the cause, and through the league became a friend of the writer Edith Somerville. She recalled of this period: 'My advocacy of 'Votes for Women' led to my being stoned through the streets of my native city by [the] sweated factory workers whose cause I so ardently espoused' (Cummins, 18). 
Cummins pursued a literary career along with her suffrage activities. With her friend Susanne Rouviere Day she wrote two plays for the Abbey Theatre, 'Broken Faith' (1914) and the comedy 'Fox and Geese' (1917). W. B. Yeats attended the rehearsals of 'Broken Faith', and Cummins treasured his comment 'When I read your tragedy I thought it was written by two men, and am astonished to find that it was written by two women. It has a strength and directness that are masculine qualities' (Cummins, 88). She published two novels, 'The Land they Loved' (1919) and 'Fires of Beltane' (1936), both of which displayed her continuing concern with women's roles. Her short stories appeared in 'Pall Mall', and in 1959 she published a volume of them as 'Variety Show'. Her biography of Edith Somerville (1952) is of little literary merit; her own autobiography, 'Unseen Adventures', appeared in 1951. Cummins's estimation of her literary talents was low, and she described herself as 'slow of speech', and as a 'dull uninformed conversationalist' (Cummins, 48-9). 
Cummins's principal interest, however, was in psychic phenomena. In June 1914 she had visited Paris with Susanne Day, where they met the psychic Hester Dowden and joined in a ouija board session. On returning to Ireland, Cummins left Cork for Dublin, where she took a job at the National Library of Ireland and became a paying guest in Mrs Dowden's house. Dowden apparently trained her in mediumship, and Cummins became less active in the suffrage cause; at this time she 'abandoned the idea of becoming a politician, it has not seemed to my mind at any time since, as humanly constructive an occupation as that of medium' (Cummins, 11). In 1923 she met Edith Beatrice Gibbes, who became her patron, and Cummins moved to Chelsea to live with Gibbes, returning to Cork each summer to visit her mother. After her arrival in London she began to produce a series of scripts through automatic writing which were later published. One series, apparently from the time of Jesus, was dictated by an early Christian called Cleophas, while a second series, begun in 1935 and finished in 1951, described the fate of Colonel Percy Harrison Fawcett, who had disappeared in South America in 1925. During the Second World War, she received while in a trance a message for President Roosevelt, which she sent to the American embassy. 
Beatrice Gibbes died in December 1951, leaving her house in Chelsea to Cummins, who continued to live there but spent increasing amounts of time in Ireland. Cummins died of cancer at Lindville Hospital, Cork, on 25 August 1969, and was buried in St Lappan's churchyard on Little Island in Cork. 


@@@@@


doc= 58639


Davies, George Maitland Lloyd (1880-1949), pacifist, was born on 30 April 1880 at the family home in Peel Road, Sefton Park, Liverpool, the fourth surviving son of John Davies (1837-1909), tea merchant, and Gwen, 'nee' Jones (1839-1918). The family attended Princes Road Presbyterian Chapel in Liverpool and their life was strongly inflected by the social and cultural world of the expatriate Liverpool Welsh community. Davies was deeply affected by the social stigma attached to his father's bankruptcy in 1891. He was educated in Liverpool and started work at Martin's Bank in that city at the age of sixteen, quickly rising to the position of secretary to the manager. In 1908 he was appointed manager of Martin's Bank in Wrexham, and took a commission in the Territorial Army. In 1913, following a mental breakdown and a realization that he could not kill other people, he resigned his commission in the Territorial Army and also left the bank. He was offered, and accepted, the post of secretary to the Welsh Town Planning and Housing Trust. 
This was a period of frequent changes of direction for Davies after the certainty and security of his early career in banking. At the start of the First World War he was a founding member of the Fellowship of Reconciliation, a Quaker-influenced peace organization that required members to make individual contributions to reconciliation, rather than take part in public protests. He worked for the organization in London for a while, before moving on to the Riverside Settlement, Melton Mowbray, a home for delinquent teenagers. On 5 February 1916 he married Leslie Eleanor Royde Smith (1884-1973), sister of the novelist Naomi Royde Smith, at Finchley; they had one child, Jane Hedd. Refusing military service when conscription was introduced in 1916, he came before a tribunal and was sent to work as a shepherd in north Wales. From January 1918 to June 1919 he was imprisoned as a conscientious objector, first at Wormwood Scrubs, where he spent time in solitary confinement, and later at Princetown on Dartmoor and at Knutsford work camp in Cheshire. On his release from prison he lived on the Gregynog estate in Montgomeryshire and became involved in promoting reconciliation in agriculture and industry. At the request of Thomas Jones, secretary to Lloyd George's cabinet, he went to Ireland in 1920 and 1921 to try to broker talks between Eamon de Valera and Lloyd George. Although myths grew about the success of this visit, including suggestions that he 'single-handedly sorted out the war of independence' ('Peace News', 13 Jan 1950, 4), his intervention in Irish affairs was inconclusive, although he worked hard to get his message across, and eventually was summoned to an interview with De Valera in the Mansion House in Dublin. 
In 1923 Davies was elected to parliament as an independent Christian Pacifist candidate for the University of Wales, a constituency whose electors were graduates of the university. He took the Labour whip but never joined that or any other political party, asserting his wish to retain the freedom to speak and act according to his conscience. He was one of a number of conscientious objectors who took their seats in this parliament; his maiden speech was on the 'Irish Free State Bill'. He lost the seat at the following election in 1924 and redirected his energies to religion, social action, and writing. 
In 1926 Davies was ordained a minister in the Calvinistic Methodist church (later the Presbyterian Church of Wales). He was the pastor of churches at Tywyn and Cwm Maethlon in Merioneth from 1926 to 1930, when he became interested in social improvement and developed his ideas relating to industrial reconciliation. About 1926 he published a pamphlet, 'The Politics of Grace', in which he suggested that reconciliation methods could be used in all fields, from politics and industry to animal training. In the early 1930s he was involved in the settlement movement at Bryn-mawr in south Wales, at Rhosllanerchrugog, near Wrexham, and at the Quaker settlement at Maes-yr-haf in the Rhondda valley. At this time he was concerned with developments on the continent. This theme was dealt with in his pamphlet 'Reparations and Industrial Ruin' (published in 1932, but written in the early 1920s) in which he correctly prophesied that the harshness of the Versailles treaty, which required Germany to export large quantities of free coal to markets formerly supplied by the coalfields of south Wales, would have a dire effect on Wales's industrial life. 
In 1937 the Welsh National Pacifist Society (Heddychwyr Cymru) was established, with George Davies as president and Gwynfor Evans (later Plaid Cymru's first MP) as secretary. The society, a response to the Anglocentric attitude of the Fellowship of Reconciliation, published dozens of pamphlets. At this time Davies was close to a number of intellectuals who were prominent in the young Plaid Genedlaethol Cymru (the Welsh National Party), though he did not become a member. This was a period when he was conscious of the possibility of another major war and he was trenchantly critical of the growth of fascism. Davies was particularly active in promoting peace during the 1940s, publishing three pamphlets in Welsh for the Fellowship of Reconciliation: 'Ffordd y cymod' ('The way of reconciliation'); 'Gandhi a chenedlaetholdeb India' ('Gandhi and Indian nationalism'); and 'Triniaeth troseddwyr' ('The treatment of prisoners'). In 1946 he published 'Essays towards Peace', a collection of twenty-two of his articles, including some letters from prison. Between 1946 and 1949 he was chairman of the Peace Pledge Union. 
George Davies was a charismatic figure who inspired deep personal loyalty and was commonly regarded by those who knew him as a 'saint', an incongruous description in nonconformity. This perception of his saintly persona has ensured an iconic -- but sometimes misleading -- impression of his life and achievements. His prison experience, more than any other influences, turned him from a Liberal to a socialist, and he wished to share, as much as possible, in others' poverty. While working at the Maes-yr-haf settlement in the Rhondda in the 1930s he chose to live alone in a small shed rather than to share the staff quarters. He suffered from depression throughout his adult life and committed suicide on 16 December 1949 while a voluntary patient at the North Wales Mental Hospital, Denbigh, but the suicide does not seem to have damaged his reputation as a 'saintly' peacemaker in Wales. He was buried at Dolwyddelan, his family's home village. 
Apart from his political and social work, George Davies published books, pamphlets, and many articles in Welsh- and English-language periodicals and newspapers on peace and reconciliation, but also on such subjects as housing, the economy, the prison system, Ireland, and the state of the Calvinistic Methodist church in Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 58640


Smith, Sir Reginald Hugh Dorman- (1899-1977), politician and colonial governor, was born on 10 March 1899 in Bellamont Forest, co. Cavan, Ireland, the second son of an established farmer, Major Edward Patrick Dorman-Smith ('b'. 1870), and his wife, Amy, 'nee' Patterson. His elder brother, Eric, was born in 1895. Educated at Harrow School and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, Reginald Dorman-Smith served briefly in the Indian army before being invalided out at the age of twenty-one. He married Doreen Agnes Edith Watson ('b'. 1896), the only daughter of Sir John Watson of Earnock, second baronet, on 2 March 1921; they had two daughters. 
For twenty years Dorman-Smith devoted his life to agriculture, becoming vice-president of the National Farmers' Union (NFU) at the age of thirty-two, and Conservative MP for Petersfield in 1935. Elected president of the NFU the next year, he was the spokesman for farmers in parliament and a natural choice for minister of agriculture when Neville Chamberlain formed a government in 1939. With the fall of the Chamberlain ministry in May 1940 Dorman-Smith left ministerial office and became a colonel in the home defence executive. During his sixteen months as a minister much of the groundwork was laid for putting British agriculture on a more productive wartime footing, including the ploughing of 1.5 million acres of pasture land and the creation of a reserve of 3000 tractors. His appointment as governor of Burma was a means of rewarding, and deliberately sidetracking, an ambitious younger politician still in the prime of political life. 
Sir Reginald (he was knighted in 1937) arrived in Rangoon as governor in 1941, and found a city throbbing with political ferment as nationalist youth pushed the elected Burmese politicians to demand from the British authorities an early transfer of power to a fully indigenous government. (Under the 1935 'Government of Burma Act', a form of parliamentary government had come into existence in 1937.) The governor's role was to preside over the European-dominated civil service and military forces in conjunction with a Burmese cabinet formed from a highly factionalized legislature composed of various indigenous and immigrant ethnic groups and British economic interests. The Burmese premier, U Saw, was a wily politician who had created a significant political patronage machine behind him. The two men immediately hit it off. Dorman-Smith, unlike his stiff predecessor, Sir Archibald Cochrane, was open to the arguments of co-operative Burmese nationalist politicians that the best way to defend British interests from both the impending possibility of a Japanese invasion and the leftist rhetoric of young Burmese nationalists was a speeding up of the process of granting Burma a fuller degree of internal self-government within the British empire and Commonwealth. 
Before Dorman-Smith and the premier could solidify their political and personal relationship, however, the Japanese invaded early in 1942 and forced the governor and the rest of the British administration to go into exile in India. There Dorman-Smith remained, planning for the economic and political reconstruction of Burma after the devastation of war, until the allies retook Burma in 1945. But U Saw was not with him, having been intercepted on a round-the-world journey and detained by the British in Uganda for the duration of the war, for allegedly treasonous contacts with the Japanese after the start of the war in the Pacific. 
Sir Reginald returned to re-establish a civilian government in Rangoon in mid-October 1945. There he found a very different political situation from that which he had left three years earlier. The young nationalists of the 1930s were now experienced soldiers of the Japanese-sponsored Burma Independence Army and its various successors. Led by General Aung San, the eventually martyred hero of Burma's independence struggle, the disorganized but highly popular indigenous forces of Burmese nationalism, which had co-operated with Lord Mountbatten's forces in driving out the Japanese, now claimed their right to establish Burma's independence outside the British empire. Sympathetic to Asian nationalist voices as he was, Dorman-Smith remained loyal to the pre-war politicians with whom he had previously worked. Moreover, his room for manoeuvre was severely constrained by official British government policy toward the post-war reconstruction of Burma. Rather than speeding Burma's independence, the war cabinet had agreed that the country would come under seven years of direct rule by the governor to allow for economic reconstruction. Only after that had been achieved would the country's politics be allowed to return to the semi-parliamentary forms of the 1930s. This was clearly unacceptable to the nationalist forces. 
While official Burma policy remained frozen in the mindset of the 1930s, men such as Dorman-Smith were more aware of the strength of nationalist aspirations. Mountbatten appreciated the virtues of young nationalists such as Aung San, and was even more willing to make concessions to internal forces on the left. The governor quickly found himself isolated. He was out of sympathy with the young men who had helped drive him from Burma in 1942, and equally out of sympathy with the initial unwillingness of the new Labour government in London to consider changing the now totally unworkable policy of direct rule he was expected to implement. Only Mountbatten had sufficient influence in London to effect a change in policy, and by the time he did, Dorman-Smith's credibility in Rangoon and London had been destroyed by his inconsistent attempts to put together a political base from the now discredited pre-war moderate Burmese politicians such as U Saw, who had returned to Burma. 
Dorman-Smith sailed for London on 14 June 1946 while convalescing from a severe bout of amoebic dysentery. By the time he arrived in Britain on 13 July his role in Burma had ended. In the interim, government policy had changed: an accommodation was being sought with Aung San and his nationalist forces, and Sir Hubert Rance, who had been military governor of Burma at the end of the war under Mountbatten, was appointed in Dorman-Smith's place. The ignominy of his departure was compounded by the insult of not being received in the formal style of a colonial governor when he arrived in London. 
Sir Reginald continued his interest in Burmese affairs after the war, but never regained public influence. He became high sheriff of Hampshire in 1952. However, after attempting to write his own account of his time in Burma, he turned to a popular and prodigious author of books on Burma to provide a sympathetic account of what he had tried to do. But the liberal Maurice Collis in his 'Last and First in Burma (1941-1948)' (1956) sympathized more with the Burmese nationalists and the liberal Mountbatten than with the engaging, but ultimately embittered and betrayed tory politician turned colonial governor. To the end Dorman-Smith felt wronged by history and was confident that had he been able to govern without the interference of London, he would have saved Burma for the Commonwealth, which it left at the time of independence on 4 January 1948. He died on 20 March 1977 at the King Edward VII Hospital, Easebourne, Midhurst, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 58641


Dukes, Charles, Baron Dukeston (1880-1948), trade unionist, was born on 28 October 1880 at Bedcote, Stourbridge, Worcestershire, the first child of George Harry Dukes, a spade plater, and his wife, Ann Hatton. After leaving elementary school at the age of eleven he was employed as an errand boy. When he was thirteen his parents moved to Stockton Heath, Warrington, where he worked with his father in an iron forge and then had a series of labouring jobs, including one as a 'ripper' with navvies on the Manchester Ship Canal. At the age of seventeen he joined the United Builders' Labourers' Union and later the National Union of Gasworkers and General Labourers -- the union which in 1924 became the National Union of General and Municipal Workers (NUGMW). In his early working life he took a leading part in local disputes, which made employers reluctant to employ him, and in 1911 he became full-time secretary of the Gasworkers' Warrington branch, living on commission. In three years he increased the membership from thirty to 3000, and he was appointed district officer in 1915, the year of his marriage to Emily Forster (1879-1969). A tall, imposing figure, 'with the voice of a gentle sergeant-major' ('County Express', 22 May 1948), he was an outstanding organizer and a thoughtful and skilful negotiator. In 1924 he was appointed temporary district secretary for the NUGMW Leeds district and in 1925 he was elected district secretary for Lancashire. 
Throughout these years Dukes was active in politics. When he was nineteen he had joined the Independent Labour Party (ILP) and a year later he was secretary of the Warrington branch. He served on Stockton Heath parish council, was secretary of the Warrington Trades Council and Labour Representation Committee, and fought municipal elections. In 1912 he became a member of the national executive of the newly formed British Socialist Party (BSP), to which members of the ILP left were drawn, and he was among the majority within the BSP who opposed war. In 1916, when conscripted into the Cheshire regiment, he refused to obey military orders, was court-martialled, and served a prison sentence. None the less, in the 1923 general election he became Warrington's first Labour MP, but he lost the seat in the following year's general election. He again represented Warrington in the Commons from 1929 to 1931. 
Dukes's election as district secretary for Lancashire in 1925 automatically placed him on the union's national executive, where he rapidly established himself as the dominant force. He supported the decision of the general council of the Trades Union Congress (TUC) to call off the general strike, and in 1927 vigorously enforced his own union executive's rule against members of the Communist Party or minority movement holding office in the NUGMW. When, in 1933, Will Thorne, the general secretary of the NUGMW since 1889, announced his impending retirement, Dukes was the obvious successor; following his election he took office in 1934. Between 1936 and 1938 he carried through a much needed reorganization of the union, bringing in compulsory retirement at sixty-five for full-time officers, redrawing the boundaries of the union's districts, abolishing the office of president, and enhancing the authority of national officers. Under his leadership the NUGMW was on the right of labour politics. 
The general secretaryship gave Dukes a seat on the general council of the TUC, where, after Ernest Bevin and Walter Citrine, he was recognized as its strongest personality. After Bevin became minister of labour in 1940 it was Dukes who moved many of the council's most important resolutions during the war. He was made a CBE in 1942. In 1945-6 he was president of the TUC. Following his retirement from the general secretaryship of the NUGMW in 1946 he received a peerage in the new year's honours in 1947, and was later appointed a director of the Bank of England. His career epitomizes that of many trade union leaders of his generation who, in their early days, combined militant political views with trade union activism and then, as their trade union responsibilities increased and they experienced the inter-war depression and the failure of the general strike, became political moderates. 
Dukes died from a lympho sarcoma in Granard House Royal Cancer Hospital on 14 May 1948, and was buried in St Leonard's churchyard, Chesham Bois, near Amersham, on 19 May. He left no heir and his barony became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 58642


Dunnico, Sir (James) Herbert (1875-1953), Baptist minister and politician, was born in the Flintshire village of Cefn-y-bedd on 2 December 1875, the eldest of the nine children of James Dunnico (1853/4-1913), a coalminer, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Owens (1854/5-1941). The family moved to Gresford while Herbert was still an infant before settling in Lancashire in 1885. He never lived in Wales again, but he retained a sense of his Welsh identity; he frequently returned to speak and preach there. He grew up in a political family. His father was a trade union activist, first in north Wales and later in Lancashire, where, despite his illiteracy, he was appointed an agent of the Lancashire and Cheshire Miners' Association. Both parents were devotedly religious. 
Dunnico started work in the Lancashire cotton industry as a half-timer at the age of ten. Two years later, he followed his father into the pit, but left the coal industry after a year and began work in a grocer's business. There he combined his clerical employment with private study. He took up a place at Nottingham University College in 1898 and then at Midland Baptist College. 
Dunnico entered the Baptist ministry in 1902, taking up a position at Golborne Street Baptist Church, Warrington. Already evident was the broad-minded ecumenical attitude to which he adhered throughout his life. Having married Harriet Rathbone ['see below'] on 7 September 1903, he left Warrington in 1906, despondent at the 'narrow minds' he encountered there ('Manchester Courier and Lancashire General Advertiser', 2 May 1906). He took up a post at Kensington Baptist Church, Liverpool, where he also encountered some hostility. His sermons were disrupted by opponents, on one occasion following his invitation to a Jesuit priest to deliver an address. 
Dunnico inherited an early allegiance to the Liberal Party from his father and belonged to the executive of the Warrington Liberal Association. But he gravitated towards Labour. Socialism complemented his Christian beliefs, and in 1909 he became founder member and president of the Free Church Socialist League, which he claimed could 'take some part in the destruction of the present commercial and industrial system which is based upon greed, lust and unholy rivalry, and the creation of a better system based upon equality, brotherhood and co-operation' (Jones, 351). He was president of the Liverpool branches of the Independent Labour Party, Fabians, and Labour Representation Committee, and in 1915 joined the West Derby board of guardians as a Labour member. 
As a minister of religion Dunnico was exempted from military service. In January 1916 he left Kensington Baptist Church to replace W. E. Darby as full-time secretary of the Peace Society. One of Dunnico's initiatives, in connection with members of the Peace Society's newer and more vibrant rival, the Union of Democratic Control, was the launch of the Peace Negotiations Committee in March 1916, which met regularly, organized meetings, and promoted a petition that attracted hundreds of thousands of signatures. Dunnico addressed hundreds of meetings in the final years of the war, and, following a speech at Aberdare in January 1918, was summoned under the 'Defence of the Realm Act', charged with attempting to cause disaffection among the civilian population, though the case was dropped. Dunnico remained secretary of the Peace Society (the International Peace Society after 1930) until his death. He also became involved in the International Peace Bureau, based in Geneva, acting at different times as director and a vice-president. He regularly added his signature to calls for the inauguration of a world peace day. 
In 1917 Dunnico had briefly been Labour's parliamentary candidate for West Derby, but his anti-war activities created tensions with his Liverpool colleagues. At the general election of 1918 he stood instead for Ilford, Essex, where the family had moved in 1915. Although heavily defeated, Dunnico remained involved in local Ilford and Essex politics for the rest of his life. He sat on both the town and county councils, was appointed a JP for the Becontree division in 1920, and later became chief magistrate for Ilford. 
Forced to look elsewhere for an entry into national politics, Dunnico was adopted as Labour candidate for Consett, co. Durham, where over half of all men employed in the constituency worked in the coal industry. He was elected Consett's first Labour MP in 1922, one of two nonconformist ministers in the House of Commons. Although instinctively wary of strikes, Dunnico threw his support behind the miners during the general strike and miners' lockout of 1926. His stance brought him into conflict with the conservative bishop of Durham, Herbert Hensley Henson, who was outspoken in his denunciation of the miners' actions. In October, Dunnico made a public apology to Henson and the dean of Durham Cathedral, J. E. C. Welldon, following his declaration at a miners' meeting that 'two greater representations of anti-Christ he could not imagine' ('Blaydon Courier', 16 October 1926). 
No blind follower of the party line, Dunnico became the first Labour MP to vote against a Labour government in February 1924, when he supported a Liberal motion for an adjournment to a debate over the construction of naval cruisers. He continued to contest the party line when Labour returned to opposition. Early in 1927, when the Labour Party opposed the government's dispatch of troops to defend British citizens and property in Shanghai, Dunnico praised the government's handling of the crisis. 
Dunnico also demonstrated the strength of his convictions in the debates over the revision of the prayer book later in 1927. Although parliament's ecclesiastical committee, of which Dunnico was a member, recommended that a revised prayer book should be ratified, it was twice rejected by the House of Commons. The conflict has been characterized as 'a clash of ideologies' between 'those inclined to understand nation and religion in broad, generous terms, and... those who believed a more narrowly defined Protestantism was vital' (Maiden, 155-6). Most nonconformists opposed the revision, and the Baptists were particularly critical, but Dunnico supported it. Following his contribution to the debate in December 1927, he was sent a note of appreciation by his old enemy, Hensley Henson. 
Dunnico was a fervent advocate of marriage and played a regular part in the Dunmow flitch trials, a medieval Essex custom which awarded a prize of bacon to a couple who could convince a jury that they had not quarrelled or regretted their marriage for a year and a day. In 1923 he was one of only twenty-six MPs to vote against the 'Matrimonial Causes Act', which equalized male and female access to divorce on the grounds of adultery. Convinced of the centrality of the wife and mother to the well-being of the family, he argued that 'no one who thinks seriously can for a moment suggest that the act of adultery on the part of a man is as serious in its consequences and as grave in its results as the act of adultery on the part of a woman. ('Hansard 5C', 8 June 1923)' His views on marriage led to admiration for the Roman Catholic church, for standing 'firm in its witness for the purity of family life and the preservation of the sanctities of the home' ('Chelmsford Chronicle', 11 Nov 1927). He was outspoken about betting and gambling, and convened a parliamentary committee against greyhound racing. He was less concerned with temperance and voted against the 'Welsh Temperance Bill' in 1924, earning him the criticism of other nonconformist MPs. 
In July 1929, upon the election of the second Labour government, Dunnico was appointed deputy speaker of the House of Commons. He was proud of parliament and its traditions and later wrote a guidebook to the Palace of Westminster in which he demonstrated his affection for the 'Mother of Parliaments'. He became a founder member and then grand master of the New Welcome Lodge for freemasons in the Houses of Parliament, particularly Labour MPs. When the minority Labour government resigned office on 23 August 1931, and the prime minister, Ramsay MacDonald, agreed to head a National Government, made up of Conservatives, various Liberals, and a handful of National Labour MPs, Dunnico remained loyal to the Labour Party. He hoped for a reconciliation with MacDonald but in September 1931 bowed to party pressure to resign as deputy speaker. 
Dunnico lost his parliamentary seat in the Labour collapse that followed MacDonald's decision to call a general election in October 1931. He also moved away from the political ideas that had once motivated him. He became chairman of the 1932 Club, a grouping of moderate Labour and former Labour MPs, and became increasingly critical of the trade unions and the more extremist members of the Parliamentary Labour Party. By January 1935 he had decided to support MacDonald's National Government and was adopted as National Labour candidate for Wednesbury, but was defeated in November 1935. Knighted in the new year's honours 1938, 'for political and public services', he remained parliamentary candidate (sometimes now described in the press as 'Conservative candidate') for Wednesbury until 1940. 
Dunnico never returned to parliament, but he continued to play an active part in political and social work, both local and national. From 1932 he was honorary warden of the Robert Browning Settlement in Southwark. In 1940 he became involved in the Entertainments National Service Association, an organization formed to provide entertainment for the armed forces and war workers. Though he denied any contradiction with his commitment to the peace movement, he was an active supporter of the 'Win the Peace' movement during the Second World War, set up by Lord Vansittart to campaign for the imposition of punishing terms towards Germany following an allied victory. 
Dunnico had been a good amateur footballer in his youth and became president of Ilford Football Club in the 1920s. He maintained a long association with the club, and he donated the gates to Ilford's Lynn Road site. After the Second World War he became president of Essex County Football Association. Dunnico saw in sport not only a model of discipline and team play but also a force for peace. He organized several European tours with Ilford Football Club during the inter-war years and particularly valued the contact forged with German teams. Having suffered from bouts of ill health throughout his life, he suffered a heart attack while watching Ilford, and died at his home, 2 Bathurst Road, Ilford, on 2 October 1953. He was buried alongside his wife in Ilford cemetery. 
Often described as 'Pickwickian' in the press, Dunnico was genial and well liked. Although his political beliefs shifted rightwards as he grew older, he remained consistent in his dislike of narrow sectarianism and in the openness of his ideology, whether in political or religious matters. 
His wife, Harriet Emma Dunnico, Lady Dunnico (1877-1952), voluntary worker, was born at Forest Field, Witton, Cheshire, on 16 April 1877, the third of eight children of Robert Rathbone, a stonemason, and his wife, Kate, 'nee' Miller. Upon leaving elementary school she worked as a domestic servant, but returned to live at home before her marriage to Dunnico in September 1903. She was as active in the public service of Ilford and Essex as her husband, though she never assumed his national profile. Keenly interested in issues of maternity and child welfare, she attended an international congress on the topic soon after the First World War. She was a founder of the Ilford Maternity and Child Welfare Association and president of its largest centre. She was also, at various times, local secretary of the Essex Voluntary Association for the Care of Mentally Defectives, a governor of West Ham High School for Girls, a member of the Ilford District Nursing Committee, local secretary of the United Services Fund (British Legion), and a member of the council of the British Red Cross Society. She sat as a member of the Romford board of guardians for twelve years, until the boards were abolished by the 'Local Government Act' of 1929. In that role, she was chairman of the ladies committee, charged with the care of unmarried mothers and their children, and with destitute women and girls. In 1930 she became Ilford's first female JP and was soon after appointed to the lord lieutenant's committee. She suffered a breakdown in 1948 and died at the Goodmayes Mental Hospital, Brookside, Barley Lane, Ilford, on 1 November 1952. Their only child, Herbert Rathbone Dunnico (1910-1982), a Labour parliamentary candidate, succeeded his father as warden of the Robert Browning Settlement and secretary of the International Peace Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 58643


Edwards, John Hugh (1869-1945), Congregational minister and politician, was born at 37 Powell Street, Aberystwyth, on 9 April 1869, the son of John Edwards, a flannel merchant and alderman, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Evans. He was educated at Aberystwyth grammar school and the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth (1891-8). He commenced his lifelong involvement in Liberal politics at the college, becoming prime minister of the mock parliament, and joining Cymru Fydd, a nationalist movement associated with David Lloyd George, of whom Edwards became an ardent admirer. In 1895 Edwards founded 'Young Wales', a monthly periodical supportive of Cymru Fydd, which he edited until 1904. He was one of the representatives for Cardiganshire at the meeting of the South Wales Liberal Federation at Newport, on 16 January 1896, when the proposal to merge the Welsh Liberal federations under the leadership of Cymru Fydd was defeated, with fatal consequences for Cymru Fydd. He also served on Aberystwyth borough council and Cardiganshire county council. 
From an early age Edwards was a member of Seion Congregational Church, Aberystwyth. He accepted the pastorate of the English Congregational Church, Newtown, Montgomeryshire, in August 1899 and was ordained on 24 March 1900. During his ministry at Newtown he combined preaching and public speaking with political work, representing Cardiganshire county council in Lloyd George's 'revolt campaign' against the 'Education Act' of 1902. Edwards was responsible for a series of religious and political meetings in west Wales held by the prominent Congregational leaders Silvester Horne and J. D. Jones of Bournemouth. He took part in revival meetings during 1904, and met Evan Roberts, but the Welsh revival of 1904-5 had little apparent impact on the town or church of Newtown. 
In September 1905 Edwards was inducted to the pastorate of Dulwich Grove Congregational Church, London, but by late 1906 some of the deacons concluded that his political work was causing him to neglect his pastoral duties. One of the distractions was his first book, 'From Village Green to Downing Street' (1908), a short and profusely illustrated biography of David Lloyd George, jointly written with Spencer Leigh Hughes of the 'Morning Leader'. Increasing pressure from the diaconate caused him to resign from Dulwich Grove in January 1908. He accepted a call from Hanover Chapel, Peckham, one of the oldest Congregational churches in Britain, and was followed by about forty members from Dulwich Grove. At Hanover Chapel pastoral work was carried out by an assistant, leaving Edwards free to concentrate on political and literary work. He also began to read for the bar. 
Edwards defended Lloyd George against charges that he had betrayed the nonconformists of Wales while a member of the Liberal governments, and at the general election of January 1910 he accompanied David Lloyd George for much of his campaign. In November 1910 Edwards was chosen as Liberal candidate for Mid-Glamorgan and in the general election of December 1910 was returned with an 11 per cent majority over his Labour opponent, Vernon Hartshorn. With W. F. Phillips, the unsuccessful Liberal candidate for Gower, and Clement Edwards, MP for East Glamorgan, Edwards attacked socialism, and called on workers in the south Wales valleys to return to the Liberal fold. This anti-socialist crusade earned him the hatred of south Wales socialists, whose local press regularly pilloried him. 
As an MP Edwards contributed regularly to the 'British Weekly', as well as launching in 1911 'Wales: a National Magazine', which he edited until 1914. In 1913 he resigned from the pastorate of Hanover Chapel, leaving the Congregational ministry for good. He wrote 'The Life of Lloyd George with a Short History of the Welsh People', bound in four handsome volumes published between 1913 and 1916, with a profusion of illustrations and gilding. It began with the pre-Roman Celtic settlement of Britain, and ended with Lloyd George's ascent to the premiership, presenting its subject's life as a battle against power and privilege. A number of anecdotes about Lloyd George originate in this biography; some were the result of Edwards's closeness to Lloyd George, but others have been attributed to his vivid imagination. 
The First World War had a profound effect on Edwards; at a public meeting in Aberystwyth in March 1916 he spoke of its 'nauseating horrors' (G. Morgan, 374). His abstention on the first reading of the 'Conscription Bill' in January 1916 may have played some part in Lloyd George's failure to promote him, though he received his blessing at the general election of 1918, when he was adopted as coalition Liberal candidate for the newly created Neath division. At the poll Edwards easily defeated his Labour opponent, Herbert Morgan, formerly minister of Castle Street Welsh Baptist Chapel, London. In 1919-20 he was a member of the speaker's conference on federal devolution in Great Britain, and supported Lloyd George during the parliament of 1918-22, when he lost his Neath seat to the Labour candidate, William Jenkins. 
Edwards returned to parliament in 1923, representing the Accrington division of Lancashire, where the Conservatives stood aside as part of a local anti-socialist agreement. He retained the seat as a Constitutionalist in 1924, but returned to the Liberal fold. His parliamentary career came to an end in May 1929, when he was defeated at Accrington by Thomas Snowden, the Labour candidate. 
From 1905 Edwards lived in England, at first in south London until 1920, when he moved to the suburb of Purley. He served on Purley and Coulsdon urban district council and played a prominent role in the organization of ratepayers' associations, serving as president of the National Confederation of Ratepayers' Associations of England and Wales. He was also a member of the councils of the university colleges of Cardiff and Aberystwyth. Although considered to be a confirmed bachelor, he married on 20 April 1933 (Vera) Doris (1890-1988), daughter of the industrialist Sir Samuel Faire, and settled at Fairdene, Hindhead, Surrey. There were no children of the marriage, and it is probable that he and his wife were estranged by the time of his death, of bronchopneumonia, at Holloway Sanatorium, a mental-health institution near Virginia Water, Surrey, on 14 June 1945. He was buried four days later at St Luke's, Grayshott, Hampshire, after a funeral at Tower Road Congregational Church, Hindhead. 
One of a small group of nonconformist ministers who have sat in the House of Commons, Edwards was a man of striking appearance, usually elegantly dressed, with considerable skills as a speaker and preacher. Many of his contemporaries described him as loyal, with a winning personality, but others regarded him as self-serving and egotistical, most notably the author John Vyrnwy Morgan and the Caernarvonshire Liberal MP Ellis W. Davies, who accused Edwards of being 'an adept liar' (NL Wales, Ellis W. Davies papers, diary, 26 Feb 1907). His adversarial reaction to socialism did not endear him to the coming generation of Welsh political leaders, while some of his fellow Welsh Liberals mocked his ostentatious identification with Lloyd George. This closeness lends importance to his published work on Lloyd George, which provides a picture of Liberal Wales on the eve of the rise of Labour. 


@@@@@


doc= 58644


Tiwana, Sir Khizr Hayat (1900-1975), prime minister of the Punjab, was born on 7 August 1900 in Chak Muzaffarabad, Sargodha, in the Shahpur district, Punjab, India. He was the son of Umar Hayat Khan Tiwana (1874-1944) -- an honorary major-general in the Tiwana lancers (later the 19th (King George's own) lancers) who saw active service both in France with the Indian expeditionary force and in Mesopotamia during the First World War -- and his wife, Fateh Khatun. The General, as his father was commonly called, was the family patriarch and exerted a profound influence on Khizr's life. The Tiwanas were Rajputs who had entered the Shahpur region nearly seven centuries earlier from Rajputana. Khizr was descended from the cadet Mitha Tiwana branch. It rose to prominence after the Second Anglo-Sikh War (1848-9) and the 1857 Indian mutiny. The family's prosperous Kalra estate was carved out of crown wasteland awarded to Khizr's grandfather Malik Sahib Khan. It was greatly developed during Umar's minority, when it was administered by the court of wards. 
Khizr entered Aitchison Chiefs' College, Lahore, in 1908, and later attended Government College, Lahore. He volunteered for military service at the time of the 1919 Punjab disturbances and was attached to the 17th lancers, which guarded Government House and other public buildings in Lahore. He accompanied the regiment to the front at the time of the Third Afghan War. Although still only a teenager, he earned a mention in dispatches and was appointed OBE in 1921. For the next fifteen years he devoted himself to the running of the Kalra estate. He married his first wife, Sultan Bibi, daughter of a kinsman, Malik Muzaffar Khan, and took Fateh Bibi, the wife of one of his tenants, as a mistress. Khizr eventually married her, although this was kept a secret from Umar for many years. With his father Khizr attended the 1935 silver jubilee celebrations in London of George V and Queen Mary. 
Khizr stood for the Khushab constituency in the 1937 Punjab provincial elections after the devolution of provincial power to Indian hands after the 1935 'Government of India Act'. Despite his lack of experience he became minister of public works and local self-government in Sir Sikander Hayat-Khan's Unionist cabinet. In 1939 he also took charge of the manpower committee of the Punjab war board and the civil defence departments. Sikander and the prominent Hindu Jat leader Sir Chhotu Ram chalked out a programme of agrarian reform which curbed the power of the moneylenders and cemented the Unionist Party's rural intercommunal appeal. Its support from the Punjab's three major communities, Muslim, Hindu, and Sikh, had been a unique feature of the region's politics since the party's foundation in 1923. The Unionists' subsequent channelling of political divisions in the countryside along rural-urban rather than communal lines severely handicapped the Muslim League's development. 
Sikander's celebrated pact with M. A. Jinnah in 1937, in which a Muslim assembly member could be simultaneously recognized as a Unionist and a Muslim Leaguer, in fact ensured a close Unionist supervision of the Muslim League organization in the province. The ambiguities surrounding the pact were, however, to be later exploited by Jinnah in his tussle with Khizr in April 1944. Khizr became prime minister after Sikander's sudden death in December 1942. Growing economic dislocation had already undermined the Unionists' popularity. The Muslim League increasingly sought power in the geographical 'cornerstone' of Pakistan. Behind the 1944 tussle over the interpretation of the Sikander-Jinnah pact there existed two conflicting accommodationist and communalist visions of Punjab politics. 
Jinnah journeyed to Lahore in March 1944 for negotiations which were temporarily suspended after Umar's death on 24 March. Despite this family tragedy Khizr resumed the discussions on 20 April. When they finally collapsed he was unprecedentedly expelled from the All-India Muslim League. 
Khizr refused to compromise because of loyalty to his non-Muslim colleagues. He had also been encouraged to resist Jinnah by the governor, Sir Bertrand Glancy, who feared that a Muslim League ministry would disrupt the war effort. Khizr relied increasingly on Glancy's advice, after the severe blow of Chhotu Ram's death in January 1945, but he later felt that the British had let him down in their dealings with Jinnah, particularly at the time of the July 1945 Simla conference. From then on Khizr was accused of betraying the Pakistan cause. After the 1946 elections the Unionist Party was reduced to a rump of eighteen members in the assembly of 175. The Muslim League was the single largest party, but could not form a government in an increasingly polarized situation. Despite the protests of the League, Sir Bertrand Glancy invited Khizr to form a coalition Unionist, Akali, and Congress ministry on 7 March 1946. 
Khizr attended the Paris peace conference between 29 July and 15 October 1946. He was, however, an increasingly isolated figure in Punjab politics: the Muslim League launched a direct action campaign on 25 January 1947 in response to the banning of the Muslim League national guards, and the agitation revealed the unpopularity of the coalition government. Khizr only finally resigned, however, after Attlee's announcement of 20 February that the British would quit India by June 1948. The Unionist departure precipitated an outbreak of serious communal disturbances; the Sikh desire to avenge these attacks contributed to the later communal holocaust of August 1947. Khizr's warnings that partition would unleash widespread violence were chillingly vindicated. 
Khizr feared for his safety and only entered Pakistan in October 1949, after a period of self-imposed exile in London. Unlike other Muslim Unionists, he never again resumed public life. His remaining years were spent at Kalra and in travel to Britain and the United States. He was knighted in 1946. As his economic fortunes declined he entered into two further unsuccessful marriages. Khizr died near Chico, Glen County, California, on 20 January 1975. His body was flown home for burial four days later in the family graveyard at Kalra. 
Khizr's legacy lies in his style of statecraft. His natural tolerance and flexibility enabled him to practise intuitively a consociational system of power-sharing based on decentralization in political representation and government appointments, and cross-communal coalition building. Significantly, the abandonment of such traditions of political accommodation has been accompanied in contemporary south Asia by a recrudescence of communal and ethnic violence. Khizr's attachment to the politics of accommodation is likely to be of increasing interest in a critical reappraisal of the partition era. 


@@@@@


doc= 58646


Alexander, William Whiteway (1852-1933), athletics administrator, was born on 3 December 1852 at Park Hill Farm, Andover, Hampshire, the younger son of James Whiteway Alexander ('b'. 1821/2), who later became an inn-keeper. Most of his boyhood was spent on the Isle of Wight. In his teens, certainly before he was eighteen, he left home and made his way to the mainland, apparently distressed when his father remarried soon after his mother's death. He was interested in horses and worked for some years as a stable boy. Aged nineteen he was a domestic servant in the household of the vicar of Brewood, Staffordshire. He moved to Birmingham to take a job with the Post Office as a letter carrier and married, on 19 August 1877, Mary Ann Lucy ('b'. 1852/3), daughter of William Hancox. They had six children. He followed his father into the licensed trade, at Redditch and then at Halesowen, Worcestershire, where in 1901 he was manager of a public house. He later became a sub-postmaster. 
At Brewood Alexander began to compete in local athletics meetings, and after moving to Birmingham he joined Birchfield Harriers in 1879. He developed into a good cross-country runner and finished fourth in the English championship of 1881. But after becoming secretary to the Birchfield club in 1882 and taking a place on the committee of the Midland Counties Cross Country Association, his running took second place to administration and an ambition to make Birchfield a successful club. The national and area associations had recently been formed and many new clubs were being founded. Within Birmingham there was intense rivalry between Birchfield and Moseley Harriers, and also between the men who were the driving forces behind these clubs, Alexander and Harry Oliver. The most prestigious prize in inter-club competition was the English cross-country championship, which Birchfield won for the first time in 1880. Inspired by Oliver, Moseley took the title the following four years, using the strategy of importing good runners from outside the Birmingham area. 
When Moseley disbanded in 1886 it left Birchfield as the top club in the midlands, and Alexander set about making it the top club in the country. He did so by copying Moseley's policy and signing up some of the best runners from all around the midlands, and then, at the turn of the century, setting up club branches and feeding runners to the parent club. It proved extremely effective. Birchfield enjoyed a prolonged run of success in the cross-country championship that a century later remained the most outstanding in any branch of inter-club competition in Britain; of the forty-nine championships held from 1886 to 1939 the club won twenty-seven of them, and finished outside the first three only six times. 
Although primarily interested in the fortunes of Birchfield, Alexander had an abiding love for cross-country and all those who took part in it. He claimed it was the purest and healthiest of pastimes, with no material reward for weekly toil and strict training. In this, he was certainly drawing a comparison with the track handicap races, where the lure of attractive prizes caused some chicanery. He was official handicapper in the midlands from 1886 until the authorities formed a handicapping board in 1901. In 1930 the Amateur Athletic Association produced a book detailing the first fifty years of organized athletics in England, and Alexander wrote the section on cross-country. He was secretary of the Midland Counties Cross Country Association (1888-98), and its treasurer (1888-95) and president (1903-4); he was also secretary of the English Cross Country Union (1890-93 and 1896-8). 
On 20 September 1926 Birchfield members were called to a meeting 'to consider the purchase of land for an athletics track and sports ground which will perpetuate the life work of Mr W. W. Alexander and commemorate the club's jubilee in December 1927'. The motion was passed, the money raised from club funds and public subscription, and the Alexander Stadium was officially opened on 27 July 1929. It was Birchfield's home until the club moved to a new stadium (named the Birmingham Alexander Stadium) in 1977. 
Alexander married a second time and had four children with his second wife, the last child being born when he was seventy-eight. Alexander died from bronchial pneumonia at his home, 176 Gooch Street, Birmingham, on 6 October 1933 and was buried in the cemetery of Aston parish church, Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 58647


Snook, William (1861-1916), athlete, was born at Belle Vue, St Julian, Shrewsbury, on 3 February 1861, the son of George Snook, a road surveyor, and his wife, Mary, formerly Corfield. He was educated at Admaston College, Shropshire, and began competing in sprint handicap races at the age of sixteen, but soon found he was better suited to longer distances. It is said that he once ran a mile on a stretch of road in under five minutes wearing 'ordinary shoes'. He took to running in one-mile handicaps and within two years was off scratch in most races. His form attracted Moseley Harriers, a Birmingham club with a reputation for signing talented distance runners, and he joined them at the age of eighteen. 
One of Snook's team-mates at Moseley was Walter George, the most outstanding runner of the day, and together the two men helped the club to win the prestigious English cross-country team championship four successive times from 1881 to 1884. In track races, however, they were rivals, and although George won most of their encounters, Snook recorded a number of significant wins. In the 1883 Amateur Athletic Association (AAA) championship he beat George in the 1 and the 4 mile races, and two days later won the 10 miles, a race George did not contest. Snook was again the winner in the one-mile and half-mile races at Widnes three weeks later. 
George regained the ascendancy in 1884 and beat Snook in all major races. He then turned professional and left the field open for his rival to establish himself as top amateur. Snook, who moved to Birchfield Harriers, took full advantage, winning the English cross-country race in March 1885, and four titles at the AAA championships in July that year. His fame, however, was short-lived. When he finished second in the cross-country championships at Croydon on 6 March 1886, the AAA officials decided that he had 'thrown' the race for financial gain and suspended him for life from all amateur athletics. Bookmakers played a prominent part in athletics at that time and Snook had been heavily backed to win. The suspension was seen as a move to clean up the sport by making an example of one of its biggest names, and public opinion sided with the AAA. 
After his suspension Snook ran as a professional for three years and was the licensee of at least two public houses in Birmingham before moving to France, where he coached runners and cyclists. His wife, Elizabeth Jane Coleman, whom he had married in August 1884, and from whom he was separated, died in 1900, their only child having died in infancy. Snook eventually returned to England in 1916, destitute and in poor health, and was admitted to the Birmingham workhouse infirmary at Erdington. He died there on 9 December 1916 and was buried in a common grave in Witton cemetery, the funeral fees being paid by Birchfield Harriers. 


@@@@@


doc= 58648


Hutchins, Henry (1857-1939), athlete, was born at Alpha Place, Putney, Surrey, on 27 February 1857, the third son in the family of three sons and three daughters of James Hutchins (1817/18-1856), a journeyman stonemason, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Harper (1816/17-1880). His father died before he was born, and his widowed mother worked as a charwoman. As a boy he was said to have delivered newspapers in Putney, but he became a clerk, and was described as such, living in Wimbledon, when he married, at Hammersmith on 3 March 1880, Harriett (1858-1930), daughter of James Scotcher, corn merchant, of Guestling, Sussex. They had a daughter, Hilda (1881-1952). 
Known as Harry Hutchens, he competed mostly in handicaps at the main centres for professional meetings, Sheffield and Edinburgh. He was a 'marked man' from the time he won a Sheffield handicap in 1878, but running off scratch he won there in 1879, 1882, and 1891. Handicapped severely, he never won the 120 yards at the new year gala meeting at Powderhall, Edinburgh, regarded as the blue riband event for professionals. Indeed, Hutchins's reputation was to some extent based on what people thought he could have achieved if he had run flat out more often than he did, for he sometimes found it more profitable to lose races he might well have won. 
Having run in America in 1884, in Australia in 1886 Hutchins beat the expatriate Irishman Tom Malone in a three-race series, then lost twice to Charles Samuels, an Aborigine. He beat Samuels so decisively in a third race, however, it seemed likely, as was claimed, that he deliberately lost the first two. In Melbourne on 29 January 1887 he ran 100 yards in 9.75 seconds. On 13 September 1887 he was involved in a fiasco that virtually ended the claim of professional races to be genuinely competitive. At Lillie Bridge Stadium, London, he was due to meet Harry Gent of Stockton over 120 yards. With several thousand spectators present, the race was cancelled at the last moment because their backers could not agree which runner should lose the race. The crowd rioted and burnt down the grandstand. 
Hutchins's fame, however, spanned several generations, and people who had not seen him run repeated the cliche of those who had: that he was the finest sprinter who ever lived. Three examples of performances when he was apparently moving at top speed show that he was very fast by any standard: 131 yards (120 metres) in 12.4 seconds, and 50 yards in 4.5. He always used a standing start, and was still competing and starting off scratch in his late thirties. At Paisley, a month before his thirty-seventh birthday, he was timed at 11.8 seconds for 120 yards and 21.8 for 220. By 1901 he was employed as a foreman at the Royal Naval Ordnance Depot, Woolwich. Hutchins, described as a 'professional athlete (retired)', died at 134 Brookdale Road, Catford, London, on 2 January 1939, fifty-five years to the day after he had covered 300 yards in 30 seconds on a cold winter's day in Edinburgh, a performance that still impresses historians of athletics. 


@@@@@


doc= 58649


Enderby family (per. c.1750-1876), whale and seal oil merchants and promoters of Antarctic exploration, came to prominence in the early 1750s, when the firm of Samuel Enderby & Sons is recorded as oil merchants trading from Paul's Wharf, Thames Street, in the City of London. The founder was 


@@@@@


doc= 58653


Erskine, John Francis Ashley, Lord Erskine (1895-1953), politician and administrator in India, was born on 12 April 1895, the elder son of Walter John Francis Erskine, twelfth earl of Mar and fourteenth earl of Kellie (1865-1955), and Lady (Susan) Violet Ashley-Cooper (1868-1938). He bore the courtesy title of Lord Erskine, but, predeceasing his father, he never succeeded to the peerage. Erskine was educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford. He served through the First World War, initially in the Scots Guards and later, in the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, attaining the rank of major. The war over, on 2 December 1919 he married Lady Marjorie Hervey ('b'. 1898), elder daughter of the fourth marquess of Bristol. They had four sons. In November 1922 he was elected as the Unionist MP for Weston-super-Mare, which he represented for the next eleven years, except for a few months in 1924 when the Labour Party was in office. In 1932 he became an assistant whip in the National Government. 
Erskine had a keen interest in the affairs of the empire, following particularly closely the round-table conferences of 1930-33 which eventually led to the 'Government of India Act' of 1935. Before it was passed, however, he accepted the governorship of Madras, arriving in India in 1934. Madras represented one of the few unequivocal successes of the previous scheme of constitutional reform drawn up by Edwin Montagu and Lord Chelmsford in 1918 and enacted in 1920. A local 'Justice Party' had emerged to work the reforms with the British government and to keep the nationalist Congress Party at bay. Erskine confidently expected the same to happen after the first elections under the new act, which took place in 1937. But he was to be sorely disappointed. The Congress Party swept to power with its largest majority anywhere in India. 
At first, this promised Erskine serious difficulty. The Madras Congress was led by Chakravarti Rajagopalachari, one of Mahatma Gandhi's principal lieutenants. However, Erskine's political skills proved refined, and the 1937-9 Congress ministry co-operated with the British authorities to a degree not initially anticipated. Madras enjoyed two years of relatively stable government. None the less, denouement came with the approach of war: in 1939 Erskine was obliged to suspend the legislature under section 93 of the 1935 act and impose direct rule by the British executive, as Congress withdrew from office in protest at India's involvement in the war. 
Erskine returned to England in 1940 and, soon after, was elected MP for Brighton at a by-election. He was eager to serve in the wartime government but was to be disappointed. He represented a side of the Conservative Party which had long been at odds with the now ascendant Winston Churchill, who had opposed the 1935 'Government of India Act'. In March 1941 Erskine resigned his seat and retired to his house, Ickworth, near Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, where he was active in local affairs, especially during the Second World War. But his health steadily deteriorated and, after a major operation, he died at Ickworth on 3 May 1953, at the age of fifty-eight. His wife survived him. Erskine always regarded himself as a Conservative in the liberal tradition, perhaps closest among his generation to R. A. B. Butler, who had drafted the 1935 act. This meant that his political fortunes went into eclipse under Churchill's leadership, and he died before they had a chance to recover in later years. 


@@@@@


doc= 58655


Monsell, Bolton Meredith Eyres, first Viscount Monsell (1881-1969), politician, was born at home at Hamble Cottage, Hamble, Hampshire, on 22 February 1881. His Anglo-Irish ascendancy family was a branch of the Monsells of Tervoe, who had settled in co. Limerick in 1644 and were represented in the senior line by the extinct barons Emly. His grandfather was the hymn writer John Samuel Bewley Monsell. His father, Bolton James Alfred Monsell (1840-1919), was an army officer and then chief constable of the Metropolitan Police from 1886 to 1910, and his mother, Mary Beverley Ogle (died 1929), was the second daughter of General Sir Edmund Ogle, sixth baronet; Monsell was the younger of their two sons in a family of six children. Although his father had an army background, Monsell was destined for the senior service. After preparatory schooling at Stubbington House, Fareham, he entered HMS 'Britannia' as a cadet in 1894. He went to sea as a midshipman in 1896 and specialized as a torpedo lieutenant in 1903, but his marriage to an heiress brought his naval career to a close. On 3 December 1904 he wed Caroline Mary Sybil (1881-1959), the only child of Henry William Eyres of Dumbleton Hall, near Evesham in Worcestershire. The names were joined together as Eyres Monsell, and the match enabled him to retire from the navy in 1906 and embark instead upon a political career. 
Monsell was elected Conservative MP for Evesham in January 1910, and in the following year became a whip at the suggestion of Bonar Law. During the war he returned to active duty in the navy, and was awarded the order of the Nile for service in Egypt in 1915 before being promoted to commander in 1917. Monsell became deputy chief whip, as treasurer of the household, on 5 February 1919. On 1 April 1921 he moved to the Admiralty, where he was civil lord up to the fall of the coalition and then parliamentary and financial secretary. He was on good terms with Stanley Baldwin, who sat for the adjacent Bewdley division, and with other Conservative anti-coalitionists. It was therefore not surprising that Bobby (as he was known to his friends) should be chosen as chief whip when that post became vacant shortly after Baldwin's succession to the Conservative leadership. Monsell was sworn of the privy council on 7 July 1923 and took over as chief whip on 25 July. 
Monsell served as chief whip for more than eight years, and was considered one of the most successful holders of this office. He possessed enormous charm and impeccable manners, was amusing and intelligent, and liked to be liked. Noted as being the best-dressed man in the House of Commons, he was tall, elegant, and strikingly handsome. He was cultivated and sociable, and enjoyed the parties of the 'smart set' and the company of women, but he was also very particular and easily bored, when a sardonic note might surface. He enjoyed yachting and holidays at friends' houses on the Mediterranean. He also loved life in the country, where shooting was his favourite pursuit; he took great trouble in shaping the Dumbleton woods into one of the best and most difficult shoots in the country. 
Monsell enjoyed his work as chief whip, and was closely consulted by Baldwin on appointments and parliamentary strategy. Under his command the whips' office ran with smooth efficiency; in the 1924-9 parliament the huge Conservative majority was organized in a rota system which gave MPs some leisure while ensuring a government majority. Although Monsell was normally a patient man, tempers can fray in the summer heat and in July 1928 his exasperation with Sir Basil Peto, a notably awkward 'die-hard', led to the unusual step of withdrawing the whip for several months. This explosion was untypical: dissidents were normally handled with 'a nice admixture of polite persuasion and hints of party discipline', applying 'the spur and bridle, when needed, with a deft touch' ('The Times', 24 March 1969). He encouraged the development of both the 1922 committee and the party's official back-bench committee system which began in 1924. He faced a more difficult period while the Conservatives were fractious and dispirited in opposition between 1929 and 1931. Dissatisfaction with Baldwin's leadership and policy, whipped up by the press lords, led to two party meetings being held in 1930, the first of which Monsell chaired. The critics were outmanoeuvred, but unrest continued into the spring of 1931. Monsell, who had been knighted on 28 June 1929, acted as chief whip during the first emergency National Government and then joined the cabinet as first lord of the Admiralty on 5 November 1931. 
The longest-serving first lord of the 1930s, Monsell began by restoring confidence after the shock of the Invergordon mutiny (September 1931) and the uncertainty of Sir Frederick Field's period as first sea lord (1930-33). In 1932 Monsell decided to replace him with the outstanding service figure of the 1930s, Admiral Sir Ernle Chatfield, with whom he established a good working relationship based on mutual respect for their complementary roles. Under the economic pressures of the early 1930s, Monsell 'had to struggle on behalf of the Navy against his old friends in the Cabinet, a severe trial to his nature'. By the end of his tenure, a programme of replacement and expansion had begun. In Chatfield's view 'no one could have done more, few could have achieved so much' (Chatfield, 2.98). 
The Anglo-German naval agreement of 1935 was the most controversial event of Monsell's career. Although he signed it on Britain's behalf, it originated as a German offer and was shaped by many hands. The agreement was attacked by Churchill at the time and in his memoirs, and for many years after the Second World War it was regarded as a defining example of the folly of appeasement. The terms negotiated allowed Germany to build up to same strength in submarines, but her overall naval tonnage was limited to only 35 per cent of Britain's. Recent research has suggested that the Admiralty was mainly concerned with countering the danger that Germany would build large surface warships, and in this respect the agreement was successful. The German navy never posed a serious surface threat in the Second World War, while no treaty could have prevented the rapid building of submarines in wartime. 
Monsell's intention to retire had been known since the middle of 1935, but he was persuaded to remain owing to the approaching international naval disarmament conference; as this met in London, he had the further burden of acting as its chairman. He retired from the House of Commons at the 1935 general election, and was raised to the peerage as Viscount Monsell on 30 November 1935. He eventually stood down as first lord on 5 June 1936, by which time the negotiations for the London naval treaty had been concluded. The conference failed to secure any significant disarmament, but even a partial continuation of the Washington treaty system had some advantages and was better than an unbridled naval arms race. 
From 1941 to 1945 Monsell served as regional controller of civil defence for south-east England. He had one son and three daughters, but was something of a remote figure to his children. By the late 1940s his first marriage was effectively over, and he did not defend his wife's suit for divorce on grounds of adultery. A decree 'nisi' was granted on 25 May 1950, and exactly two months later Monsell remarried. His second wife, Essex Leila Hilary (1907-1996), was a granddaughter of the first earl of Ypres and daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Edward Gerald Fleming French; her marriage to Captain Vivyan Drury of Castle Kevin, co. Wicklow, was dissolved in 1935. Monsell died on 21 March 1969, and was cremated at a ceremony held on 28 March, after which the ashes were scattered at sea from a warship. He was succeeded by his only son, Henry Bolton Graham Eyres Monsell ('b'. 1905), who died unmarried in 1993 and the title became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 58659


Bowater, Sir Thomas Vansittart, first baronet (1862-1938), businessman and politician, was born on 20 October 1862 at Cheetham Hill, Manchester, the eldest child in the family of seven sons and two daughters of William Vansittart Bowater (1838-1907), paper merchant and agent, and his wife, Eliza Jane (died 1912), daughter of Thomas Davey of Islington, London. Educated at Broughton College, Manchester, and at Stourbridge, he left school at a comparatively early age to enter the Manchester textile warehouse of J. and N. Phillips as an apprentice. Soon after the family moved back to London about 1880, he joined the family business. He married, on 8 June 1887, Emily Margaret (1867-1924), daughter of John Spencer of Croydon, with whom he had four sons and two daughters. 
In 1889 Thomas Bowater (and two brothers) became partners in W. V. Bowater & Sons. As the buying agents from around 1890 for Alfred and Harold Harmsworth (later respectively viscounts Northcliffe and Rothermere), the company was closely connected with the largest and most successful of all the mass-market publishers and flourished accordingly. By 1900, however, the three brothers rebelled against their father's hard-drinking and tyrannical personality to assume joint control. In 1910 the partnership was turned into a relatively prosperous private company and in January 1914 the brothers decided to enter paper manufacture with the construction of their first paper mill at Northfleet, near Gravesend, Kent, although the intervention of the war ensured that it would not be in operation until 1926. 
The company's growth to become by 1938 the world's largest manufacturer of newsprint owed most to the dynamic personality of Bowater's nephew Sir Eric Vansittart Bowater. Tension between Eric's restless entrepreneurial spirit and his more conservative uncles was resolved with the enforced removal of Thomas Bowater from both the chairmanship and the board (along with his brother Frank) in November 1927. Yet in reality, as the company's historian notes, for some years, the outgoing chairman had 'presided with dignity over the affairs of the firm rather than actively managing them' (Reader, 25). 
From at least 1904 Bowater had left his two younger brothers to run the business while he devoted most of his time to public life in the City of London. Having become a freeman in July 1897, he soon became a member of the City board of guardians. After an unsuccessful contest in 1898, he was elected as a common councilman for Vintry ward from 1899 to 1907 serving as chairman of the cattle markets committee in 1903 and the central markets committee in 1905. In 1905 Bowater was also elected as one of the City's two sheriffs and at the end of his term he received a knighthood (June 1906). On 28 August 1907 he was comfortably elected as alderman of Castle Baynard ward, a position he occupied until 1931, when he transferred to the ward of Bridge Without. In 1913 Bowater became lord mayor and soon after (16 July 1914) he was created a baronet. Lord mayor at the outbreak of the First World War (his son Frank held the same office at the outbreak of the Second World War), he was recalled from a motor tour of France only three days before war was declared. He immediately rallied the City, raising a new battalion of the City of London regiment and organizing relief works, particularly for Belgian refugees. 
Bowater stood as an independent Conservative in the City of London by-election on 19 May 1922 on a vigorous economy platform. Although the tide had clearly receded since the Anti-Waste League's by-election victories of the previous year, he still polled 6178 votes to the 10,114 for his official Conservative opponent. Standing as a Conservative at another by-election in the City of London in February 1924, he easily defeated his Liberal opponent by 12,962 votes to 5525. He held his seat in this double-member constituency until his death. 
Bowater's back-bench parliamentary career was undistinguished: his contribution was confined largely to a few brief questions and interventions either advocating protectionism for the newsprint industry or defending the interests of his constituency. His only significant speech, in March 1931, was a brief but spirited defence of the retention of the business vote for the City of London when all other such qualifications were to be abolished by clause 3 of the unsuccessful 'Representation of the People (no. 2) Bill'. After his first wife's death in 1924, on 12 August 1925 he married Alice Mary (died 1949), widow of Archibald Coysgarne Sim of Harrow Weald Park. Bowater died at his home, 53 Hans Mansions, London, on 28 March 1938. 


@@@@@


doc= 58661


Boyce, Sir (Harold) Leslie, first baronet (1895-1955), businessman and politician, was born at Taree, New South Wales, Australia, on 9 July 1895, the third son of Charles Macleay Boyce (1868-1936) and his wife Ethel May Thorne (died 1943). Boyce attended Sydney grammar school from 1911 to 1913 and maintained links with the institution thereafter. In 1924 he established the London branch of the Old Sydneian's Union and in 1952 he was host at a banquet of London members. 
In 1915 Boyce joined the Australian Imperial Force and served as a second lieutenant in the 27th battalion in Egypt and Gallipoli. Promoted to lieutenant in the 27th battalion, he was seriously wounded in July 1916 while fighting on the western front and almost buried alive after being taken for dead. After a lengthy period of convalescence in Britain, he returned to Australia and made a deal with the minister of defence that if he personally raised an infantry unit within six weeks he would be allowed to return with it to active service in France. This he did. 
Early in 1919 Boyce entered Balliol College, Oxford, as a colonial military student, supported by a Huth scholarship and scholarships from the Rhodes Trust, and graduated in 1921 having completed the shortened course in modern history. In 1922 he was called to the bar by the Inner Temple and between 1923 and 1926 he worked in commercial law, dealing mainly with cases of damage to British goods and property in the Middle East during the First World War. In 1922 he acted as technical adviser to the Australian representative before the permanent mandates commission of the League of Nations in Geneva. He was later appointed a substitute delegate and legal adviser to the Australian delegation at the third assembly of the league. On 16 July 1926 he married Maybery Browse Bevan (died 1978), daughter of Edward Philip Bevan of Melbourne. They had three sons. 
In 1931 Boyce became managing director and chairman of the struggling Gloucester Railway Carriage and Wagon Company. He implemented a plan of reorganization with 'energy and vision' (Amery, 132), economizing in key areas and recruiting his friend Leopold Amery onto the board of directors. The firm gained large orders for railway rolling stock from Canada and Queensland. Profitability was restored and expansion soon followed. Boyce remained managing director of the company until 1945 and chairman until his death. He also held positions with several other companies, sat on the executive committees of various national trade associations, and was chairman of the all-party parliamentary railway group. 
In May 1929 Boyce was elected a Unionist MP for Gloucester, his adopted home. He was also high sheriff of Gloucester (1941-2). During the turmoil created by Lord Beaverbrook's empire free trade campaign, he played a minor part in attempts to conciliate the different factions within his party. Sharing a platform with Beaverbrook in Gloucester in February 1930, he stressed the possibilities for a 'rapprochement' between Baldwin and the rogue press baron. In private he suggested a referendum to resolve the issue (Barnes and Nicholson, 16, 64, 65). In 1930 he accompanied the empire parliamentary delegation to Northern Rhodesia. 
During the Second World War Boyce joined the Palace of Westminster company (35th London battalion) of the Home Guard. He also sat on the advisory committee of the Ministry of War Transport and in 1946 led a UK trade mission to China. He lost his Gloucester seat to a Labour opponent at the general election of 1945 and did not sit in parliament again. 
As a successful barrister, politician, businessman, and financier, Boyce naturally also developed strong links with the City of London. He was elected alderman for the ward of Walbrook (1942-54), having stressed in his campaign the task of reconstruction that faced the war-ravaged City and the need to 'meet modern requirements, and yet preserve inviolate all the ancient rights and privileges, and our immemorial customs' (Guildhall Library, MS 14809). He was a liveryman of the Loriners' and Carpenters' companies and became master of the Loriners in 1951. He acted as sheriff of the City of London from 1947 to 1948 and lord mayor of London from 1951 to 1952. 
Boyce's elevation to the ceremonial pinnacle of the City establishment elicited a variety of responses. The 'Gloucester Journal' (17 November 1951) was keen to claim him as a son of the town, drawing parallels with his illustrious Gloucestershire predecessor, Dick Whittington. The London 'Evening Standard' (9 November 1951) meanwhile dubbed the event the 'austerity Lord Mayor's Show', owing to a shortened procession that reflected Britain's post-war economic difficulties. For others imperial sentiment distracted attention from budget cuts. Boyce was widely acclaimed as the first dominions-born lord mayor of London, an association further cultivated when the lord mayor's day procession stopped at Australia House to receive an address of congratulation sent by Robert Menzies, the Australian prime minister. At his inaugural banquet Boyce claimed that the City of London remained 'the very heart and centre of the British Empire -- still the greatest Empire the world has ever known' (lord mayor's day book, 1951). His Australian origins were later deemed especially significant when he presided over the presentation of the freedom of the City of London to Menzies on 4 June 1952. His career demonstrated the continuing strength of the imperial bond between Britain and the dominions during the decades that followed the Second World War. 
Boyce was created KBE in 1944 and a baronetcy was conferred on him in November 1952 at the end of his year of office as lord mayor. His interests included freemasonry (he was senior grand deacon from 1948 to 1949 in the grand lodge of English freemasons) and the St John Ambulance Brigade. He was also one of his Majesty's lieutenants and a JP for the City of London, and sat as a commissioner of the central criminal court, a governor of the Royal Hospitals and chairman of the executive committees of the King George VI Memorial Fund and the King George VI Foundation. He died of heart failure on 30 May 1955 at the Royal Hospital, Southgate Street, Gloucester. 


@@@@@


doc= 58663


Coutts, William Lehman Ashmead Bartlett Burdett- (1851-1921), philanthropist and politician, was born in Plymouth, Massachusetts, on 20 June 1851, the second son of Ellis Bartlett (died 1852) and his wife, Sophia, daughter of John King Ashmead of Philadelphia. His grandparents on both sides of the parental line were British subjects. His mother was widowed in 1852 and she moved to England with her two sons, William (who was known as Ashmead for much of his life) and Ellis Ashmead Bartlett (1849-1902). She settled in Torquay and met one of its most distinguished residents, the wealthy philanthropist Angela Georgina (from 1871 Baroness) Burdett-Coutts (1814-1906). Angela Burdett-Coutts was charmed by the intelligence and quick wit of the younger son, sympathized with Mrs Bartlett's predicament, and paid for William's education, privately in Torquay and later at Highgate School. In 1870 he entered Keble College, Oxford, recently founded to provide an inexpensive education on Anglican lines for men of limited means, and held the first scholarship to be endowed at the college. After graduating with third-class honours in modern history (1874), he read for the bar at the Inner Temple, but moved into the baroness's secretariat and became increasingly involved in her philanthropic activities. In 1877 she dispatched him as voluntary special commissioner to organize the Turkish Compassionate Fund, founded to provide relief to Turkish villagers displaced during the Russo-Turkish War. Even though Bartlett succumbed to typhus, these moneys were administered efficiently. In 1879-80 Bartlett, having recovered, travelled to Ireland to organize charitable relief among Irish fishermen. 
The most important event of Bartlett's life was his marriage to his mentor, the baroness, at Christ Church, Down Street, London, on 12 February 1881. The marriage of a young impecunious American, not yet thirty years old, to a wealthy woman in her late sixties provoked much gossip casting doubt on the veracity of Bartlett's motives. Queen Victoria herself referred to 'the 'mad' marriage' (Healey, 213) and tried to dissuade the baroness from plighting her troth. A Miss Shirley came forward and claimed that Bartlett had had an affair with her, but the baroness was not deflected. What Edith Wharton called in her novel 'The Buccaneers' (1938) a 'feeling of affinity with this new band of marauders' ('The Buccaneers', 103) renewed the baroness's philanthropic energies, and she gained much happiness from the marriage. Yet there can be little doubt that Bartlett gained most. Henceforth he assumed his wife's name by royal licence. In 1885 he was elected Unionist MP for Westminster. Acting on the baroness's behalf, he secured the passage of the 'Hampstead Heath Act', which added Parliament Hill and 300 acres to those areas granted public access. He was a competent back-bencher, who acted as his wife's political agent. But he also took part in reorganizing the City of Westminster under the 'Local Government Act' of 1899. 
That same year Burdett-Coutts travelled to South Africa as the 'Times' correspondent concerned with inquiring into the conditions endured by the sick and wounded during the South African War, where his nephew Ellis Ashmead-Bartlett was serving. His graphic account of their suffering spurred the setting up in 1900 of a royal commission of inquiry (chaired by Sir Robert Romer), which resulted in the reform of the Army Medical Services. 
The baroness's fortune was reduced by three-fifths as a result of the legal action taken by her sister when she married an alien. Nevertheless, Burdett-Coutts did not manage his wife's financial affairs with acumen. Her wealth enabled him to pursue expensive hobbies, such as racing and horse breeding, and he founded the Brookfield stud; this went out of business in 1910. The baroness died in 1906, but Burdett-Coutts continued much of her charitable work. He helped found, and then served as treasurer of, the Great Northern Central Hospital; he was twice master of the Turners' Company, and was a governor of Christ's Hospital. Burdett-Coutts also busied himself with railway reform, contributing to the passage of the 'Railway (Accounts and Returns) Act' of 1910. During the debates on parliamentary reform in 1917-18 he founded the Anti-Proportional Representation Committee. At the 1918 general election he was elected unopposed for the Abbey Division of Westminster and was sworn of the privy council in April 1921, but died suddenly at his home, Holly Lodge, Highgate, Middlesex, on 28 July 1921. He was buried at Frant, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 58668


Cecil, Evelyn, first Baron Rockley (1865-1941), politician, was born on 30 May 1865 at 32 Eccleston Square, London, the elder son and first of three children of Conservative MP Lord Eustace Brownlow Henry Gascoyne-Cecil (1834-1921), fourth son of the second marquess of Salisbury, and his wife, Lady Gertrude Louisa Scott (died 1919). Evelyn went to Eton College and New College, Oxford (1884-7). He took a second in jurisprudence and made a world tour before reading for the bar at the Inner Temple and joining the western circuit in 1889. Two years later, however, he gave up the law to become assistant private secretary (1891-2, 1895-1902) to the prime minister, who was his uncle, Lord Salisbury (even though his father viewed Salisbury as a betrayer of true Conservatism). 
While the Conservatives were in opposition, Cecil wrote a scholarly study of primogeniture (seen by him as a path to the ideal of refinement) and won a seat on the London school board (1894-9), where he made his name as a champion of religious education. A high-church Anglican like all the Cecils, he would have liked denominational divinity lessons to be available to all. The Hon. Alicia Margaret Tyssen-Amherst (1865-1941), garden historian, became his wife on 16 February 1898. They had three children. 
Evelyn Cecil, the first parliamentary candidate to use a motor car, secured a narrow victory at the Hertford by-election of 22 June 1898. A cogent speaker, with pleasant features and a thick moustache, he continued to specialize in educational and church issues, and could always be relied on to oppose legalization of marriage with deceased wife's sister. Less predictably he soon emerged as a fervent imperialist after visiting South Africa in 1899-1900. His book 'On the Eve of War' (1900) argued that peace had been impossible with a corrupt Boer oligarchy intent on turning the Transvaal into a hotbed of pan-Afrikaner conspiracy. After Britain overran the Boer states Cecil endorsed Alfred Milner's plan to flood the new colonies with English-speaking immigrants. Concern about German penetration of east Africa inspired him to propose the select committee on foreign steamship subsidies and their effect on British trade, which he chaired in 1901-2. 
Cecil, who had transferred to the safe seat of Aston Manor, near Birmingham, in 1900, agreed to serve on the executive council of the Tariff Reform League at its launch on 21 July 1903. Imperial preference joined church schools, empire migration, and merchant shipping as one of his primary interests; Joseph Chamberlain had few stauncher Conservative disciples. 
New Liberal reforms provoked fierce condemnation from Cecil, who contended that free school meals would check the flow of charity, encourage irresponsible parental behaviour, and sap the foundations of national independence. Passive resistance by taxpayers and a flight of capital abroad might be the result of the 1909 budget. He attacked women's suffrage and the payment of MPs. His own income came from directorships: of the Foreign and Colonial Investment Trust Company (1896-1940), the London and South Western Railway (1902-23), and the Southern Railway (1923-41). A member of many international railway congresses between 1905 and 1937, he could speak with knowledge on railway legislation. 
Though never as prominent in the House of Commons as his cousins Lord Hugh Cecil and Lord Robert Cecil, Evelyn Cecil took part in all the debates on disestablishing the Welsh church between 1912 and 1914. The theme of his political life throughout the ensuing decade, however, was the need to economize: the Liberals had let loose a spirit of reckless expenditure, and war added urgency to his calls to minimize waste. A member of the committee on public retrenchment, set up in July 1915, he campaigned doggedly for an increase in the postal rate from 1died to 11/2died until its enactment in May 1918. He was sworn of the privy council on 13 June 1917 and attended the inter-allied parliamentary committee (1916-18), at which British MPs and peers met French and Italian deputies and senators. Consciousness of the war debt burden made him persist in urging thrift after 1918, when his recommendations included scrapping labour exchanges, replacing super-tax with graduated income tax, and strengthening the powers of the Treasury. 
A senior back-bencher, Cecil was chairman of the select committee on the telephone service (1921-2) and the Home Office committee on young offenders (1925), and he served on the royal commission on honours (1921-2). Wartime charity work as secretary-general of the order of St John of Jerusalem (1915-21) largely accounted for his own knighthood in January 1922. The greatest legislative achievement of his career came at the third attempt in December 1926, when the 'Judicial Proceedings (Regulation of Reports) Act' outlawed salacious press coverage of divorce cases. Still eager to encourage dominion settlement, Sir Evelyn visited Australia with an empire parliamentary delegation in 1926. (He had been shortlisted for the governor-generalship the previous year.) 
In 1929 Cecil did not seek re-election for Aston (the name of his constituency since the boundary changes of 1918), yet his public life continued in an undramatic way. He was chairman of a Board of Trade committee on deaths by coal gas poisoning in 1930, and the new year honours of 1934 brought him a peerage, as Baron Rockley of Lytchett Heath. He had inherited Lytchett Heath House near Poole in Dorset from his father in 1921 and purchased picturesque Rockley Sands on the shores of Poole harbour to preserve them from factory development. 
Rockley introduced a 'Life Peers Bill' in 1935 in accordance with his long-standing interest in cautious reform of the House of Lords (which predated his participation in the second chamber conference chaired by James Bryce in 1916-17). The Lords passed it, but the Commons found no time. On 14 December 1935 he took on his final major assignment: the chairmanship of the royal commission on safety and health in coalmines, set up to consider revision of the 'Coal Mines Act' of 1911 in the light of the Gresford disaster of 22 September 1934, when 266 men were killed in a pit explosion. The Rockley report of 1938 ('Safety in coal mines', 'Parl. papers', 1938-9, 13, Cmd 5890) suggested greater powers for mines inspectors (but legislation had to wait until 1954). Evelyn Cecil made his last speech in the Lords in March 1939 on the subject of pithead baths. After retiring to Dorset, he died on 1 April 1941 at Lytchett Heath, where his funeral took place at the family's private chapel (later St Aldhelm's Church) on 5 April. His wife, Alicia, survived him by only a few months, dying on 14 September 1941. He was succeeded as second Baron Rockley by his son, Robert William Evelyn. 


@@@@@


doc= 58670


Hamilton, Douglas Douglas-, fourteenth duke of Hamilton and eleventh duke of Brandon (1903-1973), boxer, aviator, and politician, was born on 3 February 1903, the eldest of the seven children of Alfred Douglas-Hamilton, thirteenth duke of Hamilton (1862-1940), and his wife, Nina Mary Benita Douglas-Hamilton, nee Poore (1878-1951), anti-vivisectionist. He was educated at Eton College and at Balliol College, Oxford (1921-5), but took no degree. Then styled marquess of Douglas and Clydesdale, he was 5 feet 7 inches in height and possessed of exceptional strength. At Oxford he formed a close friendship with Eddie Eagan, the American Rhodes scholar who was the Olympic light heavyweight boxing champion, and Clydesdale succeeded Eagan as captain of the Oxford boxing team. Eagan described Clydesdale as having 'the broad shoulders and deft balance of a natural fighter', and together they went on a world boxing tour, taking on all comers. The tour was chronicled in Eagan's enthusiastic, if effusive, book 'Fighting for Fun' (1932). Clydesdale reached the semi-finals of the British middleweight amateur championships and won the Scottish middleweight championship; in Scotland his prowess resulted in the sobriquet the Boxing Marquis. 
Clydesdale joined the Royal Auxiliary Air Force in 1927 and was rapidly promoted, becoming squadron leader of 602 (City of Glasgow) squadron in 1931. In 1933 he was chosen to be chief pilot of the Houston Mount Everest flight expedition, and on 3 April 1933 was the first man to fly over Everest; he was followed by Flight Lieutenant David McIntyre, both in experimental Westland aircraft. This feat represented a decisive leap forward in aviation development and technology. Clydesdale and McIntyre recounted their experiences in 'The Pilot's Book of Everest' (1936). Clydesdale was granted the freedom of Hamilton in 1933 and made a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society; in 1935 he was awarded the Air Force Cross. The Everest expedition gave Clydesdale and McIntyre the standing as professional flying instructors that they needed to start a flying school at Prestwick, after which they founded Scottish Aviation to build aircraft. More than sixty years and several mergers later, it constituted the Scottish division of British Aerospace. On 2 December 1937 Clydesdale married Lady Elizabeth Ivy Percy (1916-2008), elder daughter of Alan Ian Percy, eighth duke of Northumberland. They had five sons. 
Having unsuccessfully contested Govan in 1929 Clydesdale was elected MP for East Renfrewshire as a Conservative in 1930, and retained the seat until he succeeded to the dukedom in 1940. He spoke in the House of Commons on RAF and Scottish matters, and travelled with other MPs to Russia, Italy, and Germany. His visit to the Berlin Olympic games in 1936 was to have repercussions: while there, he met not only Goering and Milch, in charge of the Luftwaffe, but also Professor Albrecht Haushofer, a personal adviser to Rudolf Hess, and special adviser on foreign affairs to Hitler and Ribbentrop. From the outbreak of war in 1939, Clydesdale served full time with the RAF. He was a sector commander of 11 group, Fighter Command, and was mentioned in dispatches for service during the battle for France in 1940. During the battle of Britain he was station commander for the Turnhouse air sector in Scotland. He succeeded his father as fourteenth duke of Hamilton and hereditary keeper of Holyroodhouse in 1940, and in the same year became lord steward of the royal household, a position he retained until 1964. 
Unbeknown to the new duke, in the autumn of 1940 Haushofer had told Hess that Hamilton 'had access, at all times, to all important persons in London, even to Churchill and the King'. Hess, who had conceived of the idea of negotiating a peace settlement between Britain and Germany, asked Haushofer to write to Hamilton, a letter which received no reply. On 10 May 1941, the same evening that the House of Commons was bombed, Hess parachuted into Scotland, gave a false name, and asked to see the duke of Hamilton, whom he had never met before. On 11 May Hess admitted to Hamilton that he was on a 'personal unauthorised mission', but claimed that he knew what Hitler's peace terms would be. Hamilton at once flew south to report to the prime minister, who was then at Ditchley Park. Churchill found Hamilton's report hard to believe, saying, 'Well, Hess or no Hess, I am going to see the Marx Brothers'. However, later that night he had a long interview with Hamilton, and Hess was identified and treated as a prisoner of war. Later in 1941 Hamilton was promoted to group captain, in command of the Air Training Corps in Scotland. He was made honorary air commodore, and in 1946 was appointed GCVO. 
Hamilton, who became president of the British Airline Pilots Association in 1937, was president of the Air League of the British Empire from 1959 to 1968. He was also associated with the Air Cadet Council and the Guild of Air Pilots and Air Navigators. In 1962 Julian Amery, minister for aviation, appointed him to chair a committee on civil aviation pilot training; his recommendations were implemented. He was active as an elder of the Church of Scotland, serving as lord high commissioner to the general assembly in 1953, 1954, 1955, and 1958. He had a lifelong interest in young people, and was president of the Boys' Brigade in Scotland, and in promoting sport, presiding over the National Advisory Council on Physical Training (Scotland) and the Scottish Amateur Boxing Association. He had many business interests, and was president of the Building Societies Association (1961-5). From 1948 until his death he was chancellor of St Andrews University, and his last major act was to go to North America in the early 1970s to raise more than $1 million of funds for the university. He died in Edinburgh on 30 March 1973, and was succeeded by his eldest son. His ashes were scattered from the air beside Lennoxlove Politicians Walk on the fortieth anniversary of his flight over Everest. 
A devoted Scot, the duke of Hamilton 'cared very much about everything to do with Scotland, both in the preservation of her past tradition and continuing identity, but more especially in the building of her future as a meaningful country in the modern world' ('The Times'); his creation of the aviation industry in Scotland was his single most important contribution. 


@@@@@


doc= 58671


Collins, Sir Godfrey Pattison (1875-1936), politician and publisher, was born on 26 June 1875 at 14 Park Grove Terrace, Glasgow, the second of three children of Alexander Glen Collins (1848-1910), printer and publisher, and his wife, Cornelia (1853-1938), daughter of Godfrey Pattison, merchant, of Glasgow. He was the great-grandson of the founder of the Collins publishing enterprise ['see 'Collins family]. While other sons of the Collins dynasty had been educated at Harrow, Godfrey, intended for a career in the navy, was sent after preparatory school at Temple Grove, East Sheen, to HMS 'Britannia' at the age of thirteen. After service in the East India station he retired from the navy in 1893 to join the expanding family firm, and married on 26 April 1900 (Margaret Jean) Faith, daughter of J. C. Aitken Henderson, with whom he had a son and a daughter. 
Collins was first sent to London to train as a compositor and to learn the technicalities of printing. In 1899 he was dispatched to Germany to investigate state-of-the-art printing machinery. In Leipzig he found revolutionary rotary printing presses and supervised their installation in Glasgow. The Collins enterprise now had its own modern paper-making, printing, and publishing organizations. Cheap books were now possible. First came the 'Collins Illustrated Pocket Classics' for 1's'. each. Some 80,000 copies (ten titles from 'David Copperfield' to 'East Lynne') were sold in the first six months. Then came even cheaper series, the 'Nation's Library' and the 'Sevenpennies'. 
By 1910 the company, under the joint control of Godfrey Collins and his older brother, was highly successful and Godfrey felt able to follow the family tradition of public service. A known advocate of the social policies of the 'new Liberals' and Lloyd George, he was invited to stand as Liberal MP for Greenock. Elected in January 1910, he almost at once became parliamentary private secretary to the secretary of state for war, and was a member of the War Office supplies committee. During 1915-16 he was parliamentary private secretary to the chief Liberal whip. 
At the outbreak of the First World War, Collins and his brother, together with 275 of their employees, volunteered for service in the army. He was first appointed to the War Office staff of the quartermaster-general. He then served in Egypt, Gallipoli, and Mesopotamia. There he reorganized the chaotic systems of supply and accounting, saving millions of pounds. In recognition he was made CMG in 1917. 
Now Lieutenant-Colonel Collins, he returned to the House of Commons. His main interest was in the economy, particularly in the supervision of government expenditure, about which he had found abundant scope for criticism during his war service. His efforts in the Commons were responsible for the establishment of the select committee on public expenditure. In 1919 he was knighted and made a junior lord of the Treasury in Lloyd George's coalition government. But he quickly became disheartened by the squabbles within the divided Liberal Party and with the government's failure to secure the supervision of public expenditure that he saw to be necessary. Finally, unable to accept government policy over reprisals in Ireland, he resigned in February 1920 and crossed the floor of the house to join the Liberals under Asquith. In 1924 he was appointed Liberal chief whip in the House of Commons by Asquith, but was removed when Lloyd George became party leader in 1926. 
Collins remained active in publishing. Because of the war, supply of paper and other materials had become difficult and costs had risen. Cheap book production from Glasgow was now impossible. He established an office at 48 Pall Mall, London, and began to publish 'new' authors. His first books were previously unpublished works by Henry James. His list soon included H. G. Wells, Rose Macaulay, and Walter de la Mare, among others. He then launched the Crime Club, publishing Agatha Christie, Dorothy Sayers, Ngaio Marsh, and other new authors. His final venture was into the 'westerns' so much enjoyed by his former colleague Lloyd George. 
In 1931 Collins threw in his lot with the National Government, and retained his Greenock seat with an enlarged majority at the general election held in that year ['see 'Liberal Nationals]. He was appointed as secretary of state for Scotland in September 1932 and began the Indian summer for which he will be best remembered. He initiated the Calton Scheme to establish the centre of Scottish administration in Scotland rather than in London. Although he did not live to see the completion of St Andrew's House on Calton Hill in Edinburgh, before his death 96 per cent of the Scottish administrative apparatus had been moved north of the border. During his few years of office he brought in over thirty bills to improve conditions in Scotland. His finest performance in the house was on the 'Housing (Scotland) Bill' of 1935, a measure to tackle Scotland's notorious housing conditions. Other bills related to education, land reform, and inshore fishing. He set up the economic development committee to consider ways of restoring Scotland's economy that had been devastated earlier in the century. He appointed the committee on Scottish medical services that produced the plan that led, in 1948, to the creation of a national health service in Scotland that was appropriate for Scottish conditions. He was made LLD of Glasgow University in 1935. 
Collins was an enthusiastic stalker, an excellent tennis player, and an experienced yachtsman (he represented Britain in the British-American 6 metre cup in 1931). He died of septicaemia on 13 October 1936 following a minor nose operation in Zurich, Switzerland. He was buried three days later at the Glasgow necropolis. In a relatively short life he had been a successful publisher and an outstandingly effective secretary of state for Scotland who had never been a partisan politician. 


@@@@@


doc= 58672


Colman, Sir Nigel Claudian Dalziel, baronet (1886-1966), politician, was born at Carlyle House, Chelsea Embankment, London, on 4 May 1886, the second son of Frederick Edward Colman, chairman of J. and J. Colman, and his wife, Helen, daughter of Davison Octavius Dalziel. He was thus born into a major industrial family, and was later a director both of Reckitt and Colman Holdings Ltd and of J. and J. Colman Ltd. He was brought up, though, in Surrey, and retained links with that county: he owned from 1950 a house near Reigate in addition to his main residence in Grosvenor Square, London. During the First World War he served initially in the Royal Navy: he started as an able seaman but was later commissioned, before transfer to the Royal Flying Corps, where he reached the rank of captain. 
A lifelong Conservative where earlier members of the family had mainly been Liberals, Colman was politically active during the 1920s in London, and became Conservative member of the London county council for Brixton in 1925. Then a fortuitous by-election came up in Brixton when his uncle Sir Davison Dalziel, chairman of the International Sleeping Car Company, received a barony in the birthday honours of 1927. Following Dalziel's advice and no doubt anxious to continue with the family's generosity, the local party selected Colman, who proclaimed himself a staunch supporter of Baldwin and all his government's policies, including the unpopular 'Trades Disputes Bill'. He was comfortably elected Brixton's MP, partly no doubt because the mere twenty-four days between Dalziel's peerage being announced and polling day left the other parties no time to establish any momentum. The 'Evening Standard' recommended a candidate who was 'young, handsome and dapper', and photographs show a trim figure who carried his forty years well (20 June 1927). 
Colman did not seek re-election to the London county council in 1928, but remained active in the Conservatives' London organization, serving on the area council from 1927 to 1965, and becoming at different times treasurer, chairman, and president. He remained Brixton's MP until the Labour landslide of 1945, but made little impact: in eighteen years he made few speeches and rarely asked questions, while outside election campaigns his activities were reported in 'The Times' only half a dozen times. Loyalty and self-effacing support for his leaders and his party were the watchword. But lack of progress in parliament, where he achieved no ministerial appointment, was balanced by a steady increase in influence outside. He served on the party's national executive committee from 1934, and was chairman of the central council in 1939; he missed the chance to chair a party conference only because his turn came in 1943, when no conference was held. But he was elected to the chair of the national executive in 1945 and held that post until 1951, and so steered the party membership through the post-war Conservative recovery. He deserves to be seen, alongside Lord Woolton and David Maxwell-Fyfe, as an architect of that recovery, while his tenure of the chairman's office set a pattern by which unknown figures could exercise influence through continuity in office and the acquisition of expertise that came to match that of the paid officials. 
After retirement from the national executive chair Colman received a baronetcy in January 1952, and on 30 July 1952 married Nona Ann, daughter of Edward Henry Miles Willan. They had no children, so the baronetcy became extinct when he died at their home, Flat 3, 49 Grosvenor Square, London, on 7 March 1966. His wife survived him. 
Alongside but preceding his political career, Colman took a lifelong interest in horses and dogs. He was at various times president of the National Horse Association of Great Britain and of the Hackney Horse Society, chair of the British Horse Society, which awarded him its medal of honour in 1953, and a committee member for the Kennel Club. He devoted most of his spare time to breeding and exhibiting harness horses, and was a respected judge at horse shows. 


@@@@@


doc= 58675


Bathurst, Violet Emily Mildred, Lady Apsley (1895-1966), politician, was born at 3 Cavendish Square, London, on 29 April 1895, the elder of two daughters of Lieutenant Bertram Charles Christopher Spencer Meeking (1864-1900) of the Royal Hussars, and his wife, Violet Charlotte Fletcher (died 1921). Her father died of enteric fever at Bloemfontein, during the South African War, when she was not yet five; in 1912 her mother married Herbert Johnson. On the death of her grandfather Charles Meeking in 1912, she succeeded to the family estate, Richings Park, Colnbrook, Buckinghamshire, which she sold in 1922. During the First World War she served with a Voluntary Aid Detachment. 
Violet Meeking was active in Conservative politics from the 1920s, an involvement which was reinforced by her marriage on 27 February 1924 to Allen Algernon Bathurst, Lord Apsley (1895-1942); they had two sons. Her husband was the elder son of Seymour Henry Bathurst, seventh Earl Bathurst, and his wife, Lilias Margaret Frances Bathurst, Countess Bathurst, who, as daughter of Algernon Borthwick, Baron Glenesk, had inherited the proprietorship of the 'Morning Post'. Lord Apsley was Unionist MP for Southampton (1922-9) and National Conservative MP for Bristol Central (1931-42); Lady Apsley, as she was now known, served as president of the women's Conservative associations in his constituencies (1924-9 and 1932-52). When, as parliamentary private secretary to the department of overseas trade, Lord Apsley was sent to Australia to investigate complaints about the treatment of emigrant settlers, Lady Apsley convinced him that she should accompany him to investigate the women's point of view. They published their experiences in the jointly written 'Amateur Settlers' (1926). 
Lady Apsley was a lifelong participant in equestrian sports, and rode with hounds. She wrote three books on the subject: 'To whom the Goddess' (1932), on hunting and riding for women, written with Lady Diana Shedden; 'Bridleways through History' (1936), a history of hunting from prehistoric times, written with her husband; and 'The Fox-Hunter's Bedside Book' (1949), a compilation of stories about the sport. From 1946 to 1956 she was joint master of Earl Bathurst's hunt. Inspired by her husband, who was a keen aviator and had commercial interests in airlines, she obtained her aircraft pilot's licence in 1930. 
Lady Apsley was county commandant for the Auxiliary Territorial Service for Gloucestershire, where the Apsleys lived, in 1938-9, and group commander in 1939-40. She was ATS welfare officer for the county from 1940 to 1943. After the outbreak of war she became increasingly involved in local politics, serving on Sudbury rural district council (1941-3). On her husband's death, on 17 December 1942, on active service on Malta, she was nominated to succeed him as Conservative candidate for the Bristol Central parliamentary constituency. Because of the wartime electoral truce between the parties, no official Labour candidate stood against her, but there were three independents, including Jennie Lee. As a result she had to undertake a great deal of campaigning, despite being confined to a wheelchair following a hunting accident. She won the seat (18 February 1943) with a slightly larger majority than her husband had enjoyed. 
Lady Apsley made a profound impact on the House of Commons when she appeared in her wheelchair, dressed in mourning. Her maiden speech (23 March 1943), in a debate on war pensions and disablement, drew upon both her personal experience and her position as national chair, since 1942, of the women's section of the British Legion. Her parliamentary career was, however, short, for she lost the Bristol seat in the 1945 general election. She subsequently contested Bristol North-East as Conservative and National Liberal candidate, but without success. She died on 19 January 1966. 


@@@@@


doc= 58680


Beckett, John William (1894-1964), political activist and journalist, was born at 165 King Street, Hammersmith, London, on 11 October 1894, the only son of William Beckett, master draper, and Eva Dorothy ('nee' Salmon). He was educated at the local elementary school and Latymer Upper School, but left at fourteen to become a shop assistant. Later he became a part-time student at the polytechnic, and studied journalism and advertising by correspondence course. At the outbreak of the First World War he immediately volunteered for the army. He was wounded and discharged in March 1917 as unfit for further service. On 2 April 1918 he married Helen, 'nee' Shaw ('b'. 1892), daughter of a commercial traveller. 
Beckett's experiences as a 'temporary soldier' ('WW') wrought a profound change in his thinking. In Sheffield, where he was seeking work, he was converted to socialism, joining the Independent Labour Party (ILP) in September 1917. When his employers dismissed him for publicly advocating socialism, he returned to the south of England, settled in Hackney, and joined the local branch of the ILP. He became co-founder and chairman of the National Union of ex-Servicemen. The union was soon dissolved for, unlike similar associations, it refused to amalgamate into the British Legion. 
Beckett swiftly established a reputation as an effective public speaker. Elected to Hackney council, his angry words once again caused offence to his employers and he was dismissed. Unabashed he pursued his political activities with even greater purpose. In 1920 he was elected to the divisional council of the ILP. Later that same year he was appointed Clement Attlee's full-time political agent. Next, he became secretary both to the ILP's divisional council and the No More War Movement. At Clifford Allen's invitation Beckett, with other enthusiasts, helped to draft the ILP programme for the 1922 national conference. When Attlee entered parliament in 1922, Beckett became his private secretary. In 1923 came Beckett's own first, unsuccessful, attempt to enter parliament, for North Newcastle, but the following year he was adopted for Gateshead and was returned in a three-cornered contest with a majority of more than 9000. In 1929, for personal as much as for political reasons, Beckett abandoned Gateshead for Peckham, serving as their ILP MP until 1931. 
Though comparatively short, Beckett's parliamentary career was packed with tumult and incident. He was twice suspended from the Commons: in 1929 for calling the prime minister a liar, and in 1930 for seizing and making off with the mace. He had little respect for the traditions of parliament, believing them to be outdated. His relations with most of his colleagues were not easy. Many thought him vulgar and untrustworthy. He was certainly indiscreet, both in his extramarital relations and in his eagerness to tackle issues that others as eagerly avoided. His impatient, passionate, incautious nature was offended by what he supposed was the Labour Party's reluctance to implement its supporters' wishes. His disillusion was compounded by the death of the left-wing Labour MP John Wheatley in 1930, and made complete when MacDonald's government introduced the 'Unemployment Insurance Anomalies Bill'. This measure, Beckett openly avowed, discriminated unfairly against the most vulnerable groups of workers. In the subsequent general election he stood against the official Labour candidate to no avail: the National Government candidate was elected. 
Beckett's first marriage ended in divorce in 1929. The following year, on 5 July, he married Violet Kyrle (1892/3-1948), daughter of Louis Hance Falck, solicitor, and widow of Arthur Bourchier, actor and theatre manager. She was herself better known as the actress Kyrle Bellew. From 1921 to 1923 Beckett successfully edited a monthly magazine he had founded, the 'East London Pioneer'. When his other duties allowed, he contributed occasional articles to the small Labour press. His journalistic skills enjoyed more scope when, like some other disillusioned Labour supporters, he joined the British Union of Fascists in March 1934. This inversion of political loyalties followed an unsuccessful period as business manager of his wife's theatre, the Strand, which ended in bankruptcy. Oswald Mosley's New Party provided Beckett with unrivalled opportunities to indulge his pugnacity in street-corner confrontations. His histrionic skills made him a rousing public orator, and he was appointed the New Party's director of publicity. For all his anti-Jewish ranting, Beckett was never a doctrinaire antisemite: Jews were a convenient focus for his anger and aggression. He edited 'Fascist Weekly', supposedly the more highbrow of the party's two weekly papers. It was renamed 'Action' in 1936, the reincarnation of the equally pitiful little paper that Harold Nicolson had edited until its closure in 1931. Beckett's diatribes attracted a series of sensational lawsuits. In March 1937 Mosley told his senior staff there was insufficient money to continue paying them. Beckett, together with William Joyce, did not wait for their dismissal, but left to form the National Socialist League. This hopelessly ineffectual organization at least afforded Joyce and Beckett a platform from which to censure Mosley, the leader to whom they had previously shown sycophantic loyalty. 
Beckett admired Joyce, but in 1939 they parted, for Beckett, the old soldier, could not bring himself to support Hitler. Beckett acquired new, more aristocratic political associates in Viscount Lymington and the duke of Bedford. They formed the British People's Party (BPP), another hopelessly impotent political grouping that espoused a bizarre hotchpotch of contradictory ideas on pacifism, fascism, and social credit. At the outbreak of war, they renamed themselves the British Council for Settlement in Europe. In May 1940 Beckett, then secretary of the BPP and an enthusiastic member of the Local Defence Volunteers, was arrested under regulation 18B of the 'Emergency Powers (Defence) Act' of 1939, which allowed the government to imprison without trial and without term anyone thought to endanger national security. This was because of his former association with Mosley. Though his imprisonment was clearly politically motivated, his 'ex parte' application for a writ of habeas corpus failed, and Beckett was one of the last of those imprisoned under the regulation to be released in October 1943. It was a neat, though cruel, irony that the man responsible for Beckett's tardy release was home secretary Herbert Morrison: in the early 1920s, when Morrison was appointed mayor of Hackney, Beckett had accused him of political jobbery. 
Ill, and under a restrictive order, Beckett re-established contact with the BPP. In the public's mind, whatever was claimed to the contrary, the BPP was tarred with antisemitism and pro-Nazi sentiments. BPP meetings invariably prompted public protest. When the duke of Bedford, who had been effectively Beckett's patron since his release from prison, died in 1953, Beckett's career as a political activist was ended. In the years that remained, he supported himself and his family (he had two sons and two daughters) by publishing a fortnightly stock market tip sheet, 'Advice and Information'. An interest in Roman Catholicism prompted by his painful experiences in both world wars culminated in Beckett's reception into that church in 1952. He died at his home in London, 187 Queen's Gate, on 28 December 1964, leaving a third wife as his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 58683


Bennett, Sir Ernest Nathaniel (1865-1947), politician and journalist, was born on 12 December 1865 (though in later life he gave his birth year as 1868) in Colombo, Ceylon, the only son of the Revd George Bennett (1830-1897), a Church of England clergyman and schoolmaster, and his wife, Eliza ('bap'. 1830, died 1911), daughter of Captain Thomas Fewson of the East India Company and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Mapleton. George Bennett was the second son of Thomas Bennett, a cobbler or shoemaker of Roseacre, near Kirkham, Lancashire, graduated from Trinity College, Dublin (BA, 1849), and was rector of Rede, near Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk (1885-96). He was described as being 'strongly Tory'. 
Ernest Bennett was educated at Durham School (1881-5), becoming a king's scholar, a school monitor, and captain of the rugby fifteen. Briefly at Wadham College, Oxford, in 1885, then scholar (1885) of Hertford College, Oxford, he gained firsts in classical moderations, 'literae humaniores' (BA, 1889), and theology (1890), and won the senior Hall-Houghton Greek testament prize. He became a fellow of Hertford (1891-1915), and was a lecturer of Wadham, Pembroke, Lincoln, and Hertford colleges. In 1900 he published 'Christianity and Paganism in the Fourth and Fifth Centuries', a short book based on his lectures to honours theology men. 
Bennett travelled in Palestine and elsewhere, and in 1896 he explored the island of Socotra with James Theodore Bent (1852-1897). An ambitious man, Bennett wanted to make his name as a journalist before entering politics. In 1897, as a 'Times' assistant correspondent, he reported the insurrection in Crete. In his February 1898 'Blackwood's' article 'Amongst the Cretan insurgents', Bennett, in the tradition of Victorian war correspondents, described his adventures and narrow escapes from death under fire. He praised the Turks, and condemned the Cretan insurgents as barbaric 'ruffians' who massacred their prisoners of war. He also, in what was to be a recurring theme of his writings, denounced wartime 'alleged atrocities'. 
In the 1898 long vacation Bennett went as correspondent of the Liberal 'Westminster Gazette' to report the Sudan reconquest. He described himself as a 'non-journalistic amateur, who, in order to go through the campaign, has secured a permit to act as a correspondent' (Bennett, 'The Downfall of the Dervishes', 77). He reported the battle of Omdurman (2 September 1898) and its immediate aftermath. Like other correspondents, he rushed out a book on the campaign, 'The Downfall of the Dervishes' (1898). As an imperialist, he condemned the Mahdist regime and praised the reconquest. However, he criticized the killing of wounded Mahdists. He also criticized, unnamed but identifiable, Bennet Burleigh, the veteran 'Daily Telegraph' war correspondent. Bennett in his January 1899 'Contemporary Review' article 'After Omdurman' condemned the killing of Mahdist wounded, looting, and the treatment of the Mahdi's corpse and tomb as 'a return to the barbarism of the Middle Ages'. His allegations 'created such a stir' (Churchill, 1004), made him 'one of the most talked of men in England' (Gaskell, 85), and provoked rebuttals from (among others) Burleigh in the 'Daily Telegraph' and 'Khartoum Campaign, 1898' (1899). Burleigh denounced Bennett's allegations as 'unwarranted and untruthful libels... inaccuracy and sensationalism' (Burleigh, 337, 339). The hostile response apparently surprised Bennett. He hoped to stand as a Liberal parliamentary candidate at the next election, and he wrote to C. P. Scott that he feared no constituency would listen to someone who by Burleigh's and others' 'disgraceful' attacks had been misrepresented as a 'traducer' of British imperial forces (Spiers, 122). When, in 1899, the government proposed a money grant to Kitchener, Scott opposed it on the issue of the Mahdi's remains and the treatment of the wounded. Bennett gave Scott information, but asked him not to quote him in the house. 
In 1899 Bennett went to the South African War and joined, as an orderly, a Royal Army Medical Corps volunteer ambulance train attached to Lord Methuen's command. Like some other volunteers he donated his pay to the Widows' and Orphans' Fund. He witnessed the aftermath of the battles of Belmont, Graspan, and Magersfontein. He left in 1900 and later that year published 'With Methuen's Column in an Ambulance Train', a short, impressionistic, and opinionated work, bound in the fashionable khaki, in which he criticized Uitlanders, especially 'German Jews', Kipling, and 'amateur critics at home', and praised the British soldiers. In May 1900 he was commissioned second lieutenant in the 1st (Oxford University) volunteer battalion, Oxfordshire light infantry, and in 1902, as temporary lieutenant, he commanded the Oxfordshire Volunteers in the Orange River Colony. By 1912 he shared the view that the war had been engineered by 'cosmopolitan financiers'. 
In 1906, asserting his belief in 'the creed of Radicalism' and campaigning largely on the free trade issue, Bennett was elected Liberal MP for the Mid or Woodstock division of Oxfordshire. He was especially committed to the cause of Congo reform, though he also spoke on the auxiliary forces and other issues. In 1909 he was appointed parliamentary private secretary to Sir Edward Strachey, bt, of the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries. Bennett was defeated in both 1910 elections. Relatively radical, he favoured land reform and criticized Grey's conduct of foreign policy. In 'Problems of Village Life' (1914) he attacked the 'chains of Feudalism' and the drink trade, and demanded land nationalization. He was honorary treasurer of the Land Nationalization Federation. Meanwhile he continued part-time soldiering with the volunteers of the Oxfordshire light infantry, as a lieutenant from March 1903 and a captain from August 1904. He was an Oxfordshire JP from 1909 to 1936. 
In 1911, with authorization as a 'Manchester Guardian' reporter, Bennett visited the Turkish army during the Turco-Italian war in Libya, leaving in 1912. His reports and his 'With the Turks in Tripoli' (1912) were pro-Turkish and anti-Italian. In the First Balkan War of 1912 he accompanied the Turkish army, and acted as press censor in Thrace. In the first year of the First World War he was a British Red Cross commissioner in Belgium, France, and Serbia. Later he was attached to the staff of 11th (reserve) infantry brigade, admiralty intelligence division, headquarters of 9th army corps (1917) and headquarters of the army of the Rhine (1919). On 4 October 1915 he married Marguerite Wilhelmina, eldest daughter of H. G. Kleinwort, of Wierton Place, near Maidstone, Kent. They had two sons and one daughter. 
Bennett was one of the first former Liberal MPs to defect to Labour, joining the Independent Labour Party in 1916. He unsuccessfully contested West Wiltshire (1918), Banbury (1922 and 1923), and South-West St Pancras (1924). Apparently sharing the leftist reaction against Versailles and the war, in 1921 he translated 'The German Army in Belgium: the White Book of May 1915', German propaganda attempting to justify their killing of Belgian civilians. In May 1929 he was elected for Central Cardiff, and in 1930 he was knighted. Opinions of Bennett differed. Hugh Dalton wrote in 1930 that Bennett was 'a talkative and unatmospheric fool -- audibly and visibly half a Liberal who, by his continual intervention, creates suspicions against himself' (Pimlott, 109-10). In 1931 he supported Ramsay MacDonald's National Government and became one of thirteen National Labour MPs. In 1932 he went to India as a member of the (Lothian) Indian franchise committee, and in 1933 he was a British delegate to the League of Nations assembly. From October 1932 to December 1935 he was assistant postmaster-general. He was on various committees, including (from 1939) the select committee on national expenditure, and was chairman of the Near and Middle East Association. He was a member of the archbishops' committee on church and state, and of the governing body of the Church in Wales. By 1937 he had acquired his home called Cwmllecoediog, Aberangell, Montgomeryshire, and had an entry in Burke's 'Landed Gentry'. 
Bennett had three predominant political concerns: anti-communism, improving relations with Germany, and a pro-Arab, anti-Zionist policy for Palestine. A member of the Anglo-German Fellowship, in letters to the press and elsewhere he condemned the Versailles treaty as 'harsh, vindictive, indefensible' (Griffiths, 'Fellow Travellers of the Right', 256), advocated appeasement of Nazi Germany, and condemned the Franco-Soviet pact (1935), and he voted in support of the Munich agreement in October 1938. In 1937 he condemned Italian reprisals in Abyssinia. His predominant political concerns led him in 1939 to associate with extreme right-wing and antisemitic groups, and to join Captain Archibald Maule Ramsay's clandestine Right Club. He deplored the British declaration of war in 1939, and voted for Chamberlain at the Norway debate (May 1940). In late 1939 and early 1940 he was prominent among those MPs advocating a negotiated peace with Germany, and he worked with the parliamentary peace aims group. On 22 May 1940 he was one of a delegation of MPs who asked Lloyd George to appeal for a negotiated settlement: Lloyd George refused. Bennett retired from parliament in June 1945. 
At Oxford Bennett was influenced by the psychical research of F. W. H. Myers, 'a veritable inspiration' (Bennett, 'Apparitions', xviii). In 1894 he joined the Society for Psychical Research and from 1901 he was on its council. He attended seances and investigated various alleged paranormal phenomena, sometimes exposing fraud. He believed that, despite fraud and trickery, there were genuine paranormal phenomena, including 'telepathy from the dead' (ibid., 376), and called for further research. He claimed that he once witnessed at a seance 'the production of a complete, visible and tangible figure' (Bennett, 'Apollonius', 79). He published 'Apollonius, or, The Present and Future of Psychical Research' (1927) and 'Apparitions and Haunted Houses: a Survey of Evidence' (1939). His interest in the field continued: early in 1942, for example, he investigated for the society an alleged poltergeist case at the Clarence Nursing Home, Malvern, in which, reportedly, a kitchen poker detached itself from its hook, rose in the air, and flew some 10 or 12 feet. Bennett died at Amberfield, Chart Sutton, near Maidstone, Kent, on 2 February 1947, and was buried in Oxford. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 58684


Bennett, Sir Thomas Jewell (1852-1925), journalist and newspaper proprietor, was born on 16 May 1852, at Elm Road, Wisbech, Cambridgeshire, the son of John Thomas Bennett, solicitor's clerk, and his wife, Charlotte Mary Galopin Chabert. He entered journalism early in life, beginning his apprenticeship on the paper of the Cambridgeshire fenland, the 'Isle of Ely and Wisbech Advertiser'. After a move to Carlisle his career in provincial journalism peaked when he became assistant editor of the 'Western Daily Press' in Bristol. This was followed by a stint in Fleet Street working on 'The Standard' as a leader writer. 
As was becoming increasingly common, Bennett journeyed overseas in 1884 to work in the English newspaper press of the empire, proceeding to Bombay, the principal city in western India, where he was to remain for seventeen years. He worked initially for the 'Bombay Gazette' as associate editor and leader writer for eight years. Henry Curwen, a close personal friend, was the editor of the influential English newspaper the 'Times of India', and upon Curwen's death in 1892 Bennett succeeded to the editorship and to Curwen's principal proprietary interest in the paper. At first he ran the paper in partnership with Curwen's business manager, Charles Kane, and after the latter's death in 1894 became its sole proprietor. Bennett was responsible for the consolidation, modernization, and expansion of the paper, making it the premier newspaper publishing house in India. He set up new machinery at the offices, acquired land from the Bombay Improvement Trust, and erected new buildings. More significantly, using his professional connections in England, Bennett strengthened the paper's staff. He brought from London a master printer, F. M. Coleman, and his brother; and the publishing company that they formed, Bennett, Coleman & Co., still operated a century later. He also utilized his Bristol press connections to bring over British writing staff, including Lovat Fraser and Stanley Reed, both of whom subsequently became editors of the paper. His decision to bring across such aggressive, imaginative, and professional journalists was a boon for the development of the newspaper press in India. Fraser (editor, 1901-7) was the leading journalist of his time, winning from the viceroy, Lord Curzon, the assurance that the 'Times of India' was the first newspaper in Asia. Though Bennett left India in 1901, he continued to guide the fortunes of his company from England. (The company passed into Indian ownership in 1946.) 
In directing the policy of his paper, Bennett demonstrated sound and cautious judgement, and his support for the raj was discriminating. While recognizing the gravity of the increasing political unrest in western India which was encouraged by B. G. Tilak, for instance, he was nevertheless alive to the political and economic problems of the Indian community and worked steadfastly for Indian political advancement and to enhance amity between the races. He wrote largely on Indian topics, and championed Indian grievances with regularity and compassion. On leaving India he was presented with an address of thanks by 3000 agricultural workers from Gujarat for the persistence with which he had brought their grievances before the government. He was nominated by the Bombay government as a fellow of Bombay University, but for the most part declined direct participation in the university's affairs in order that he might retain his journalistic independence. Similarly, he only accepted company directorships, for example, of the Bombay, Baroda and Central India Railway, after his retirement. 
Back in Britain, Bennett was a JP for Kent, and in December 1910 unsuccessfully contested the Brigg division of Lincolnshire as a Unionist. He was returned for the Sevenoaks division of Kent in December 1918, and held the seat until December 1923. In parliament he spoke chiefly on Indian issues, and occasionally on domestic, Irish, and African empire affairs. He was a vehement critic of racism in the empire, as was demonstrated by his spirited speech against the racist tenor of the Commons debates in July 1920 on the Hunter committee report into the unrest in India in 1919 and in particular into the massacre of unarmed civilians at Amritsar. Bennett stressed the importance of taking account of the broad interests of India and the feelings and expectations of her people. British rule, he affirmed, was not founded on brute force alone but on sympathy, generosity, and co-operation: 'Unless we get the sympathy and goodwill of the people of India our task is ended or will be ended in a short time,' he remarked. Though his reasoned support for the coalition government's censure of General Dyer's action at Amritsar brought him into trouble with the 'diehard' element in his constituency, he held his ground and was rewarded when a party meeting expressed its entire confidence in him. 
Bennett's aversion to reaction and racism was complemented by his desire for Indian political advancement, and he hoped that even after becoming a self-governing nation India would remain an integral part of the British Commonwealth. Thus he was a warm supporter of the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms of 1919. He spoke vigorously in defence of the 'Government of India Bill' during its successive readings in the Commons, and served as a member of the joint select committee on the bill, and subsequently on the joint standing committee on India. Outside parliament he continued to work on Indian issues, often contributing to the columns of 'The Times'. Bennett was one of the first back-bench Conservatives to advocate publicly the policy of ending the party's support for the coalition government led by Lloyd George, a policy later adopted at the famous Carlton Club meeting in 1922. 
On 1 August 1917 Bennett married the forty-year-old Elena Brooke-Jones, daughter of Thomas Brooke-Jones, mining engineer, of Ferrol, Spain. She was active in the Unionist organization. Bennett was described as a widower at this time, though nothing is known of a former marriage. They made their home at Harwarton House, Speldhurst, Kent, and at 38 Hans Place, London. A member of the Church of England, Bennett represented the diocese of Rochester on the national assembly of the Church of England. In 1902 he had been awarded the silver medal of the Society of Arts for a paper on the British connection with the Persian Gulf, and in 1903 he was made a CIE. He was knighted in 1921. After a period of ill health Sir Thomas Bennett died from heart failure on 16 January 1925 at 38 Hans Place. The funeral was held at Speldhurst church, Kent. His widow, who survived him by more than twenty-five years, served on the national assembly of the Church of England from 1930. 


@@@@@


doc= 58686


Bernays, Robert Hamilton (1902-1945), politician and diarist, was born in Stanmore, Middlesex, on 6 May 1902, the fourth child and third son of the Revd Prebendary Stewart Frederic Lewis Bernays (1867-1941), rector of Great Stanmore, and his wife, Lillian Stephenson (died 1935). He was educated at Rossall School, Lancashire, from 1915 to 1920, taught briefly at Solihull, and went up to Worcester College, Oxford, as an exhibitioner in history in 1922, being awarded an 'aegrotat' degree in 1925. A member of the Liberal Club, he was president of the Oxford Union in 1925. Having tried and failed to enter the Sudan political service while at Oxford, he became a journalist and later leader writer with the 'News Chronicle'. 
After standing unsuccessfully as Liberal candidate for Rugby in 1929, Bernays had more luck in Bristol North in 1931. There, despite his hurried adoption and advocacy of free trade, he was unopposed by a Conservative and won the seat with a 13,000 majority. Before his election he had collected material as 'News Chronicle' special correspondent in India for his first book, a study of Gandhi, 'Naked Fakir' (1933), while after entering the Commons he used his status as an MP to advantage by travelling throughout Europe as a highly paid journalist. His second book, 'Special Correspondent' (1934), consisted largely of an account of the beginnings of the Nazi regime in Germany, which he had visited in 1933. 
Politics and journalism did not always combine well, however. Bernays's decision in November 1933 not to follow his party leader, Sir Herbert Samuel, into opposition to the National Government cost him his job at the 'News Chronicle'. Though something of an impoverished political orphan for the remainder of the 1931-5 parliament, Bernays obviously enjoyed politics and the company of politicians. His sense -- however precarious -- of being close to the centre of things emerges clearly in the diary he maintained and in his letters to his sister, Lucy, who was living in Brazil. These, in edited form and covering the years 1932 to 1939, were published in 1996. They plot not merely the career of a young and ambitiously earnest politician, but also the tensions and uncertainties of politics in the 1930s. In throwing off his free-trading Liberal Party hat, Bernays had invested heavily in the National Government's survival ['see 'Liberal Nationals]. Calculating correctly that the route to promotion lay in joining the Liberal Nationals he did so, and reward, when it came, took the form of his being appointed parliamentary secretary to the minister of health in May 1937. In this way he became one of the band of non-Conservative MPs serving in Chamberlain's administration. But the beneficiary of one form of coalitionism in British politics became the casualty of another. Hard-working though Bernays was, he was dropped as soon as Churchill formed his coalition government in May 1940. 
Serving thereafter as deputy commissioner for the southern civil defence region, Bernays made two decisions in April 1942. One was to join the army and take a commission with the Royal Engineers. The other was to marry, on 26 April, Nancy Britton (died 1984), the daughter of a constituent. The couple had two sons, neither of whom have any memory of their father. At the age of forty-two, while a member of a parliamentary team visiting troops in the Mediterranean, he was killed in an air crash off Brindisi on 25 January 1945. 
By 1945 there was not much future for National Liberalism, and had he lived to contest Bristol North in the general election of that year Bernays would doubtless have been defeated. His political career would probably have ended then anyway. Although his life was cut short, he should be remembered as both creature and chronicler of an unusual phase in national politics: the period of National Government. In life his achievements were considerable without being exceptional. As an unattached and amusing young man he featured in the pre-war London scene. In death, however, he left in his diary and letters one of the fullest and most colourful accounts of a distinct political regime. In common with other noted political diarists (Cuthbert Headlam, Harold Nicolson, Henry (Chips) Channon, and, most recently, Alan Clark) he never rose above junior office status. Perhaps that level offers the best vantage point for a diarist. 


@@@@@


doc= 58689


Smith, Zepherina Philadelphia (1836-1894), nurse and social reformer, was born on 1 April 1836 at Sopley, Hampshire, the elder daughter of the Revd William Douglas Veitch (1802?-1884), vicar of St Saviour's, Paddington, London (1862-73). Both her parents took an interest in the social welfare of the working class and, like many young women of her class and generation, Zepherina was determined to do something useful with her life. Recent reforms had raised the status of nursing as a suitable occupation for ladies and in 1867 Zepherina went to University College, London, to train as a nurse under the All Saints sisters. In the following year she was placed in charge of the surgical wards at King's College Hospital and in 1869 was made superintendent of nurses at St George's Hospital. After a few months she resigned this appointment and took a variety of temporary hospital posts before leaving England in September 1870 to work with the All Saints sisters in Sedan during the Franco-Prussian War. She wrote about her experiences of nursing abroad in letters to her sister, extracts from which were published after her death in the 'Nursing Notes' (November 1894). In 1870 she published 'A Handbook for Nursing the Sick', which reached a second edition in 1876. Rosalind Paget, one of the leaders of the Midwives' Institute, described it as the best book for nurses that existed. 
On her return to England, Zepherina Veitch became interested in improving the practice of midwifery and the status of midwives, most of whom received little or no training. She qualified as a midwife in January 1873 at the British Lying-In Hospital, Endell Street, and became only the tenth person to obtain the diploma of the London Obstetrical Society (LOS). She continued to work in hospitals, but her mother's ill health meant that she tended to stand in for others rather than taking up a permanent post. Her employment as a professional nurse ended when she married a widower, the surgeon Henry Smith ('b'. 1822/3), son of William Smith, a solicitor, in December 1876. 
After her marriage Zepherina Smith put her energies into the cause of midwifery reform. Her aim was to improve the status and efficiency of midwives; she emphasized the importance of training, and argued that a woman should not be able to call herself a midwife unless she was properly trained. She hoped to see well-educated, middle-class women take up the work, not only so that there would be an improved midwifery service for the poor, but also so that midwives could be an 'influence for good' on working-class families. Smith's activities should be seen in the context of the development of a women's movement in the middle decades of the nineteenth century which sought to expand educational and employment opportunities for single, middle-class women. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that when she submitted an article on midwifery to the 'Women's Gazette' she immediately came to the attention of the editor, Louisa Hubbard, who took an interest in expanding women's work opportunities and in improving their employment conditions. Zepherina Smith was one of seven midwives, all holders of the LOS diploma, who were called to a meeting by Hubbard in December 1881 to form the Matron's Aid Society, with the aim of improving the training of midwives and securing their registration by act of parliament. The name was chosen because the word 'midwife' was rarely used in 'polite' society, but by the late 1880s the members of the society were confident enough to change the name to the Midwives' Institute (which became the Royal College of Midwives in 1948). Zepherina Smith was the treasurer of the society, which had only a handful of members at the beginning, until it was incorporated in 1889. She then became its first president, serving from 1890 until her death. 
Zepherina Smith worked tirelessly to promote the cause of midwife training and registration and used her wide range of personal contacts to good effect. She represented the institute on deputations to the government, and when a committee sat to frame the first 'Midwives' Bill' in 1890 she was asked to attend the sittings to watch proceedings from the point of view of the midwife. This was a new departure, since midwives were rarely asked for their opinions. She also gave evidence to the select committee on midwifery in 1892 and delivered numerous papers to clubs and societies on the subject of midwife registration. 
Smith was remembered by friends and colleagues as an eloquent speaker with a bright face and a cheery word for everyone. Her sister recalled that Zepherina found that early years spent in Palestine had taught her how to be adaptable, a skill which was invaluable when nursing in difficult circumstances without the resources of a hospital. On one occasion when she had to attend a very poor patient in her own home she found that there was nothing bigger than a meat tin in which to hold water. 'She at once solved the question of how to wash the baby by making a bath in her lap of a big waterproof apron she wore' (Paget). After several months of ill health Zepherina Smith died on 8 February 1894 at her home, Summerhill, Horsell, near Woking, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 58690


Ethel Maude Tawse Jollie (1874-1950), founder of the Rhodesian Responsible Government Association, was born Ethel Maude Cookson at Lichfield Road, Castle Church, Stafford, on 8 March 1874, the eldest daughter of Dr Samuel Cookson, general practitioner, of Foregate, Stafford, and his wife, Jane, formerly Gibson, 'nee' Day. She studied art about 1894 under Anthony Ludovici at the Slade School of Art, where she first met Colquhoun, although their friendship did not develop until they met again in 1900; within a few weeks of this second encounter they were married. The couple shared political interests, and Ethel Colquhoun was a leading member of several organizations of particular interest to him, such as the National Service League, the Imperial Maritime League, the British Women's Emigration Society, and the Women's Unionist Association, of which she was an executive member. She also shared her husband's interest in the colonial empire and gave several scholarly papers to learned societies on colonial subjects. They remained married, apparently very happily, until his death in 1914. Given Colquhoun's disappointment with the slow development of Southern Rhodesia after his departure in 1891, it is perhaps ironic that it was his widow, by then remarried -- her new husband was a Rhodesian farmer from Melsetter called John Tawse Jollie -- who in 1917 founded the Responsible Government Association there, which set the territory's course outside the Union of South Africa in 1922. She became a thorn in the side of the British South Africa Company, and was elected to the legislative assembly of Southern Rhodesia in 1923 as the first woman parliamentarian in the British overseas empire. She regarded the attainment of self-government as in no small way revenge for what she saw as the British South Africa Company's bad treatment of her first husband. She died in Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia, on 21 September 1950. 


@@@@@


doc= 58691


Linnaeus, Carl (1707-1778), naturalist and taxonomist, was born on 23 May 1707 NS (13 May OS) in a turf-roofed homestead at Rasult, near Stenbrohult, in the province of Smaland in southern Sweden, the eldest of five children of the pastor, Nils Nicolaus Linnaeus (1674-1748), and his wife, Christina Broderzonia (1688-1733). After schooling at Vaxjo, a nearby town, he began medical studies at the University of Lund, transferring in August 1728 to Uppsala University. Befriended by the theologian and naturalist Olof Celsius (1670-1756), who appointed him demonstrator in botany in 1730, he travelled to 'Lappland', as it was then known, in summer 1732, reporting to the Vetenskapsakademien (Swedish Royal Society of Sciences) on its natural history and economy. In 1734 he met his future wife, Sara Elisabeth Moraea (1716-1806), daughter of Johan Moraeus, the town physician of Falun, and Elizabeth Hausdotter; they were engaged in January 1735 with an agreement to delay marriage for three years. 
Linnaeus left Sweden for the Netherlands in April 1735, travelling via Hamburg to Harderwijk, a Dutch university town specializing in issuing 'instant' degrees. He registered as a student on 18 June and gained his medical doctorate on 23 June within a week of his arrival. He then moved to Leiden and met and impressed the medical doctor and botanist Johan Gronovius (1690-1760). Gronovius and Isaac Lawson, a young Scottish doctor, agreed to fund the printing of Linnaeus's first published work, the 'Systema naturae' of 1735, which classified the three kingdoms of nature and outlined the sexual system for the classification of plants. Gronovius was also instrumental in introducing Linnaeus to the wealthy but hypochondriac Anglo-Dutch financier and director of the Dutch East India Company, George Clifford (1685-1760), owner of a magnificent garden at Hartecamp, suggesting that he employ Linnaeus as house physician and garden superintendent. Linnaeus moved to Hartecamp in September with a salary of 1000 florins a year and free board and lodging. His own and contemporary accounts give a picture of a methodical and sensual observer of nature 'little, flurried, rushed, nimble' (Linnaeus, 97) and Lindroth concludes that his success in the Netherlands was due to 'his personal attractiveness, his capacity for captivating grizzled authorities' (Frangsmyr, 54). 
After almost a year in Clifford's employment Linnaeus travelled to England, arriving at the end of July 1736 and returning to the Netherlands in late August. His 'Systema naturae' of 1735 had been sent ahead by Gronovius and Lawson to Sir Hans Sloane, president of the Royal Society. Despite a fulsome letter of introduction he met with a cool reception from Sloane, although he was shown Sloane's museum. He also met Philip Miller, superintendent of the Society of Apothecaries' garden at Chelsea. Both were unhappy initially about Linnaeus's new system of classification but Miller was won over by Linnaeus's botanical knowledge and was then generous with plants for Clifford. Other London acquaintances included the Quaker naturalist and merchant Peter Collinson, whom he visited and with whom he maintained a lifelong correspondence. He travelled to Oxford to meet the Sherardian professor of botany, Johan Jakob Dillenius, who initially disagreed with him, also giving him a cold reception. This changed just as Linnaeus was about to return to London when, after discussing what Dillenius had marked as errors in advance pages of 'Genera plantarum' (which was not published until the following year), it was demonstrated by dissection of plants that Linnaeus was correct. They remained lifelong friends and correspondents, Dillenius telling him to 'write as one friend ought to address another' (Smith, 2.107). Linnaeus also records meeting John Martyn, professor of botany at Cambridge, and Georg Ehret, whom he knew from the Netherlands. The majority of the forty-plus British correspondents of Linnaeus first wrote to him later on, when he had established his reputation. 
These contacts were important as being among the earliest to promote both Linnaeus's binomial nomenclature for living organisms and to publish floras using his sexual system for the classification of plants. The rules for this were explained in Linnaeus's 'Fundamenta botanica' (1736) and expounded in his 'Classes plantarum' of 1738, based on the tabular key published in the 'Systema naturae' of 1735. This system used the flower and the number and arrangements of its sexual organs of stamens and pistils to group plants into twenty-four classes, which in turn are divided into orders, genera, and species. Amateur botanists and gardeners in England, such as Peter Collinson and John Ellis, were quick to adopt his methods. The binomial system that Linnaeus used for genus and species names supplied short names ideal for quick reference. The accompanying diagnostic phrase names give the fuller description of the plant. Among the earliest to use Linnaean concepts in a published work were the naturalist and apothecary John Hill, who described the system in his publications as early as 1751, and the Irish naturalist Patrick Browne, who used phrase names in his 'Civic and Natural History of Jamaica' of 1756. The apothecary William Hudson published his 'Flora Anglica' in 1762, one of the first floras to use the binomial system, and its acceptance in British circles was shown when Philip Miller adopted it in the eighth edition of his 'Gardener's Dictionary' of 1768. Its adoption became widespread in Britain and its overseas colonies, and was reinforced when Sir Joseph Banks employed one of Linnaeus's pupils, Daniel Solander, as his curator and librarian. These British contacts formed the start of what later became the almost universal acceptance of the Linnaean system, and were further reinforced in the 1780s when Linnaeus's botanical collections, purchased by J. E. Smith, went to Britain and the Linnean Society of London was founded. Linnaeus himself was elected to the Royal Society of London in 1753. 
Returning to the Netherlands, Linnaeus took back new plants for Clifford's garden and remained in Clifford's employment until autumn 1738; using Dutch printing facilities he published in 1737 'Genera plantarum', 'Flora Lapponica', 'Critica botanica', and 'Hortus Cliffortianus'. A brief visit to Paris was followed by his return to Sweden in the autumn of 1738, to establish a medical practice in Stockholm. 
Practical advice on treatment of venereal disease from a French medical doctor helped to establish Linnaeus's reputation and, through a successful prescription for a friend of the queen and contact with Count Carl Tessin (1695-1770), leader of the ruling Hat party, he was appointed physician to the admiralty, also becoming first president of the newly established Academy of Science of Stockholm. His long-awaited marriage to Sara Lisa Moraea took place on 26 June 1739 and in January 1741, a son, Carl, was born. Later that year the medical professorship at Uppsala University was offered to Linnaeus, and in making the move he was able to arrange to exchange positions with E. Rosen (1714-1796), botanical professor and a rival of long standing, each then teaching the subjects best suited to him. Linnaeus took charge of the botanical garden and revived it, adding a small menagerie. He was an incomparable academic teacher, inspiring his disciples, and his lectures were often crowded. 
In 1744 Linnaeus wrote in his autobiography that he had achieved his desires. He continued to publish prolifically but increasingly suffered from brooding despair, despite the increasing international fame which followed publication of the 'Species plantarum' of 1753, now recognized as the starting point of modern botanical nomenclature, and the tenth edition in 1758 of the 'Systema naturae', which is the equivalent for zoological nomenclature. Today's international codes which govern the use of scientific names for all living organisms recognize Linnaeus as the starting point of modern taxonomy: about 12,000 of these names have the abbreviation 'L' appended to them, indicating their origin in a published Linnaean description. 
An increasing family included four surviving daughters (a daughter and a son dying in infancy). In 1758 Linnaeus bought a country estate at Hammarby, and was made a knight of the Polar Star; further honours followed in 1761 when he was ennobled, taking the title Carl von Linne in 1762. At this time he arranged to hand over his teaching duties to his son, Carl von Linne the younger (1741-1783), for reasons of ill health; he continued to live mostly at Hammarby, where he built a museum to hold his collections safe from fire. In his last years his health declined, after he suffered two strokes. He died on 10 January 1778 in Uppsala from an ulcerated bladder. His funeral and burial were at Uppsala Cathedral on 22 January 1778. 


@@@@@


doc= 58692


Boland, John Pius (1870-1958), politician and tennis player, son of Patrick Boland (1840-1877), businessman, and his wife, Mary Donnelly, was born at 135 Capel Street, Dublin, on 16 September 1870. His father, the wealthy proprietor of the largest bakery in Ireland, died in 1877, and his mother in 1882, leaving their seven children under the guardianship of Mrs Boland's half-brother Nicholas Donnelly, auxiliary bishop of Dublin. John Pius Boland owed his second name, which caused him some embarrassment in youth, to the fact that his baptism followed shortly after Pope Pius IX's loss of temporal power upon the capture of Rome by Victor Emmanuel. He was educated by the Marist Fathers at the Catholic University School, Lower Leeson Street, Dublin, and then from 1881 to 1890 at the Oratory School, Birmingham, where he was a contemporary of Hilaire Belloc. In 1890, after a semester at the University of Bonn, he proceeded to London University, where he graduated BA in 1892. In January 1893 he matriculated at the University of Oxford from Christ Church, where he read jurisprudence, and graduated BA with fourth-class honours in 1896 (he proceeded MA in 1901). 
At Oxford, Boland was a prominent sportsman and debater. In the spring of 1896 he travelled to Athens at the invitation of Constantine Thrasybulos Mano (1869-1913), a Greek undergraduate at Balliol during 1894-5, who was involved in the organization of the first Olympic games of the modern era. On the spur of the moment Boland entered the singles and doubles in lawn tennis; he was paired in the doubles by Fritz Traun of Germany, and despite having to play in leather-soled shoes and with 'a tennis bat of sorts, secured at the Panhellenic Bazaar' (journal, fol. 103, 10 April 1896), he emerged victorious in the finals (11 April 1896) of both events. Boland thus ranks as Ireland's, and Britain's, first Olympic champion. 
On his holidays in the south-west of Ireland Boland was disturbed by the illiteracy prevailing in districts where lessons were taught in a language -- English -- which the children did not speak. He now committed himself to the twin causes of home rule and the Irish language. Though called to the bar from the Inner Temple in 1897, he never practised. He was elected MP for South Kerry in 1900 and held the seat for the next eighteen years. In 1902 he married Eileen (1876-1937), daughter of Dr Patrick Moloney, a wealthy Australian, and with her had one son and five daughters. 
Appointed a nationalist party whip in 1906, Boland soon became adept at manipulating the rules of parliamentary procedure, turning unlikely subjects such as the Maltese language question in an Irish direction. A vice-president of the Irish Industrial Development Association, he was active in promoting Irish trade, and it was due to his efforts that an Irish trade mark was patented in 1906. His main speciality, however, was education, the cause for which he had entered politics. After the passage of the 'Irish Universities Bill' in 1908, he was appointed as one of the ten commissioners charged with the establishment of the new university based in Dublin, which at his suggestion was named the National University of Ireland. As a lawyer he was much involved in drafting the statutes, and he brought to the commission a broad experience of three universities. It was on his insistence that competence in the Irish language was made a condition of matriculation. 
In 1918 Boland became acting chief whip of the Irish party, but later that year lost his seat in the general election which brought Sinn Fein a majority of Irish seats. In recognition of his work for education he received a papal knighthood. Disillusioned by the turn of events in Ireland, he retired from political life and settled in London, where from 1926 to 1947 he served as secretary of the Catholic Truth Society. In his memoir, 'Irishman's Day: a Day in the Life of an Irish MP' (1944), he evoked the camaraderie of the Irish Parliamentary Party in its final phase under the leadership of John Redmond. His contribution to Irish university education was honoured in June 1950, when the National University conferred on him an honorary doctorate in laws. 
Boland died at his London home, 40 St George's Square, Westminster, on 17 March (St Patrick's day) 1958. One of his daughters, Mrs Honor Crowley, represented his old constituency of South Kerry in the Dail for some years as a Fianna Fail deputy. Another daughter, the novelist and playwright Bridget Boland, paid an affectionate tribute to her parents in her memoir 'At my Mother's Knee' (1978). 


@@@@@


doc= 58693


Giffard, William (d. 1731), man-midwife, about whose early life nothing is known, practised in Brentwood, Essex, before moving to Westminster, London, in 1724. From 1725 he began recording some of his midwifery cases, with a view to publication. Giffard recorded the use of the forceps from 8 April 1726. He called them his 'extractor'. The blades were straight, not conforming to the pelvis though curved to fit the foetal head, whereas those depicted by Edmund Chapman in 1735 in the second edition of his book, 'A Treatise on the Improvement of Midwifery', also showed a curve to match that of the pelvis. 
Giffard wrote his only work, 'Cases in Midwifry', at Brentwood, to where he had retired. The place is significant because it is near to Woodham Mortimer, where Peter Chamberlen, a member of the family of refugee Huguenots, who had invented the obstetric forceps, had prudently retired during the civil war. Chamberlen took his then secret instrument -- the obstetric forceps -- with him but about the beginning of the eighteenth century they became known to a few practitioners living nearby, Giffard included. Giffard's book was published posthumously in 1734 by Edward Hody, who wrote that it was 'an account of 225 mostly difficult cases and to which he had been summoned by midwives'. Giffard believed that 'midwives should summon a male practitioner as soon as they encountered any difficulty in the birth; failure to do so he criticized as 'self-sufficiency'' (Wilson, 98). The book has a frontispiece engraving of Giffard's forceps and of the forceps as 'improved' by John Freke, surgeon at St Bartholomew's Hospital. 
Giffard once used the forceps on a face presentation. He removed the placenta (afterbirth) manually after the birth of the baby. He recorded a case of the uterus turning inside out (inversion) when he had pulled on the cord attached to the placenta when it was still inside the womb. In breech deliveries he brought down the arms. For the after-coming head in breech presentations he used a finger in the mouth, and fingers over the shoulders to pull the head out of the pelvis. The manoeuvre was later attributed to William Smellie, though Giffard predated him by several years. He also supported the perineum at birth with his hand. This became known much later as von Ritgen's manoeuvre after he described it in 1828. 
Giffard also recorded a case which was probably a tumour of the placenta (choriocarcinoma), and he early described the manner of stopping the ante-partum haemorrhage of placenta praevia (placenta in front of the presenting part of the foetus) by turning the presentation to that of the breech using a hand inside the uterus (internal version), then drawing down a leg so that the bleeding site could be compressed. 
In his numerous cases Giffard described many obstetric complications dealt with in competent and practical fashion. He was among the first to write about them. Following the diffused knowledge of the forceps, many obstetricians in London evolved newer methods of coping with obstetric difficulties and taught their methods to students and medical practitioners. Giffard was in the forefront of these movements in ideas and practice. Hody described him as 'a plain man, remarkable for an honest, frank behaviour, of strong judgment, skilful and experienced in his profession and very charitable to the poor, averse to all kinds of flattery, and a generous and judicious practitioner' (Spencer, 18). Giffard died at Brentwood towards the end of 1731. 


@@@@@


doc= 58694


Kent, Frances (d. 1685), midwife, was probably born some time between 1615 and 1640. The details of her birth as well as her maiden name are unknown. Her husband was John Kent of Reading, a clothier and a Quaker, who survived her by two years. The Kents had at least four children. Their daughter Hannah died (unmarried) in 1676. Their daughters Sarah and Mary each married London merchants (John Harwood and Samuel Clay, respectively) that same year. Their son John and his wife Ann had five children between 1682 and 1690. 
The exact date of Frances Kent's conversion to Quakerism is unknown. During the 1660s and 1670s she was an active participant in the Quakers' Reading and Warborough monthly meeting. Like other prominent Quakers, she attended local business meetings where she reviewed proposals of marriage by Quaker youth. She also signed Quaker marriage and birth certificates, including those of her own children and grandchildren. During these years, Frances Kent was also gaoled twice at Newgate (in 1663 and 1672) for attending Quaker conventicles. 
Despite religious persecution by state officials, Frances Kent was highly sought after as a midwife by prominent non-Quaker families, including the Buckinghamshire and Leicestershire gentry. Only three years after her first imprisonment at Newgate, Edmund Verney, the eldest son of Sir Ralph Verney, invited Frances Kent to be his wife Mary's midwife at Middle Claydon, Buckinghamshire. According to contemporary accounts, Mary Verney was mentally ill. Her husband had engaged the services of local women healers and London gentlewomen to try to cure her. Verney was ambivalent about inviting a Quaker to be his wife's midwife, but the glowing references of local gentlewomen and female relatives convinced him to do so. As Verney commented in a letter to his father, Frances Kent was a midwife 'reputed by all the doctors of Oxford as the best in England' (Hess, 'Community Case Studies', 108). A female cousin ('old lady Woodward') told Verney that 'she had never seen such a learned and adroit midwife, and that anyone would think themselves happy if they could have her, and that one gave her ordinarily $20, $10, and at the least $5 for her pains'. This cousin also reported to Verney that Frances Kent 'never meddled in speaking of her religion to her patients', that 'if she promised to come she is perfectly faithful to her word', and furthermore that 'if the Queen had continued pregnant she would have been her midwife' (ibid., 109). Frances Kent wrote to Verney to decline his offer (like many other Quakers she was fully literate), apologizing: 'friend I ame sor[ry], thee hath put thyself to soe much trobell and I not in a Condicion to serve thee for the Ladey davis had layen in in London... I canot in aney means disopoint her shee being in a weekley Condicion. (ibid., 110)' Frances Kent promised that if Lady Davis delivered in time at London then she would 'macke all the hast' she could to attend Mary Verney at Middle Claydon. Whether Frances Kent actually delivered the Verney baby is unknown (ibid., 111). 
In addition to being sought out by the royal family and the gentry of Restoration England, Frances Kent was also employed by prominent Quaker families who lived in Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire, and London. Among them was the wife of William Penn, the founder of Pennsylvania, as well as Sarah Meade, the daughter of Margaret (Fell) Fox and stepdaughter of George Fox, the founder of English Quakerism. Sarah Meade praised Frances Kent in a letter to her mother; 'Frances Kent stayed with me a week after I was laid. She is a fine woman; it was the Lord sent her to me. It was the Lord's mercy to me that I had her, who is a very skilfil and tender woman for that imployment. (ibid., 113)' On 27 August 1685, the year after she delivered Sarah Meade's baby at London, Frances Kent died at Reading. She was buried by the Quakers on 1 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 58696


Stephen, Margaret (fl. 1765-1795), midwife and teacher of midwifery, lived at 42 Ely Place, Holborn, London. Nothing is known about her origins or married life aside from the fact that she was the mother of nine children. There are indications of an education and background befitting a gentlewoman: Stephen's own competence in 'foreign' languages, and her insistence that midwifery was a suitable occupation for 'well-educated' and respectable women who have fallen on hard times (Stephen, 5, 18). 
Stephen's importance stems from the fact that she was the author of one of the very few books on midwifery written by a woman in the eighteenth century. In addition, she was offering instruction to women at a time when the traditional system of ecclesiastical licensing and training had long ceased and male midwives had, for the most part, assumed control of the training and supervision of midwives. Stephen herself had been taught by a pupil of William Smellie, the well-known male midwife who had set himself up as a teacher of midwifery in the 1740s. In all likelihood, Stephen was instructed by John Harvie, who took over Smellie's teaching role on his retirement from his London practice in 1759 and who inherited his 'apparatus', used in lectures for demonstrating various aspects of child delivery (Peachey, 62). 
Stephen's curriculum of instruction included anatomy, correction of malpresentations, and the use of forceps. She required her female pupils to take notes of her lectures which eventually comprised a pocket-sized volume that they could carry to labours. Such was her self-confidence in her teaching that she stated her pupils were 'as well qualified as men' in their practice. In her book 'The Domestic Midwife', published in London in 1795, she noted her use of a 'machine' for instructing her female pupils in the correct use of forceps in the rare instance when they might be required to save the life of a mother. The recurring theme of her book, however, written from her own experience of more than thirty years, is a critique of the overuse of forceps, particularly by young, inexperienced male practitioners. A strong advocate for female midwives Stephen condemned male midwives for unjustly maligning their female counterparts, whom they charged more for instruction than aspiring male candidates. At the same time, Stephen argued, the male instructors withheld knowledge from these women and then accused them of ignorance and incompetence. 
In an era which had espoused 'scientific' knowledge and Enlightenment values, Stephen's book maintained the integrity of women's traditional knowledge with its emphasis on experience. The articulate and intelligent Stephen, however, augmented women's practical experience with instruction in anatomy and the emergency instruments associated with male practice. The date of her death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 58697


Maubray, John (d. 1732), man-midwife, was born probably in Scotland. Nothing is known of his early life. About 1724 or 1725 he set himself up in London as a teacher of midwifery. An unlicensed practitioner, he sought the patronage of Sir Hans Sloane, and such an eminent contact may have persuaded the Royal College of Physicians to ignore his lack of a licence. Maubray's first book was 'The female physician, containing all the diseases incident to that sex, in virgins, wives and widows' (1724). His second book was 'Midwifery Brought to Perfection by Manual Operation' (1725), in which he appealed for the founding of a lying-in hospital, becoming one of the first to do so. He wrote that there were many excellent hospitals but 'on this point of provision for poor miserable women in the time of their affliction, when they are in no case in a condition to help themselves we have been hitherto and are still deficient' (Spencer, 11). He cited the Hotel Dieu in Paris as a suitable model. Maubray published his course on midwifery from his house in New Bond Street. He gave about twenty lectures between the hours of five and six twice a week; students engaged in practical work with patients, which allowed them to perform vaginal examinations (the touch) and conduct deliveries. 
One object of Maubray's teaching was 'to confute and reject the barbarous and truly inhumane use of all 'chirurgical tools'' (Spencer, 12). Practitioners were at that time acquiring knowledge of obstetric forceps, which Maubray probably was condemning, as he did all the other, much more barbarous instruments then being used in obstetric practice for difficult labours. According to Adrian Wilson, Maubray was among those whig men-midwives who opposed the use of forceps. He was the first to describe different shapes of bony pelvis, categorizing them as deep, large, broad, flat, oval, and round. He also coined the term 'andro-boethogynist' to describe a male practitioner of midwifery. 
Despite being a pioneer in the teaching of midwifery, writing about it, and proposing a lying-in hospital, there is evidence that Maubray did not have much practical experience for he says he was only called 'occasionally' to births in London (Spencer, 8). He travelled to Venice, Germany, and the Netherlands to learn more, and it was in the Netherlands, on a Zuyder Zee ferry, that he attended a woman, who, he said, produced a Moodiwarp, 'having a hooked snout, fiery sparkling eyes, a long round neck, an acuminated tail and an extraordinary agility of feet' (Spencer, 9); it yelled and shrieked like a demon and scooted round the deck finding a place to hide. Other evidence of his gullibility is that he accepted astrologers' views on the magic number seven, believing that babies born in the seventh month of pregnancy were stronger than those born in the eighth. Eight-month babies were ruled by Saturn, an enemy to all creatures that breathe life; Maubray said that they were always weakly, with tender constitutions, and often half-witted. It was because of his holding these views that his injunction 'to watch the patient during pregnancy so as to prevent all preternatural disasters' (Spencer, 8) was misinterpreted as his trying to prevent the birth of jumping rabbits and similar strange creatures. Maubray, who was also duped during the Mary Toft affair, was a mixture of the far-sighted and the credulous in midwifery. 
Maubray was chairman of the Charitable Corporation in 1730, and in 1732 he drew the attention of the House of Commons to one of the members of his committee who was misappropriating funds on behalf of the Pretender. At his death, which occurred in London on 27 October 1732, Maubray was described in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' as 'justly esteemed as an honest publick-spirited man' (Spencer, 14). 


@@@@@


doc= 58698


Waddington, Mary King (1845/6-1923), observer of British society, was born in New York, the youngest of the four daughters and one son of Charles King (1789-1867), president of Columbia College, New York, and his second wife, Henrietta Liston Low. She had seven half-brothers and half-sisters. Her grandfather was Rufus King, the second US minister to the court of St James (1796-1806). She was educated in America, and travelled with her family in Europe after the civil war. Following the death of her father, in 1871 she went with her mother and sisters to live in France, where on 10 November 1874 she married, as his second wife, 
Mary King Waddington stands out among the many diplomatic wives who spent time in Britain on account of the vivid letters she wrote to her sisters, selections of which she published as 'Letters of a Diplomat's Wife' (1903). The value of her account lies in the freshness of her eye: the routines and rituals of upper-class London society were new to her and her correspondents, and she provides a wealth of detail that English writers, familiar with the social round, took for granted. She had found the immense ceremonial and rigid etiquette of the Russian coronation fascinating, 'like some old mediaeval picture', and contrasted it with the simplicity of Queen Victoria's court. The twice-republican Mary Waddington thought Victoria 'a wonderful woman and a wonderful Queen' (Waddington, 372), but continued to be amused at the way the English considered London 'the great centre of the world', and that life there 'spoils one for everything else' (Waddington, 389). The Waddingtons returned to Paris in April 1893, where William died on 13 January 1894. Mary Waddington returned to England in 1900, when she was at Cowes and had a final interview with the queen. On this occasion, she also called on the former Empress Eugenie, who was living out her long exile in England: they had never met before, as William Waddington 'was in such violent opposition always to the Empire' (Waddington, 393). 
Madame Waddington published her letters from Russia and Britain in 1903, and followed it with 'Italian Letters of a Diplomat's Wife' (1905), and 'Chateau and Country Life in France' (1908). In 1914 she published her recollections of 'My First Years as a Frenchwoman'. 'My War Diary', an account of the first months of the First World War in France, was published by Scribners in New York in 1917 and by John Murray in London in 1918. She died at Osmoy, Seine-Maritime, in France on 30 June 1923 and was buried at Neuchatel-en-Bray. 


@@@@@


doc= 58699


Shepherd, Lady Mary (1777-1847), philosopher, was born on 31 December 1777 at Barnbougle Castle, Linlithgowshire, the second of five children of Neil Primrose, third earl of Rosebery (1728-1814), and his second wife, Mary (1752-1823), daughter of Sir Francis Vincent of Stoke d'Abernon and Mary, 'nee' Howard. According to her eldest daughter, Mary Elizabeth, Lady Mary's upbringing was 'chiefly at Barnbougle (though sometimes in London at Holland House), on the old fashioned Scotch plan with a Dominie -- one Mr. Pillans' (Brandreth, 25-6). She married Henry John Shepherd QC (1783?-1855), on 11 April 1808. Her father-in-law, Sir Samuel Shepherd, was a well-known and widely respected lawyer, and a friend of Walter Scott. She had three children. Her son, Henry Primrose Shepherd, became an invalid in his youth, and her younger daughter, Maria Charlotte, lived only fifteen years. 
Rosebery family papers describe Lady Mary as 'remarkable for her high attainments, humour and agreeable society'. At her 'salon', her 'humour seems to have been as well known as her logical powers, and occasional causticity' (Brandreth, 4). Above all, she was passionately interested in metaphysical debate. Both she and her husband corresponded over many years with Charles Babbage, the philosopher and mathematician, who encouraged her philosophical interests. He sent his 'Essay on Induction' and other treatises in 1825. She, in return, often asked for his opinion of her latest theories and speculations. 
Lady Mary's two metaphysical works, 'An Essay upon the Relation of Cause and Effect' (1824) and 'Essays on the Perception of an External Universe' (1827), challenged the conclusions of the philosophers George Berkeley and David Hume concerning ideas of the external world. These conclusions, she believed, could be used as a foundation for atheism. She countered Hume's scepticism, arguing that reason, not 'fancy' or 'custom', leads to knowledge of cause and effect. In 'Lady Shepherd's metaphysics' ('Fraser's Magazine', July 1832) she continued her criticism of Berkeley's philosophy that 'to be is to be perceived' (or that nothing exists outside the perception of mind). She admitted that her own views might appear at first sight to have much in common with his, since she too accepted the necessity of metaphysical reality as the ground of material or phenomenal reality. Berkeley's error, she argued, was a confusion of ideas with their external causes; ideas are incapable 'of the application of the definitions belonging to extension and to materiality' ('Lady Shepherd's metaphysics', 'Fraser's Magazine', July 1832, 698); this led Berkeley to deny the existence of objects that are independent of mind. 
The power of Lady Mary's intellect and argument was respected among her contemporaries; for example, Robert Blakey discusses and praises the 'great acuteness and subtility' (Blakey, 40) of her work. Her criticisms of the conclusions of John Fearn, a retired naval officer with philosophical interests, were published in 'Parriana' (1828), together with Fearn's inadequate and condescending reply: her article in 'Fraser's Magazine' was a further response to Fearn and demonstrates the superiority of her intellectual grasp. 
Samuel Taylor Coleridge records meeting Lady Mary at a gathering of British philosophers and scientists at Cambridge in November 1833. Also present were the astronomers Sir John Herschel and Sir George Biddell Airy. Having expressed admiration of the wives of these two men, Coleridge adds the following scribbled lines: '
Lady Mary Shepheard, 

As restless as a Leopard 

Tho' not so lithe and starry, 

Did wait on S. T. Coleridge 

To learn the extreme polar ridge 

Of Metaphysic Scholarship. 
(Coleridge, fol. 73)' The remainder of the comic verse suggests his admiration of Lady Mary's views, as opposed to the materialist positions of, for example, Herschel. 
Her daughter's memoirs include an account of Lady Mary's friendship with Elizabeth Barrett Browning, and report that William Whewell 'made one of... [her] books a text book at Cambridge'. He, and Sir Charles Lyell, had spoken of Lady Mary as an 'unanswerable logician, in whose argument it was impossible to find loophole or flaw' (Brandreth, 29). She died on 7 January 1847 at Hyde Park Terrace, London. Her will contains a 'special Admonition' relating to the $10,000 settled on her at her marriage by her father. 


@@@@@


doc= 58700


Thompson, Elizabeth Maria Bowen (1812/13-1869), missionary in Syria, was the daughter of Hannibal Evans Lloyd (1770-1847), a philologist and translator, and his wife, Lucy Anna Margaretta von Schwartzkopff (1782/3-1855), who was from Hamburg. Her father lived in Hamburg between 1800 and 1813, after which he returned to England on account of the hardships of the French occupation. Elizabeth inherited a spirit of travel and adventure from her paternal grandfather, Henry Humphrey Evans Lloyd (c.1718-1783), an army officer; her practicality is said to have come from her mother. She had three sisters who later joined her in her missionary work -- Susette, later Mrs Henry Smith, Augusta, later Mrs Mentor Mott, and Sophia, who remained unmarried -- and a brother of whom very little is known. Her father's cousin was Henry Salt, the discoverer of the Rosetta stone and one-time British consul in Alexandria -- a family connection with the Middle East. She was religiously inclined from childhood, when she was taunted for being 'a little saint' (Lloyd, 3). She came under revivalist influences in Scotland while visiting friends and relatives there, and also came into contact with Unitarians. She herself notably converted a young sergeant on his way to China, whose fervour was such that he held 'Bible' classes on board the 'Himalaya'. 
Lloyd identified herself early on with the cause of black education and was a founder, and joint secretary with one of her sisters, of the Ladies Society for the Early Education of Negro Children. She later joined the Syro-Egyptian committee under the presidency of Sir Culling Eardley, in which connection she probably met her future husband, Dr James Bowen Thompson. Thompson had been a medical missionary in Syria and director of the British Syrian Hospital in Damascus, which he had opened and ran from 1843 to 1848. After living in London, where they married on 14 December 1850 at St Botolph, Aldersgate, they went to Constantinople to pursue Thompson's pet project of opening a direct railway communication to India via the Euphrates valley. In December 1852 or January 1853 they moved to Suediah, near Antioch, where Thompson possessed some property, and resided there until June 1855. It was during this time that Elizabeth Bowen Thompson was initiated to the language and manners of the East, and 'her full heart yearned over the darkness and deprivation of the women'. She once began a school in her own house in Suediah. James Bowen Thompson died at Constantinople on 5 August 1855, of a 'malignant fever', reportedly contracted at Balaclava. 
Elizabeth Bowen Thompson subsequently returned to London, where she lived with her sister Augusta. She was active with her sisters and other members of her family in several charitable enterprises, such as the committee led by the lady mayoress of London for the Indian mutiny. She also started the Central Association for Soldiers' Wives and became active, in 1860, in the Syrian Temporal Relief Fund. This involvement led to her departure for Beirut after news of the massacres in Mount Lebanon and Damascus reached her. Her voyage was preceded by a prayer meeting at the house of the Revd William Pennefather, the founder of the Mildmay conference hall, the home of much foreign mission work. She arrived in Beirut on 27 October 1860 and took a house called Beyt 'Ayub Bek; her original intention was to stay for six months. However, she was handicapped at the outset by an attack of rheumatic fever, and it was not until December that she began her work, initially with thirty women, mostly widows from the massacres of Hasba'iyyah, and sixteen children. Assistance was forthcoming from Lord Dufferin, who was there engaged in a diplomatic mission, and his mother, Helen Selina Blackwood, the dowager duchess. 
Bowen Thompson's arrival coincided with a time when the established American missions in Beirut were undergoing a financial crisis caused mainly by the American Civil War, and when the Anglo-American committee was distributing relief without doing any educational or missionary work. She was joined by her sister Augusta Mentor Mott and the latter's husband in January 1861, following the destruction of their house by fire, and was additionally joined by her sister Sophia Lloyd in the summer of 1862. Her third sister, Susette, remained active in the cause from London, until she herself went to work in Beirut in 1875. 
Bowen Thompson's friends in England formed a society to support her, the Society for the Social and Religious Improvement of Syrian Females, and there was another association, formed under the leadership of Lord Shaftesbury, for the establishment of English industrial and ragged schools in Syria. The former, which was formally constituted as a mission at the house of the Hon. Arthur Fitzgerald Kinnaird, also enjoyed the patronage of Lord Shaftesbury, who later became its chairman. Mary Jane, Lady Kinnaird, 'nee' Hoare, to whom the Lloyds were probably related, was president; the secretary was Elizabeth Bowen Thompson's sister Susette Smith, and her other sister Augusta also sat on the committee. The organization evolved to become the Ladies' Association for the Social and Religious Improvement of the Syrian Females, later the British Syrian Schools and Bible Mission for the Social and Religious Improvement of the Syrian Females (1876), then the British Syrian Schools and Bible Mission (1882), and finally the British Syrian Mission. The successor institution in the late twentieth century was Middle East Christian Outreach. 
The schools in Beirut were visited by the prince of Wales during his visit to the Middle East in 1862 and attracted the attention and support of Fuat Pasha, who later became grand vizier. Bowen Thompson also established a good relationship, after an initial clash, with Daoud Pasha, the governor of Mount Lebanon, who gave her an official escort and went personally with her to Ain Zhalta at the opening of the Palm Branch School there on 13 October 1867. Following the establishment of the schools and workrooms and the training of 'Bible' women in Beirut she also established a school in Hasba'iyyah on 28 September 1863 and received numerous requests from places like Zahlah, Deir al-Qamar, and, later, Damascus, all cities that had suffered badly in 1860. She was against the provision of free schooling and charged each student 'according to their several ability'. Her aim was to create independent institutions 'unfettered by any official authorization', and she encountered a lot of opposition from Roman Catholic clergy. Furthermore, in 1866 she had to close a small school in Deir al-Qamar because of local opposition, with the native teacher going to prison as a result. 
Bowen Thompson's real breakthrough came with the granting of an imperial firman in 1868, giving her full powers to open schools at Zahlah and Deir al-Qamar and calling for the authorities to give her the fullest aid and protection. This was suggested by the prince of Wales to the sultan during the latter's visit to London in 1867, and supported by the British ambassador to the Porte, and by Fuat Pasha, the grand vizier. In the same year a school for blind children was opened in Beirut. In 1865 and 1866 Bowen Thompson was in England, and took with her some of the products of her schools to sell. She was awarded a prize at the International Reformatory and Schools Exhibition, and also established branch associations in parts of England and Scotland. She was helped by donations from the prince of Wales and Lady Francis Egerton, who established the Ellsmere School in Deir al-Qamar, while funds for the Olive Branch School were contributed by the officers and men of HMS 'Mars'. A Mr Tabet gave up his house in Beirut for the establishment of the school there and a notable in Zahlah also donated his house: the mission's motto was 'Jehovah jireh' ('God will provide'). Although her initial goal was to work with women left widowed by the civil war, Bowen Thompson also taught children of Druze princes and Muslim notables who came to her. Sitt Naifeh Junblatt gave her support at the initial stages of her setting up in Hasba'iyyah. Only one publication by her is known, a simplified version of Edward Greswell's 'Harmony of the Gospels' turned into a narrative suited for classes -- which was later translated into Arabic by Salim Bustani. 
Bowen Thompson, whose family motto was 'Dare and persevere', fell ill after a tough journey from Zahlah to Damascus in snow, and never recovered fully. She later went on business to Constantinople and England, where she died in Charlton, Blackheath, at Morden College, in the house of her sister Susette, on 14 November 1869. Her body was laid to rest by the side of her father and mother at 'God's Acre' -- a secluded cemetery at Morden College, which was founded by an ancestor of Susette's husband, Henry William Smith, the treasurer of the college. Her sisters continued the work of the mission after her death. 


@@@@@


doc= 58709


Westcott, Foss (1863-1949), bishop of Calcutta, was born on 23 October 1863 in Harrow on the Hill, the fifth son of seven sons and three daughters of Brooke Foss Westcott (1825-1901), Church of England clergyman and future bishop of Durham, and his wife, Sarah Louisa Mary Whithard (1830-1901), the elder daughter of Thomas Whithard. He had a public-school education at Cheltenham College from 1876 to 1882, before proceeding to Peterhouse, Cambridge, and thereafter reading for his ordination (1887). 
Four of the Westcott sons joined the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel as missionaries in India. Foss, with George Herbert Westcott, his immediate senior, subsequently bishop of Lucknow, was posted to Cawnpore in 1889. There they swiftly inaugurated industrial training for young Indian Christians. As bishop of Chota Nagpur (1905-19) Foss was to develop his concern with education by founding the Bishop Westcott schools for some 400 Anglo-Indian children, while fostering his substantial Christian communities for the Santali and Munda peoples. 
In later life he claimed that if he had inherited none of his father's scholarship, he shared his repugnance for controversy. He had absorbed at source the 'social Christianity' taught by his father and family friends such as Bishop Lightfoot, by whom he was ordained priest. This persuasive reading of Christian faith kept divisive doctrinal issues in the background. Public-school education consolidated faith for him, as for many, as an unproblematic ideal of 'service'. To undertake imperial responsibility with manly integrity was in itself to advance Christian civilization. 
For many of his class, the norms of arduous sportsmanship embodied the style of this engagement with public life. Westcott, who had played football and cricket for Cambridge, became familiar as a lean, bearded figure striding across the Himalayan foothills. He thought nothing, even in his seventies, of ignoring tea breaks during afternoons of tennis in Calcutta. Westcott never married. 
Burdened by routine administration, each of his two bishoprics posed in addition a distinctive challenge to Westcott's eirenic, organicist vision. The first challenge, precipitated by the First World War, was a crisis over German Lutheran missionaries in Chota Nagpur. All fifty or so had to be interned. The situation was delicate; the Anglicans had benefited from a secession movement in the past, and expatriate opinion was intensely anti-German. Westcott raised funds and substituted staff, refusing all applications to transfer from Lutheran communion to Anglican, lest the Lutherans should some day return. His chivalry was not universally admired. He was translated to Calcutta as metropolitan in 1919. In 1920 Oxford and Cambridge conferred on him honorary degrees of doctor of divinity. 
A second challenge transformed his responsibilities as metropolitan. In 1927 parliament freed the church in India from the general superintendence and revision of the archbishop of Canterbury, and it became a self-governing branch of the Anglican communion. This decision entailed laborious administrative implementation, but it also called for progress in the doctrinal integration of distinct denominations, the four southern dioceses of the Anglican church of India, Burma, and Ceylon, the Methodist (originally Wesleyan) church in south India, and the South India United church (Presbyterian, British, and American Congregationalist, and Swiss Evangelical). Westcott initiated this lengthy process with tact and patience. In 1935 he could announce that agreement had been reached in south India on the fact of the historic episcopate, the Nicene and apostles' creeds, and the sacraments of holy communion and holy baptism, and that he fully expected agreement on confirmation to follow. 
However, the emergence of Gandhian nationalism and of nationalist sentiment among native clergy and congregations increasingly exposed Westcott's limitations. In correspondence with Gandhi, while solicitous about the mahatma's health and encouraging over social reform, he was bleakly uncompromising on political dissidence and indignant about Gandhi's blackmailing tactic of fasts. He got much the worst of an exchange with Gandhi's Christian associate J. C. Kumarappa. In this Westcott, who had obtained a third-class degree in natural science (1885), referred to the necessarily absolute reliability and fixity of natural law, and insisted that Gandhian civil disobedience violated a corresponding order in social life, invoking St Paul's assertion that 'rulers are not a terror to the good work but to the evil' ('Romans' 13: 1-3) Kumarappa gratefully printed the complete exchange in Gandhi's 'Young India' in June 1930. 
Archbishop Cosmo Gordon Lang, who was heavily involved in the work of the parliamentary joint select committee on Sir Samuel Hoare's white paper for the 1935 'India Act', grew impatient with Westcott from this period, for losing touch with his responsibilities and for his involvement in the Oxford Group movement. Inspired by the American Lutheran Frank Buchman, this concentrated on inner conversion and self-reformation guided by group interaction. It was particularly active during Westcott's furlough in 1933, when he was allowed extended leave to attend its major meetings. His enthusiasm, justified in a letter to 'The Times' (21 September 1933), had less to do with the movement's reactionary political tendencies, however, than with its revitalization of his faith and the supportive collectivism of its adherents. In his later years, he attempted to stimulate public interest in the problems that would face the racially mixed Anglo-Indian community in an independent India. His personal austerities did not prevent him during the war from extending generous hospitality to servicemen passing through Calcutta. 
Westcott continued to cycle around Ranchi, India, after retiring there in 1945. He died in Darjeeling on 19 October 1949, and he was buried there. 


