@@@@@


doc= 58710


Westcott, George Herbert (1862-1928), bishop of Lucknow, was born in Harrow on the Hill on 18 April 1862, the fourth son in the family of seven sons and three daughters of the Revd Brooke Foss Westcott (1825-1901) and his wife, Sarah Louisa Mary Whithard (1830-1901), elder daughter of Thomas Whithard. His father was then a master at Harrow School, but later became bishop of Durham. Westcott enjoyed a dependent relationship with his younger brother Foss Westcott, ultimately bishop of Calcutta and metropolitan of India, Burma, and Ceylon. Two other brothers also joined the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel (SPG) in India, a field of prime importance to their father. Famous for promoting 'co-operative' industrial relations, particularly in the Durham coalfields, B. F. Westcott's understanding of Christ's incarnation and the social mission of an imperial church profoundly influenced them all. 
George went to Marlborough College from 1875 to 1881, returning as assistant master from 1886 to 1889. The norm of an athletic 'Christian' manliness had been established there by successive disciples of Arnold of Rugby. He engaged with this as a boy, but without the distinction achieved by Foss at Cheltenham and Cambridge, where they were contemporaries at Peterhouse. A scholar of the college, he took a second class in the classical tripos in 1885. He was ordained by the bishop of Salisbury in 1887. 
In 1889 both men were posted by the SPG to Cawnpore, India. The brotherhood was small, seldom up to strength, financially straitened, and committed already to the expatriate community, to the care of Christian famine orphans and an agricultural settlement, and to teaching in the high school, which Westcott rebuilt in 1892. The brothers started a printing press and industrial workshops, notably a brass foundry, to train orphans, recruiting European instructors, and raising money from grants and deputation work on brief furloughs. By 1916 press and workshops had served their turn and were closed; local factories took on all their employees forthwith, in preference to others and often at improved rates. Christ Church College with its hostels developed from the high school in 1897, and George served on the syndicate of the University of Allahabad to which it was affiliated. 
Their fraternal partnership was dissolved reluctantly. Westcott refused the see of Rangoon in 1903, and in 1905 Foss Westcott hesitated before accepting Chota Nagpur, partly on the grounds that his brother 'was far better qualified for Episcopal work than myself' (F. Westcott to Bishop H. H. Montgomery, 23 March 1905, USPG archive). This was probably an accurate assessment at the time as regards the standard burden of diocesan administration, but Westcott was developing less routine inter-faith ambitions. Dr A. Clifford, whom he succeeded as bishop of Lucknow in 1910, informed SPG headquarters in 1909 that 'George Westcott without Foss is not quite the same person' commenting on the mission's loss of 'tone... smoothness and... vigour' (A. Clifford to H. H. Montgomery, 15 July 1909, USPG archive); but he overlooked this significant supplementary distraction. 
The brothers' commitment to 'Indianization' and unification of Christian denominations entailed careful defocusing of doctrinal differences, in Foss Westcott's question-begging words on the grounds that 'irregular' sacraments and practices are not invalid but potentially fruitful, where manifestly 'given by God in answer to the sincere faith of the recipients' (F. Westcott to G. H. Westcott, 12 Dec 1917, USPG archive). George Westcott, alarmed by the establishment of religious centres in north India by Muslims, Hindus, and Arya Samaj, sought to apply this simple 'fulfilment theology' in an inter-faith context. From 1908 he eagerly promoted the establishment of a college of study, with accommodation for both Christians and non-Christians, to explore, in constructive, well-grounded confrontation, the gradual fulfilment in Christianity of fundamentally valid non-Christian insights. 
He was defeated by 'chronic hardupness' (to quote a sympathetic London Missionary Society missionary), by the war and, he believed, by SPG neglect, but wrote his book, 'Kabir and the Kabir Panth' (1907; reprinted 1953). Kabir ('fl'. 1480), had drawn on Sufi and Hindu insights, but particularly from the personal devotionalism of the popular and unorthodox 'bhakti' saints and poets, to excoriate exclusivism, ritualism, and caste hierarchy, and to teach a life of Christlike integrity. Characteristically, the principal acknowledgement in Westcott's modest scholarly work was to his own gardener, a 'mali' of low caste and a 'panthi' or devotee, who had furthered Westcott's enquiries 'with great intelligence' and introduced him to many 'mahants' or exponents in Kabir's contemporary following. 
As bishop, Westcott cherished the garden he fostered at Allahabad, and against the climatic odds he was notably successful with his roses. Before he could retire to the Nilgiri hills in south India, within reach of his brother, Westcott died, unmarried, at his home, the bishop's house, Allahabad, on 16 January 1928. He was buried in Allahabad. 


@@@@@


doc= 58713


Morice, William (1733-1819), Church of England clergyman, was born on 28 January 1733, the second son of William Morice, high bailiff of Westminster from 1719 to 1731, of Delahay Street, Kensington, and his second wife, Anne (1705-1743), daughter of Captain John Philpot of Rotherhithe. He matriculated at Hertford College, Oxford, on 8 December 1750, graduating BA in 1754 and MA in 1757. Ordained deacon on 16 May 1756 and priest on 6 March 1757, he served as curate at St Peter-le-Poer, London. On 2 September 1762 he married Hannah Voyce (1737-1789), with whom he had seven children. 
Richard Terrick, bishop of London, collated Morice in September 1767 to Wennington, Essex, and Frederick Cornwallis, archbishop of Canterbury, presented him to All Hallows, Bread Street, and St John the Evangelist, in September 1771. He began assisting Dr Daniel Burton, secretary of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel (SPG), in 1768, and was himself elected secretary in 1778. Salters' Hall Company elected him lecturer in St Dunstan-in-the-East, Fleet Street, in December 1768. After being commissioned chaplain in the 103rd regiment of foot in June 1769, he was appointed chaplain-in-ordinary to the king in 1772. Archbishop Cornwallis conferred a DD degree on him in 1781. 
Morice's career was notable for its dedication and efficiency. He served sixteen years as a curate, forty-five as rector of Wennington, forty-eight at All Hallows and St John the Evangelist, and fifty-one years in service to the SPG. He regularly conducted two Sunday services at All Hallows and for twenty years he delivered the Thursday evening lecture. A notice of the bishop's visitation received on 9 March 1790 was answered the next day. His tenure with the SPG is noted for consistent attendance and diligence in his duties, for example in managing all books and papers and waiting upon the archbishop of Canterbury (president of the society) and the bishop of London, in whose overseas diocese missionaries served. Morice prepared and published annual reports with sermon for distribution to all members. Copies of his correspondence fill seven volumes. In addition to official minutes, he kept a private account of the society from 1751 to 1819. 
Major events during Morice's years with the SPG were the American War of Independence and the challenge to provide missionaries for Canada. The SPG charter of 1701 limited their service to British possessions. By 1781 the society knew it had to discontinue work in the independent states but it offered continued employment to those who repaired to the king's dominions. It was Morice's responsibility to inform the missionaries of this and help to arrange new assignments. In 1778 the SPG had ninety-four missionaries registered in the independent states but by 1785 there were none. Canada and its neighbouring provinces had twenty-two missionaries in 1785. That same year parliament directed that Canada should be divided into parishes, and provided the society with a grant. The consecration on 12 August 1787 of Charles Inglis, a loyalist missionary from New York and the first colonial bishop, assigned to Nova Scotia, initiated a new era in the society's work. Inglis's consecration fulfilled the SPG's desire for local supervision of their missionaries and Morice's co-operation with Inglis provided seventy-nine appointees to Canada and neighbouring provinces by 1818. 
Morice was described as 'firm' and 'friendly'. His greeting was 'your affectionate brother and humble servant'. His resignation in 1814 was withdrawn at the request of Archbishop Charles Manners-Sutton. The qualities that characterized his SPG service were evident in his family relations. His journal reveals affection and encouragement towards his children. Two of his sons, William and Henry, followed his clerical example. A third son, Burton, a barrister, became secretary to the lord chamberlain. His desire was to be buried beside his daughter Charlotte (died 6 May 1775) and wife, Hannah, beneath the communion table in All Hallows, Bread Street. He died at his home, 53 Gower Street, London, on 7 January 1819. Archbishop Charles Manners-Sutton described him as 'their Venerable Secretary... zealous and faithful... upwards of 50 years' ('SPG Minutes', 32, 1819-20, 22). 


@@@@@


doc= 58715


Abbott, Peter Harriss (1774/5-1850), accountant and official assignee, was born on the island of St Christopher in the West Indies, the son of Peter Abbott and Jane Dijett. Abbott's early career remains obscure, but it is known that by 1812 he was in business as a merchant working from 121 New City Chambers, Bishopsgate Within, in the City of London. There are many examples of merchants developing commercial skills and subsequently setting up in business as public accountants, and this was the route followed by Abbott, who was listed as an 'accountant' in the 'Post Office London Directory' for 1823. Abbott has been described as 'the leading public accountant of the day' (Bywater, 791), and, in the years that followed, William Quilter and John Ball -- individuals who played leading roles in the formation of a professional accounting body in London in 1870 -- trained in his office. Indeed one of Quilter's obituarists described Abbott as the 'practical founder of the profession of public accountants in this country' ('The Accountant'). 
It was as a public accountant expert in bookkeeping matters that Abbott was first called in to advise the government. The state of central government financial accounting and control was the subject of vitriolic attack in parliament during the 1820s, particularly from radicals led by Joseph Hume. The prime minister, Wellington, appointed a parliamentary finance committee in 1828 that called for the establishment of a 'commission of experts, whose duty it would be to examine the wasteful system of Public Accounts and recommend judicious improvements' (Bartle, 113). Abbott and two civil servants were appointed Treasury commissioners for that purpose. It was not a successful liaison. 
The civil servants, Thomas Constantinus Brooksbank and Samuel Beltz, were determined to ensure that reforms built on the long-established system of central government bookkeeping. Abbott was equally keen to impose on civil servants the commercially oriented 'mercantile' system of bookkeeping, an early attempt to apply what would today be described as a private sector solution to a public sector problem. Brooksbank and Beltz won a debate that descended into sharp attacks by each party on the other, but this reversal does not appear to have harmed Abbott's stock with the government. In the course of giving evidence to a select committee in 1837 Abbott revealed that he had been frequently consulted and employed by the government and had recommended the introduction of 'the commercial system of double entry' into each of the twenty-eight government offices he had surveyed. He also claimed to be in the process of introducing reforms at the excise department that 'would get rid of at least 700 volumes of books' and result in estimated savings of '300,000'l'. a year in the administration of the department' ('Parl. papers', 1837, 7, questions 1312-13). Confirmation of Abbott's continuing involvement in the reform of public accountancy was provided by John Bowring, who in 1844 reported the results of an inquiry into changes made in the system of bookkeeping in government offices since 1831. Abbott's enduring interest in central government finances is further reflected in his pamphlet 'On the Public Debt, with a Plan for its Final Extinction' (1839). 
When Abbott was in his mid-forties his career moved in a new direction. The availability of bankruptcy and liquidation work, particularly during periods of economic distress, was a major source of profitable employment for many accountants during the nineteenth century. The 'Bankruptcy Act' of 1831 was a significant milestone in the history of the accounting profession since it made provision for the appointment of accountants to the newly created position of official assignee. The lawyer Arthur Woolf, writing in 1912, believed that this 'first official recognition of accountants by the State... must have done much to increase the prestige of the profession' (Woolf, 174). Abbott's appointment proved reasonably lucrative, giving him an average annual remuneration of $694 10's'. 0died But this proved woefully inadequate to meet Abbott's financial requirements. In the spring of 1841 he absconded to Brussels with, allegedly, $82,196 'in his hands' ('Parl. papers', 1850, 19, question 167). He was adjudged bankrupt in April of that year, with sources reporting claims outstanding against his estate of up to $100,000. Only about $1200 was collected and, probably due to expenses involved, this was deemed insufficient to enable a dividend to be paid to the creditors. 
A possible explanation for this perhaps aberrant behaviour on the part of Abbott is contained in a letter written to the former lord chancellor, Lord Brougham, in 1845. Brougham drew the House of Lords' attention to Abbott's claim that 'the grave offence for which he had suffered' had been perpetrated because he had been defrauded of the whole of his property. Although no justification for Abbott's behaviour, Brougham felt it to be 'a palliation of his conduct' ('Hansard' 3, 78, 3 March 1845, 232). Whatever the reasons for his need of the money, it is certain that Abbott showed little regard for the regulations applying to his position as official registrar. Contrary to these, he 'engaged in several speculative trading companies' ('Parl. papers', 1850, 19, question 176). When Abbott's legal representatives had attempted to stifle proceedings against him in the court of bankruptcy Sir John Cross described it as 'a lamentable case, in which a public officer, who was bound not to trade, had set the restriction at nought, and mixed himself up in various commercial dealings' ('The Times'). 
Abbott died in Brussels on 9 May 1850. His death certificate describes him as 'directeur de la banque anglaise' and further reveals the fact that he was the widower of Catherine Hodges. He had been respected within government circles, and raised the profile of the accounting occupational group with the state, thereby helping to pave the way for the closer links between central government and the accounting profession that gained pace in Victorian and Edwardian Britain and blossomed during and after the First World War. Even in disgrace he left his mark: his defalcation was of such proportions as to require a major strengthening of the regulations relating to the apprehension of bankrupts, the seizure of their assets, and the actions and accountability of official assignees. 


@@@@@


doc= 58717


Veale, Richard (1687?-1756), master mariner and privateer, was probably the son of Richard Veale, a fuller, who was born on 20 January 1687 and baptized in St George's, Exeter, on 30 January. Another son, Joseph, became receiver of taxes for Devon. Veale married twice. His first wife, Margaret Brown, died in July 1734; they had two children, but both had died in infancy. On 6 May 1735 he married Jane ('bap'. 1716, died 1754), daughter of James King, a City merchant. 
After extensive experience as a master Veale was commissioned in 1744, when the war against Spain was formally extended to France, as commander of the 'Hunter', a private man-of-war. He subsequently commanded the privateers 'Inspector' and 'Dreadnought'. 
Veale's successes as a privateer included the capture of an English privateer from a French man-of-war which had taken her; and after a running sea fight, the capture of a valuable French privateer. But they were offset when several owners of the 'Hunter' brought proceedings against him in the court of chancery in June 1746, and by the earlier wreck of the 'Inspector' in Tangier Bay in January 1746, with the loss of ninety-six men and the imprisonment of most of the rest of the crew. Veale was rescued by HMS 'Phoenix'. The last survivors were not freed until 1750, and an account of their suffering was published by a member of the crew in the following year. 
By 1749 Veale had resumed his career as a merchant mariner -- in command of the 'Queen of Portugal', on which he carried Henry Fielding to Lisbon in 1754. Fielding has left a vivid picture of Veale. He presents him as a mercurial figure: a brave and good-natured man who was a father to his sailors, but who 'wore a sword of no ordinary length by his side, with which he swaggered in his cabin, among the wretches his passengers, whom he had stowed in cupboards on each side' and had 'a voice capable of deafening all others' (Fielding, 29). Veale died two years after his second wife, in June 1756. His will was proved in the prerogative court of Canterbury on 19 October 1756. 


@@@@@


doc= 58720


Essinger, Anna (1879-1960), educationist, was born on 15 September 1879 in Ulm, Germany, the eldest of nine children of Leopold Essinger (1853-1934), a Jewish insurance agent, and his wife, Fanny Oppenheimer (1858-1942). She attended school in Ulm until 1893. In 1899 she went to live with an aunt in Nashville, Tennessee, where she became interested in education. At the University of Wisconsin she read German from 1913 onwards for an MA degree, then taught German there as a Pfister fellow. In 1919 she was sent to southern Germany by the American Society of Friends (by whom this non-practising Jew was greatly influenced) to organize the Quaker post-war relief work for children. Then she was involved in establishing further education programmes for working women, but decided, however, that her true vocation lay in educating children. 
With the help of her family Essinger founded the co-educational progressive boarding-school, Landschulheim Herrlingen, near Ulm, in 1926. She was in close contact with leading national and international representatives of the New Education Fellowship. The education was based on some fundamental precepts: equal importance of practical and theoretical work; pupils taught in groups according to their abilities and individual work to be encouraged; no learning by rote; no physical punishment; no competitive tests or assessments. In her school English and French were even spoken at table. Teachers were addressed by their nicknames and the informal 'Du'; the headmistress was Tante Anna. 
When Hitler came to power in 1933, Essinger realized that her school would have no future in Nazi Germany. With the permission of the British authorities and the support of Quakers and private donors she secretly moved sixty-five Jewish pupils of her school to Bunce Court, a manor house near Otterden, Kent. Bunce Court School employed an equal number of English and German staff and also attracted British pupils. In view of possible emigration of pupils to Palestine modern Hebrew was offered. Practical work was no longer solely taught for pedagogical reasons, but also to make the school self-supporting. Sadly science was neglected in favour of the humanities. There were workshops in which photography, model building, art, and music were taught; an open-air theatre was built by the pupils where plays and operas were performed. Numerous Bunce Courtians, including Gerard Hoffnung, Frank Auerbach, and Frank Marcus, made careers in art, music, and literature, others in science. When the financial situation became precarious because parents were no longer able to send money abroad, the very short-sighted and stout but formidable headmistress made weekly fund-raising trips to London lecturing on the plight of refugee Jewish children. 
In November 1938 Essinger was asked to organize Dovercourt Camp, a reception camp of the 'Kindertransports' when 10,000 Jewish unaccompanied children arrived from Nazi Germany shortly after 'Kristallnacht'. A guarantor had to be found for each child while dozens were admitted to her already overcrowded boarding-school. In June 1940 Bunce Court was requisitioned by the military. Trench Hall near Wem, Shropshire, was converted into a makeshift home for the school. Moreover, all male teachers and pupils over sixteen of German nationality were interned. After the war she returned to a dilapidated Bunce Court. The last intake included hidden children from eastern Europe and concentration camp survivors. In 1948 the school closed down, largely because it had fulfilled its purpose. 
Essinger, a complex personality, had rescued many hundreds of Jewish children and given them a haven of security in her school family. In her last years she was blind and lived on the Bunce Court estate with three of her sisters who helped her to maintain an enormous correspondence with former pupils, many of whom visited her until her peaceful death at her home, The Bungalow, Bunce Court, on 30 May 1960. She was cremated at Charing, Kent, on 2 June. 
Essinger's singular commitment perhaps left her with more admirers of her work than close friends. Professor Leslie Baruch Brent, a former pupil, concluded his funeral oration: 'Anna Essinger devoted herself singlemindedly to the cause of education and the saving of young lives from the persecution of Nazi Germany, and in this she was sustained by an unshakeable faith in the idea of human progress.' 


@@@@@


doc= 58723


Grueber, Francis (1658?-1730), gunpowder and leather manufacturer and merchant, was born in Lyons, France, probably in December 1658, the eldest of the three sons and three daughters of Daniel Grueber (died 1692) and his wife, Susanne ('nee' Monginot). The Huguenot family arrived in England about 1680 and, as distressed protestants, were endenizened in November 1682 and subsequently naturalized by act of parliament in June 1685. Daniel Grueber remained domiciled in the London parish of St Swithin, and a member of the capital's French Walloon community, until his death in 1692, but by 1687 he had rented leather and gunpowder mills in the parishes of Ospringe, Preston, and Faversham in Kent, and was involved in a regular coastal trade, exporting grouph petre and general groceries to Faversham, and importing the gunpowder and skins manufactured in his mills by return. 
After Daniel's death Francis and his youngest brother, Nicholas, inherited their father's lease on the gunpowder and leather mills (on a two-thirds to one-third ratio respectively). Nicholas appears soon to have surrendered his share, and by the mid-1690s Francis had emerged as the largest of five Faversham merchants supplying gunpowder to the Ordnance Office. In 1699, for example, Francis Grueber alone was responsible for 1337 of the 2692 barrels of gunpowder shipped coastwise from Faversham. Refined saltpetre also featured prominently in consignments to the capital under his name. Grueber's export of sheep and deer skins to the metropolis was likewise substantial in the 1690s, and he also dabbled occasionally in the grain trade that dominated the business of the port of Faversham. After 1700, however, Grueber seems to have concentrated increasingly on gunpowder manufacture, his mills providing employment for others among the small community of Huguenot refugees who had also settled in Faversham by the turn of the century. Before 1690 he had married Susanna (died 1738), with whom he had two daughters and three sons. Between 1691 and 1693 he was a deacon of the French church in Threadneedle Street, London, and was an elder between 1705 and 1708 and after 1713. 
The risks inherent in gunpowder manufacture were not always neutralized by Huguenot technical expertise. In September 1703 one of Grueber's Faversham mills exploded spectacularly. As Daniel Defoe later recalled: 'The blast was not only frightful, but it shattered the whole town, broke the windows, blew down chimneys, and gable-ends not a few... but what was most remarkable in it all, was, that the eldest son of the master of the powder-mill, a youth of about fifteen years of age, who was not in the mill, or near it, when it blew up: but in a boat upon the river, rowing cross for his diversion, was kill'd by a piece of the building of the mill, which blew up in the air by the force of the powder, and fell down upon him in the boat. (Defoe, 112)' Francis Grueber the younger (1691-1703) was buried on 15 September, along with three Huguenot powdermakers who had been directly blown up at work 'by the store of fried-up powder' (CKS, TR 1042/11/7). In October 1703 Faversham corporation somewhat belatedly ordered the purchase of 'a dozen leather buckets... for the extinguishing of fire which at any time might happen', and that the 'engine belonging to this town be put in good and sufficient repair... that it may be fit to extinguish any fire' (CKS, Fa/AC 4, pt ii, fol. 255'v'). 
The acknowledged urban gentry status of the family notwithstanding, disputes centring on production and working practices at the gunpowder mills meant that relations between the Gruebers and Faversham corporation were often strained in later years. In 1728 Grueber was reportedly facing bankruptcy, at which point he entered into a partnership with Thomas Coram, the merchant, American colonist, and later founder of the Foundling Hospital, London. Following his death on 15 April 1730 Francis Grueber, 'gentleman', was buried in Faversham parish church on 19 April; he was survived by his wife, who was buried in the church on 21 December 1738. After his death the business passed to his surviving son, (Henry) Francis (died 1747). In April 1741 this Francis Grueber was censured by the corporation for dangerously transporting loose gunpowder through the town, but by then his business was in trouble, and within two or three years the day-to-day management of local powder mills had fallen entirely into different hands. Faversham's principal gunpowder mill was eventually purchased by the Ordnance Board in 1759. 


@@@@@


doc= 58727


Ganguly, Kadambini (c.1862-1923), physician and political activist, was born in Bhagalpur, a town in eastern India (now in the state of Bihar) where her father, Brajakishore Basu, was headmaster of a school. He was an active member of the reformist Brahmo Samaj, a religious movement based on the philosophy of the 'Upanishads' and influenced by Sikhism, Islam, and Unitarianism, which stressed intellectual freedom and women's rights. There is no information on Kadambini's mother or siblings, though her mother's brother, Monomohan Ghose, a barrister, was instrumental in persuading Brajakishore to send Kadambini to the progressive Banga Mahila Vidyalaya, the closest approximation to a girls' boarding-school in Calcutta. Monomohan and other Brahmos, including Dwarakanath Ganguly (1844-1898), who was later to marry Kadambini, were the founders of this unique school and continued to be very active in the running of the institution. In 1878 Dwarakanath had to expend considerable energy and time in getting permission for Kadambini to sit for the entrance examination to the University of Calcutta, after she had passed a preliminary test. As there were no girls' colleges at that time the Bethune School in Calcutta added special classes in 1879, and in 1882 Kadambini and Chandramukhi Basu became the first women graduates of the University of Calcutta. Due to the proscriptions of female seclusion it soon became essential to introduce training for women in nursing and medicine; while the missionaries were the first to enrol, these professions started recruiting Indian women by the 1880s. After her graduation Kadambini decided to study medicine at the University of Calcutta, where a BA degree was adequate for admission to the course. Despite an official commitment to expand medical education among women the authorities granted her a place grudgingly: clearly, those in charge of women's education were not unaffected by the prejudices against its dissemination. 
On 12 June 1883, shortly after entering medical college, Kadambini married Dwarakanath, by now a 39-year-old widower with six adult children. Dwarakanath had been her teacher, and clearly the two had become very close during Kadambini's later school years. The marriage caused a stir even among the reformist Brahmo Samaj; while there is no information on family responses, Dwarakanath's close friends and associates apparently disapproved and refused to attend the marriage ceremony. The leading women's journal 'Bamabodhini Patrika', which usually carried information on Brahmo Samaj marriages, made no mention of this interesting match and it is possible that Dwarakanath was viewed as having taken advantage of the emotions of a young woman assigned to his charge. By all accounts the marriage was an extremely successful one, and Dwarakanath fully supported Kadambini's further education and professional career. 
In 1886 Kadambini passed in all the written papers of the final medical examination but failed in an essential component of the practicals; deliberate bias against her for being a woman was suspected. Instead of an MB degree she was awarded that of a GBMC (graduate of Bengal medical college), which enabled her to practise. In 1885 the Dufferin Fund (later known as the National Association for Supplying Female Medical Aid to the Women of India) was set up; the fund was the first systematic attempt at institutionalizing Western medicine and its use among Indian women. Clearly Kadambini was quick to take advantage of the facilities being made available for Indian women in the field of medicine and in 1888 was appointed a doctor at the Lady Dufferin Medical College on a monthly salary of Rs300. Kadambini soon had a flourishing practice and among her patients were women of the Nepalese royal family; the queen mother loaded her with gifts, which included a pony. In no time pony rides became popular with her two children and stepgrandchildren, to whom Kadambini was a remote and busy figure, different from all the other women they knew. Kadambini's clinic-cum-study held many mysteries for them, including a human skeleton. As she commuted between patients in a horse-drawn carriage she occupied herself with the ubiquitous feminine occupation of the times -- making fine lace, for which she gained some reputation. 
Soon after the establishment of the Indian National Congress in 1885, Dwarakanath Ganguly began agitating for women's representation at the annual sessions and the 1889 Bombay session had a delegation of six women including Kadambini. The following year, at the Congress session at Calcutta, she delivered the vote of thanks in English, becoming the first Indian woman to speak at such occasions. Not unexpectedly, orthodox Hindus viewed Kadambini's career with deep misgivings. Fearing that their own women might emulate her, a section of conservatives launched a slander campaign, and in 1891 'Bangabasi', a journal of the traditionalists, accused Kadambini of being a whore. Dwarakanath and other eminent Brahmos committed to women's emancipation launched a counter-offensive in the columns of a Brahmo publication, the 'Indian Messenger', where articles strongly criticized those who felt that the 'maintenance of female virtue is incompatible with their social liberty' (Kopf, 126). Dwarakanath was vindicated when the editor of the 'Bangabasi', Mohesh Chandra Pal, was fined Rs100 and sentenced to six months' imprisonment. 
In 1892 Kadambini went to the United Kingdom for higher medical education and was made LRCP (Edin.), LRFPS (Glasgow), and DFPS (Dublin); at a time when women of her own class had barely started coming out in mixed company Kadambini's sojourn abroad further marked her out as an exceptional woman, intelligent, tenacious, and self-confident. During her long widowhood (Dwarakanath died on 27 June 1898), Kadambini continued to combine wider community activities with her professional life. At the beginning of the twentieth century she became the president of the Indian branch of the Transvaal Indian Association, established by Henry Pollack, a co-worker of M. K. Gandhi. A year before her death Kadambini became a member of a commission to enquire into the working conditions of women workers in Bihar and Orissa. Though little is known about her later years, family sources reported Kadambini's tireless commitment to her profession and to the cause of women in fast changing times. She died on 3 October 1923. 


@@@@@


doc= 58729


Bainton, Edgar Leslie (1880-1956), composer and conductor, was born on 14 February 1880 at 2 Florence Villas, De Beauvoir Square, Hackney, London, the second son among the three children of the Revd George Bainton, a Congregational minister, and his wife, Mary Cave, both Londoners by birth. They moved to Coventry shortly afterwards, where Bainton started learning the piano at the age of four and made his first public appearance as a pianist at nine. At eleven he was awarded a musical scholarship to King Henry VIII Grammar School in Coventry, and at sixteen an open scholarship to the Royal College of Music, London, to study the piano with Franklin Taylor. He was later awarded the Wilson scholarship to study composition with Sir Charles Villiers Stanford, and won the Hopkinson gold medal in 1900 and the Tagore medal in 1901. 
In 1901 Bainton was appointed to the Newcastle upon Tyne Conservatoire of Music as a teacher of piano and composition. He worked there for the next thirty-two years, becoming principal in 1912. One of his students, Ethel Frances Eales (1885-1954), became his wife on 31 July 1905; their two daughters, Guendolen and Helen, were born in 1906 and 1909. During this time Bainton became increasingly important in the north-east of England, particularly as conductor of the Newcastle Philharmonic Orchestra and as pianist and annotator of programme notes for the Newcastle chamber music society. Works by Bainton such as 'The Blessed Damozel', a setting of D. G. Rossetti's poem, and 'Prometheus' were performed at major local festivals in 1907 and 1909. Also during these years he came into regular contact with a group of Georgian poets, including Wilfrid Wilson Gibson, Gordon Bottomley, and Robert Trevelyan, who provided texts for his songs and operas. 
In the summer of 1914 Bainton was intercepted in Germany 'en route' for the Bayreuth Festival, which he visited yearly, and interned in a prison camp for British civilians in wartime Germany at Ruhleben, near Berlin. During the next four years he took charge of all the musical activities in the camp, from conducting orchestral concerts and supervising music examinations to writing music for productions of Shakespeare's 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' and 'Twelfth Night'. Early in 1918 he was invalided out to The Hague because of ill health, and on 8 December 1918, shortly after the armistice, he became the first British conductor to conduct the Concertgebouw Orchestra, in a concert of all British music. 
During the 1920s Bainton's reputation as a composer continued to rise, with works such as 'Three Pieces for Orchestra', 'Eclogue', and the 'Concerto fantasia' being performed at the Henry Wood Promenade Concerts and the Bournemouth Municipal Orchestra concerts. Commissions were completed for the Three Choirs Festival, and his orchestral rhapsody 'Epithalamion' was featured by the BBC Symphony Orchestra in its festival of British music in 1931. He was also one of the first recipients of the Carnegie Trust's British music awards, for his choral symphony 'Before Sunrise' in 1917 and for his 'Concerto fantasia' in 1920. His work as a teacher, lecturer, adjudicator, and conductor was officially recognized with the award of a fellowship of the Royal College of Music and an honorary doctorate of music from Durham University, both in 1934. 
In 1934 Bainton was appointed as director to the New South Wales Conservatorium of Music in Sydney, Australia, and he remained in that country until his death in 1956. In addition to fulfilling his duties as director, he was much in demand as a conductor of the recently founded Australian Broadcasting Corporation Sydney Symphony Orchestra and introduced much new British music to Australia. The climax of his career was the highly successful production of his opera 'The Pearl Tree' by the conservatorium opera school in Sydney in 1944. After retirement in 1946 he continued in his career as conductor, teacher, and composer, even venturing into film music for a brief time. 
It is as a composer that Bainton deserves primarily to be remembered. His music is characterized by richness of feeling, lyricism, and imagination inspired by literary sources. His orchestration in particular is noteworthy for its delicate clarity of expression, which reflects the composer's sensitivity and disciplined mind. His first symphony, 'Before Sunrise', for contralto, chorus, and orchestra, is a setting in four movements of poems by Algernon Swinburne dating from 1907. His second symphony of 1940 is more innovative, being cast in one extended movement in twelve sections. In his third symphony, completed in 1956, shortly before his death, Bainton reverted to a four-movement structure, but its character reflects the ruggedness of the Australian landscape that Bainton had come to know so well on his many walking tours. 
Bainton's three extant chamber works are also of interest. His string quartet in A was completed in Ruhleben in 1915 as a work in three movements, of which the third returns to the theme and mood of the opening; in 1920 this work was heavily revised, and a finale added. The viola sonata of 1922 is one of Bainton's very finest works and also one of the great viola sonatas of its time. Written in three movements, it displays a dark and autumnal mood, with considerable harmonic flexibility and simultaneous use of contrasting metres in the second movement, which combines the functions of slow movement and scherzo, and in the finale, where the opening folk-song-like theme of the second movement's unaccompanied viola melody floats above the military ostinato of the piano part, again with simultaneous contrasting metres, a most striking and original concept. The cello sonata of 1924, also in three movements, is less innovative but still striking in its lyricism and harmonic sensitivity; the second movement's final cadence is original. 
Among Bainton's three large-scale operas, 'Oithona' (after Ossian) was completed in 1905 and first performed at the 1915 Glastonbury Festival but was later withdrawn. His two most important operas were 'The Crier by Night' (libretto by Gordon Bottomley) of 1912, broadcast from Australia in 1942, and 'The Pearl Tree' (libretto by Robert Trevelyan) of 1925, premiered at the New South Wales Conservatorium opera school in 1944. Both works utilize the leitmotif method of composition familiar to Bainton from hearing Wagner's operas during his annual visits to the Bayreuth festivals. Bainton also composed several works for chorus and orchestra, inspired by the excellent standard of choral singing throughout Britain during the first half of the twentieth century. These are 'The Blessed Damozel' of 1907, 'Sunset at Sea' (Reginald Buckley) of 1910, 'The Vindictive Staircase' (W. W. Gibson) of 1913, 'A Song of Freedom and Joy' (Edward Carpenter) of 1920, 'The Tower' (Robert Nichols) of 1924, 'The Dancing Seal' (Gibson) of 1926, and 'A Hymn to God the Father' (John Donne) of 1926. 
Literary connections form an important feature of Bainton's shorter orchestral works, notably in 'Pompilia' of 1903 and 'Paracelsus' of 1904 (both inspired by Robert Browning), 'The Golden River' of 1908 (John Ruskin), 'Prometheus' of 1909 (Shelley), and 'Epithalamion' of 1929 (Edmund Spenser). Bainton wrote over 100 each of songs and partsongs but only four church anthems, of which 'And I saw a new heaven', completed on 13 June 1928, remains his single most famous work. Edgar Bainton died while taking his regular swim at Point Piper Beach, Sydney, on 8 December 1956. 


@@@@@


doc= 58733


Barke, James William (1905-1958), novelist, was born on 22 May 1905 at Torwoodlee, near Galashiels, Selkirkshire, the fourth child of James Bark (1862-1937), dairyman, and his wife, Jane ('b'. 1866), a dairymaid, daughter of Thomas Gibb, ploughman. The family moved in 1907 to Tulliallan, Fife, which Barke, remembering his happy rural childhood, considered to be in effect 'the land of my birth' (Barke, 279). In 1918 they moved again, to Glasgow. Barke was educated at Tulliallan parish school and Hamilton Crescent public school, Glasgow. He trained as an engineer and worked for a Glasgow shipbuilding and engineering firm, becoming manager of its brickworks, while beginning his writing career. His first novel, 'The World his Pillow', was published in 1933. The same year he married Agnes (Nan) Coats and they had two sons. 
Barke listed his interests as 'Scotland, 'piobaireachd' [bagpipe music] and anything controversial' ('Glasgow Herald', 21 March 1958). A friend wrote: 'He was a man full of humanity, a very individual man. His novels are like him' (Allan). He was a committed socialist and his fourth novel, 'Major Operation' (1936), argues the case for socialism at some length, while providing a striking impressionistic description of Glasgow in the depression years. 'The Land of the Leal' (1939), considered his masterpiece, is a novel on an epic scale, the odyssey of a couple and their family in pursuit of work from their native Galloway to the Scottish borders, Fife, and Glasgow, echoing the experiences of Barke's parents. 
After the Second World War, Barke resigned from his Glasgow job and moved to Ayrshire to work on an ambitious series of novels based on the life of Robert Burns. The 'Immortal Memory' quintet, which appeared between 1946 and 1953, was extremely popular with readers, but was attacked by many Burnsians who deplored Barke's colourful rendering of the poet's life. 
After an unsuccessful hotelkeeping venture in Ayrshire Barke returned to live in Glasgow in 1955. He had been in poor health for some years and died, following a heart attack, in Glasgow Royal Infirmary on 20 March 1958. A private cremation four days later was followed by committal at New Kilpatrick cemetery, Bearsden, where C. M. Grieve (the poet Hugh MacDiarmid) gave the funeral oration. Barke was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 58734


Barrington, Kenneth Frank (1930-1981), cricketer, was born on 24 November 1930 in Reading, the eldest of the three sons and four daughters of Percy Barrington, a regular soldier, and his wife, Winifred Lambden. His early experience of poverty shaped his life, for cricket, his abiding passion, also became his passport to better times. After attending Wilson Central School and Katesgrove secondary school in Reading, he began his working life at fourteen as a motor mechanic. This was followed by two years as assistant groundsman at Reading cricket club. From there the stockily built Barrington joined Surrey in 1948 as a promising leg-spinner. Encouraged to concentrate on his batting, he worked his way up but did not make his first team debut until 1953, having spent 1949-50 in Germany, doing his national service as a lance-corporal in the Royal Wiltshire regiment. On 6 March 1954 he married Ann Cozens ('b'. 1933), a secretary, the daughter of a butcher turned publican in Reading. She was an important source of strength to him. In the season following his marriage he scored his maiden century, becoming part of the great Surrey side of that vintage. In 1955 he won his first test cap against South Africa at Trent Bridge, but failed to score and was dropped after the next test. It was to be another four years before he returned. During this time he eliminated the risks within his game, and adopted an open-chested stance, which, although ungainly to the eye, proved highly effective in combating the surfeit of in-swing bowling then prevailing. 
After a successful return against India in 1959 Barrington prospered on his first senior tour to the West Indies in 1959-60 and all subsequent ones, most notably in Australia (1962-3) and in South Africa (1964-5), where he averaged over 80 in the tests on both tours. Apart from the quickness of his eye and his strength on both front and back foot, the key to his success lay in his supreme concentration and determination never to surrender his wicket. At home he was nearly as dependable and at Old Trafford against Australia in 1964 he achieved his highest test score of 256, but the painstaking manner in which he accumulated his runs rarely made for compulsive viewing. In 1965 he was dropped for slow scoring after a turgid 137 against New Zealand at Edgbaston but celebrated his return at Headingley in style with a swashbuckling 163. 
A drawback to this prodigious run scoring was the debilitating effect it had on Barrington's health. For in contrast to his easygoing approach off the field, batting was an emotionally taxing business and after an unhappy beginning to the 1966 series against the West Indies, Barrington, close to a nervous breakdown, felt compelled to withdraw. A year away from test cricket helped revive him, and in 1967 he was back to his best, heading the national averages and scoring centuries in three successive tests against Pakistan. He began the 1967-8 series against the West Indies with a courageous 143 at Port of Spain but once again the tension began to get to him. A serious heart attack in Australia later that year, when participating in a demanding double-wicket competition, brought his premature retirement and he acquired and ran a successful garage and motor dealership in Surrey. He returned to the game in 1975, first as a test selector (a position he held for the rest of his life), then as a manager and finally as assistant manager on five successive tours between 1976 and 1981. His technical expertise as a coach coupled with his benign charm and his devotion to his charges made him a universally revered figure. 
Barrington almost cared too much, burdened himself with responsibility and obligations, and once again the strain began to take its toll. It was during a particularly traumatic tour to the West Indies, aggravated by political troubles, that Barrington collapsed and died of a heart attack in Bridgetown, Barbados, on 14 March 1981. His funeral was held at Randalls Park crematorium, Leatherhead, Surrey on 23 March. 'No cricketer was ever more widely mourned', declared 'Wisden' (90). 'He set out to become an impregnable batsman and, changing his technique, made himself into one of the finest defensive players of cricket history', asserted John Arlott in 'The Guardian' (15 March 1981). He was survived by his wife and their son Guy. His test record of 6806 runs, average 58.67, in a career of 31,714 runs with 76 centuries, average 45.63, ranks with the very best. He also took 273 wickets at an average of 32.63 and held 515 catches. Of medium height (5 foot 9 inches tall), he was a distinctive figure on the field with his neatly cut crinkling black hair, roman nose, and jutting jaw. His soldierly background was reflected in his immaculate dress and meticulous care of his cricket gear. He is commemorated by the Ken Barrington Cricket Centre, which was opened by Surrey at the Oval in 1990 to provide indoor nets and sporting facilities to encourage young cricketers. 


@@@@@


doc= 58736


Bell, Robert Anning (1863-1933), artist and designer, was born at 1 Little Street, Andrew Street, St Giles, London, on 14 April 1863, the son of Robert George Bell, a cheesemonger, and his wife, Mary Charlotte Knight. He received his early education at University College School, but left at the age of fourteen because of straitened family circumstances, and was then articled in the architectural office of his uncle. He thus acquired considerable skills as a draughtsman through detailing architectural drawings. Subsequently he studied under Professor Fred Brown at the Westminster School of Art and at the Royal Academy Schools, following these studies with a year in Paris under the tuition of M. Aime Morot. On his return he shared a studio at 98A Warner Road, Camberwell, with George Frampton where they experimented with a form of low-relief painted plaster sculpture inspired by the work of the Renaissance artist Luca della Robbia. The influence of Italian art was paramount, particularly the woodblock illustrations from the 'Hypnerotomachia Poliphili' by Francesco Colonna, issued in Venice in 1499 as a guide to artists and republished as the 'Dream of Poliphilus' (by J. W. Appel) by the Department of Science and Art in 1893. It was further reinforced by extensive travel throughout Europe, including Italy. These travels were partly financed by a generous gift from the purchaser of one of Bell's half-crown watercolour pot-boilers which he produced in the studio as a means of earning a living. 
The newly formed Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society gave Bell an early opportunity to display his talent working in the applied arts. In 1889 and 1890 he exhibited various designs for an altarpiece comprising low-relief sculptural panels and paintings carried out in association with his studio partner Frampton. These were later installed in the Roman Catholic church of St Clare, Liverpool. These designs marked the start of a long association with the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society. He showed regularly with the group, in exhibitions at home and abroad, notably at Turin in 1902, where he served on the hanging committee with Walter Crane and W. A. S. Benson. The society was itself an offshoot of the Art-Workers' Guild to which Bell was elected in 1891, remaining a member throughout his life: he was appointed master in 1921. The 'Studio', an influential monthly art magazine which espoused the arts and crafts movement and progressive contemporary arts generally, began publication in 1893. From its inception it gave Bell favoured treatment: the first issue illustrated four of his ex-libris bookplates, and the second contained a photograph of his plaster relief panel 'Harvest' (1890), using it as a frontispiece, together with other illustrations of bas-relief decorations by him. Subsequent issues showed numerous book illustrations, ex-libris designs, and plaster reliefs. 
The arrangement of sharing a studio with George Frampton ended in 1895 when Bell at the age of thirty-two was appointed instructor at Liverpool University school of architecture, a position he held until 1899. By this time he had already achieved a considerable reputation particularly in the field of the decorative arts. At the end of 1893 Harold Rathbone had established the Della Robbia pottery in Birkenhead which, as the name suggests, shared its source of inspiration with Bell. From the pottery's inception Bell was associated with it, designing its trade-mark galleon motif and providing designs for ceramic relief panels. 
Following the death of his first wife, Amy Caroline, 'nee' Ditcham, whom he had married on 8 September 1900, Bell married on 15 August 1914 Laure Caroline Richard 
(formerly Richard-Troncy; 1867-1950)
, a French-born divorcee. She studied art in Paris and at the Slade School under Legros, and later exhibited at the Royal Academy and the Paris Salon where she was awarded medals in 1913 and 1920. 
From the mid-1890s onwards Bell became increasingly successful as a book designer and illustrator. The subjects chosen were usually from literary sources including fairy tales, works by the romantic poets, and the 'Bible'. His illustrations from Shakespeare were particularly distinctive: those for 'The Tempest' (1901) are widely regarded as among his finest. His distinctive style, characterized by dreaming maidens in a setting of symbolist swirls, was redolent of the emerging European art nouveau movement. He was greatly admired and secured important commissions in France and Spain where his first biography was written and published in 1910. 
Public commissions played an increasingly important role in Bell's work, and to accommodate the necessary practicalities he extended his range of skills to include mosaic and stained glass. Commissions included designs for a mosaic on the facade of the Horniman Museum at Dulwich, the tympanum over the west door of Westminster Cathedral, and also the altarpiece in the lady chapel. He carried out important works over several years at the Palace of Westminster, including two of the four patron saints in the octagon hall; all these works were carried out in mosaic by workmen trained by Bell. 
At no stage in his career did Bell neglect painting either in oil or watercolour. He exhibited his first painting at the Royal Academy in 1885; but it was not until 1914, when he was elected an associate member, that he began to exhibit there regularly. From then onwards he showed annually until his death; he was elected a Royal Academician in 1922. From 1888 until 1901 he showed at the New English Art Club, both paintings and coloured plaster reliefs. In 1901 he was invited to become an associate of the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours (the Old Watercolour Society) and he was elected a member three years later; in that time he exhibited twenty-nine works. During that period watercolours became Bell's principal form of expression, and he wrote enthusiastically about the merits of the watercolour medium, which he prized above all others, in the second annual volume of the 'Old Water-Colour Society's Club'. The Tate collection has four of his works, three of which are watercolours; several others are in provincial and foreign galleries. Nearly all Bell's work is figurative; 'The Battle of Flowers', his diploma work for the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours, is a particularly ambitious composition with many figures. It is described by his Spanish biographer, Alejandro Riquier, as 'a poem, a poem of life, of colour and of line' (Erskine, 55). 
After his departure from Liverpool, and throughout his life, Bell maintained an interest in his work, giving lectures and writing articles. In 1911 he took up teaching again at Glasgow School of Art where he was appointed chief of the design section. In 1918 he was appointed professor of design at the Royal College of Art, a post he held until 1924. In the year following his death at 28 Holland Park Road, London, on 27 November 1933 a memorial exhibition of Bell's work was held at the Fine Art Society. Bell epitomized the arts and crafts ideal, in which movement he was a central figure. He was master of many skills and excelled in all the diverse fields he undertook. In his own lifetime Bell received a good measure of popular as well as critical appreciation for his prolific and varied work, particularly his many public commissions mainly executed in mosaic and stained glass. These showed a versatility which one obituarist compared to 'the great artists of the Renaissance' ('The Times', 28 Nov 1933). Writing about his work as a painter, T. Martin Wood also perceived in his work 'the issues of the Italian Renaissance... its ability to revive in art remote experiences which have passed into its veins' (Wood, 256). After the memorial exhibition at the Fine Art Society in 1934, Bell's reputation languished until 1989 when fifteen of his works were included in the exhibition 'The Last Romantics' held at the Barbican Art Gallery, London. The exhibition catalogue refers to Bell's 'mastery of so many art forms [which] brought him numerous duties and honours' (Christian, 155). 


@@@@@


doc= 58737


Bindoff, Stanley Thomas (1908-1980), historian, was born at 13 Stirling Place, Hove, Sussex, on 8 April 1908, the son of Thomas Henry Bindoff, a barman, later described as a licensed victualler's manager, and his wife, Mary Jane Emma Ball. Educated at Brighton grammar school under a great history master, A. E. Wilson, he went on to University College, London (UCL) in 1926, when J. E. Neale was about to succeed A. F. Pollard. After graduation, he kept the wolf from the door as a research assistant, a professional indexer, and as history tutor to the future King Farouk of Egypt. In 1935 Bindoff joined the staff of University College, and with the outbreak of war followed the department to north Wales, where he lived among the slate quarries and 'Bible'-black chapels of Bethesda, later acknowledging the hospitality of its 'kindly folk'. There followed three years with the naval intelligence division of the Admiralty. On 18 April 1938 he married Marjorie Blatcher (1906/7-1979), Pollard's research assistant, an authority on the technicalities of legal history. At the age of forty-two, Bindoff confessed that he had enjoyed 'a career remarkable chiefly for its uneventfulness'. The thirty years of life which remained were not so much eventful as filled with selfless service. In 1951 Bindoff was appointed the first professor of history at Queen Mary College in the Mile End Road, London, where his impact was great. He became a statesman in the complex affairs of the University of London. Bindoff remained at Queen Mary College until retirement, after which he continued to live in Surbiton, which makes a suitably undramatic terminal point. 
In 1950 Bindoff published his 'Tudor England' in the 'Pelican History of England' series. Since he is remembered as a Tudor historian, it might be thought that, Elisha-like, he had simply taken on the Pollard-Neale mantle. But the truth was more interesting. University College had engaged the services of the greatest Dutch historian of his generation, Pieter Geyl. Under Geyl's supervision Bindoff wrote an MA thesis, 'Great Britain and the Scheldt, 1814-1839', based on research in Dutch and Belgian archives, as well as in the papers of Lord Palmerston. Harold Temperley was another influence. In 1945 the Dutch government sponsored the publication of 'The Scheldt Question to 1839', which traced this long-running diplomatic issue from its beginnings in the fourteenth century. The book was dedicated to Geyl, with whom Bindoff had co-operated in translating 'The Netherlands Divided' (1936), part of his 'Geschiedenis van de Nederlandsche stam' (1934). 'The Scheldt Question' is spoken of with respect, so that it is distressing to report that it was first borrowed from the Cambridge University Library in February 1998. 
The fate of 'Tudor England' was different. It was a runaway success. And here we detect the influence of R. H. Tawney, for Bindoff had used his Tudor special subject teaching (reflected in Tawney and Power, 'Tudor Economic Documents') to strengthen his credentials as an economic and social historian, at a time when social history was still a literary, and humane, pursuit. So 'Tudor England' was more a history of the English people than of the English state, and its epicentre was a chapter which analysed the interactive economic and social crises of the 1540s, a time as pregnant with change for the Englishman's getting and spending as the 1530s were for his governance and creed. Elsewhere he put into the mouths of the Norfolk farmers who made the so-called Ket's rebellion of 1549, and who lay in their mass grave at Dussindale, this 'prosopopeia': 'What sort of people do they think we were? We who lie here were honest, sober, sturdy folk, having God and the commonwealth before our eyes.' Bindoff was a man of conservative inclinations, but this was a book redolent with the values of Clement Attlee's England. It was also saturated in the language of the 'Bible' (and of Shakespeare), although the Bindoffs had married in a register office. 
Bindoff never wrote another book. In 1978, at seventy, the editors of his Festschrift ('Wealth and Power in Tudor England') counted twenty-nine published items, not including a modest batch of reviews. The books which Bindoff never wrote were his postgraduate students, with whom he spent countless hours, in seminars (in 1952 Bindoff detached himself from the Neale seminar and began to preside over his own), in the tea-room of the Institute of Historical Research, and often in the pubs of Store Street. The pipe, the gruff and slow-moving voice: these were what laboriously animated the most important experience of their lives for many of these pupils. 
Bindoff's later years were dominated by the 'History of Parliament', a gazetteer of members and constituencies of the House of Commons. Bindoff was the editor of the section covering the parliaments of 1509-58, and the three stout volumes which appeared in 1982 were published in his name. Once again, Bindoff's massive learning was modestly concealed rather than displayed. He wrote no general introduction, and while his personal input to all of the biographical essays was considerable (and one of the last things he did was to read the proofs), he appended his initials to only nine of the 2263. One of these subjects was Thomas Cromwell, but the remaining eight were MPs so obscure that even their very names are in doubt. Either no other member of the team wanted, or was trusted, to handle these hard cases; or, more plausibly, Bindoff took characteristic pleasure in the sublimely pointless task of establishing the real identity of Edward Lloyd, or Floyd, or Powell, or Sooll, the MP for Buckingham in 1529. Students were told that that was what history was all about. However, Bindoff called the ''H. of P.'' 'the monkey on my back' and regretted that he never wrote the ambitious books projected, on Antwerp and on the international economics of early modern northern Europe. 
Bindoff fell ill with bronchopneumonia in the winter of 1980 and died on 23 December at 24 Langley Avenue, Surbiton, Surrey, survived by a son and a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 58738


Blackie, John (1782-1874), publisher, was born at Old Wynd, Glasgow, on 27 October 1782, the first child of John Blackie ('b'. 1762), tobacco spinner of Glasgow, and Agnes Burrell ('b'. 1760), who had married in 1781. Childhood memory survives only in Blackie's own words that he was 'very little at school after six years of age'. As American independence reduced the Glasgow-dominated European tobacco trade, Blackie was apprenticed, aged eleven, to a master weaver. At eighteen he was a journeyman with another, John Duncan. 
On 31 December 1804 Blackie married Duncan's daughter, Catharine (1777-1847). Nelson's victory at Trafalgar dispelled fear of Napoleonic invasion, but development of power-looms brought new worries. In 1805 a son was born and Blackie abandoned weaving to join W. D. and A. Brownlie, publishers. For them he sold books in cheap monthly parts, as a colporteur. 
Unexpectedly, retiring in 1807, the Brownlies offered their business to Blackie. Acceptance became possible through the generosity of Walter Graham, a Glasgow merchant. Mrs Graham had befriended Blackie before his marriage, and her husband stood as guarantor for payment. The friendship prospered, and later, in 1816, a second (surviving) son was baptized Walter Graham Blackie. 
Meanwhile Blackie entered partnership in 1809 with William Sommerville and Archibald Fullarton, former Brownlies employees, later joined by another, Edward Khull, a printer. In 1816 they erected a five-storey building in the city: ground-floor printing works, with bindery, warehouse, and offices above. Operations were divided in 1819 between Glasgow and Edinburgh; subsequently numerous reorganizations took place. Sommerville left in 1821: Khull became independent but still printed for Blackie. John Blackie junior became publishing partner in Blackie & Son, Glasgow: young Walter was learning printing under Khull. In 1826 Khull finally left, and in 1829 Blackie bought the valuable business at Villafield of Andrew and J. M. Duncan, university printers and successors to the Foulis brothers, famous throughout Europe in the eighteenth century. His younger son, only twenty-one, with stout parental confidence, led a new firm, W. G. Blackie & Co., printers, Villafield. 
Although the original partners had disagreed, Sommerville and Blackie always intended to publish books. Before Sommerville left, a substantial list included religious, historical, and travel works; literature, notably Richardson's four-volume 'Pamela'; and yet another to join the myriad editions of Burns's 'Poems'. By 1842 all three of Blackie's sons were partners. Throughout the changes Blackie himself controlled finance, and his remarkable skills never failed, despite his lack of schooling. 
Those skills went beyond financial management. Blackie travelled throughout Britain, later crossing the Atlantic, visiting paper, cloth, and board mills; renewing plant and stocks. He assessed manuscripts with technical comprehension; appointed marketing and distribution agents; supervised quality control in factory and offices. Blackie never relaxed from self-imposed responsibilities, driven sometimes by determination to banish sadness. A devout man, concerned in matters of the established church, and later the Free Church, he was greatly disturbed by the Disruption of 1843, and in 1847 by the death of his first wife. 
Blackie's private time and money were much devoted to ailing relations; he invested shrewdly in property and the stock market, becoming, in 1850, a director of the Clydesdale Bank. On 4 November of that year he married Margaret Ferguson, 'nee' Frame, a widow. She survived him. A natural manager, Blackie worried over working conditions and the welfare and health of his employees. He eschewed popularity. His understanding of difficulties in the lives of others had grown out of the humble beginning and order of his own: his employees developed reciprocal understanding, and devotion to him. 
Blackie died at his home, 20 Kew Terrace, Glasgow, on 16 June 1874. The business he founded was carried on successfully by his son Walter Graham Blackie, who was eventually succeeded by 'his' son John Alexander Blackie (1850-1918); it developed for generations as Blackie & Son. It became renowned among the great Scottish printers and publishers for nearly 200 years. Another grandson, Walter W. Blackie, wrote of him with affectionate pride, and of 'the impression that he was rather an exceptional man, a blend of a Saint, a Superman, and a Right-Good-Sort' (W. W. Blackie, 'John Blackie, Senior', 74). 


@@@@@


doc= 58742


Briscoe, Arthur John Reginald Trevor (1873-1943), engraver and marine artist, was born on 25 February 1873 at Mount Pleasant, Oxton, Birkenhead, Cheshire, the eldest son of John Briscoe (died 1893), a prominent Liverpool businessman and senior partner in the cotton-broking firm of Briscoe, Fox & Partners, and his wife, Eliza Ann Trevor, whose father was proprietor of the 'Chester Chronicle'. Educated at Shrewsbury School, Briscoe demonstrated an aptitude for drawing which had been evident from early childhood. After leaving school he accompanied his father on a world tour and on his return announced that he wanted to be an artist. Arrangements were made for him to go to the Slade School of Fine Art, where he studied under Professor Frederick Brown. On completing his studies at the Slade he spent eighteen months at the Academie Julian in Paris, where he started etching in Pre-Raphaelite style, but this practice was brought to a halt when he temporarily ran out of funds and was obliged to sell his press. 
Briscoe returned to London, where he produced black and white images, under the Burne-Jones influence. Soon afterwards he was commissioned to illustrate an edition of Keats (his favourite poet) and the fairy tales of Hans Christian Andersen. Although a cartoonist of great ability, Briscoe never felt the need to establish himself as an illustrator. He had a comfortable allowance, was not ambitious, and had no wish to raise his prices to wealthier clients. 
Abandoning French styles, Briscoe became interested in the work of Philip Wilson Steer (1860-1942). Also a Birkenhead man, Steer had been painting in Essex and this influence led Briscoe to Malden and Heybridge basin, where he obtained lodgings and a studio, making local friends who were interested in small-boat sailing. Briscoe designed and built his own flat-bottomed dinghy and was a founding member of the Blackwater Sailing Club. About 1899 he bought a 3 ton cutter, the 'Doris', in which he sailed around the Essex coast. 
On 19 March 1901 Briscoe married Mabel Grace Sarah (1881/2-1969), eldest child of Samuel Shawyer, an Indian mutiny veteran; their son William was born in 1903. The family generally spent eight or nine months of the year aboard the yacht, sailing to Calais, along the Belgian coast, and through the Dutch waterways; when abroad Briscoe was constantly sketching and painting in watercolours and oils. He excelled as a marine artist, his sketches being evocative of the last days of square-rigged sailing ships, Dutch craft, the coast of East Anglia, and nautical activity. Influenced by Vermeer, the Van der Veldes, and also by Mesdag, Mauve, and Breitner, he had studied his subjects intensively, filling his sketchbooks with details of rigging, barges, and steamers, all with the intention of understanding the workmanship involved. As a result he combined technical accuracy with aesthetically pleasing and balanced effects, and his work remains unsurpassed. 
In 1906 Briscoe held a one-man show of thirty-five watercolours, called 'Round the North Sea and Zuyder Zee', at the Modern Gallery in Bond Street, London. It was a great success and established his reputation. Other exhibitions followed at the Leicester Square Galleries, London, and elsewhere. Briscoe wrote and illustrated 'A Handbook on Sailing' (1908) under the pseudonym Clove Hitch, the name he frequently used in the yachting press. Later in that year he took delivery of a yacht named the 'Golden Vanity'. He often took this yacht in to the Dutch canals, and his sketchbooks are filled with drawings of scenes from these parts. 
In 1910 Briscoe's mother financed the building at West Mersea of Buzzon, a house with a studio. When the First World War broke out, Briscoe was offered a commission in the navy. He enlisted in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve auxiliary patrol as lieutenant, and joined his ship on 31 December 1914. The immediate post-war period was spent cruising to and around the Netherlands in the 'Golden Vanity', but about this time Briscoe came across several unused copperplates from his days in Paris and began etching. In 1923 James McBey saw these plates and took them to London, where he printed them on his press. Briscoe started etching seriously, his activities coinciding with the etching revival, which he witnessed at its peak and then saw slump. 
In 1926 Briscoe made a superb scale model of the 'Cutty Sark', a vessel which appears intermittently throughout his sketchbooks. He was divorced in that year, and in May 1927 married Alice Conyers Baker (died 1942), leasing a small studio flat in Notting Hill, London. In August he and Alice cruised to the Netherlands and were joined at Rotterdam by Harold Dickens, who published his etchings. The 'Golden Vanity' was sold in 1929 and the couple moved to Lansdowne House in Holland Park, London, where Briscoe devoted his energies to etching and painting. He and Alice spent long summer holidays at St Mawes and he also had an 18 foot lugger built, named the 'Liberty'. Sketchbooks during his cruise aboard the 'Alastor', in 1929 or 1930, are full of sketches and colour washes detailing the trip, and are rich with vignettes of polar bears, nude sketches of Alice, and various other details. 
In the early 1930s Briscoe's mother died and he came into a considerable inheritance. He had never liked London and bought a house in Walton on the Naze. He added a large studio, had the 'Liberty' brought over from St Mawes, and in 1934 settled in. 
When the Second World War broke out, Briscoe tried to rejoin the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve but at sixty-six he had to be content with being an ARP warden. Early in 1940 he suffered a stroke, and he and Alice went to the Berry Head Hotel in Brixham, overlooking Tor Bay, where in former days he had loved to sketch the sailing trawler fleet. Alice died in 1942, and Briscoe moved into a private hotel, Broomfield Lodge, Broomfield Road, Chelmsford, near where his son was living. He died there on 27 April 1943 and was buried in Broomfield church. 


@@@@@


doc= 58743


Brockhurst, Gerald Leslie (1890-1978), painter and printmaker, was born on 31 October 1890 at 106 Summer Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, and registered as the fourth son of Arthur Brockhurst, a coal merchant, and his wife, Amelia, 'nee' Ward. The various mythologies surrounding his early life established a pattern of lifelong ambiguities and energetic self-promotion. By 1901 he was registered at the Birmingham School of Art, where his precocious talent won him a place at the Royal Academy Schools, which he entered in 1907. Here, among other awards, he won the gold medal and travelling scholarship, the latter enabling him to visit Paris and Italy where he studied the art of the fifteenth-century Italian painters and more specifically the work of Piero della Francesca, Botticelli, and Leonardo da Vinci. Their influence was to be central to the evolution of his own artistic development. On 5 December 1911, in Chelsea, he married his first wife, Anais, 'nee' Folin, a Frenchwoman whose distinctive features provided the inspiration for many of his early portraits (such as 'Ranunculus', 1914, Sheffield City Art Galleries); described on their marriage certificate as an artist and painter, she was the daughter of Jean Folin, timber merchant. From 1915 to 1919 Brockhurst and Anais lived in Ireland, where they were introduced by Oliver St John Gogarty to Augustus John and his circle. In 1919 the first significant exhibition of Brockhurst's work was held at the Chenil Galleries in London, where he returned to live in that year. Contemporary reviews of the exhibition spoke of his art as giving 'an edge to forms which vision does not experience' ('Vogue', 15 April 1919). This 'edge' was to characterize the best of all his subsequent work. 
It was during the 1920s and 1930s that Brockhurst established himself first as a printmaker of outstanding virtuosity and second as one of the most original and successful portrait painters of his generation. Both printmaking and portraiture were notoriously over-subscribed in the inter-war years but, concentrating almost exclusively on female portraits and frequently using his wife as his model, he produced a large body of memorable etchings throughout the 1920s, often repeating the image in pencil and oil. An example of this process is his exceptional male portrait of Henry Rushbury (1927, Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania). By 1930, while still pursuing printmaking, he had turned increasingly to painting, establishing for himself a role as a portraitist of rare power and vision. Working with a new model, Kathleen Woodward (whom he met when she was sixteen, and renamed Dorette, and who later became his second wife after he and his first wife divorced in 1940), he was inspired to create some of his most highly charged images, as, for example, the etching 'Adolescence' (1932) and the painting 'Dorette' (1933, Harris Museum and Art Gallery, Preston). Later sitters included the actresses Merle Oberon (exh. RA, 1937; priv. coll.) and Marlene Dietrich (exh. RA, 1939; priv. coll.) and the duchess of Windsor (1939, National Portrait Gallery, London). 
In 1939, at the height of his career, Brockhurst moved to the United States, where he remained for the rest of his life, living first in New York city and later in New Jersey. Although he continued to paint and undertook many commissions, he never again attained that powerful combination of technical prowess and psychological intensity which characterized the etched and painted work of his earlier career. Brockhurst died on 4 May 1978 in Franklin Lakes, New Jersey, where he and Dorette had made their home. 


@@@@@


doc= 58744


Buck, Sir Percy Carter (1871-1947), musician, was born Percy Hartshorn Buck on 25 March 1871 in West Ham Lane, West Ham, Essex, the son of William Richard Buck, clerk in the War Office, and his wife, Alice Emmeline Wilson. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, and in 1891, after studying the organ with Walter Parratt at the Royal College of Music, he won an organ scholarship to Worcester College, Oxford, where he was awarded a BMus in 1892. Although he had completed the work for a DMus by 1893, the degree was not conferred until 1897. After leaving Oxford in 1894 he taught for a short time at Rugby School, taking up the post of organist at Wells Cathedral in 1896. In 1896 he married Lucy (died 1940), eldest daughter of Thomas Bond FRCS, a surgeon at Westminster Hospital: they had three sons (one of whom was killed in the First World War) and two daughters. In 1899 he was appointed organist of Bristol Cathedral. 
Buck became director of music at Harrow School in 1901, where he took the line that as very few of his piano pupils were likely to become concert performers, it was more important to turn them into useful musicians: accordingly he taught them to accompany, to transpose, and to extemporize. He also wrote three school songs: 'You?', 'Avete', and 'The Silver Arrow', and several hymn tunes for the Harrow School hymnbook. While at Harrow, Buck began a secret affair with the writer (Nora) Sylvia Townsend Warner (1893-1978) which lasted for some seventeen years. Although Buck remained at Harrow until 1927, he took on several part-time positions as well: from 1910 to 1920 he was non-resident professor of music at Trinity College, Dublin, and he joined the staff of the Royal College of Music in 1919, appointed by the new director, Hugh Allen, to teach theory. In 1925 he was appointed King Edward professor of music at the University of London, a chair he held until 1937. Buck was particularly concerned with the training of music teachers, and at the Royal College of Music he helped to set up the teachers' training course, for which he lectured on psychology. In 'The Scope of Music' (1924), based on his Cramb lectures at the University of Glasgow in 1923, he stressed the importance of the study of psychology for music teachers, and his topics included memory, habit, interest and attention, how to practise, and the art of explaining, with many practical examples and much useful advice. 'Psychology for Musicians' (1944) remained in print for thirty years. He was also responsible for framing the syllabus of the graduate of the Royal Schools of Music (GRSM) diploma, designed to give school music teachers the same status (and pay) as university graduates. His influence on music education was not confined to the training of music teachers. From 1925 to 1937 he was musical adviser to the education committee of the London county council, and as well as revising the music curriculum in the elementary and secondary schools he selected talented children for music lessons at the Royal College of Music and the Royal Academy of Music. He was also professor of music at the University of Sheffield from 1927 to 1928. 
Buck's other books included 'The Organ: a Complete Method for the Study of Technique and Style' (1909), 'Unfigured Harmony' (1911), and 'Acoustics for Musicians' (1918). He edited the introductory volume (1929) to the 'Oxford History of Music', and revised the first two volumes, 'The Polyphonic Period' (1929 and 1932) of the second edition, originally written by H. E. Woolridge in 1901. He edited the 'Oxford Song Book', volume one (1929) and the 'Oxford Nursery Song Book' (1934), and was co-editor of 'The English Psalter' (1925). The only organist on the editorial committee of the ten-volume 'Tudor Church Music' (1922-9), published for the Carnegie Trust, he used his skill as a contrapuntist to supply missing parts. Buck was also a composer, and his published works include three organ sonatas (1896, 1902, and 1904), piano pieces, anthems, and songs. Fourteen of his hymn tunes were used in the 1916 edition of 'Hymns Ancient and Modern'. In addition he wrote chamber music, including a string quintet, a piano quartet, and a violin sonata, and an overture, 'Coeur de lion': these were unpublished. His books and the manuscripts of many of his early unpublished works were destroyed in an air raid during the Second World War, a loss he felt deeply. 
Buck was knighted in 1936. He died on 3 October 1947 in Stoneycrest Nursing Home, Hindhead, Surrey, after a short illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 58749


Carstairs, John Paddy (1910-1970), film-maker and writer, was born at 1 St Stephen's Mansions, Smith Square, London, on 11 May 1910, the eldest of four sons of Nelson Waite (Bunch) Keys (1887-1939), actor and comedian, and his wife, Hazel Eileen Saqui, actress, of Dublin. After Alleyn Court preparatory school, Westcliff-on-Sea, Essex, he went to Repton School in 1924. Self-confessedly a genial exhibitionist, he became a proficient lightweight boxer. His headmaster, the Revd Geoffrey Fisher, later archbishop of Canterbury, supported his formation in 1927 of a cinema club, with its own tie and magazine; he produced a full-length melodrama of public-school life, 'The Hero of St Jim's', and news of its success reached Fleet Street. To the initial annoyance of his father, he abandoned any idea of proceeding to Cambridge, becoming instead an apprentice to his father's old friend Herbert Wilcox, the film producer and director. 
Henceforth Carstairs was irretrievably wedded to the film industry. Having changed his name so as not to cash in on his father's success, he profited from Wilcox's sponsorship and from him learned the spadework of the film business: editing, camera work, and scenario writing. This proved invaluable in his later career as a director. At the age of nineteen, after a year in Hollywood, he went on to spend two years as assistant director to Basil Dean, who disliked his loud clothes and the American accent he had acquired in his time there. At this time Carstairs also collaborated on scripts with A. P. Herbert, Miles Malleson, and Evelyn Waugh, and wrote a series of articles on Hollywood for the 'Evening News'. A trip around the world was followed by script writing for Gaumont-British and an unsuccessful directorial debut with 'Paris Plane' (1933). In 1934 he secured a six-month contract in Hollywood with MGM as a scenario writer and collaborated on 'A Yank at Oxford' (1937). Back in England, he survived a serious car accident; directed 'Night Ride' (1937); wrote and directed 'Incident in Shanghai' (1938), set during the Sino-Japanese War; and directed 'Lassie from Lancashire' (1938) and, with George Sanders in the title role, 'The Saint in London' (1939). 
On the outbreak of war Carstairs made three short films for the Ministry of Information on 'careless talk' and directed George Formby in 'Spare a Copper' (1940), a comedy set in Merseyside which netted $130,000. For much of the war he worked in the Royal Navy's air photography section. When he resumed his film career in 1945, his speed and efficiency as a director and his flair for comedy ensured his constant employment. In all, Carstairs directed forty-five feature films, including the comedies 'The Chiltern Hundreds' (1949), 'Made in Heaven' (1952), 'Sands of the Desert' (1960), and 'A Weekend with Lulu' (1961). Despite some clash of personalities, he directed Norman Wisdom's earliest films, including 'Trouble in Store' (1953) and 'The Square Peg' (1958). He directed Tommy Steele in the musical 'Tommy the Toreador' (1959). 
Carstairs was also a prolific author, producing more than thirty books. A light novel, 'Vinegar and Brown Paper' (1939), sold 144,000 copies. 'Movie Merry-Go-Round' (1937) was a technical analysis of film-making. The war years saw him publish 'Bunch' (1941), a biography of his father, and two volumes of autobiography, 'Honest Injun!' (1942) and 'Hadn't we the Gaiety?' (1945). He also wrote eight popular novels and romances, including 'Gremlins in the Cabbage Patch' (1944) and 'No Music in the Nightingale' (1945). Post-war works included the satirical 'Sunshine and Champagne' (1955); a book of short stories, 'My Fancy has Wings' (1948); a third autobiographical work, 'Kaleidoscope and a Jaundiced Eye' (1946); and a book for children, 'Lollipop Wood' (1946). In addition to eight other novels, he published seven detective novels from 1958 to 1967 featuring his sleuth Garway Trenton. 
Carstairs was also a painter of figures and townscapes in watercolours, oils, tempera, and gouache. He studied under Sir William Coldstream at London University and attended life classes at the Slade. His initial London exhibition was in 1949, and he later exhibited at the Paris Salon, and the John Whibley, Redfern, and Leger galleries. Between 1957 and 1968 he showed a dozen paintings at the Royal Academy and his work is represented in public collections. He painted in the manner of the Impressionists, and he was much influenced by great colourists like Derain, Matisse, Dufy, and Picasso. He favoured harbour scenes, crowded streets, and seascapes, many set in the south of France. Works such as 'Venice, 1970' have a naive quality. In 1958 he published an artists' handbook, 'Watercolour is Fun'. He died of heart failure on 12 December 1970 at Kingston Hospital, Kingston upon Thames, and was cremated at the Kingston crematorium. He was survived by his wife, Molly. 


@@@@@


doc= 58750


Castle, Vernon (1887-1918), ballroom dancer, was born Vernon William Blyth on 2 May 1887 at Mill Hill Road, Heigham, near Norwich, Norfolk, the youngest in the family of four daughters and one son of William Thomas Blyth, public house manager, and his first wife, Jane Finley. His mother died when he was a child, and after attending local schools he studied civil engineering at Birmingham University. In the summer of 1906 he accompanied his sister, Coralie Blythe, and her husband, Lawrence Grossmith, to New York, where they had been engaged to act in a revue, 'About Town', the first Broadway show put on by the comedian Lew Fields at his Herald Square Theater. When the play went on tour, he became Grossmith's understudy, and back in New York he was given a small part in 'The Girl behind the Counter' (1907), in which he was noticed for his elegant dancing. It was at this point that he took the name of Castle. 
Castle played comic roles and danced in several more Lew Fields productions, including 'The Midnight Sons' (1909), 'Old Dutch' (1909), 'The Summer Widowers' (1910), and 'The Hen Pecks' (1911), which set off a craze for ragtime, with dances such as the turkey trot, the grizzly bear, and the bunny hug. Castle married Irene Foote ['see below'] in May 1911. He had persuaded Lew Fields to give her a very small part in the replacement cast of 'The Summer Widowers' in November 1910 at the Majestic Theater in Brooklyn, her first professional engagement. After their honeymoon in England, she joined the cast of 'The Hen Pecks' for its reopening. 
Vernon and Irene Castle first appeared professionally as dancing partners in Paris in 1912. Vernon had been engaged to appear in a comic revue by a Paris manager who had seen him in 'The Hen Pecks' in New York, in a famous slapstick scene in a barber's shop. Irene was given a small part, but they soon left to try out as dancers at the Cafe de Paris, dancing the grizzly bear and the Texas tommy. An overnight success, they spent six months there as cabaret entertainers. 
On their return to New York the Castles were inundated with offers of work, and they set off a dancing craze which swept America. Turning their backs on the acrobatic animal dances, they popularized social ballroom dancing with dances such as the hesitation waltz and the Castle walk, and showed that dancing could be refined and graceful. Their most popular dance was the one-step, danced to ragtime music, and they introduced the tango to the ballroom in 1912, and the foxtrot in 1914. The Castles danced in C. B. Dillingham's Broadway production of 'The Sunshine Girl' (1913), in which Vernon also had a comic role. They taught at Castle House, a school of modern dancing in New York -- Vernon was an excellent teacher -- and in 1914 they brought out 'Modern Dancing', showing people exactly how to dance the new dances: 'real dancing means graceful measures tripped to the lilting rhythm of fine music' (p. 37). Tea dances were held at Castle House, and the Castles danced most evenings at Castles in the Air, a rooftop dancing and supper establishment in New York, or at Castles by the Sea at Long Beach, Long Island, and they also owned a restaurant, Sans Souci, on 42nd Street, New York, where Vernon indulged in his passion for drumming. In 1913 they appeared in a film, 'The Whirl of Life': Irene continued to make films, and later went to Hollywood, where she starred in fifteen episodes of 'Patria' for Pathe. With Jim Europe's band they went on a whirlwind tour of America in a special train in the spring of 1914. Their best, and last, work on stage together was for C. B. Dillingham in 'Watch your Step', advertised as 'the first Syncopated Musical', with music and lyrics by Irving Berlin, which opened on Broadway in December 1914, and then toured America. 
The Castles were in France at the beginning of August 1914, engaged to dance for a month in the casino at Deauville, but with war imminent they went to England, where Irene persuaded Vernon not to enlist. But in December 1915, at the peak of his career, he left 'Watch your Step' to train as a pilot at Newport News, Virginia, before sailing to England, where he was commissioned in the Royal Flying Corps. He flew 150 missions in France, and was awarded the Croix de Guerre, but after a flying accident in 1917 he was sent to Camp Mohawk, Deseronto, in Canada, as a flying instructor, and from there went with his squadron to winter quarters at Benbrook Field, near Fort Worth, Texas. Vernon Castle was killed in an air collision on 15 February 1918, while instructing a cadet. He was buried at Woodlawn cemetery, New York, five days later. Despite his success, he was a modest, unassuming man. When not performing, he liked to play polo near the Castles' home in Manhasset, Long Island, New York, and he showed German shepherd (Alsatian) dogs. 


At the height of the popularity of the Castles, Irene set the fashions of the day. She was the first woman to bob her hair, and all America copied the Castle bob. Tall and elegant, she designed silk dresses for the Corticelli Silk Company in the 1920s, and later worked for the Formfit Company, promoting corsets in department stores. In 1928 she opened a dogs' home, Orphans of the Storm, in Illinois, and campaigned against cruelty to animals. 
Irene Castle remarried three times. In 1919 she married Robert Treman. After their divorce in 1923 she married Frederic McClaughlin: there were two children from this marriage. After his death at the end of the Second World War she married George Enziger (died 1959) in 1946. Irene Castle died on 25 January 1969 in Eureka Springs, Arkansas, USA. 


@@@@@


doc= 58751


Irene Castle (1893-1969) was born on 7 April 1893 in New Rochelle, New York, the younger of the two daughters of Hubert Townsend Foote (died 1912), a homoeopathic doctor, and his wife, Anne Elroy Thomas (died 1922). It was thanks to Vernon Castle, whom she met at a swimming party, that she went on the stage, and after he joined the Royal Flying Corps she continued to perform in 'Watch your Step'. She was in C. B. Dillingham's revue 'Miss 1917', which ran for only nine weeks after its opening in November 1917, and at the time of Vernon's death she was playing the leading role in Dillingham's 'The Century Girl' at the Century Theater in New York. After his death she found a new dancing partner, Billy Reardon, and continued to act occasionally, coming out of retirement in 1939 to play the lead in Noel Coward's 'Shadow Play'. She wrote about their partnership in 'My Husband' (1919), and in 'Castles in the Air' (1958). The Castles were much admired by Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers, and it was they who were engaged to play the leading roles in the film 'The Story of Vernon and Irene Castle' (1939), adapted from 'My Husband', with songs and dances from their heyday, including the Castle polka, danced to 'Little Brown Jug', and the Castle walk, to 'Too much Mustard'. Irene Castle was technical adviser to the film. 


@@@@@


doc= 58752


Gowland, John (d. 1776), apothecary and inventor of Gowland's lotion, was the grandson of Ralph Gowland, attorney and antiquary of Durham, his first cousin being Ralph Gowland ('c'.1722- 'c'.1782), an undistinguished MP successively for Durham and Cockermouth. John Gowland did not follow the family tradition of the law; he may have been the John Gowland who was apprenticed to John Marsden, an apothecary at York, on 27 September 1720. Possessing good social connections, about 1736 Gowland secured the post of apothecary in the household of Frederick, prince of Wales. 
Gowland clearly prided himself on his professional integrity, and chafed at having to dispense medicines prescribed by court physicians all too ready to blame most ills on impure blood and to rely mainly on sudorifics, purges, and emetics. In 1743 Elizabeth Chudleigh, the future countess of Bristol, was appointed maid of honour to Frederick's wife, Augusta, princess of Wales. Miss Chudleigh had from a precociously early age realized that her face, and other bodily parts that she was not shy of exposing as the occasion called for, were her fortune. When her skin became blotchy and opaque, the royal doctors subjected her to purging, sea-bathing, and other ineffectual treatments, while she attempted to disguise her blemishes with patches and paints. Gowland's diagnosis was that the pores had become clogged from make-up or other causes, and he therefore devised a lotion with which to bathe regularly the face, hands, or any other affected area. Its action would release a form of scurf that could be rubbed away, allowing the skin to breathe naturally and so recover its customary bloom. Freckles and other disfigurements would likewise vanish, and pallor be corrected by a renewed supply of blood to the face. In reality the lotion contained not only bitter almonds and sugar but also a small quantity of corrosive sublimate, a derivative of sulphuric acid and thus powerful enough to remove the top skin. John Corry, in 'Quack Doctors Dissected' (1801, 45), condemned its action as follows: '
There's the lotion of Gowland that flays ladies' faces, 

Distorting the features of our modern graces. 

' In spite of containing a noxious and poisonous substance the lotion restored Miss Chudleigh almost instantly to pulchritude, and society ladies anxious to emulate her schoolgirl complexion beat a path to the door of Gowland's residence in Bond Street, London, where the lotion was concocted and sold. However, he refused to add a hyperbolic adjective to what he named simply Gowland's lotion, or to advertise it in the press, relying entirely on personal recommendation. That celebrity led to his appointment in 1760 as apothecary to George III, an office he held until his death. For her part, once she embarked on her undulating career as a gold-digger 'par excellence', Miss Chudleigh was by no means happy about the story of her cure being publicized, and it did not appear in print until after her death. 
The demand for Gowland's lotion, and its high price of 10's'. 6died a quart bottle, made him a wealthy man; in later life he owned much property and had $23,000 out in personal loans. As he and his wife, Elizabeth, left no children, he bestowed handsome legacies on his cousins Ralph Gowland and Thomas Gowland, and their families. The secret formula of his lotion he entrusted to Thomas Vincent, clerk to the royal music closet and principal oboist in the king's band, who had been his close friend since early in their court days. When Gowland died at Bath on 3 August 1776 Vincent took over the making of the lotion and inherited the business on Elizabeth Gowland's death just over three years later. 
Vincent's troubles began when he married as his second wife Maria Elizabeth, a glazier's widow. Having moved into her house in Davies Street, London, he bought the lease and the contents, which he injudiciously placed in her sole name. During his absence abroad she and some confederates began to make their own variety of the lotion, clearly inferior, as she did not know the exact formula. In order to end relations with her Vincent had to leave home; together with his son-in-law, Robert Dickinson, he started up production at 55 Long Acre. A war of pamphlets between husband and wife ensued. He was compelled to begin advertising, and strove to build up a network of retailers in all cities and towns of Britain. Vincent died apparently in 1800, and Dickinson clearly lacked his entrepreneurial vigour, so Mrs Vincent's counterfeit version captured most of the trade. 
The name of Gowland might have been entirely forgotten, had not Jane Austen in 'Persuasion' (1818) made Sir Walter Elliot compliment his neglected daughter Anne for her greatly improved complexion, which had become cleaner and fresher. 'I should recommend Gowland, the constant use of Gowland, during the spring months. Mrs Clay has been using it at my recommendation, and you see what it has done for her. You see how it has carried away her freckles' ('Persuasion', ed. R. W. Chapman, 145-6). Jane Austen may have read the puffing pamphlets, with their emphasis on curing pallor and freckles, one having been published in 1792 by the retail agent R. Cruttwell in Bath. Curiously enough, Emma Elizabeth Chamberlayne, her second cousin once removed, in 1766 had married John Gowland's second cousin Thomas Gowland junior, a West India merchant. Fascinated though she was by the ramifications of her extended family, Jane Austen probably never knew of this distant kinship with the man she had immortalized. 


@@@@@


doc= 58753


Godfrey, Thomas (d. 1721), apothecary and inventor of Godfrey's cordial, was probably one of the many Thomas Godfreys who were baptized in various Hertfordshire parishes during the middle years of the seventeenth century. He should not be confused with Ambrose (Hanckwitz) Godfrey (died 1741), chemist, of Southampton Street, London, who in the late seventeenth century issued handbills advertising 'good cordials as royal English drops'. Very little seems to be recorded about Thomas Godfrey's life and career; his will, drawn up on 27 July 1721, described him as a 'chirurgeon' of Hunsdon, Hertfordshire. It was not uncommon for medical practitioners of that era, in the provinces as well as in London, to make up their own medicines for patients, and then begin to market them more widely when demand began to grow. No wife or children survived Godfrey, but he mentioned a brother and two sisters in the will, which was proved in London on 28 October 1721. 
As no reference was made in Godfrey's will to the cordial or its recipe, it is not surprising that rivals in Hertfordshire were very soon vying for the trade. In December 1721 John Fisher, 'physician and chymist', advertised that he had the true formula from Godfrey, and warned the public that illiterate and ignorant persons, such as bakers, maltsters, and goldsmiths, were striving to manufacture the cordial, even though the skill needed was beyond their reach, 'so that by their Covetousness and Pretensions, many Men, Women, and especially Infants, may fall as Victims, whose Slain may exceed Herod's Cruelty' ('Weekly Journal', 23 Dec 1721). 
Not to be outdone, Thomas Humphreys, of Ware, surgeon, two months later publicized his version of the cordial, allegedly concocted according to a recipe made out in Godfrey's own hand. Whatever the result of the two doctors' battles, the list of 'nostrums and empirics' in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for 1748 mentions only Mr Godfrey of Newcastle's cordial for the stomach: one of the cheapest of all those listed, at 6died a bottle. Partly because of the medicine tax, its price had risen to 9died by the end of the century. 
In 1823 Thomas Wakley, first editor of 'The Lancet' and scourge of nostrum-mongers, published an analysis of Godfrey's cordial. Its contents were found to include Venice treacle, ginger, rectified spirits of wine, oil of sassafras (or medical bark), and tincture of opium. Its sweetness and agreeable flavour, added to its ability to knock out or at least dull the senses of the most fractious patient, made it a boon for distraught mothers and lazy nurses: a forerunner of the notorious nineteenth-century Mrs Winslow's Soothing Syrup from the United States, which was well laced with morphia. 
In 1837-8, no fewer than twelve children were recorded as having been killed by Godfrey's cordial, but some of the differing varieties then on sale were widely known to be less dangerous than others. After the introduction of the National Health Service in 1948 the cordial was still occasionally prescribed, despite being held to be a poison. Later Godfrey was immortalized by his inclusion in the 'Oxford English Dictionary', a lexicographic privilege bestowed on the very few, such as Robert James and Thomas Holloway, who had also gained celebrity as quacks. 


@@@@@


doc= 58754


Chamberlen family (per. c.1600-c.1730), medical practitioners, practised medicine and midwifery in London during the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. Some were barber-surgeons, others physicians, and one -- Paul -- advertised as a vendor of an 'anodyne necklace' effective in labour. Connections to apothecaries existed through marriage, giving the family access to a further body of medical knowledge. Unusually for this period, the Chamberlens were often referred to by contemporaries as 'men-midwives'; several family members tried to extend their control over the London midwives, while challenging the established boundaries between the sphere of the surgeon and that of the physician. 
The family originated in France, and may have sheltered in the Dutch republic before settling in England. William Chamberlen arrived at Southampton on 3 July 1569 with his wife, Genevieve ('nee' Vingnon), and three children: Peter the elder, Simon, and Jane. A third son, James, was baptized on 26 July 1569; Peter the younger was born in 1572. William is assumed to have been a surgeon or apothecary; both Peters became barber-surgeons. William died before March 1596, and it appears that most of the family moved to London at some time between 1588 and this date. 



@@@@@


doc= 58756


Smith, George Charles Moore (1858-1940), literary scholar, was born on 3 September 1858 at Whittlesey in the Isle of Ely, the eldest child of George Moore Smith (died 1870), a solicitor in Whittlesey, and his wife, Elizabeth, only child of the Revd James Clarke Franks, vicar of Huddersfield. His great-uncle was Lieutenant-General Sir Harry Smith (1787-1860) and his maternal grandmother was Elizabeth Firth, godmother to two of the Bronte children. 
Moore Smith attended a preparatory school in Dalston, London, from 1868 until 1870, when his father died. The family then moved to Tonbridge, where he and his brothers attended Tonbridge School as day boys. The two headmasters during his time there were both former fellows of St John's College, Cambridge, and it was to this college that Moore Smith proceeded in 1877. He matriculated as an exhibitioner, then held a foundation scholarship from 1880 to 1884, which enabled him to continue his studies after he graduated with a first class in the classical tripos in 1881. He used this opportunity to study English language under W. W. Skeat. There followed a long period of uncertainty in his career before he moved to Sheffield in 1896. He spent some time teaching and studying in Europe, making many friends among German and Danish scholars. His life continued to revolve around Cambridge, however, and he was disappointed that he was never able to obtain a permanent situation there (he was eventually made an honorary fellow of St John's College in 1933). He played a leading part in raising support in Cambridge for the Toynbee Hall settlement in London, and from 1885 onwards he did some work as a Cambridge University extension lecturer, first in Norwich, and later in Northampton and St Albans. 
Moore Smith arrived in Sheffield at an important moment in the development of higher education in the city. His first appointment, in 1896, was as professor of English language and literature at Firth College (opened in 1880). But the following year Firth College combined with the technical and medical schools to become University College, Sheffield, and in 1905 this college received its charter as the University of Sheffield. Moore Smith retained his post and played a vital part in building up the social and academic status of the new institution. As honorary librarian from 1896 to 1907 he was responsible for developing its library holdings to more than 10,000 books, many obtained as gifts or legacies through his many contacts. He also founded and edited the magazine 'Floreamus', which solemnly chronicled the affairs of the college and university. His own scholarly publications increased steadily after his appointment, and he came to be regarded as one of the most eminent scholars in the new university. Family connections led him for a while into military history: the relief of Ladysmith (a town named after his great-aunt, Lady Juana Smith) prompted him to edit 'The Autobiography of Lieutenant-General Sir Harry Smith' (1901) and the success of this book, which was reprinted several times, led on to 'The Life of John Colborne, Field-Marshal Lord Seaton' (1903). But Moore Smith's real interests lay in literary history, particularly in the work of authors who, like himself, had received a classical training at Cambridge. He made a special study of the Latin plays written and performed by Cambridge scholars in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, and produced scholarly editions of 'Pedantius' (1905), 'Victoria' (1906), 'Club Law' (1907), 'Hymenaeus' (1908), 'Fucus histriomastix' (1909), and 'Laelia' (1910), together with a companion volume, 'College Plays Performed in the University of Cambridge' (1923). His other major scholarly works included editions of 'Gabriel Harvey's Marginalia' (1913), 'The Poems, English and Latin, of Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbury' (1923), and 'The Letters of Dorothy Osborne to Sir William Temple' (1928). He received a LittD from Cambridge in 1907 and honorary doctorates from the universities of Louvain and St Andrews, as well as from Sheffield. He retired in 1924 and on his seventieth birthday was presented with 'A Bibliography of the Writings of G. C. Moore Smith', which listed more than 300 published items. It is a striking feature of Moore Smith's career that hardly any of these items were substantial monographs: even the books he had largely written, like 'The Life of John Colborne', were officially only 'compiled' by him. He evidently preferred the role of scholarly editor or glossator to that of critic or author. In this respect, although he was very much formed by Cambridge, Moore Smith's approach to the study of literature was quite antithetical to that of the later 'Cambridge English' tradition. His tastes were uncritically those of Victorian Romanticism and his practice, both as teacher and scholar, was modelled on his early success in classics. 
Moore Smith departed from his usual topics to produce 'The Story of the People's College, Sheffield, 1842-1878' (1912). He was committed to the 'civic' mission of the university in Sheffield, and so served on several local educational committees, and gave many public lectures. He continued to live in Sheffield after his retirement, but suffered increasingly from arthritis, and died at home on 7 November 1940 from injuries sustained after a fall in his room. After a funeral at St Augustine's Church, he was buried on 9 November in the Sheffield general cemetery, less than a mile from his home at 31 Endcliffe Rise Road which, as a lifelong bachelor, he had shared with his surviving sisters. 


@@@@@


doc= 58758


Cavendish, William, fifth duke of Devonshire (1748-1811), nobleman, was born on 14 December 1748, the eldest of the four children of William Cavendish, fourth duke of Devonshire (bap. 1720, d. 1764), politician, and his wife, Charlotte Elizabeth Boyle, Baroness Clifford (1731-1754), daughter and heir of Richard Boyle, third earl of Burlington. He was known by the courtesy title Lord Cavendish until his mother's death, when he succeeded her as seventh Baron Clifford; from his father's accession to the dukedom in 1755 he was known as marquess of Hartington. He attended a school before becoming duke, but it is unknown which one. On his father's death on 3 October 1764 he became fifth duke of Devonshire and inherited vast estates in England, principally in Derbyshire and Yorkshire, and in Ireland valued at over $36,000 a year. These included the properties of Chatsworth House and Hardwick Hall in Derbyshire, Londesborough House and Bolton Abbey in Yorkshire, Lismore Castle in co. Waterford, Chiswick House in Middlesex, and Devonshire House and Burlington House in Piccadilly, London. Further family estates were settled on his brother George, later first earl of Burlington (1754-1834). After the deaths of his parents Devonshire was brought up by his three bachelor uncles -- lords Frederick, George, and John Cavendish -- and was presented at court in the spring of 1765. His uncles abandoned an idea that he should attend Cambridge University for fear people there would 'pay dirty court' to him and that he would contract 'unbecoming friendships' (Lord John Cavendish to Richard Newcome, 11 Oct 1764, Chatsworth MS 428.12). He travelled on the continent in 1767-8, and his uncles kept him informed of their management of his interest at the 1768 general election. 
On 7 June 1774 Devonshire married the gregarious Lady Georgiana Spencer ['see 'Cavendish, Georgiana, duchess of Devonshire (1757-1806)], eldest daughter of John, first Earl Spencer, at Wimbledon parish church, Surrey, despite rumours that he was to wed Lady Betty Hamilton. Earlier in the year he had fathered an illegitimate daughter, Charlotte Williams, by a London milliner, Charlotte Spencer (died 1781). Georgiana bore him three children: Georgiana (1783-1858), Harriet (1785-1862) ['see 'Gower, Henrietta Elizabeth Leveson-, Countess Granville], and William George Spencer Cavendish, the future sixth duke (1790-1858). In contrast to his extravagant wife, Devonshire was reserved and insular, prone to heavy drinking and gambling, and he possessed a greater affection for dogs than for people. As Nathaniel Wraxall described him: 'He seemed to be incapable of any strong emotion, and destitute of all energy or activity of mind. As play became indispensable in order to rouse him from this lethargic habit and to awaken his torpid faculties, he passed his evenings usually at Brookes's, engaged at whist or faro. Yet beneath so quiet an exterior he possessed a highly improved understanding, and on all disputes that occasionally arose among the members of the club relative to passages of the Roman poets or historians, I know that appeal was constantly made to the Duke, and his decision or opinion was regarded as final. ('Historical and Posthumous Memoirs', 3.344)' Devonshire came from one of the wealthiest and most powerful whig families. However, he possessed no great ability or political ambition. He was lord high treasurer of Ireland and governor of Cork from 1766 to 1793, and lord lieutenant of Derbyshire from 1782 to his death, but three times refused cabinet office: once during the formation of the Fox-North administration in 1783, again during the regency crisis of 1788-9 when Charles James Fox told him any post was his for the asking, and again in 1806 when he was invited to join the 'ministry of all the talents'. He took his duties seriously: in 1778 he became colonel of the Derbyshire militia, and he spent summer the next year in camp with his men rather than go to Spa with his wife and her family, although this decision also reflected a measure of estrangement between Devonshire and the duchess. He made the first of his two recorded speeches in the House of Lords on 6 March 1780, when he opposed the dismissal of Francis Osborne, marquess of Carmarthen, and Henry Herbert, earl of Pembroke, from their lord lieutenancies. He was appointed KG on 19 April 1782, an honour he allegedly said he would no more ask the king for 'than I would ask him for a blue great coat' ('Last Journals of Horace Walpole', 2.427). On 3 July 1793 he was created DCL by the University of Oxford. 
In May 1782 the Devonshires met Lady Elizabeth Christiana Foster ['see 'Cavendish, Elizabeth Christiana, duchess of Devonshire (1757-1824)], daughter of Frederick Hervey, fourth earl of Bristol, bishop of Derry, and estranged wife of John Thomas Foster MP. Together the three formed a bizarre love triangle whose conspicuous interdependence provoked much gossip and speculation. Georgiana and Lady Elizabeth nicknamed the duke Canis because of his obsessive love of dogs. Lady Elizabeth gave birth to two children fathered by the duke: Caroline St Jules (1785-1862), who married George Lamb, and Augustus William James Clifford (1788-1877), later a naval officer and a baronet. The irregularity of their domestic arrangements lent colour to Devonshire House, which remained the focus for the Foxite whigs through the 1790s. Neither Devonshire's hostility to the radicalism favoured by Fox and Georgiana's lover Charles Grey, nor his opposition to the policy of peace with France favoured by Fox's circle, threatened its status, which was guaranteed by the personal qualities of Georgiana, and by the willingness of the duke to divert his estate income towards the financial support of Foxite candidates and impoverished members of the circle. 
Devonshire regarded himself as bound to the whig tradition by heredity. He was not a natural leader, and those who thought he could succeed Fox as the focus of the whig party when Fox temporarily retired from politics were disappointed: John Nichols dismissed him as 'a mere sensualist' (Foreman, 309). His sympathy towards some of the Pitt ministry's measures in the face of revolutionary agitation and invasion from France led him to make his second recorded speech in the Lords, supporting an address to the king on Irish affairs on 15 June 1798. It was said that when he voted with the government on an anti-Jacobin measure, his whig nominees as members for Knaresborough in Yorkshire arrived at Devonshire House the next day to submit their resignations; Devonshire responded: 'I never interfere with your vote -- I don't see why you should interfere with mine' (Thorne). Although a tolerant borough patron where his members were concerned, Devonshire jealously protected his rights as the proprietor of the majority of the burgesses in Knaresborough. At the general election of 1806, when the inhabitants attempted to disrupt the voting of the burgesses in the hope of overturning the limited franchise, he sent in 300 lead miners and soldiers of the Scots Greys to take on the disaffected residents. 
From middle life Devonshire increasingly suffered from bouts of ill health, the consequence of excessive drinking, and spent less and less time in London, preferring Chatsworth, Chiswick, or visits to Bath. The death of Georgiana in 1806 shook his life both personally and politically. Lady Elizabeth Foster took over as female head of the household, to the fury of his unmarried daughter Harriet. It was only at this point that he made a great effort to know his children, and considered it a great expression of affection when in November 1807 he presented Harriet with a puppy, attempting to pass on his mania for dogs. Harriet wrote: 'he really thinks of little else and the whole time of dinner and supper he feeds and watches them, laughs excessively every time they squeak or run and listens to no conversation with half the pleasure as he does when these puppies are the subject. ('Letters of Lady Harriet Cavendish', 232)' His cohabitation with Lady Elizabeth Foster was regularized on 19 October 1809 when they married at Chiswick House, although the marriage seems to have scandalized society more than Lady Elizabeth's previous status as his mistress, and fewer people than before called at Devonshire House. 
Devonshire died at Devonshire House, Piccadilly, London, on 29 July 1811, of 'water on the chest' (GEC, 'Peerage'), and was buried at All Saints' Church, Derby. He left an estate estimated at $125,000, but expenditure on the acquisition of land and on property development during his lifetime, including The Crescent at Buxton, Derbyshire, as well as the burden of Georgiana's gambling losses and the other demands of the Devonshires' expensive lifestyle, had burdened the estate with debts calculated at $593,000 in 1814, an unpromising legacy to his successor. Nevertheless most of his contemporaries would have agreed with Wraxall's assessment: 'if not a superior man, he was an honourable and respectable member of society' ('Historical and Posthumous Memoirs', 3.344). 


@@@@@


doc= 58761


Chisholm, Erik William (1904-1965), composer and conductor, was born on 4 January 1904 at 2 Balmoral Villas, Cathcart, Glasgow, son of John Chisholm, master house painter, and his wife, Elizabeth McGeachy Macleod. His formal schooling was short: at the age of thirteen he was removed from Queen's Park School because of poor health. But he displayed a precocious talent for composition, and some of his early songs and keyboard pieces were published during his childhood. He also made an early impression as an instrumentalist, and after piano lessons with Philip Halstead he studied the organ with Herbert Walton. He progressed quickly, and at the age of twelve gave organ recitals at Glasgow Cathedral and in Hull. Keen to develop Chisholm's talent, his father approached the composer John Ireland in London. He hoped that Ireland would teach Erik composition by correspondence, but the composer rejected the idea and the pianist Leff Pouishnoff became his principal teacher and mentor. 
In 1927 Chisholm travelled to Nova Scotia, Canada, and was appointed organist and choirmaster at the Westminster Presbyterian Church, New Glasgow, and director of music at Pictou Academy. But his stay was short and he returned to Glasgow two years later. There he accepted the post of organist at Barony Church and taught privately. Concerned that he had no formal qualifications, he decided to apply for a place at the University of Edinburgh. Supported by recommendations from Edward Dent and Donald Tovey, his application was successful, and he gained a BMus in 1931 and a DMus in 1934. During his student years he remained active professionally, and the tasks that he undertook reflected his diverse talents: in 1928 he formed the Scottish Ballet Society; in 1929 he founded the Active Society for the Propagation of Contemporary Music; between 1930 and 1934 he was a music critic with the 'Glasgow Weekly Herald' and the 'Scottish Daily Express'; and in 1933 he was the soloist at the premiere of his piano concerto no. 1 in Amsterdam. 
During the 1930s Chisholm became increasingly interested in conducting. He had a flair for theatre music, and his reputation as a conductor of opera and ballet soon flourished. His performances with the Glasgow Grand Opera Society between 1930 and 1939 were of particular importance, and by leading the British premieres of Mozart's 'Idomeneo' in 1934 and Berlioz's 'Les Troyens' and 'Beatrice et Benedict' in 1935 and 1936 respectively he attracted national attention. But Chisholm did not restrict his conducting activities to one society, and, with an immense capacity for work, he pursued his career with missionary zeal: he was the founder conductor of both the Barony Opera Society and the Scottish Ballet Society; he established the Professional Organists' Association; and in 1938 he was appointed music director of the Celtic Ballet, for which he composed four works. At the outbreak of hostilities in 1939 Chisholm was declared unfit for military service. Determined to help the war effort where possible, he conducted performances with the Carl Rosa Opera in 1940, and later joined the Entertainments National Service Association. For the latter he toured Italy with the Anglo-Polish Ballet in 1943 and served as musical director to the south-east Asia command between 1943 and 1945. In this capacity, he formed a multi-racial orchestra in India and founded the Singapore Symphony Orchestra. 
In 1946 Chisholm was appointed professor of music at the University of Cape Town and director of the South African College of Music. But he was unhappy with existing arrangements and was quick to make changes: he appointed new staff, extended the number of courses, and introduced new degrees and diplomas. As an artist of wide experience, he was aware that South Africa could not provide the opportunities for young musicians that he had enjoyed in Britain. Determined to improve the situation where possible, he founded the South African National Music Press to help young African composers in 1948, established the university opera company in 1951, and started the university opera school in 1954. The opera company soon became a vehicle for innovation, and Chisholm used it to champion the cause of aspiring composers and to perform some of his more recent compositions. He conducted the group in the premiere in 1954 of his 'Dark Sonnet', later performed successfully in New York; the first performance of his opera 'The Pardoner's Tale'; and also the premiere of John Joubert's 'Silas Marner' in 1961. Though based in South Africa, he was keen to maintain an international profile, and in 1956 he travelled to the United Kingdom with the company. As part of that tour he led the first staged performance in Britain of Bartok's 'Bluebeard's Castle', a work with which he had a special affinity. Two years later he conducted the Moscow State Orchestra in his piano concerto no. 2 ('On Hindustani themes') in Russia. 
Throughout his career Chisholm composed at great speed, completing over 100 works, many of which remain unpublished. Because Scottish composers are few and the quality of his music is often good, his apologists have argued that his works should be heard more regularly. But his music can be harsh and his uncompromising approach is often unattractive to audiences. Even so, some of his works have been revived, and recordings of his piano and vocal music have been made. He had a lifelong interest in Scottish music and published a collection of Celtic folk-songs in 1964. He was also interested in Czech music, and completed his book 'The Operas of Leos Janacek' shortly before his death. His services to Czech music were recognized formally in 1956, when he was awarded the Dvorak medal. Erik Chisholm died of a heart attack at Cape Town, South Africa, on 8 June 1965. 


@@@@@


doc= 58764


Coborn, Charles (1852-1945), music-hall entertainer and songwriter, was born Colin Whitton McCallum on 4 August 1852 at 25 Sydney Square, Mile End, London, the son of Colin McCallum (1799-1872), shipbroker and freeman of the City of London, and his wife, Frances, 'nee' Whitton, a district visitor, the daughter of a customs officer at Wapping. Educated privately, he had a series of clerical jobs in the City (1866-71) and was later a commercial traveller in briar pipes, artificial hair, and women's fur collars. An early talent for impersonating a drunken man led to his first salaried engagement as a twice-weekly music-hall artist (1872) at the Alhambra, north Greenwich. Originally appearing under the stage name Charles Laurie, he changed it to Coborn, after Coborn Road, Poplar. In 1875 came his first full week's engagement, at the Gilbert Music-Hall, Whitechapel (where Whitechapel underground station was later built), as well as his first performance outside London, at the Oxford, Gravesend, and his first pantomime, at Sandgate, Kent. He toured the midlands, the north of England, Scotland, and Ireland (1877-8), and first appeared on the regular West End variety stage (29 September 1879) at the Middlesex, Drury Lane, followed (20 October) by a six-month engagement at the Oxford, where the manager, J. H. Jennings, billed him as 'The Comic of the Day'. He married (26 January 1882) Ellen Stockley of Dublin; they had four sons and three daughters. 
Coborn was an active campaigner for improved working conditions in music-halls, and he was largely instrumental in forming the Music-Hall Artistes' Association (1885) and later the Music-Hall Benevolent Fund. But such union activities eroded his popularity with managers, and he was often unemployed. He first sang 'Two Lovely Black Eyes' on 21 May 1886 at the Paragon Music-Hall, Mile End. It was a parody of a song successful in America, and Coborn plugged the chorus (in eight languages) so successfully that it became highly popular and the subject of political cartoons in 'Punch'. The tune was even taken up by the Salvation Army, and was still being sung by the prince of Wales in Whitechapel in the 1920s. Its success secured Coborn a fourteen-month stint at the Trocadero and three years at the London Pavilion. In 1891 he bought Fred Gilbert's song 'The Man who Broke the Bank at Monte Carlo', which was based on the gambling exploits of a certain Charles Wells, and, donning evening dress, top hat, eyeglass, and buttonhole, Coborn portrayed a tough man about town. The song was again illustrated in 'Punch', and Coborn later acted in a film of the same name, made in Monte Carlo in 1919. 
In 1900-01 Coborn toured the United States and Canada, and on his return formed his own concert party. During the First World War he entertained the troops and produced a home-made periscope, which was fully tested by the army for use in the trenches. In the 1920s he did fourteen long-distance walks for charity. His autobiography, 'The Man who Broke the Bank', was published in 1928. A church sidesman and lay reader, he continued to make occasional appearances until shortly before his death at 27 Elgin Mansions, Paddington, London, on 23 November 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 58767


Dalton, John Neale (1839-1931), Church of England clergyman and royal tutor, was born on the Isle of Thanet, Kent, on 24 September 1839, the eldest of five sons (among nine children) of John Neale Dalton (1808-1880), a Church of England clergyman, and his wife (and first cousin), Eliza Maria (1807-1895), daughter of William Allies. The herald Lawrence Dalton was an ancestor. He went from Blackheath proprietary school to Clare College, Cambridge, as a scholar, afterwards taking a first in theology. Bishop Samuel Wilberforce ordained him in 1865, and his first curacy was in his father's parish of Milton Keynes. He was next a curate in Cambridge (1866-9) and then at Whippingham on the Isle of Wight, where he impressed Queen Victoria during her residence at Osborne. 
In 1871 Dalton was appointed tutor to Queen Victoria's grandsons Prince Albert Victor (Eddy), duke of Clarence and Avondale, and his younger brother Prince George, duke of York (afterwards George V). He proved more concerned with their moral character than with book learning. Dalton enforced a meticulously strict routine on the princes, and was obsessively concerned to stop errors or infractions. The princes were not, however, deeply or broadly educated. The narrowness of George V's outlook, and his excessive punctilio over formalities, may be attributable to Dalton's influence. As a royal tutor he became accomplished at artifice. By dissuading the queen from sending the older boy to public school, where he might be contaminated by vicious influences, Dalton ensured that he remained the princes' tutor while they were naval cadets on the 'Britannia' at Dartmouth (1877-9). 
Dalton again proved his aptitude at intrigue by securing the decision -- despite opposition in the cabinet and from courtiers -- to send the princes (then aged fourteen and fifteen) on a world cruise lasting three years (1879-82). The princes were thus removed from the influence of their family and the court and delivered wholly into the charge of Dalton, who accompanied them on HMS 'Bacchante' as their chaplain and tutor. His account of this cruise published in 1886 covers 1518 pages; it is an ill-judged affair, by turns showy, pedantic, and self-glorifying. On the 'Bacchante' Dalton was regarded as a martinet whose difficult temper disrupted the wardroom. He became jealous of the senior midshipman's intimacy with the princes, and having denounced 'his almost feminine ways', had him sent away (Nicolson, 22). Although Prince Eddy became depressed during his long sojourn at sea, Prince George thrived. Dalton's 'Sermons to Naval Cadets' was published in 1879. 
At the end of the voyage Dalton was made CMG (1882) and governor to Eddy at Trinity College, Cambridge, until 1885. In 1884 he was nominated to a canonry at Windsor, which he held until his death. On 16 January 1886 he married Catherine Alicia (1863-1944), daughter of Charles Evan-Thomas, Glamorgan landowner and colliery proprietor, and sister of Admiral Sir Hugh Evan-Thomas. They had a daughter and two sons, of whom the elder, (Edward) Hugh Neale Dalton, became a leading Labour politician and the younger died at birth. Canon Dalton had a romantic interest, doubtless sublimated, in young men. He reorganized the Windsor choir school in 1892, and liked to terrify or charm its choristers. 
Dalton caused much unrest during his forty-seven years at Windsor. His love of the buildings and traditions of St George's Chapel was wholehearted; but as the chapel's steward, responsible for managing its finances and protecting its fabric, he made his colleagues miserable. In obtaining his objects he was adamant and unscrupulous. 'Thank heavens there are two things I have never had; nerves or a conscience', he once exclaimed (Bolitho, 111). He was a bully and firebrand who shouted down colleagues who thwarted him. Perhaps, after his importance in the royal family and his years at sea, he was frustrated by the pettiness of cloister life; but certainly he seemed to revel in quarrels. The perversity of Dalton's behaviour was rooted in his social values. He was disrespectful of noblemen and contemptuous of his fellow clergy, but capable of geniality, patience, and humility with servants, poor or knavish youths, and pilfering or unlucky working men. When the poor of Windsor were unwell, he was an energetic and solicitous visitor. Finding the wife of a lodge keeper ill in bed, he got on his knees and scrubbed the kitchen floor for her. 
Although the contents of Dalton's sermons were commonplace, no one could doze during them. The range of his voice from high falsetto to thunderous bass was remarkable. He loved the 'Bible', and his readings of its more dramatic passages ('My father hath chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions', for example) were histrionic. He had severe but handsome features and stupendous physical vitality. He was a good Hebrew scholar (though detractors falsely claimed that he published a translation of the 'Psalms' without knowing a word of Hebrew), but curiously ignorant of English literature. On church architecture and antiquarian subjects he could speak authoritatively. His rollicking manners -- he was something of an expurgated Falstaff -- had an outlet at dinners of the Drapers' Company, of which he was master in 1919-20. 
Dalton accompanied Prince George, as prince of Wales, on his voyage to Australia (1901), and retained his pupil's devotion always; among other court appointments, he was domestic chaplain during George V's reign. He was created CVO in 1901 and promoted KCVO in 1911. Having read a lesson at evensong on 28 July 1931, he died of a stomach haemorrhage a few hours later that evening at his house in Windsor Castle cloisters. After cremation at Woking on 30 July, his ashes were interred in the south aisle of St George's Chapel on 31 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 58768


Davies, Idris (1905-1953), poet and schoolteacher, was born on 6 January 1905 at 16 Field Street, Rhymni, Monmouthshire, the elder child of Evan Davies (1881-1947), a colliery winderman, and his wife, Elizabeth Ann, 'nee' Williams (1884-1971). In their home they spoke Welsh, as did some two-thirds of the town's population at that time; although most of Davies's work was written in English, which he learned at the local primary school, he read widely in Welsh, having studied it at evening classes, and wrote a little in the language, both verse and prose. An early influence on the young boy was his uncle Edward, a Calvinistic Methodist and liberal, who spoke very little English and introduced him to the 'Bible' and contemporary politics. In later life Davies rejected Christianity in favour of an idealistic humanism, but as a boy he attended a Baptist chapel. 
Davies left school at the age of fourteen, against his parents' wishes, to become a miner at the McClaren colliery in Abertyswg, Monmouthshire; he later regretted this decision not to receive secondary education. In the summer of 1920 he moved to the Maerdy pit in nearby Pontlotyn. Having been introduced to the work of Shelley by a workmate named Eddie Balman, he quickly perceived that poetry could relate to politics, particularly socialism. At this time, too, the shy, introverted, but humorous young man began what was to become a lifelong habit of wandering the moorlands above the town of Rhymni, the wild beauty of which contrasted sharply with the dereliction of the valley, and in which he was to find escape from the grim industrialism which he denounced so vehemently in his poetry. His first experience of industrial conflict came with the miners' strike of March-July 1921 and the 'black Friday' (15 April) on which the miners considered their cause to have been betrayed. Early in 1926, shortly before the general strike of that year, he lost the little finger of his left hand in an accident underground, and had barely resumed work after the seven-month stoppage when the closure of the pit forced him to consider other ways of earning a living. Although he was deeply committed to the miners' cause, he and his family were spared much of the hardship of the strike because his father remained in work as a safety man. 
Now unemployed, Davies used his new-found leisure to attend lectures at the town's workmen's institute, where his political awareness was sharpened further, and he then took a correspondence course. After matriculating, he went on to study at Loughborough College and the University of Nottingham, qualifying as a teacher. In 1932 he began teaching at Laysterne junior school in Hoxton, in the East End of London. He remained in London for fifteen years (with the exception of the years of the Second World War) and, by now an avid reader of the work of both Welsh and English poets (particularly R. Williams Parry and A. E. Housman), was one of the expatriate Welsh writers who frequented Griff's Bookshop in Charing Cross Road. One of his closest friends at that time was Tom Buchanan, from Ayrshire, a fellow teacher with whom he went on walking holidays in Scotland, Ireland, and France. 
A few of Davies's poems were published in newspapers in south Wales during the early 1930s, but his emergence as a poet coincided with the launch of the magazine 'Wales', edited by Keidrych Rhys, to which he became a regular contributor; he also contributed to London magazines such as the 'Poetry Review' and 'The Adelphi'. His first volume, 'Gwalia deserta' (1938), took as its theme the desert of industrial south Wales during the depression of the inter-war years and established him as the voice of his generation; it includes 'The Bells of Rhymney', a poem which was set to music and made famous by the singing of Pete Seeger. In the year of its publication Davies gained a diploma in history from the University of London. At the outbreak of the Second World War his school was evacuated to Pytchley in Northamptonshire, and then to the villages of Meesden and Anstey in Hertfordshire; it was at Anstey, in June-July 1941, that he wrote 'The Angry Summer' (1943), 'a poem of 1926', which is regarded as his finest work. In April 1942 he returned to London, and taught at a school in Shoreditch. Later in the year he was moved again, this time to Treherbert in the Rhondda valley, where he stayed for two years and completed his third book, 'Tonypandy and other Poems' (1945), which includes the long autobiographical ballad 'I was Born in Rhymni'. In Treherbert he formed a close relationship with Morfydd Peregrine, a fellow teacher at Dunraven School. They never married, because she had an invalid mother whom she could not leave; the relationship was sometimes strained, as his diaries reveal, but they remained devoted to each other to the end of his life. Despite his sympathy with the working class, Davies was appalled by the materialism and vulgarity of the people in the Rhondda, and was not happy there. To his great relief, he was directed to a school in Llandysul in Cardiganshire at the beginning of 1945, where he was again in charge of a group of London evacuees, and was impressed by the high standard of the district's Welsh-speaking culture. He nevertheless had to return to London, to teach at Whitmore primary school and then at Wordsworth School in Stoke Newington. After many applications for a permanent post, in 1947 he obtained one at Cwmsyflog junior school, not far from his home in the Rhymni valley; he also taught English in evening classes at nearby Bargoed and Merthyr Tudful. His homecoming was something of a disappointment, however, for he found that Rhymni, having been for so long ravaged by unemployment, emigration, and social deprivation, now had a cultural life that compared unfavourably with the one he had known as a young man. 
A volume of Davies's 'Selected Poems' was published by Faber and Faber, on the recommendation of T. S. Eliot, less than a month before his death. In January 1952 he underwent an unsuccessful operation for cancer of the colon at Tredegar Hospital. After his convalescence, he remained in the care of his mother at 7 Victoria Road, Rhymni, until his death just after midnight on 6 April 1953. His ashes were buried in Rhymni cemetery a few days later. Plaques were erected to Davies's memory on the wall of the house in Victoria Road and in Rhymni Public Library. His 'Collected Poems', edited by Dafydd Johnston, was published by the University of Wales Press in 1994. 


@@@@@


doc= 58769


Deller, Alfred George (1912-1979), singer, was born on 31 May 1912 at 42 Clifton Terrace, Margate, Kent, the son of Thomas William Deller (1871-1951), a physical training instructor, and his wife, Mary Ann Cave (1874-1946). He was the sixth of seven children. He was educated at the Central School, Margate, before finding employment in 1927 as an apprentice in the furniture shop of Munro Cobb in Margate. When that job was discontinued he went to work in 1929 for the Hastings firm of Elijah Gray & Sons Ltd, house furnishers and undertakers, as a furniture salesman. There he met the owner's daughter, Kathleen Margaret (Peggy) Lowe (1913-2006), whom he married on 5 June 1937; they had two sons and a daughter. His wife became a firm supporter of his desire to sing and to give that precedence over his other employment. 
Deller's earliest singing experience was as a boy chorister at St John's Church, Margate, where he sang the treble solos until he was sixteen. His first position as a counter-tenor was at Christ Church, St Leonards, where he sang from 1930; he moved to Canterbury Cathedral as a lay clerk in 1939. A firm pacifist, after appearing at a conscription tribunal in October 1940 he was registered as a conscientious objector. Deller was fortunate enough to find work on a farm within cycling distance of Canterbury which allowed him to continue with his cathedral duties. 
Deller's solo career was launched in 1943 when Michael Tippett was in Canterbury prior to the first performance of his 'Plebs angelica'. Tippett was encouraged to hear him sing Purcell's 'Music for a while', at which, Tippett wrote later, 'the centuries rolled back. For I recognised absolutely that this was the voice for which Purcell had written' (Tippett, Bergmann, and Spencer, 43). In a testimonial dated 15 July 1946 Tippett further wrote: 'It is the most remarkable male alto voice that I have ever heard, with an unrivalled purity of diction added -- I can only imagine by hard work' (private information). Tippett and Walter Bergmann together decided to take Deller's voice to London, where Deller made his debut singing Purcell's ''Tis nature's voice' from the ode to St Cecilia of 1694 at the Friends' meeting-house in Euston Road on 31 December 1943, a concert promoted to raise funds for Morley College. Tippett then asked Deller to perform the 'Esurientes' from J. S. Bach's 'Magnificat' with the Morley College choir. Many engagements followed, including an invitation to sing Purcell's 'Come ye Sons of Art' in the BBC Third Programme's inaugural concert in 1946. Deller soon moved to London after this, turning fully professional when he joined the choir of St Paul's Cathedral in 1947 as a vicar-choral, a post that he held until 1961. Although his career was to require him to live in London, and to travel all over the world, he never lost touch with Kent, eventually settling in Ashford. 
Deller's reputation rests principally on his performances of English lute songs, most importantly those of Dowland, and as an unrivalled interpreter of Purcell: it was his artistry that caused both these repertories to be recognized for their full worth for the first time. In addition he had a limited but significant career as an opera singer, culminating in the role of Oberon in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', which Benjamin Britten wrote for him. This received its first performance in 1960 at Aldeburgh: Deller sang both on this occasion and on the subsequent recording. He founded the Deller Consort in 1950, primarily to specialize in the English madrigal repertory, and the group toured widely in North America, Europe, Australasia, and the Far East. In addition, in 1963 he started the Stour Music Festival in Kent, where he directed performances of larger works. His regular accompanists included Walter Bergmann, Desmond Dupre, and later Robert Spencer. 
Deller's reputation also rests on the fact that he was the first falsetto singer to bring the counter-tenor voice to prominence. Indeed he did more than this, since when he started his career the counter-tenor sound was scarcely known outside cathedral circles and, when it became known, was treated with suspicion. Bergmann remembered that: 'audiences in the 1940s did not know what to make of a man who sang in a female voice's tessitura. At its best they held it for a gimmick, at its worst for 'unnatural', even for a castrato's voice. And was there any music composed for that strange voice, and if so was it not outdated?... At each concert [Deller] had first to overcome the antipathy of 75 per cent of his audience. (Tippett, Bergmann, and Spencer, 44)' Deller himself liked to tell the story of an agent who, at the beginning of his career, broke out in indignation, 'What? A Purcell programme? A dead loss' (ibid.). Yet such was Deller's talent and tenacity of purpose that works which had once been bypassed because they contained complicated counter-tenor solo parts were eventually searched out and performed for the same reason. 
As the first counter-tenor to become an international star, Deller created the platform on which many younger singers were able to perform; yet none of them made a sound to resemble his. The explanation is that Deller trained in cathedral choirs and retained the essentially vibrato-less, almost white tone of the ideal cathedral singer. Later it became customary for counter-tenor soloists to develop a fuller tone, even in lute songs, which by comparison gives Deller's performances -- described at various times as being 'sweet', 'flexible', 'agile', and with the sound 'focussed to a pin-point' -- a rare quality. Unusual also was the intensity of his conviction that singing was nothing if not communication with an audience, in modern concert conditions. Unlike many later singers of the earlier repertories Deller had no interest in musicological knowledge or analysis, but relied on a vivid artistic imagination which left everything to the performance. Robert Spencer recalled: 'Alfred disliked rehearsal... The first time I accompanied him he reluctantly went through every song with me, and I was feeling reasonably confident. Fortunately his son Mark warned me that the performance might not be so predictable, but I was flabbergasted when the evening bore so little resemblance to the afternoon. (Tippett, Bergmann, and Spencer, 45)' Deller has occasionally been criticized for vocal mannerisms -- the colouring of a high note, the drawing back of a rhythm -- yet the artlessness of his vocal sound conveys a straightforward sincerity. However involved the search for authenticity in early music becomes it will never find a way of replacing Deller's concern for the inspiration of the moment. 
Despite suffering from angina, Deller continued to sing, 'albeit with diminishing range and power' (Steane). He was appointed OBE in 1970. He had a heart attack while in Bologna in Italy, and died there at the Ospedale S. Orsola on 16 July 1979; he was buried in the churchyard of All Saints', Boughton Aluph, Kent. His wife, Peggy, survived him. His son Mark Deller continued to perform with and direct the Deller Consort. 


@@@@@


doc= 58772


Dinwiddie, Robert (1692-1770), merchant and colonial administrator, was born in Germiston, outside Glasgow, on 3 October 1692, one of nine children of Robert Dinwiddie (died 1712), merchant in Glasgow, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Glasgow bailie Mathew Cumming of Carderock. Robert entered the transatlantic trade immediately following graduation in 1710/11 from the University of Glasgow, where he studied under John Law, professor of moral philosophy. The university later awarded him two honorary degrees. 
In 1718 Dinwiddie settled in St George's parish, Bermuda, where he became one of the island's most substantial men. Like many industrious and enterprising eighteenth-century Scots, Dinwiddie sought his fortune in the service of the British crown. He began his public career in 1727 with his appointment by Horatio Walpole, brother of the prime minister, Sir Robert Walpole, as the collector of customs in Bermuda, at an annual salary of $30. 
Some time in the mid-1730s Dinwiddie married Rebecca (died 1793), only daughter of the Revd Andrew Auchinleck, member of the council of Bermuda, who also served three times as chief executive of the colony in the absence of a governor. Rebecca's mother came from the Tucker family, one of the most influential families in Bermuda. They had two daughters: Elizabeth, born in 1738, and Rebecca, born in 1742. 
Dinwiddie corresponded frequently with the Board of Trade in London, commenting and advising on economic and political problems in the West Indies and America. In 1736 he suggested to the board that a special agent inspect and report on the American colonies. On 11 April 1738 Walpole appointed him 'Surveyor General of the Southern Part of the Continent of North America. Viz. South and North Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Bahama Islands and Jamaica'. In effect this post made him overseer of the British customs service for most of the British possessions in North America and the West Indies. The appointment was for life and carried an annual salary of more than $300. As a result of this new post, Dinwiddie moved with his family in 1741 to Norfolk, Virginia, where he remained for five years before moving to London. He consigned his post of surveyor-general to the Virginian Peter Randolph in 1749. But Dinwiddie was not content with remaining outside of government service, and sought the lieutenant-governorship of Virginia. On 4 July 1751 his appointment was confirmed and he returned to the Old Dominion. 
An ardent defender of British interests, Dinwiddie soon came into conflict with colonial Virginians. In 1752 controversy arose over the selection of a president for the College of William and Mary, the use of executive power, and Dinwiddie's plan to charge a fee of 1 pistole for every land grant he signed. Viewed by the lieutenant-governor as a legitimate and lucrative source of income for the Treasury, the fee was seen as a sign of Dinwiddie's greed by members of Virginia's house of burgesses. The conflict between royal authority and colonists' interests culminated during the threat of French occupation of the Ohio district in 1753. As lieutenant-governor Dinwiddie struggled to defend and expand the British empire against the French, and to strengthen the authority of the crown over Britain's colonies in North America. It was his decision to send a young Major George Washington to confront the French in the Ohio valley, and to demand their removal from land claimed by the British. The French refusal prompted the outbreak of the French and Indian War. Although he urged intercolonial support for common defence in the face of the French threat, Dinwiddie was constantly frustrated by the lack of co-operation. In response he called for parliamentary action for the royalization and the confederation of the American colonies for their common protection. To reassert the authority of the mother country he strongly advocated the levying of British taxes on the Americans to pay for their own defence but found his efforts limited by restrictions imposed by members of the general assembly. 
Dinwiddie's efforts in the colonies affected his health, and he left Virginia on 12 January 1758 to return to England. He died at Hotwells at Clifton, near Bristol, on 27 July 1770, and was buried at the parish church of Clifton. Dinwiddie was a hard-working and talented colonial politician. His confrontations over revenue prompted early questions to be raised over the relationship between lieutenant-governors and colonial legislatures, and over the treatment of the colonies by the British government that eventually led to the American War of Independence. 


@@@@@


doc= 58774


Dunsterville, Lionel Charles (1865-1946), army officer and literary prototype, was born on 9 November 1865 in Lausanne, Switzerland, the son of Lieutenant-General Lionel D'Arcy Dunsterville (1830-1912) of the Indian army and his wife, Susan Ellen (1835-1875). The family moved to Jersey and then to the Isle of Wight, and Dunsterville was brought up by his older sisters as his mother was an invalid: 'I needed a strong hand, and I got five pair of strong hands. Bless them' (Dunsterville, 'Stalky's Reminiscences', 16). He was then sent to Woolwich under the care of an officer's widow, with whom he remained for five years. 
In 1875, about the time his mother died, Dunsterville began to attend the United Services College at Westward Ho! in Devon, where he was to be a studymate and boon companion of the young Rudyard Kipling. 'I was in the passive condition of a bundle of Chinese fire-crackers to which his fertile brain eagerly applied the torch' (Dunsterville, 'Stalky's Reminiscences', 26), Dunsterville later recalled. He is too modest by half; before Kipling's arrival in 1878 the young squib had been thoroughly bullied, had failed in an attempt to run away to sea, and had almost blown himself up with gunpowder. With the advent of Kipling and George Charles Beresford, Dunsterville and his two cronies read and lolled out of bounds in a hut in the furze-bushes, smoked cigars Dunsterville had helped smuggle into England from the continent, and hatched plots against those who had 'incurred our odium'. The result was his 'incorporation' into Kipling's 'Stalky & Co.' (1899), perhaps Dunsterville's most lasting claim to fame. In later life he noted that '[n]o amount of explanation could convince the public that Stalky is a character of pure fiction and I frequently have to undergo a severe examination on the details of exploits which are purely imaginary. Certainly the episodes narrated are very much like things that did happen fifty years ago in the old college at Westward Ho! And it is certain that Kipling, Beresford and myself shared a study and were generally at war with masters and boys who incurred our dislike. Our various plots were often highly ingenious and often hugely successful. From this solid foundation arises the noble structure of 'Stalky & Co'. ('New York Times')' Dunsterville subsequently passed the army examination and attended the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, from 1883 to 1884. Commissioned in the Royal Sussex regiment, he was posted to Malta, where he received numerous mess fines, and then to Egypt, where he was almost arrested for gambling debts. Ordered to India, Dunsterville transferred to the 24th Punjab regiment and subsequently to the 20th. While he became acclimatized to Indian army life, it is clear that his exuberant tendencies remained; on one occasion when asked to suggest a new march-past tune, he offered 'The Man that Broke the Bank at Monte Carlo'. He admits to having 'acquired some renown as a singer of somewhat vulgar music-hall songs' (Dunsterville, 'Stalky's Reminiscences', 106), and on another occasion was accused of having stolen a horse and trap. Bitten by a mad dog in 1891, Dunsterville was sent to Paris for treatment by Louis Pasteur and also began a lifelong friendship with the archaeologist and explorer Sir Aurel Stein. In 1894-5 Dunsterville took part in the Waziristan campaign before coming down with rheumatic fever (a native friend wished to sew him up in the skin of a dead sheep for ten days, but was overruled). 
Subsequently Dunsterville visited Germany and Russia to learn and perfect these languages: 'it took me some little time to learn the 'song' wherein resides the spirit of the language' (Dunsterville, 'Stalky's Reminiscences', 149). Throughout his career Dunsterville possessed both an ease with people and a facility for foreign languages. A friend noted of 'Stalky' that 'He speaks Russian like a Slav. In Peking (Beijing) he was the only Englishman who could converse easily with representatives of the different powers in their own tongue. In his command of Pushtu and all the patois of the Northwest Frontier, he is second to none. And he can interpret what is in the hearts of strange peoples as well as what is on their lips. ('New York Times')' On 9 November 1897 he married Margaret Emily, the daughter of Colonel W. Keyworth of Bishopsteignton, Devon, whom he had met while in Wiesbaden. Dunsterville returned with his wife to India, where they hopscotched across the country according to his orders, moving on no fewer than five occasions. 
It was at this time that Dunsterville published his own newspaper, 'The Jhansi Herald': it was 'not a financial success... but the unlimited opportunity it gave me of libelling my friends amply compensated me for the money I lost by it' (Dunsterville, 'Stalky's Reminiscences', 171). In 1900 he and his unit were ordered to China to help suppress the Boxer uprising. He vividly describes the effects of halting a company in hobnailed boots on the ice, playing early morning music for the Royal Navy (the officers of the 'Algerian' threatened to open fire if the noise did not cease at once), and 'capturing' towns whose cannon had red rags hanging out of their muzzles: '[t]his was done to make us believe that these were flames coming out of the muzzles of the guns and it was hoped that we would retire under the impression that the guns were firing at us' (ibid., 187). In 1902 the Dunstervilles' first son was born before he and his wife received orders back to India. The family visited England in 1903 -- he almost dying of malaria on the passage -- and returned to India, after a continental tour, in late 1904. Dunsterville, who took command of the 20th Punjab regiment as lieutenant-colonel in 1908, continued his session there until early 1914, a daughter being born in 1911. 
At the outbreak of the First World War Dunsterville was appointed a train-conducting officer in France -- and later wrote an amusing account of being shunted in cattle trucks, with cheeses and sides of bacon, as well as the passengers, being hurled in the air. A year later he assumed the command of Jhelium brigade in India, and he saw action for the next two years on the north-west frontier. A Sikh poet memorialized at least some of his achievements here, but Dunsterville was unable to obtain a copy as the gentleman in question was also a shopkeeper who had copied his verses on the back of his customers' bills! He was appointed CB in 1916. Early in 1918 Dunsterville was appointed head of a mission to Tiflis, Georgia, involving the reorganization of revolutionary Russian troops using a core group of officers and NCOs pulled from various fronts to oppose the Turkish push towards Baku's oilfields and the Caucasus. However, 'Dunster force' was understaffed and undersupplied at best, and had no real impact up to its disbanding in September 1918. The Russian General Baratov is alleged to have commented ''Dunsterforce'!... I know Dunster all right, but where is the 'Force'?' (Dunsterville, 'Stalky's Reminiscences', 277). Indeed one of Dunsterville's officers improvised 'a very fine armoured car out of a Ford van and some tissue-paper... [A]s no one was allowed near enough to poke their fingers through the 'armour', it terrorized the whole countryside' (ibid., 278). Promoted major-general in June 1918, he later returned to India, where he commanded the Agra brigade until his retirement in 1920. 
In retirement Dunsterville participated in many activities, including the founding of the Kipling Society -- about which Kipling rather unfairly commented, 'How would 'you' like to be turned into an anatomical specimen, before you were dead, and shown upon a table, once a quarter?' Dunsterville wrote a number of fascinating volumes of memoirs, including 'The Adventures of Dunsterforce' (1920), 'Stalky's Reminiscences' (1928), and 'Stalky Settles Down' (1932). He was also the author of such fictional works as 'And Obey' (1925) and 'More Yarns' (1931). He died at Camelot, Barton Hill Road, St Mary Church, Torquay, on 18 March 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 58778


Evans, Merlyn Oliver (1910-1973), painter and printmaker, was born in Llandaff, Cardiff, on 13 March 1910, the only child of Pryce Oliver Evans, an analytic chemist, and his wife, Minnie Veronica Edwards, a former nurse. Although the family moved to Rutherglen, Glasgow, in 1913, Evans always referred to himself as Welsh. He was educated at Rutherglen Academy, Glasgow, from 1917, and from 1925 to 1927 at Allan Glen's School, Glasgow, noted for its bias towards technical and scientific subjects. As a child, he proved adept at technical drawing, yacht modelling, and kite design. From the age of ten he received free private tuition in drawing and painting from John Houston RSA and his brother Charles. From 1927 to 1931 he attended Glasgow School of Art, exhibiting at the Royal Scottish Academy in 1930, and in 1931, when he won the $50 Haldane travelling scholarship and a scholarship to the Royal College of Art. 
Evans was deeply affected by the poverty and violence he witnessed in Glasgow during the depressed years of the late twenties, and by 1930 he had begun to develop a highly personal abstract style, feeling that the lyrical naturalism in which he was already highly competent was inadequate to the reality around him. His experimental drawings and paintings at this time, combining plant, crustacean, and mechanical forms, announce a lifelong commitment to morphological abstraction, and to the idea that art should be an engagement with life, reflecting psychological, ethical, and political concerns. This conviction was intensified by firsthand experience, in Berlin, Copenhagen, and Paris in 1931 and 1932, of the work of Juan Gris, Lyonel Feininger, Klee, Kandinsky, Mondrian, Ernst, and Stanley Hayter among others. 
Evans was not happy at the Royal College, where abstraction was discouraged. Not permitted to study sculpture, he took private lessons from a stonemason. Although he made few stone carvings, there remained a strong sculptural quality to his imagery, and he always favoured the intaglio graphic techniques, engraving and etching, that make possible the high definition and contrast of forms in pictorial space. He left the college in 1933 after only one year. Surrealism early became an influence, and in 1936 he exhibited several works in the International Surrealist Exhibition in London. He associated with the surrealist group around Roland Penrose, Humphrey Jennings, and Herbert Read, but remained, characteristically, independent of it. His work through the thirties assimilated a wide range of influences, from analytic cubism to vorticism to surrealism, and from ancient and ethnographic art. His subject matter became increasingly social and political, reflecting his growing concern over economic distress at home and political disaster in Europe. 
In 1934 Evans married Phyllis Sullivan, a former fellow student at the Royal College of Art, and moved to Streatham in south London. He taught art at Wilson's Grammar School, Camberwell, from 1934 to 1936, and at Riemann's design school in Belgravia from 1936 to 1938. In 1937 he exhibited with the Artists' International Association, the London Group, and in 'Surrealist Poems and Objects' at the London Gallery. In 1938 he moved with his wife and their infant son and daughter to Durban, South Africa, to teach at Natal Technical College. The European crisis continued to preoccupy him, however, and in paintings that made explicit reference to economic depression, atrocity, and war Evans declared himself a political artist. His style, with its interlock of the organic and the mechanical, and its grotesque morphologies, proved highly effective as a response to the anguish of the time. 
In August 1942 Evans joined the South African army 14th armoured brigade, and saw action in north Africa, and with the Eighth Army in Italy, where he was awarded the Italian star. Demobilized in 1945, and his marriage recently dissolved, he returned to London. After a refresher course in etching and aquatint at the Central School in 1946, he embarked on a distinguished printmaking career, in theme and image parallel to his painting. Through the late 1940s he continued to treat of political and philosophical themes in pictorial allegories that drew upon eclectic sources, with recognizably human forms in theatrical space. 
In 1950 Evans was married again, this time to Marjorie Few, a concert pianist. After living and working in Mecklenburgh Square for some years he finally settled at 40A Downshire Hill, Hampstead, setting up a studio in a nearby disused nineteenth-century church. In the mid-fifties Evans's work became more abstract, its imagery deriving from wharfside and industrial landscape. By the early sixties architectural and mechanomorphic forms in the paintings and prints had given way to starkly silhouetted quasi-geometric shapes against flat grounds. The expressive vehemence of 'Vertical Suite in Black' (1958), and further series of aquatints and mezzotints, established Evans as one of the great printmakers of the post-war era. As his work became increasingly geometric he maintained that its implications were always indirectly figurative. His first retrospective was held at the Whitechapel Gallery in 1956; later important exhibitions included those at McRoberts and Tunnard, London (1963), the Art Institute of Chicago (retrospective, 1967), Marlborough Fine Art, London (1968), and the Victoria and Albert Museum (graphic work, 1973). 
Evans was a handsome man, witty and sardonic, whose temperament combined passion and intellectuality. His love of speculation and argument was informed by his studies in psychology, philosophy, politics, mechanics, optics, and the history and techniques of art. He was deeply read in modernist literature and contemporary poetry. He played the piano and trumpet well enough to amuse his friends with stylish pastiches and improvisations. He was practical and ingenious, and a good craftsman. All these aspects of the man found expression in his work as an artist. He was also a gifted writer and teacher. Evans died at 40A Downshire Hill, Hampstead, London, on 31 October 1973; his second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 58780


Farrer, Reginald John (1880-1920), traveller and plant collector, was born on 17 February 1880 at 3 Spanish Place, Marylebone, the elder of two sons of James Anson Farrer (1849-1925), barrister, whose country home was at Clapham in the North Riding of Yorkshire, and his wife, Elizabeth Georgina Ann, daughter of Colonel Reynell-Pack. The Sitwells were second cousins. Farrer was born with a harelip (and probably a cleft palate), which he later disguised with a thick moustache; during a childhood in which he underwent frequent operations he was educated at home, and on solitary excursions studied the flora in the local limestone hills. In 1889 his father inherited the Ingleborough estate, and when only fourteen Farrer redesigned the alpine garden there, and wrote a note in the 'Journal of Botany' on the occurrence of the sandwort 'Arenaria gothica' on Ingleborough Fell, its only known British habitat. In 1898 he followed family custom in attending Balliol College, Oxford, where he graduated in 1902. While at Oxford he aided the Revd H. J. Bidder in the construction of the celebrated rock garden at St John's College. 
In 1903 Farrer went on his first long journey, reaching Peking (Beijing), briefly visiting Korea, and spending about eight months in Japan, where he had an affair with a geisha girl and his drift to vegetarianism was hastened by the discovery that he had eaten his pet kitten, served as fricassee of chicken. His first book, 'The Garden of Asia' (1904) was an evocative account of his stay. At this time Farrer's plant and gardening interests were subsumed in his ambition to become a novelist, poet, and playwright. Between 1905 and 1911 he published two poetic dramas and five novels, of which 'The Anne-Queen's Chronicle', with its heroine Anne Boleyn, was the best. All now forgotten, their undisciplined alternation of satire and melodrama, marionette-like characters, and ill-connected episodes appear today as 'an adolescent... mixture of cleverness and silliness' (Taylor, 121). Yet Farrer had an acute appreciation of the novelist's art, and was devoted to Jane Austen, on whom he wrote a memorial article for the 'Quarterly Review' (1917). 1907 saw the publication of 'My Rock Garden', his most popular and influential work and continuously in print for over forty years. A sequel, 'Alpines and Bog Plants', followed in 1908. Early in 1908 he accompanied his friend, Aubrey Herbert, to Ceylon, where he further immersed himself in the religious mystery and ethics of Buddhism. On his return he published 'In Old Ceylon', a discursion on Sinhalese religion, history, literature, and art. Farrer then inadvisedly ventured into politics: his witty scepticism sat uneasily with the high moral seriousness of pre-war Liberalism and, although he was elected a Yorkshire county councillor (and was a JP for the West Riding), he was defeated in a parliamentary contest at Ashford, Kent (January 1910). He spent much of the $1000 given him by his father for election expenses on buying cypripedium orchids. 
Hardly a year passed between 1903 and 1913 when Farrer did not make a pilgrimage, with gardening friends, including Edward Augustus Bowles, to the Dolomites, Dauphine, or the Alpes Maritimes, 'his novitiate for the more serious work of plant collecting in the East' (Cox, 433). These visits resulted in books like 'Among the Hills' (1911) and in 1913 'The Dolomites' ('a land of magic, enclosed by peaks like frozen flames'; p. 1), which are full of vivid descriptions and clearly convey the beauty in plants. In May 1912 Farrer's Craven Nursery Company won a first prize for alpines in the Royal International Horticultural Exhibition at Chelsea. 
From April 1914 Farrer spent two years with William Purdom, a Kew-trained gardener, in Kangsu, north-west China, and in Tibet, collecting specimens and seeds, despite the lawlessness of the area. He had a narrow escape from drowning after a 20 ft fall from a rickety bridge. Arguably the most exciting of their finds were 'Gentiana farreri', 'which burned in the alpine turf like an incandescent turquoise' (Allan, 192), and the winter-flowering guelder-rose, 'Viburnum farreri'; but others, like 'Geranium farreri', 'Aster farreri', and 'Clematis macropetala', can also be found today in specialist nurseries. On his return Farrer described his expedition in the flamboyant 'On the Eaves of the World' (1917) and the posthumously published 'The Rainbow Bridge' (1921). Back in England by the spring of 1916, Farrer, declared unfit for war service, joined the Ministry of Information (1916-18). For part of the time he worked for John Buchan, who regarded his description of the Somme as 'the best thing that has been done on that battlefield by a long way' (quoted in Illingworth, 76); it was printed in 'The Void of War' (1918). 
1919 saw the publication of 'The English Rock Garden', a massive two-volume work of 1000 pages, which Farrer had written in 1913. Although in dictionary form, it is long-winded, opinionated, and at times perverse; yet Farrer had the ability to transmute botanical phraseology into pleasurable reading, and it is full of memorable literary conceits like his description of hyacinths as 'immense frizzed women of the world, scented and unctuous and rather stolidly complacent' (vol. 1, p. 419). In 1919, accompanied by E. H. M. Cox, and from a base at Hpimaw, Farrer explored the highlands of Upper Burma, then botanically little known in England. He wrote thirty-nine separate articles for the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' on the expedition. Unfortunately, few of the beautiful plants they discovered proved suitable for propagation in Britain, which lacks the constantly saturated soil and atmosphere of their native terrain; among those which have adapted are the scarlet ginger-wort, 'Hedychium coccineum', the weeping cypress, 'Juniperis coxii', and the spruce, 'Picca farreri', while Farrer's Burmese rhododendrons can be seen in Windsor Great Park and the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh. After Cox returned home, Farrer pressed on to Nyitadi, where, in a leaky bamboo hut, sodden by rain and mist for weeks at a time -- 'never have I known a country to cry so constantly' (quoted in Coats, 176) -- he became ill, and on 17 October 1920 died, probably of diphtheria. He was buried six days later at Kawngglanghpu (not Konglu, as was previously believed), where a fenced-off grave has a brass tablet with the words: 'He died for love and duty in search of rare plants.' He was unmarried, but at the time of his death was looking for a wife. 
Farrer overcame delicate health and stunted stature to become a self-contained (yet sociable) figure, with immense vitality and mental agility. He had black hair and dark, speaking eyes; his sallow complexion, which became more florid with age, caused him often to be regarded as of far eastern extraction. His conversation was agreeably lively, yet artificial in manner, and his vanity meant he 'liked to air the contents of a well-stored and observant mind' (Sitwell, 17-18) in a rather startling voice that could sound 'like one of those early gramophones fitted with a tin trumpet' (ibid., 16). Farrer was sensitive about this -- a rare example of a Yorkshireman with an inferiority complex. Not an easy man to deal with, he could be considerate to friends, but he was crotchety, he could be outrageously offensive, and his conversation and writings were peppered with biting sarcasm. He summed up his dislikes in a letter to Osbert Sitwell from Nyitadi in 1920: 'I hate lies and humbug, journalism, Christianity, domesticity, dulness, and European civilisation in general with a fury that, if I let it, makes me feel quite ill' (Sitwell, 21). 
Farrer's style of writing displeased many of his colleagues, and today his works are mainly consulted for their picturesque and poetic descriptions rather than for knowledge about plants. Although his herbarium collections, sent to Edinburgh, the prime centre for the study of Sino-Himalayan plants, were notable for the expressive detail of his field notes, his approach to taxonomy could be cavalier, and as a historian of the English rock garden he was unreliable. Farrer wrote at least nineteen books, some illustrated with his skilful paintings of plants as discovered in their natural habitats. His name appears in some thirty-six plant descriptions -- but for the First World War and the fact that no seeds from his final Burmese expedition survived, his impact might have been even greater. He was awarded the Gill memorial by the Royal Geographical Society (1920), and he is commemorated in a 4 mile nature trail in the Yorkshire Dales National Park, which overlooks some of his own plantings. 


@@@@@


doc= 58781


Fawcett, Percy Harrison (b. 1867, d. in or after 1925), soldier and explorer, was born on 31 August 1867 at Devonia, Torquay, Devon, the son of Edward Boyd Fawcett (1839-1884), of independent means, a noted amateur cricketer who had played for Cambridge University and Sussex, and his wife, Myra Elizabeth, 'nee' MacDougall. Percy recalled a childhood 'devoid of parental affection', though he had some 'grand times' with his elder brother (Edward) Douglas Fawcett (1866-1960), later well known as a philosopher and mountaineer, and with his sisters (Fawcett, 'Exploration Fawcett', 15-16). He was educated at Newton School, Newton Abbott, 'with canings that did nothing to alter my outlook' (ibid.); then, destined for an army career, he was enrolled at Westminster School from June 1881 to April 1882. Cadet years at Woolwich led in 1886 to a commission in the Royal Artillery and his first posting to Trincomalee, in Ceylon, where he met his future wife, Nina Agnes (1870-1954), the daughter of C. W. Paterson, a district judge at Galle, and widow of Captain Herbert Pritchard. He was back in Britain by the early 1890s, took a course of gunnery instruction at Shoeburyness, Essex, and was posted to Falmouth, Cornwall. On 26 January 1901 he and Nina were married at St Mathias's Church, Richmond, Surrey. 
Fawcett was one of several undercover officers sent to Morocco, where the Foreign Office needed intelligence, to make traverses, noting the topography and agricultural features along their routes. His accounts of journeys between Mazagar and Morocco, and between Mogador and Morocco, appeared in the War Office's 'Military Report on Morocco' (1903). There was a spell at Malta, where, assisted by his wife, he learned the basics of surveying before he undertook the War Office training on boundary survey and obtained a diploma. In 1902 he went east to Hong Kong, then to Ceylon, where his first son, Jack ('b'. 1903, died in or after 1925), was born in Colombo on 19 May 1903. The following year, now promoted to major, he was posted to Spike Island, co. Cork, where he settled his family. 
The sale by the Bolivian government of a portion of territory to Brazil in 1903 resulted in the border between the two states being defined by the names of rivers whose exact courses and geographical positions were uncertain, an unsatisfactory situation in a region which was a source of rubber, gold, and diamonds, with the prospect of other economic minerals. In 1906 Fawcett was approached to serve as chief Bolivian commissioner, leading a survey party from the falls of the Rio Madeira to the source of the Rio Acre, then down the Abuna; the task was estimated to last three years. Fawcett was enthusiastic about the prospect of mapping this difficult forest terrain and its network of waterways. It was inhabited by hostile Indians who, fearing the slave raiders sent out by the rubber barons, were liable to attack all intruders, and by equally aggressive wildlife, mostly snakes and insects. He left his pregnant wife in Cork and sailed to the Pacific coast of Peru, where he landed on the day that his second son, Brian ('b'. 1906), was born; from there he made his way to La Paz, the Bolivian capital. 
Fawcett's party set out for Lake Titicaca, on the Andean divide, and reached Cobija, where they found that the promised surveying instruments were not in place; Fawcett was obliged to rely on his own chronometer, compass, and sextant, as his plane table tripods had been in a case that was washed off the raft early in the journey. Some topographical work was, however, accomplished and on 26 December 1906 the party left Cobija and continued up the Acre to Riberalta. In October 1907 Fawcett was back at La Paz, where he handed over his reports to President Montes and accepted a further invitation to survey Bolivia's frontier with Brazil on the Rio Paraguay. 
After spending some time at home with his family in Dawlish Warren, Devon, Fawcett left again in March 1908, sailing to Buenos Aires with his new assistant, F. G. Fisher. This time he was well provided with instruments, stores, and cash. They embarked on a river steamer for Asuncion, intending to begin their survey at Corumba. The Rio Verde was said to be the boundary, but it was unexplored and so Fawcett and Fisher set off with a small party, past Villa Bella do Matto Grosso. The flat-topped Ricardo Franco hills, when described later by Fawcett, inspired Conan Doyle's 'The Lost World', serialized in 'The Strand' magazine in 1912. The Verde was found to follow a course some distance from that mapped when the boundary had been defined in 1873 and Fawcett's observations transferred some 1200 square miles to Bolivia. 
Fawcett was next invited to survey the Bolivia-Peru boundary; this was an exciting offer as it required exploration of the unknown upper reaches of the Rio Heath. Aware that he could not expect his secondment to be extended again, he resigned from the army two months before completing twenty years' service. He persuaded the British army to release three soldiers to join this third boundary survey, which left La Paz in 1911 and crossed the Aricoma Pass towards the Rio Heath. However, vague traditions of Inca remains began to tempt Fawcett away from the tedious business of surveying; back at La Paz in December he handed over his maps and submitted his resignation, before returning to Uplyme, Lyme Regis, where his family had settled. 
By 1913 the legends of inscribed monuments, gigantic crystals, and magical sources of light, coupled with the lure of exploring on the Bolivian side of the border with Brazil, had coalesced into what Fawcett, convinced by Indian stories of hidden cities and fair-skinned tribes, came to regard as 'the Quest'. There was talk of setting up a mining concession, funded by a London syndicate, and he spent several months in the area. He had nearly reached the Brazilian border when news of the outbreak of the First World War reached him. His party retraced their route and by January 1915 he was back in uniform and awaiting a posting to France, where he spent eighteen months in the trenches. Promoted lieutenant-colonel, he was active with the 158th brigade of the Royal Field Artillery in 1916, was slightly gassed after Christmas, and the following year was with the 6th corps of heavy artillery. In February 1919 he returned to his family, now settled at Marrick, in the Devon village of Seaton, where his sons went to school. 
With an army pension of $150 Fawcett decided that all hope for the future lay in the New World. After sending his wife and children to Jamaica, he went to Brazil, where he arrived in Rio in February 1920. In the national library he discovered an old Portuguese book with an account of a large, hidden, and very ancient city, without inhabitants, discovered in 1753. The Brazilian government agreed to fund the cost of an expedition, though Fawcett would not receive a salary. By this time the Foreign Office and the Royal Geographical Society (RGS) were irritated by his insistent requests for money; on 10 March 1920 Sir John Keltie, secretary of the RGS, wrote to the diplomat Sir Maurice de Bunsen: 'It is quite true that [Fawcett] has a reputation of being difficult to get on with, and has a queer manner in many ways, being a mystic and a spiritualist, but all the same he has an extraordinary power of getting through difficulties that would deter anybody else. (Fawcett MSS, box 1/81)' In August 1920 Fawcett departed for the town of Cuiaba, in the state of Mato Grosso. He intended to spend eighteen months in the forest and emerge on one of the great rivers, from where the party's return would be straightforward. However, they suffered a series of setbacks and made for Corumba, on the border with Bolivia, where Fawcett decided to stay until February 1921. He next made several journeys in the dry country between the Rio Sao Francisco and the Atlantic coast, before he re-equipped and, with two mules, set off alone into the interior. He emerged claiming to have found enough to make it imperative to go again, although he never disclosed the nature of these finds. 
Contemporary discoveries excited Fawcett's fanciful ideas about the past history of South America. His objective was now 'Z', the hidden city discovered in 1753. He was reluctant to disclose his plans, but in order to raise funds he described a proposed route commencing at Dead Horse Camp -- so named because his horse had died there in 1921 -- at 11 degree 43' S, 54 degree 35' W. Heading north-east to the Rio Xingu, he would visit a reported ancient stone tower, the terror of the local Indians because at night light blazed out from the doors and windows. He would head through the forest to a point between the Xingu and the Araguya, following the watershed north to 9 degree or 10 degree S. On the high ground between the states of Bahia and Goias, which was unexplored, he expected to find traces of old cities. He would continue along the mountains between the states of Bahia and Piaui to the Sao Francisco and expected to come upon the city reported in 1753 at approximately 11 degree 30' S, 42 degree 30' W. He would come out by the railway running to Salvador. This was a remarkably precise route for someone who intended to keep his goal secret, but he was mistaken in claiming that the region was unexplored; indeed Fawcett himself had conversed with a Frenchman who claimed, truthfully, to be familiar with it, but Fawcett chose to disbelieve him. 
Since his return in 1921 to Britain, where his family, not having settled in Jamaica, had set up house at Stoke Canon, Devon, Fawcett had been fretting over the delays in getting his expedition under way. He and his wife became increasingly interested in occult sciences, compiling notes on their relevance in his quest. He set about raising funds from the RGS and elsewhere for an expedition to consist of Fawcett, his son Jack, and an old schoolfriend, Raleigh Rimell. Much was made of the young men's suitability for this trip, with physical fitness being seen as less important than the fact that they were not attracted to alcohol, tobacco, or sex. 
In 1924 he travelled to New York, where he managed to raise funds from the National Geographic and other societies, and by selling the newspaper rights to the North American Newspaper Alliance (NANA). The party sailed from New York in February 1925 for Rio, then on the familiar route to Cuiaba. After buying horses and mules, and 'fattening up' in preparation for some hungry days ahead, they set out. From time to time they would send chatty letters home or Fawcett would take photographs of Indians for NANA, as the party made good progress. Fawcett's last letter, sent from Dead Horse Camp on 29 May 1925, after their Brazilian assistants had been sent back, assured his wife 'you need have no fear of failure' (Fawcett, 'Exploration Fawcett'). The party then vanished without trace. 
From Brazil there were, inevitably, rumours of meetings and finds, several of which Fawcett's surviving son, Brian, employed by the Peruvian central Railway, was able to investigate. The first news came from Roger Courteville, a French civil engineer. He and his wife had crossed from Atlantic to Pacific by car and in the state of Minas Gerais had come across an old, ragged, and sick man who said he was Fawcett. Nina Fawcett, who was still receiving her husband's meagre War Office pension as a wife and not a widow, came to believe this story and tried to persuade Brian to raise funds and return to find him. This came to nothing. 
In 1928 NANA organized a search party led by US navy commander George Dyott which discovered a metal uniform case with a maker's tag, but this was identified as having been discarded by Fawcett in 1920. The Indian tribe where it was found reported a white man and two younger men, both lame; they had taken them over the river to a village of Kalapalo Indians from where the white men had continued east and the smoke of their camp fires had been seen for a further five days. In 1930 another expedition reached this Kalapalo village but failed to return. An unsuccessful British expedition in 1932 was described by Peter Fleming in his book 'Brazilian Adventure' (1933). In 1932 Stefan Rattin, a Swiss trapper, came out of Mato Grosso with a story of an elderly Fawcett held captive by Indians, but Brian was not inclined to believe that his father, bald for many years, was now the old man with long white hair and other features that Rattin had described. Other reports of sightings of white men or artefacts belonging to them came to the RGS or the family, but were all disproved. 
Fawcett's will was proved on 31 August 1937, by which time there was no longer any likelihood of his being alive. In 1951 some more tangible evidence appeared: Orlando Vilas Boas, a Brazilian working with the Indian Foundation, had heard a deathbed confession by Izarari, a Kalapalo chief, that he had clubbed the three white men to death, the culmination of an incident involving Jack Fawcett and Izarari's wife and a subsequent argument over the provision of canoes, when the elder Fawcett had slapped the Indian's face. The two young men's bodies were thrown in the river but Izarari's son was persuaded to show where Fawcett was buried. Some bones were sent to London and examined at the Royal Anthropological Institute, but their dimensions and dental features proved that this was not Percy Fawcett. Nina Fawcett, who since her husband's disappearance had lived with their daughter at Beaulieu-sur-Mer, France, and then Baugy-sur-Clarens, Switzerland, died at Brighton, Sussex, on 8 September 1954. 
Fawcett's city 'Z' has never been seen from the ground or from aeroplanes which fly regularly across the area. It seems probable that the story arose from sightings of an eroded line of limestone hills, which from a distance appear like some ruined city. 


@@@@@


doc= 58783


Jane Helen Findlater (1866-1946), novelist, was born on 4 November 1866 at 14 Claremont Crescent, Edinburgh. As a child, Mary suffered from the isolation and restrictions of life at the remote manse, but took pleasure in Jane's company; the two formed a deep bond which endured, with only rare periods of separation, for eighty years. The sisters were educated at home by governesses. Influenced by the story-telling of relatives, friends, and servants, Mary began writing, in collaboration with Jane, at a young age. When her father died in 1886, Mary moved with her mother and sisters to Prestonpans, near Edinburgh. There Mary and Jane struggled to supplement their family's meagre income with their writing. Mary published her first book, 'Songs & Sonnets', in 1895, but it was the publication of Jane's first novel, 'The Green Graves of Balgowrie', in 1896 which launched their careers. A popular and critical success, it was praised by readers as various as William Gladstone and Ellen Terry, and it established the Findlater name in literary and intellectual circles. 


@@@@@


doc= 58784


Findlater, Mary Williamina (1865-1963), novelist, was born on 28 March 1865 at Lochearnhead, Perthshire, the second of the three daughters of Eric John Findlater (died 1886), a minister of the Free Church of Scotland at Lochearnhead, and his wife, Sarah Borthwick (died 1907). Her younger sister, 
Between 1897 and 1914 Mary published ten novels, including two written with Jane, and two in collaboration with Jane, Kate Douglas Wiggin, and Allan McAuley, while Jane published short stories and four novels of her own. Popular with British and American readers as well as with the critics, the sisters enjoyed financial security and a growing circle of distinguished friends, including Sir Edward and Lady Grey and the novelist Mary Cholmondeley. They moved to Devon in 1900 for their mother's health. In 1905 Mary and Jane went on a successful publicity tour of the United States, where they formed friendships with Henry James, and William and Alice James, among others. Neither sister ever married. Mary was once engaged for a brief time, but broke it off when she realized that she could not bear to be parted from Jane. Thereafter, the sisters would joke that ''we' could only marry a Mormon' (Mackenzie, 24). 
Mary's novels are Victorian in their large casts of characters and leisurely paced narratives, but her heroines are surprisingly modern. Unmarried yet reluctant to give in to the demands of the marriage market in either appearance or behaviour (much like Mary herself), they openly criticize the dearth of options available to women who want something out of life other than a husband and children. In 'The Rose of Joy' (1903) the heroine supports herself as an artist and chooses to live with a female companion rather than marry. In Mary's finest collaboration with Jane, 'Crossriggs' (1908), female independence again replaces the conventional happy ending of marriage as an inheritance allows the middle-aged heroine to leave behind her life of self-sacrifice to travel the world. 
Mary's career effectively ended with the First World War, after which she published only one more novel, a collaboration with Jane entitled 'Beneath the Visiting Moon' (1923). Although Mary was interested in developments in modern literature, her own novels, with their discursive plots and lack of psychological analysis, had, by the 1920s, fallen out of fashion. In 1923 she underwent surgery for cancer, but recovered to supervise the building of a new home in Rye. The threat of war prompted the sisters to return to Perthshire in 1940. 
Strikingly handsome in her youth, with dark eyes and hair, Mary was the more outspoken and emotional of the two sisters, though they were both forthright, gregarious, and intellectually curious. When Jane died of a heart attack on 20 May 1946, in Comrie, Perthshire, Mary was sure her own death would soon follow. But she lived on for seventeen years, alert and happy despite deafness and other infirmities of age. She died on 22 November 1963 at St Fillans, near Comrie. 


@@@@@


doc= 58785


Fisk, Sir Ernest Thomas (1886-1965), entrepreneur and developer of radio, was born on 8 August 1886 at Sunbury, Middlesex, the second child of Thomas Harvey Fisk, builder, and his wife, Charlotte Hariette, 'nee' Halland. Educated at St Mary's and Sunbury Boys' schools, Fisk later attended the United Kingdom College, London, a private coaching institution, and the University of Sydney, but sat no examinations. After studying engineering at Frederick Walton's works, Fisk joined the Post Office as a wireless telegraphist. In 1906 he joined Marconi, qualifying as an operator and engineer at Liverpool and Chelmsford, and from 1909 worked for American Marconi, before returning to London. 
In 1910 Fisk visited Australia to demonstrate Marconi apparatus. He returned there in 1911 as resident engineer, persuading shipowners to fit Marconi equipment, which he installed, and trained telegraphists to operate. A patent dispute between the Australian government and Marconi in 1912 was resolved in 1913 when a new company, Amalgamated Wireless (Australasia) Ltd (AWA), was formed with exclusive rights to both Marconi and Telefunken patents. Fisk was appointed general and technical manager, becoming managing director in 1916, and chairman in 1932. 
Fisk married Florence, the second daughter of Samuel Chudleigh, music teacher, on 20 December 1916 at St John's Church, Gordon, Sydney. In 1931 Marconi was godfather to Fisk's fourth son, David Sarnoff Marconi. 
In 1916 Fisk arranged a series of test transmissions from the Marconi long-wave station at Caernarfon, and, in 1918, the transmission of messages from the prime minister, W. M. Hughes, and Sir Joseph Cook established that direct wireless communication between Britain and Australia was practicable. At the Imperial Conference of 1921, Fisk, as adviser to Hughes, promoted his scheme for direct communication between Britain and the dominions. The Australian government commissioned AWA in 1922; the beam service between Australia and Britain was inaugurated in 1927, and that between Australia and Canada in 1928. In 1927 AWA pioneered empire broadcasting, and in 1930 an empire radio-telephone service. Fisk promoted wireless as integral to the empire, arguing that no scientific discovery offered such great possibility for binding together the parts of the far-flung empire, and for developing its social, commercial, and defence welfare. He promoted the wireless industry as president of the State Wireless Institute of Australia in 1914-22, founded its journal, 'Sea, Land and Air', and was president of the Institution of Radio Engineers in the 1930s. As a freemason, he was a member of the Electron chapter at AWA. 
Knighted in 1937, Fisk was invited to join the boards of several Australian companies. In 1939 Robert Menzies appointed Fisk secretary of the economic cabinet and director of economic co-ordination, but the position was terminated in 1941. Fisk held many patents: notably his solariscope, for short-wave radio users, and Fisk soundproof windows. His vision for wireless was boundless, raising hopes for an international language, and even the possibility of communicating with the dead; following the death of his son, Thomas Maxwell, in the Second World War, he maintained an interest in spiritualism. 
In 1944 Fisk left AWA to become managing director of Electrical and Musical Industries in London, but he returned to Sydney in 1952 as a consultant, concerned with the future of television, and solar, hydro, and nuclear power. Fisk, whose name became synonymous with the development of radio in Australia, died at his home at Roseville, Sydney, on 8 July 1965 and was cremated. He was survived by his wife and three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 58787


Flint, Frank Stuart (1885-1960), writer and civil servant, was born on 19 December 1885 at 117 Barnsbury Road in Islington, London, one of several children of William Thomas Flint, a commercial traveller, and his wife, Hannah Alice Tricker. He grew up in a working-class area of London and attended local schools until the age of thirteen, when his family's financial circumstances forced him to seek a variety of unskilled jobs. A tall, gangly, bespectacled youth, he soon began a programme of independent reading, and through classes in typing and shorthand at a working men's night school qualified for a secretarial job in the civil service in 1904. His particular interests in poetry, history, and philosophy, however, combined with a gift for languages, encouraged him to move rapidly beyond his neighbourhood and class. His fluency in French and knowledge of European literature, coupled with his special focus on the French symbolist poets, placed him at the vanguard of early English modernism. 
Flint began his career as a literary critic in 1908 writing articles and reviews in A. R. Orage's 'New Age'. Through his work for this journal, and later for 'The Egoist' and for Harriet Monroe's 'Poetry' in Chicago, he introduced British and then American readers to a range of new avant-garde writers, among them the French author Remy de Gourmont and the Belgian poet Emile Verhaeren. He also initiated at this time important correspondences with a myriad of younger writers publishing in Paris in the 'Mercure de France' and the 'Nouvelle Revue Francaise', among them Vildrac, Romains, Duhamel, Fort, and the Italian futurist Marinetti. He began to publish his own verse in Ford Madox Hueffer's 'English Review' in 1909. On 20 November of that year he married Violet Maude Fisher (1883/4-1920), daughter of John Fisher, a school attendance officer, and published his first volume of poetry, 'In the Net of Stars', which featured both conventional love lyrics and experimental free verse, often on urban subjects and influenced by the poetic theories he was developing in the weekly conversations of the informal poetry club which included T. E. Hulme, Frances Tancred, Florence Farr, Edward Storer, and occasionally Ezra Pound. 
Flint's reputation as an authority on modern French literature led in 1912 to his influential essay 'Contemporary French poetry' for a special issue of Harold Monro's 'Poetry Review'. Here he described several schools of post-symbolist writing and emphasized both the importance of free verse as a prosodic mode and the image as a vital element in perception and literary expression. In 1913 he joined Hulme in a second, more formal poetry club and continued to publicize French verse in his column, 'French chronicle', in 'Poetry and Drama'. He was also a member of Pound's circle of promising young writers, becoming particularly close friends with Richard Aldington and Hilda Doolittle (H. D.) and championing their new literary movement, imagism, in which he participated. 
Flint contributed poems to Pound's anthology 'Des imagistes' (1914) as well as to the three subsequent imagist anthologies edited by Richard Aldington and Amy Lowell (1915-17). In 1915 he published his second book of poems, 'Cadences', in which he experimented further with free verse, exploring the tensions between the beautiful and the squalid in modern life. The First World War interrupted his literary career, however, as many of his contemporaries entered the military, while his socialist sympathies were sharpened by the unrest both at home and abroad. His family obligations, which by this time included two children, Ianthe ('b'. 1911) and Oliver ('b'. 1914), pressed heavily upon him, and he clung to his civil service position, now in the Post Office, until conscripted in 1918. He served in the army for eleven months in primarily clerical capacities, remaining in home service, until demobilized in 1919. His most intimate friend during this period was Richard Aldington, who dedicated his poem 'The Walk' (1920) to Flint, revealing a deep affection echoed by Flint in his third and last book of verse, 'Otherworld' (1920), in which he addressed the title-poem as well as 'Soldiers' 'To R. A.'. 
When Flint's wife died in childbirth in 1920, he was devastated. Desperate for help in caring for his children, he married Violet's sister Ruth Ellen Fisher ('b'. 1884/5) within a few months, on 18 August 1920, a domestic arrangement which ended in their divorce in 1928, several years after they had ceased to live together. He became increasingly involved with socialist causes and with his new post in the overseas section of the statistics division of the Ministry of Labour. His influence on literary modernism consequently diminished. Unlike his fellow imagists he chose finally not to be a poet: he continued to translate (from French, German, and Russian) throughout the 1920s and wrote literary essays, notably for T. S. Eliot's 'Criterion', into the early 1930s, but his subjects grew increasingly topical as his early translation of literary works gave way to books about current events and general biography. His position as an authority on French literature passed to Aldington, and by the late 1920s he had turned his attention primarily to popular German non-fiction, which he translated with D. F. Tait, including Rene Fueloep-Miller's 'Lenin und Gandhi' (as 'Lenin and Gandhi', 1927), 'Die heilige Teufel: Rasputin und die Frauen' (as 'Rasputin: the Holy Devil', 1928), and 'Macht und Geheimnis der Jesuiten' (as 'The Power of the Jesuits', 1930), and Arthur Polzer-Hoditz's 'Kaiser Karl' (as 'The Emperor Karl', 1930). He concluded his writing career with two privately printed pamphlets: 'Economic Equilibrium' (1940) and 'Paying for War and Peace' (1948). 
When Flint retired from the civil service in 1951, as chief of the overseas section of the Ministry of Labour's statistics divison, he was made a companion of the Imperial Service Order. For the last years of his life, a burly and often cranky man with thick white hair, he lived in quiet isolation first in Highbury, London, then at West View, Harwell, Berkshire, where he died of a stroke on 28 February 1960; he was later cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 58788


Forde, (Cyril) Daryll (1902-1973), anthropologist, was born on 16 March 1902 at 38 Manchester Road, Tottenham, Middlesex, the son of the Revd John Percival Daniel Forde, schoolmaster, and his wife, Caroline Pearce Pittman. He went to Middlesex county school at Tottenham and then to the geography department of University College, London, from where he graduated in 1922. There in 1923 he was appointed a lecturer in geography, and in 1928 was awarded a PhD in prehistoric archaeology. At this period both geography and anatomy at University College had research interests in ethnography and archaeology, and Forde found himself welcome in both disciplines. He was also in the student set associated with the Bloomsbury group. Though he was intellectually closer to the archaeologist Gordon Childe, it was through Sir Grafton Elliot Smith in anatomy that Forde met both the psychologist W. H. R. Rivers (for whose posthumously published books Forde drew the maps) and the distinguished Californian anthropologist R. H. Lowie. Forde spent 1928-30 as Commonwealth fellow in anthropology with Lowie at Berkeley, working on American Indian economies. The twenty-eight-year-old Forde was recognized as 'the' up-and-coming geographer, and at a time when air travel was still unusual, he was flown over from California to be offered the chair of geography and anthropology at the University of Aberystwyth. 
Forde's academic career falls into four periods. The first, from 1923 to 1934, culminated in the publication of his major general text, 'Habitat, Economy and Society' (1934). He was already recognized as an innovative archaeologist with his study on Welsh megaliths; at Aberystwyth he pioneered 'anthropology at home' by initiating ethnographic studies of Welsh villages and towns. But his reading had shown him how little was really known about African economies. With the recently established International Institute for African Languages and Culture sending out researchers like Meyer Fortes to an acephalous community in northern Gold Coast, and S. F. Nadel to a complex state in northern Nigeria, in 1935 Forde opted instead for something in between -- a 'village' of 10,000 Yako in south-eastern Nigeria, whose kinship system ('double unilineal descent') was particularly interesting for lineage theorists. Forde's second period (1935-43) was interrupted by the Second World War. His curtailed fieldwork on Yako marriage was none the less published in 1941. In the same year he was posted to the Foreign Office research department (then in Oxford), heading the section on the USA. He returned to Aberystwyth in 1943. 
The third period, from 1944 to 1956, saw Forde appointed in 1944 to the post of part-time director of the renamed International African Institute in London; in 1945 was added the chair of the newly established department of anthropology at University College, London. He held both posts until 1969. As director he had to rebuild an institute crippled by war. The need for an up-to-date understanding of the societies of post-war Africa was obvious, especially with the new emphasis on economic development and calls for self-government. In 1946 Forde wrote, with R. Scott, 'The Native Economies of Nigeria'. He devised an extended practical programme of research and publication (in English and French), and negotiated funding from government and from UNESCO. In nearly sixty volumes, the 'Ethnographic Survey' under Forde's direction systematized existing ethnographic data, region by region; a similar, smaller series, 'Handbooks of African Languages', was produced; ethnographic monographs were published; 'African Abstracts' regularly summarized the periodical literature; and the institute's quarterly journal, 'Africa', which Forde edited, again became the leading journal in the field. Of the symposia from this period, 'African Systems of Kinship and Marriage' (1950) and 'African Worlds' (1954) remain outstanding. 
In his fourth period (1957-69) Forde analysed Yako ritual and belief, publishing 'Yako Studies' (1964). More importantly, he raised funds from the Ford Foundation for a series of international seminars, bringing together in different African countries scholars from America, Europe, and Africa. With new universities established in Africa and with independence near, these nine seminars (and the resulting volumes) were path-breaking, assembling the latest ideas and research in key subjects. Only Daryll Forde, with his network of contacts, his administrative skills and geniality, his intellectual energy and openness, could ensure success. 
The department of anthropology that Forde started in 1945 reflected his broad vision. Based on the American model, it was the only department in Britain to combine archaeology and material culture with both social and biological anthropology. Forde's vision and intellectual generosity attracted, by the 1950s, some of the best postgraduates of the day; posts in his department were the starting-point for a talented new breed of anthropologists (including west Africans); new directions, for example in African history or medical anthropology, were warmly encouraged. Forde created not so much a school of anthropology as a style; and he developed the field of African anthropology less by his own writings than by his dissemination of new knowledge -- through international seminars, monographs, bibliographic aids, and the journal he edited, 'Africa'. A crucial element in the expansion of African studies which he stimulated was breadth: the Forde style of anthropology included archaeology, genetics, technology, history, ecology, demography, and linguistics, as well as social anthropology. He fostered intellectual exchange and, over a period of twenty-five years, gave support, intellectually or financially, to an extraordinary number of scholars in Britain, Europe, and Africa. 
Forde was twice married. In 1930 he married Joyce Marion Stock, and they had two sons. This marriage was dissolved in 1947, and in the following year he married Evelyn Harty Singer, a medical practitioner. After a brief semi-retirement, Forde died at his home, 8 The Boltons, Kensington, London, on 3 May 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 58791


Frankau, Pamela Sydney (1908-1967), novelist, was born on 3 January 1908 at 14A Great Cumberland Place, London, the younger of the two daughters of Gilbert Frankau (1884-1952), novelist, and his first wife, Dorothea Frances Markham Drummond-Black (1874-1945). Gilbert's mother, Julia Frankau (whose pseudonym was Frank Danby) also wrote novels, giving Pamela a strong Jewish literary inheritance. Gilbert had small time for the home and less for the nursery; his departure from the family in 1919 when he left to marry an actress had no immediate effect on Pamela. In later years, however, being the stronger of the two sisters, she found herself having to give support, both financial and emotional, to her mother. Pamela's inability to remain solvent derived partly from her addiction to the gambling table, but mostly from her need to pay her mother's debts as well as her own, and her extreme generosity. After private lessons in the Old Rectory, Honiton, Devon, she and her sister, Ursula, were sent as boarders to Burgess Hill School for Girls, Sussex, from 1919 to 1924. Memories of this time are chronicled with her accustomed wit in the first part of the autobiographical 'I Find Four People' (1935). 
Slight and dark, with the look of Walt Disney's Bambi, and blessed with powerful attraction, a ready wit, and a passionate concern for others as well as herself, Pamela stood out in school as she did all her life. Her early hope was to go on the stage, but writing took over, and her first novel, 'Marriage of Harlequin', published in 1927 when she was nineteen, brought her much press notice, on the lines of 'talented daughter of a famous father'. She wrote tirelessly -- before she was thirty-two she had published twenty novels, only three of which she cared to remember: 'She and I' (1930), 'I was the Man' (1932), and 'Tassell-Gentle' (1934). All the early books, however, show traces of her idiosyncratic turn of phrase and her perception, foreshadowing what was to come. Her great-aunt, Eliza Aria, a well-known journalist and society hostess, introduced her to many of the famous of her time: John van Druten, G. B. Stern, and Rebecca West, with whom she was to have a close but stormy relationship; a rift of nine years was finally mended. 
Pamela's affair with Humbert Wolfe, poet and civil servant, whom she met in 1931, so absorbed her that his sudden death from heart failure in 1940 after a birthday dinner (he was born on 5 January 1885) cut her life in two. Married with a daughter, Wolfe was known for his many attachments, but his love for Pamela was real, if not consistently faithful. Three weeks after his death she left for the United States; after some months there in emotional disarray she returned to England via Lisbon in November 1940, at the height of the blitz. A spell in the Ministry of Food, editing 'Food Facts' (as she claimed, her largest seller), ended when she joined the Auxiliary Territorial Service in February 1942. 
Pamela was troubled always by an ambiguous sexuality, and her next love was a fellow woman officer, who became her sponsor when in 1942 she was received into the Roman Catholic church. However, on 30 October 1945 she married Marshall Dill (1916-2000), an American who was then in navy intelligence. In 1946 she gave birth to a son who lived only a few days. The marriage foundered, ending in divorce in 1951. But after a silence of nine years she had begun to write again, and returned to England with the manuscript of 'The Willow Cabin' (1949) which, drawing as it did on the experience of her love for Humbert Wolfe, was to become a Book Society choice and her most successful novel. Her books now, combining her early wit and agility of mind with a depth of experience, commanded a wide readership, both in Britain and in the United States. They speak with her own voice, her particular use of language, her lightness of touch. This is both their strength and their weakness; a surface dazzle can sometimes obscure her profound understanding of the human condition. In her obituary Rebecca West wrote that 'none of her novels, though they are better than most, was as good as she was' ('The Times', 9 June 1967). Pamela's own favourite was 'The Bridge' (1957), concerned as it was with the imperatives of the Roman Catholic faith. 'Ask me No More' (1958) showed the unacceptable face of Humbert Wolfe in the guise of Geoffrey Bliss, a playwright whose love life has a cat's-cradle complexity. 
Though Pamela was not one to have at any time a tranquil life, the last ten years had a semblance of calm, producing steady and successful work, and a last attachment, Margaret (Peggy) Webster (1905-1972), daughter of Dame May Whitty, and a theatrical director of standing. They lived together at 55 Christchurch Hill, Hampstead, London; a telegram addressed to '55 Christ Churchill' brought from Pamela the comment 'with those two characters on our side, how can we lose?' 
In 1964 Pamela was operated on for breast cancer; the disease returned in the form of cancer of the bone. She endured much pain, and faced the future with courage and humour. She died on 8 June 1967, at her home in Christchurch Hill, her sister Ursula and Peggy with her. She was buried in Hampstead cemetery, where Ursula now lies with her. Her last work, 'Colonel Blessington', a thriller, concerning a confusion of sexual identity, unfinished at her death, was completed by the undersigned, and published in 1968. 


@@@@@


doc= 58792


Gibb, Andrew Dewar (1888-1974), jurist and Scottish nationalist, was born at the High Street, Paisley, Renfrewshire, on 13 February 1888, the son of William Fletcher Gibb (1855/6-1923), medical doctor, and his wife, Mary Jane, 'nee' Walker (1860/61-1948). He was educated at Trinity College, Glenalmond (1902-6), and the University of Glasgow, where he graduated in arts in 1910 and law in 1913. He was called to the Scottish bar in 1914. During the First World War he served with the Royal Scots Fusiliers, seeing active service in France and reaching the rank of major. Under the pseudonym Captain X he published in 1924 'With Winston Churchill at the Front'. This work recounted the period in early 1916 during which his company of the 6th Royal Scots Fusiliers was commanded by Churchill. His view of Churchill was 'fulsome'. According to Gibb 'no more popular officer ever commanded troops' (p. 109). 
Gibb was called to the English bar in 1917 and practised there from 1919. He married on 22 May 1923 Margaret Isabel, daughter of Dr Walker Downie; they had one son and two daughters. In 1929 he was appointed lecturer in English law at the University of Edinburgh, and from 1931 to 1934 he was lecturer in Scots law at the University of Cambridge. 
In 1934 Gibb was appointed regius professor of law at the University of Glasgow, a chair he held until his retirement in 1958. As a legal scholar he edited a range of works, including successive editions of a text on the law of maritime collisions, and on the position of Scots law in the United Kingdom. His 'Students' Glossary of Legal Terms' appeared in 1946 and four editions of his 'Preface to Scots Law' were published between 1944 and 1964. He was particularly interested in the role of the House of Lords as a court of appeal in Scottish cases, the subject of his 'Law from Over the Border' (1950). His successor in the Glasgow chair has damned his legal writing with faint praise, remarking that 'almost all of it was small' (Walker, 58). He has, however, been described as a 'legal nationalist' (Farmer, 151-64), and there is much evidence for this. He regarded Scots law as a priceless survival of the union of 1707, which he regarded as a corrupt bargain, and he deprecated the intrusion of English procedures. Unless Scotland recovered her independent status he predicted only 'a lingering decline, leading to ultimate fusion with the Law of England and the reduction of Scotland to a like condition with that of Wales' (A. D. Gibb, 'The Shadow on Parliament House: has Scots Law a Future?', Porpoise Pamphlet 4, 'c'.1932, 28). Nevertheless, the survival of Scots law, in his view, provided a suitable basis for the restoration of Scottish nationhood. 
Gibb was politically active throughout his life. His early political career was as a Unionist, and he twice stood as a candidate for the Scottish Unionist party: at Hamilton in 1924 and at Greenock in 1929. These were unpromising contests and on each occasion he was bottom of the poll despite his 1924 candidature being characterized by 'unbounded energy and enthusiasm' ('The Scotsman', 18 Oct 1924, 10). During the 1920s he came to the view that Scotland had been ill served by the union of 1707. His 'Scotland in Eclipse' (1930) identified the economic depression with a wider cultural malaise in Scotland. In particular, he believed that Scotland's status as a partner in the imperial mission had been compromised by her lowly status in the United Kingdom. As he moved towards a nationalist position he retained a right-wing world view and imperial questions remained prominent in his writings. His 'Scottish Empire' (1937) emphasized the key role that Scotland and the Scots had played in the development of the British empire in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, but contended that this vital imperial role was being undermined by the steady encroachment upon Scotland's identity within the Union. While he sought the recovery of Scottish statehood, he did so within the structure of the United Kingdom. He opposed outright independence as likely to lead to separation and isolation and felt that even something akin to dominion status would not fully recognize the importance of Scotland to the development of the empire. These views attracted the suspicion among his fellow nationalists that he was a mere 'devolutionist'. 
Gibb's involvement in Scottish nationalism in the 1930s came initially through the vehicle of the Scottish Party. Formed in 1930, the party was composed mostly of former Unionists, and was designed as a counterpoint to the more left-wing National Party of Scotland. Gibb feared that the 'socialism', pan-Celticism, and cultural nationalism of the National Party was a disastrous combination. As negotiations proceeded to fuse the Scottish Party and the National Party he encouraged the leadership of the latter to cleanse their ranks of undesirable and extreme elements. Fusion was achieved with the creation of the Scottish National Party in 1934, of which he served as chairman from 1936 to 1940. He was the unsuccessful nationalist parliamentary candidate for the Scottish Universities seat at the general election of 1935 and at by-elections in 1936 and 1938. 
Gibb's view of politics has been described as elitist. Discussing the leadership of the Scottish Party in 1930 he emphasized to the duke of Montrose that 'the rank and file require to be guided, instructed and shepherded towards the proper course' (Finlay, 'Independent and Free', 95). He also embraced a racist conception of Scottish nationalism, considering that inter-war Scotland was in 'eclipse' as a result of the combination of large-scale emigration and the 'influx' (for which there was no statistical evidence) of what he perceived to be an inferior people from Ireland. This was an identifiable current of thought in right-wing circles in Scotland in this period, also being expressed by leading figures in the Presbyterian churches. The Irish were also condemned for lending their electoral support to the Labour Party, which made its breakthrough in Scotland in 1922. This hostility to left-wing politics led Gibb into even more dangerous territory in the late 1930s. He expressed 'admiration' for Hitler and Mussolini, even praising Hitler's Jewish policy and condemning communism as 'too largely Jewish in origin' (ibid., 197-8). It was what he regarded as the rapid leftward lurch of the National Party that led to Gibb's resignation from its chair in 1940. Despite these views he was not of the wing of the Scottish National Party that opposed the war and he did not approve of the party's policy of exploiting the electoral truce and contesting by-elections. 
Described by his successor in the Glasgow chair as 'shortish, bald with a determined, slightly prominent lower jaw and lip' (Walker, 58), Gibb maintained the style of dress of a Scottish advocate throughout his academic career. During and after the Second World War he was a less prominent figure politically, and the extreme views he had expressed in the 1930s were rarely heard (the tone of his 'Scotland Resurgent', 1950, differed from that of his earlier writings). It has been suggested that he had become a disappointed and unfulfilled figure. He served as an honorary and interim sheriff at Ayr, Paisley, and Glasgow, where he brought a tough approach to the application of the criminal law. He died at his home, 15 Kirklee Road, Glasgow, on 24 January 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 58794


Godfrey, Sir Daniel Eyers (1868-1939), conductor, was born on 20 June 1868 in Winchester Street, Pimlico, London, the elder son of Lieutenant Daniel Godfrey (1831-1903) and his wife, Joyce Boyles (who died in 1890 after a paralytic stroke). As well as a younger brother he had three sisters. The family was famous for producing three generations of bandmasters. Dan Godfrey was educated between 1880 and 1884 at King's School, the Strand, but his studies were cut short because of suspected eye trouble. He then toured Germany with a commercial career in mind and to learn the language, but on his return decided that music offered better prospects and accordingly enrolled at the Royal College of Music (1885-7), studying first the violin and then the clarinet under Henry Lazarus. After leaving the college, in the hope of succeeding his father as bandmaster of the Grenadier Guards, he studied band instrumentation with John Hartmann, an acknowledged expert, and started making some arrangements and composing small pieces of his own. In 1889 he succeeded his cousin Charles Godfrey (1866-1935) as bandmaster of the corps of commissionaires. In 1890 he gained his bandmaster's diploma at the Royal Academy of Music but because he had not passed through Kneller Hall, the bandmasters' training school, a service appointment was not open to him. He accepted instead the conductorship of the London military band, a municipal ensemble that had been established after the War Office had prohibited military bands from performing outside their own regimental districts. He also took over his father's orchestral work, which included conducting at fashionable balls and exhibitions. 
In 1891-2 he toured South Africa, as music director first of the Standard Opera Company and then of the Globe Burlesque Company. There he met Jessie Stuart (1870-1925), daughter of a civil servant in Pietermaritzburg, whom he married in Durban on 19 September 1892. They sailed back to England in October. 
In January 1893 Dan Godfrey found among his father's unanswered correspondence a request from Bournemouth to supply a band of thirty players for the reopening of the Winter Gardens. He applied for the position himself and was contracted for a five-month summer season. 'Dan Godfrey's Band' made its first appearance on Whit Monday 1893 and was so successful that he negotiated first for the winter and then for successive seasons: Bournemouth became his home for life. 
With his band, employed to play on the pier, on the lawns, and inside the Winter Gardens, Godfrey gradually introduced serious music, adding strings so that by October he was giving classical concerts in addition to his other duties. In December 1894 he inaugurated the first of his forty annual series of winter symphony concerts with which he was able to realize his ambition of making Bournemouth a home for British music where both established and young composers could be sure of a hearing. Composers were frequently invited to conduct their own works. In May 1894 he was officially appointed musical director and adviser and entertainment manager to the corporation and in May 1896 the band became the Bournemouth Municipal Orchestra, the first permanent, fully salaried, municipal orchestra in the country, with Godfrey as its musical director. 
In May 1911 the leading British composers of the day held a dinner in London in Godfrey's honour and Sir Charles Stanford toasted him as 'the greatest friend of the British composer' (Godfrey, 'Memories and Music', 83) since Sir August Manns, whose Crystal Palace concerts had been an example to Godfrey. In 1922 Dame Ethel Smyth campaigned vigorously on Godfrey's behalf for a knighthood, which was conferred on him in July by King George V. The following year Godfrey wrote his autobiography, 'Memories and Music'. 
In 1922 he gave the first of the famous Bournemouth Easter festivals that continued until 1929 when the orchestra moved from the Winter Gardens to the newly built pavilion. With the separate appointment of a general manager Godfrey found himself increasingly at odds with the corporation's attitude towards serious music and his later years were not so happy now that he had lost overall control. Nevertheless, both he and the orchestra reached a wider audience and gained further recognition through the weekly national broadcasts of his symphony concerts from the pavilion. 
In 1925 Lady Godfrey died from heart failure. Sir Dan remarried in 1929; his second wife was Mrs Annie Farlam from Buxton. There had been three sons and three daughters from the first marriage. The eldest son, Daniel Stuart (1893-1935), at one time seen as a successor to his father and known -- as his father had once been -- as Dan Godfrey jun., was a music director for the BBC (1923-6) before being appointed conductor of the Durban Municipal Orchestra in 1928. In April 1935 he died there suddenly from a heart attack. 
Sir Dan Godfrey retired in 1934 and was succeeded by Richard Austin. In 1937 he revisited South Africa, where he had some conducting engagements. He died at Bournemouth on 20 July 1939 and was buried at St Peter's Church, Bournemouth, on 24 July 1939. As a conductor his appearances outside Bournemouth were few, largely because of the corporation's restrictive policy. Over the years with the Bournemouth Municipal Orchestra he had made a number of recordings of popular orchestral works, and in 1931 a short film was made of him conducting in the pavilion. In 1926 with the London Symphony Orchestra he made the first complete gramophone recording of Ralph Vaughan Williams's 'A London Symphony', a work with which he was particularly associated. On the rostrum he was, in the words of a local critic, 'a stern disciplinarian [who] would not tolerate scamped or careless work', and he was occasionally abrupt or gruff in manner. Though outspoken at times, he lacked neither warmth nor friendliness. He liked to quote the verdict of his long-serving timpanist: 'He's hot stuff, but he's just!' (Godfrey, 'Memories and Music', 77). He was modest and without prejudice. His repertory, while not admitting the Second Viennese school, was otherwise extraordinarily catholic, with a particular fondness for Russian music. His workload was unequalled and his interpretations were widely respected. His name today rightly rests upon his championing of British music and his founding of today's Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra. 


@@@@@


doc= 58795


Gordon, (Joan) Noel (1919-1985), actress, was born on 25 December 1919 at 139 Clements Road, East Ham, Essex, the daughter of James Gordon, a marine engineer, and his wife, Joan Yell. Lessons at 'Madame Maud' Wells's dancing academy at the age of two led to her first public appearance, at the East Ham Palace. At the same age, she demonstrated another side to her talents by singing 'Dear little jammy face' during a masonic ladies' night at the Holborn Restaurant, London. 
The dancing lessons stopped when the family moved to Westcliff-on-Sea in Essex. However, when the family later moved to Ilford, nearer London, Noele Gordon attended a convent school that frequently performed plays. Intent on acting, she trained at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, then joined the Brandon Thomas Players in Edinburgh, and later performed in repertory at the Theatre Royal, Birmingham. In 1938, two years after the BBC launched its regular television service, she made her small-screen debut as Norah, the Irish maid, in Eugene O'Neill's 'Ah Wilderness!'

The television pioneer John Logie Baird then chose Noele Gordon to take part in his first colour experiment, transmitted from Crystal Palace shortly before the Second World War. After a huge union flag was displayed, she was seen sitting on a chair and trying on an array of different-coloured hats. 'Taking part in this experiment was one of the outstanding moments of my life', she later said ('TV Times', 14-20 Nov 1981). 
Back on stage, Noele Gordon toured in 'Black Velvet' (by G. Black, M. Dann, and D. Furber) during 1940 -- replete with a Norman Hartnell dark red satin dress -- and made her London West End debut in 'Let's Face It' (by D. and H. Fields, music and lyrics by Cole Porter) at the Hippodrome a year later, after another actress had to withdraw through illness. She played Panache in the musical 'The Lisbon Story' (by Harold Purcell, music by Harry Parr Davies) at the same theatre and in a 1946 film version, having already made her big-screen debut a year earlier as Mrs Wilson in the comedy '29 Acacia Avenue' alongside Gordon Harker, Jimmy Hanley, Henry Kendall, and Dinah Sheridan. Noele Gordon also starred on stage with Mae West in her comedy melodrama 'Diamond Lil'. 
In 1949, while beginning an acclaimed two-year, 1000-performance stage run as the village whore, Meg Brockie, in Alan Jay Lerner's 'Brigadoon', Noele Gordon was invited to appear in the royal variety performance, singing a medley of Harry Lauder songs, which she dedicated to him at the time when he was dying. She also toured in a 1950s stage production of 'Call me Madam' (a musical by Howard Lindsay and Russel Crouse, with music and lyrics by Irving Berlin). 
Realizing the increasing popularity of television, Noele Gordon studied the medium at a university in New York while also working as a chat show presenter for a small Seattle television station. On returning to Britain, she became adviser on women's programmes to ATV, the newly formed independent television company for the midlands, which began broadcasting in 1956. 
Noele Gordon was soon appearing on screen as a presenter, first in the television advertising magazine 'Fancy that'. Her other programmes included 'Week-End', 'Tea with Noele Gordon', 'Midland Profile', 'Midland Sports', 'Noele Gordon Takes the Air', 'Hi-T!', and, most notably, the midday chat show 'Lunch Box', which began in 1957. When Harold Macmillan agreed to appear on 'Lunch Box', she became the first woman to interview a prime minister on television. It was at the time of a general election, but they discussed haggis and black pudding. 
When Lew Grade, head of ATV, wanted to broadcast a daily serial like those in America, he asked the 'Lunch Box' producer Reg Watson to come up with an idea. The result was 'Crossroads', which started in November 1964 and featured the chat show's presenter in the leading role of Meg Richardson. As a widowed mother running a motel, she became a national institution and was known as the Queen of the Soaps. She stayed with 'Crossroads' for seventeen years and 3521 performances -- winning the 'TV Times' readers' award for favourite female personality on television eight times -- until being sacked in June 1981 in a blaze of publicity when Central Television, which took over the independent television midlands franchise from ATV, tried to revamp the soap opera, which had been under fire from the critics ever since it began, despite winning up to 16 million viewers. 
In the storyline, the motel was razed in a fire, but Meg escaped and was seen leaving on the 'QE II' from Southampton to make a new life for herself in America. The actress reappeared in the role briefly in 1983, when her newly married screen daughter Jill and her husband Adam Chance met Meg in Venice during their honeymoon there. 
In the mean time, Noele Gordon had carved out a new stage career for herself, starring as Rose in 'Gypsy' at the Haymarket Theatre, Leicester, in 1981 and appearing in a Middle and Far East tour of 'The Boy Friend' (by Sandy Wilson), a 1983 London West End production of 'Call me Madam' at the Victoria Palace, and a British tour of the 1920s musical 'No No Nanette' (by F. Mandel, O. Harbach, and I. Caesar). 
Noele Gordon died from cancer at the Edgbaston Nuffield Hospital, 22 Somerset Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, on 14 April 1985, shortly before she was due to make another brief return to 'Crossroads'. She was buried beside her mother in Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire. Noele Gordon never married, although she had a twenty-year relationship with the show business impresario Val Parnell (1892-1972). Her autobiography, 'My Life at Crossroads', was published in 1975. 


@@@@@


doc= 58796


Erskine, Rachel, Lady Grange (bap. 1679, d. 1745), victim of abduction, was the daughter of John Cheislie (died 1689) of Dalry and Margaret Nicholson; she was baptized on 4 February 1679 at Edinburgh. On 31 March 1689 her father shot dead Sir George Lockhart, lord president of the court of session, in revenge for a decision in favour of his wife's alimony claim. After torture by the boots he was executed and hung in chains. Probably in 1707 Rachel, who was accounted a great beauty, married James Erskine (bap. 1679, d. 1754), a lord of session from 1706 with the title of Lord Grange; consequently Rachel assumed the title of Lady Grange. The couple lived at the foot of Niddry's Wynd, off the High Street in Edinburgh, and had four sons and four daughters. Rachel was noted for her violent temper and ungovernable rages. The marriage was deeply unhappy; it is claimed that James had debauched her and that she forced him into marriage by threatening his life. By 1730 the marriage was over, owing to James's long absences in London as a sitting MP, but also to his affairs, in particular a long-standing relationship with Fanny Lindsay, a Scottish coffee-house keeper in the Haymarket. James decided to move his family out of Edinburgh and gave Rachel an allowance of $100, but she took to standing beneath his window in Niddry's Wynd, shouting obscenities. She then moved back into Edinburgh, after being denied contact with her children, and continued to harass her husband. She had become a social embarrassment; then, more seriously, she threatened to disclose her husband's involvement in the Jacobite rising of 1715. James's elder brother, the sixth earl of Mar, had led the abortive uprising and Rachel, who claimed to have evidence implicating James, was known to have Hanoverian sympathies. 
Lord Grange had already been involved, in 1728, in the forcible abduction of his sister-in-law Lady Mar (Mary Wortley Montagu's sister), who suffered from mental illness; he now planned to remove the threat posed by his wife in a similar fashion. On this occasion he enlisted the help of fellow Jacobites Lord Lovat and Norman MacLeod of Dunvegan. At 11 p.m. on 22 April 1732, after a violent struggle, Rachel was kidnapped from her lodgings in Edinburgh and taken, bound, blindfold, and gagged, on horseback to Linlithgow. She was then moved to Polmaise, Stirlingshire and held there for four months. After being moved through the highlands in great discomfort she was finally placed on the island of Hesker, off North Uist, where she remained for two years. By May 1734 Sir Alexander MacDonald could no longer afford to keep her and she was sent to the remote island group of St Kilda, 42 miles off Uist. There she was held incommunicado, in very primitive conditions and among Gaelic speakers, on the island of Hirta from 1734 to 1742. Meanwhile James announced her death in Edinburgh and held a mock funeral. 
Rachel eventually smuggled out a message to her cousin, the lord advocate, in a ball of wool carried by the daughter of St Kilda's minister. Her cousin sent a gunboat for her but before help could arrive Norman MacLeod had her moved to Assynt in Sutherland, and finally to Skye, where all real pretence of looking after her ended and she was reputedly abandoned to live in a local cavern. 
Rachel became a romantic figure for later writers. Samuel Johnson mentioned her tale in his 'Journey to the Western Isles of Scotland', and Walter Scott's coadjutor, William Erskine, wrote a romantic poem, 'Epistle from Lady Grange to Edward D -- ', in which she is portrayed as being sold into a loveless marriage with an older man; the poem suggests she had a younger lover from whom she was parted when sent to St Kilda. In 1897 Alexander Innes Shand wrote a romance, 'The Lady Grange', in which a young couple, Jessie and Malcolm, help Rachel escape from St Kilda and then confront James in Edinburgh. James repents of his actions but Lovat gets wind of this and has Rachel poisoned. Grange helps Jessie and Malcolm emigrate to Virginia before himself dying in penury. In fact Rachel died, at Idrigal on Skye, in May 1745 and was buried at Trumpan on Skye's Waternish peninsula. 


@@@@@


doc= 58798


Robertson, James Logie (1846-1922), literary scholar and author, was born on 18 September 1846 in the village of Milnathort, Kinross-shire, the second son of William Robertson, a shoemaker, and Mary Logie. After elementary schooling at Orwell parish school he continued there as a pupil-teacher from the age of thirteen, going on to training college in Edinburgh. After teaching practice at Haddington, Logie Robertson returned to Edinburgh and attended the university, where he was a distinguished student, winning prizes ranging from the rhetoric medal to the Murchison prize in geology; he graduated MA in 1872. He began his teaching career as assistant master at Heriot's Hospital, became assistant master at George Watson's College in 1872, then (in 1876) first English master at Edinburgh Ladies' College (later the Mary Erskine School), where he remained until his retirement in 1914. He married Janet Simpson ('b'. 1859/60), a former dux of Edinburgh Ladies' College, on 16 August 1881; she records in her memoir of him that he was drawn to teaching girls by their 'more subtle intellectual response' to literature (Robertson, vii). 
Logie Robertson is an important figure in the reinvigoration and renationalization of Scottish cultural life in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. As well as editions of the poems of Allan Ramsay, James Thomson, Burns, Scott, and Thomas Campbell, he published a selection from the work of the great fifteenth-century Scots poet William Dunbar. 'Dunbar: a Selection from the Poems of an Old Makar Adapted for Modern Readers' (1895) excludes some of the poet's best work on account of its 'coarseness', and much else is robbed of its vigour and technical audacity by being 'translated' into Burnsian forms and language -- or into English, but the edition does point forward to the inspiration which a later generation of Scots poets were to find in the Middle Scots makars generally, and Dunbar in particular. Through his regular contributions to 'The Scotsman' and to other periodicals Logie Robertson worked tirelessly to promote interest in Scottish literature and culture, while his series of articles in W. E. Henley's brilliant but short-lived 'Scots Observer' in 1888-9, reveals a sharp awareness of the connections between the state of a language and culture, and contemporary social and economic conditions. In this series, the writer's fictitious informant on 'The Revolution in the Rural Districts', one Gibbie Doss, a stonebreaker, uses a vigorous, colloquial Scots. 
The disintegration of rural communities through the growth of the 'muckle-farm system' which is chronicled in the 'Scots Observer' articles is, however, scarcely reflected in the Scots pastorals which brought Logie Robertson widespread popularity in the last two decades of the nineteenth century. In the volume which contains them only some satirical references to the lairds, to long-separated lovers, and a brief concluding pastoral drama in which a wealthy returning emigrant extols the opportunities offered by Australia, give any indication of crisis in the rural economy. Supposedly composed by one Hugh Haliburton, shepherd of the Ochil hills, the poems began to appear in 'The Scotsman' in 1881, with each new poem being eagerly awaited. Included in 'Our Holiday' in 1882, they were added to and collected in volume form in 1885 and 1900 as 'Horace in Homespun'. Logie Robertson's work was linked with that of Stevenson (whose 1887 volume 'Underwoods' contained a substantial body of verse in Scots) as heralding a revival of the vernacular verse tradition. Despite believing that lowland Scots was in retreat as a result of Anglicizing pressures operating particularly in education, and holding that it would survive only as a literary language, Stevenson and Logie Robertson helped to ensure the continuity of the vernacular tradition, and so played a part in creating the conditions for the vigorous flowering of poetry in lowland Scots which took place in the twentieth century. 
The language of the pastorals blends literary with contemporary regional Scots, but Logie Robertson follows Stevenson in rejecting dialect purism. Although its basis is in the Scots of the Ochils, the vernacular he employs is regionally as well as historically eclectic, anticipating the more radically 'synthetic' methods of later Scots poets. The poems are prefaced with brief quotations from Horace's odes, and for the nineteenth-century classically educated reader much of their appeal would have been derived from the interplay between the Scots poems and the Latin 'originals', for these are not translations but transpositions, in which the sophistication of tone, density of reference, and technical virtuosity of the Roman poet are replaced by hearty simplicities of sentiment and idiom. Logie Robertson is at his best in poems like 'Packie's Return' and 'The Tinklers' when he draws on his own close observation of country life or when, as in 'The White Winter', he is giving imaginative life to scientific speculation in a way which anticipates the use of a 'cosmic viewpoint' by C. M. Grieve (Hugh MacDiarmid) -- geology was a lifelong interest of Logie Robertson's, and the distinguished geologist Archibald Geikie a personal friend. 
Like other members of the group associated with Henley and the 'Scots Observer' (Stevenson, Barrie, and Andrew Lang were the most prominent), Logie Robertson's enthusiasm for Scottish culture was situated within a unionist and imperialist framework. In 'A History of English Literature' (1894) and 'An Outline of English Literature for Young Scholars' (1897), the literature of lowland Scotland is seen as a part, albeit a distinctive one, of a larger English-language tradition, and Logie Robertson edited selections of Chaucer, Milton, and Tennyson, as well as the work of Scottish poets. If their unionism and imperialist sympathies once seemed to divide his generation from the left-leaning Scottish intellectuals of the post-First World War period, it was possible by the end of the twentieth century to see how much they resembled each other in their commitment to rediscovering and reasserting Scotland's cultural identity, and to the belief that their country had a distinctive contribution to make to a developing international order. Logie Robertson died at his home at 1 Braidburn Crescent, Edinburgh, on 13 June 1922 after a long illness, and was buried in the Morningside cemetery, Edinburgh. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 58799


Hanratty, James Francis (1936-1962), petty criminal and convicted murderer, was born on 4 October 1936 in the County Hospital, Farnborough, near Orpington, Kent, the eldest of four sons of James Hanratty (1907-1978), labourer and dustman, and his wife, Mary Wilson. 
He attended St James's Roman Catholic school in Burnt Oak (1945-51) but remained illiterate. In the absence of steady or gainful employment James Hanratty spent most of his adolescent and young adult life engaged in crime -- indeed, his last seven years were spent in penal institutions. In September 1954 he was put on probation for a year for taking and driving away a motor car without consent and while uninsured. Hardly had he finished his period on probation than he was before the courts and imprisoned for housebreaking and theft (1955). On this occasion he attempted suicide while in custody. Another prison sentence followed in 1957 in consequence of stealing another car. Almost immediately on release from prison he was reconvicted, in March 1958, to three years' corrective training; he left Strangeways prison, Manchester, on 24 March 1961. Overall Hanratty spent 58 of the 66 months after his nineteenth birthday in prison. Up to this time Hanratty had displayed himself as little more than a small-time hoodlum, always aspiring, ambitiously, to greater notoriety. 
On 22 August 1961, however, Michael Gregsten and Valerie Storie were abducted from a Morris Minor car parked in a cornfield at Dorney Reach, Buckinghamshire. Their abductor subsequently shot Gregsten dead and raped and gravely wounded Storie at Deadman's Hill, Bedfordshire. Hanratty was charged with the murder on 14 October 1961. 
Hanratty's trial (22 January-17 February 1962) was of unprecedented length for a murder trial against one defendant. It was notable for its conspicuous fairness. The trial judge, Mr Justice Gorman, even refused to allow the crown to adduce fresh evidence about some missing black nylon gloves at a boarding-house where Hanratty had contemporaneously lodged. (Valerie Storie had given firm evidence of the assailant's wearing such gloves -- a telling pointer to identification.) The jury's verdict, delayed by a further direction on the meaning of 'reasonable doubt', was surprisingly against Hanratty. Junior counsel for the crown, Geoffrey Lane (later lord chief justice of England), had his pen poised to endorse his brief with the words 'not guilty'. The campaign against the verdict was launched, with some justifiable optimism. Its supporters were convinced that they had established an alibi for Hanratty, and attached great importance to the confession to the Deadman's Hill killing by Peter Louis Alphon. A leading legal magazine in an editorial argued that sustaining James Hanratty's conviction in order to avoid embarrassment was carrying factional solidarity to unacceptable extremes. That comment followed an independent inquiry in 1975, conducted in private and largely on the documentation, by Lewis Hawser QC, a much respected practitioner and later an official referee in the High Court. His conclusion was that the case remained overwhelming, and that there was little reason to doubt the jury's verdict. Dispirited, but not dissuaded, the campaigners renewed their efforts to upset the verdict. 
On 4 April 1962 Hanratty was executed at Bedford prison, in the precincts of which, on the same day, he was buried initially. He was reinterred at Carpenders Park, Watford, Hertfordshire, on 22 February 1966. 
Attempts to declare Hanratty innocent of the crime focused mainly on two aspects of the forensic process: the paucity of direct evidence of complicity and the functioning of an alibi. The identification of Hanratty by the murdered victim's companion, Valerie Storie, was always imperfect, even by the less stringent tests of those days. Hanratty's defence that on the day of the crime he was a couple of hundred miles away, in the north-west of the country, was hotly contested. At the time there was no legal requirement on the defence, pre-trial, to notify the prosecution of an alibi, but, problematically, defence counsel at the committal proceedings before the magistrates at Bedford disclosed his client's case pre-emptively. The jury at Bedford assizes must have been influenced by the prosecution's previous ability to break the alibi. The lack of any scientific evidence proved unavailing. 
Of all the perceived miscarriages of justice since the Second World War which scarred the face of English criminal justice, the case of James Hanratty was undoubtedly one of the few most enduring: the campaigners for quashing the 1962 conviction ceaselessly maintained a campaign of literary and other verbal output until the Court of Appeal (criminal division) pronounced finality of the judicial process in late 2001 on a referral under the 'Criminal Appeal Act' 1995. The Court of Appeal's final verdict (the title of the most substantial study of the case by Bob Woffinden in 1997) was that the 1962 criminal investigation and trial were unsafe, but that the facts ultimately revealed that Hanratty was far from innocent of the crime. Unfortunately, this disconcerted a bewildered public about the 'wrongful conviction'. The application of a DNA test on Hanratty's exhumed body in March 2001, on order of the lord chief justice, helped to bolster the soundness of the original guilty verdict, but other aspects of that trial meant that the verdict was nevertheless unsatisfactory, and dictated a quashing of the conviction. 
Hanratty's case epitomized the perennial problem of whether the quashing of a conviction was sufficient to demonstrate the individual's innocence of the crime. The public became alive to the fact that the presumption of innocence (original or revived on a successful appeal) is merely a rule of evidence and not a declaration of non-complicity in crime. As the first commentator on the Hanratty case wrote in 1963: 'Research into the causes of crime -- it seems a blindingly obvious statement -- should find its most fruitful material from the administration of criminal justice. Sad to relate, in England, it finds little or no assistance from the legal process' (Blom-Cooper, 133). Broadly speaking, that remains true today. 


@@@@@


doc= 58803


Heath, Neville George Clevely (1917-1946), murderer, was born on 6 June 1917 at 15 Dudley Road, Ilford, Essex, the elder son of William George Heath, a soft goods traveller, and his wife, Bessie Louise, 'nee' Clevely. His father claimed descent from James Heath the engraver. After leaving Rutlish, a local authority grammar school in Merton, south London, at the age of seventeen, Heath worked as a packer in a City warehouse before enlisting in the Artists' Rifles in 1935. He received a short service commission in the RAF in 1936, but was court-martialled and dismissed the following year. The charges against him included embezzlement, being absent without leave, and borrowing a car without its owner's permission. 
Heath was a bright, personable young man with charm and ability. Tall, broad, spruce, and fresh complexioned, with blue eyes and fair, wavy hair, he attracted many women. He used his gifts to woo a succession of middle-class young women with the intention of extracting money from their families. He was an incorrigible liar, braggart, cheat, and impostor. Although it is impossible to trace all his misdeeds some episodes reached the public domain. In November 1937 he was put on probation for two years after being convicted of fraudulently obtaining credit at a Nottingham hotel and of attempting to obtain a car by false pretences. Eight other offences were taken into consideration, including impersonation of the thirteenth Baron Dudley. In July 1938 he was sentenced to three years' borstal treatment after convictions for housebreaking, forging a banker's order, and stealing jewellery. He was released from the borstal at Hollesley Bay in Suffolk immediately after the outbreak of war, and was commissioned into the Royal Army Service Corps in March 1940. While serving in the Middle East he spent lavishly in the clubs and brothels of Cairo, where he liked to flagellate young women. In July 1941 he was court-martialled for being absent without leave, issuing dishonoured cheques, and fraudulently obtaining a second pay book. He absconded from a troopship returning him to England, and under the name of Armstrong enlisted in the South African Air Force, where he undertook transport and instructional duties. His operational duties amounted to one flight in October 1944 while seconded to the RAF. He stood his third court martial in South Africa in December 1945 on charges that included wearing decorations without authority. Wimbledon magistrates convicted him on a similar charge in February 1946. 
In February 1942 in South Africa, Heath married Elizabeth Hardcastle Pitt-Rivers of Johannesburg, but she divorced him in October 1945. They had one son. His sexual aggression and dissolute habits were becoming more pronounced. After being deported from South Africa he returned to London. In February 1946 he took a married woman to a bedroom of the Strand Palace Hotel, where he had registered under his favourite alias, Captain James Cadogan Armstrong. He stunned and tied her, and was caning her when the hotel manager broke in. Neither the hotel nor the woman desired publicity. On the night of 20-21 June 1946, after a day of heavy drinking, he took Mrs Margery Aimee Brownell Gardner ('b'. 1915) to his room at the Pembridge Court Hotel at Notting Hill Gate. She was a masochist who had consented to sado-masochistic rites but (perhaps inflamed by drink) he lost control. After gagging her, he lashed her with a riding crop and subjected her to cruel and disgusting violence both externally and internally. During the attack she was suffocated. Afterwards he went to Worthing to meet his fiancee, Yvonne Symonds, to whom he spoke about the murder with a detailed accuracy that could not have been gleaned from newspapers. He also sent an ill-advised letter about the murder to the investigating officer at Scotland Yard, who initiated a nationwide search so that he could be questioned. On 23 June he arrived at Tollard Royal Hotel in Bournemouth staying under the name of Group Captain Rupert Brooke. In Bournemouth on 3 July he met a young convalescent rating in the Women's Royal Naval Service, Doreen Marshall, and, after getting drunk, cut her throat, leaving her naked body in Branksome Chine. Again he subjected her body to the most intrusive and repellent mutilations. Although her body was not found until 8 July, he was detained on 6 July by police investigating her disappearance, a detective constable having noticed the resemblance between Group Captain Brooke and Heath, whom Scotland Yard wanted for questioning in the Gardner murder. Evidence quickly accumulated tying him to both crimes. 
Heath went for trial for the Gardner murder at the Old Bailey on 24 September 1946 before Sir John Morris (the Marshall murder charge was held back). Heath expressed no contrition, but made little effort to escape the gallows. His counsel, Joshua Casswell, was fascinated and charmed by him. The committal proceedings aroused a great sensation, while the trial was notable for its discussion by expert witnesses of the nature of sadism as a sexual perversion, and of the question of criminal responsibility in such a murder. This was the first time in British criminal justice that sadism was examined in such scrupulous detail in a murder trial. The jury on 26 September took under an hour to find him guilty; there was no appeal. Accordingly he was executed by Albert Pierrepoint on 26 October 1946 at Pentonville prison, and was buried a few hours later in quicklime by the prison wall. 


@@@@@


doc= 58805


Hodgson, Leonard (1889-1969), theologian, was born on 24 October 1889, at Fulham, the son of Walter Hodgson (1853-1934), official shorthand writer to the House of Commons, and Lillias Emma ('b'. 1859), daughter of William Shaw of Wolsingham, co. Durham. He was a scholar at St Paul's School, London, winning a scholarship to Hertford College, Oxford, where he gained firsts in both Greats and theology. He was ordained deacon in 1913 after a year at St Michael's College, Llandaff, which began a long association with Wales. He later served on the council of St David's College, Lampeter, and declined the offer of the bishopric of Monmouth. After a curacy at St Mark's, Portsmouth, he became vice-principal of St Edmund Hall, Oxford, in 1914 through the influence of his former tutor, H. H. Williams, who had become principal. He was awarded honorary fellowships there and at Selwyn College, Cambridge, in 1957. He was examining chaplain to the bishop of Lichfield from 1917 to 1925, and to the bishop of Winchester from 1932 to 1939. 
In 1919 Hodgson became dean of divinity and tutor in theology at Magdalen College, Oxford, and on 7 April 1920 married Ethel Margaret du Plat (1888-1960), daughter of Charles Frederick Archer, rector of Moy, co. Tyrone. They had one son and one daughter. In 1917 he had proposed in vain to the novelist Dorothy L. Sayers, who, although calling him 'a perfectly delightful padre' ('Letters', 1.130), spurned what soon became an infatuation. In 1925 he published 'The Place of Reason in Christian Apologetic', which provided the basis for his future work. The creeds, he held, were 'a rational construction' which tried to say 'something about the universe without ignoring the problem presented by the appearance of Jesus Christ upon the pages of this world's history' (p. 41). This book was based on lectures given at the General Theological Seminary, New York, where he was appointed professor of Christian apologetics in 1925, and which later made him an honorary STD in 1931. In 1928 he published 'And Was Made Man' on the relationship between the gospels and Christology, and in 1929 his first collection, 'Essays in Christian Philosophy', where, against both Hegelianism and positivism, he elaborated his philosophical position which emphasized both the rational character of revelation and the importance of experience: it was 'God's will' that man 'should think' (p. 168). He returned to New York in 1936 to give the Paddock lectures, published as 'The Grace of God in Faith and Philosophy', his most developed account of the relationship between the critical synthesis of philosophy and the rational insight of theology: Christian philosophy was 'the attempt to interpret the meaning of all things in the light of God's self-revelation in Christ' (p. 20). He was a canon of Winchester from 1931 until his election as regius professor of moral and pastoral theology and canon of Christ Church, Oxford, in 1938. At Christ Church he gave lectures beyond the theology faculty (published in 1952 as 'Christian Faith and Practice') that attracted large numbers of undergraduates. During the 1930s he became a keen ecumenist, serving on the Anglican Council on Foreign Relations and as theological and general secretary of the Edinburgh world conference on faith and order in 1937, editing the proceedings ('The Second World Conference on Faith and Order'). The conference took an ambiguous stand on the situation in Germany, refusing to condemn the German government which had deprived delegates from the evangelical churches of their passports. Hodgson also wrote a number of pamphlets on ecclesiology and Anglicanism, criticizing what he regarded as the authoritarian theology of Karl Barth and Emil Brunner. His theology developed in more systematic directions with the publication of his Edinburgh Croall lectures, 'The Doctrine of the Trinity' (1944): although mysterious, the Trinity was 'not an irrational mystery' (p. 95). 
In 1944 Hodgson succeeded Oliver Chase Quick (who had been a significant influence on him) as regius professor of divinity; he retained this position until his retirement in 1958, declining the offer of the bishopric of Carlisle soon after the Second World War. Despite his severe appearance and staccato speech, he was an inspiring and popular lecturer on the international scene. He was made an Oxford BD and DD in 1938, an honorary DCL of Bishop's University, Lennoxville, Canada, in 1929, and an honorary DD of Edinburgh in 1938 and Glasgow in 1956. It was in Glasgow that he delivered his Gifford lectures, 'For Faith and Freedom', from 1955 to 1957, which again investigated the relationship between faith and philosophy. From 1954 until 1966 he was warden of William Temple College, Rugby; there representatives of industry, psychiatrists, sociologists, and theologians were brought together. His book 'Sex and Christian Freedom' (1967) was the fruit of such conversations, in which he sought to 'talk twentieth-century common sense without being disloyal to our ordination vows' (p. 8). He died on 15 July 1969 at his home, 34 Newbold Terrace, Leamington Spa, and was buried in Epwell churchyard, Oxfordshire. 
Although Hodgson was original neither as a philosopher nor as a theologian, he stressed the fundamental agreement of philosophy and theology, retaining a great sense of the intelligibility and purposiveness of the universe. He communicated a dynamic, rational and attractive theology to a wide audience both at home and abroad. His focus on the interaction between the material and the spiritual, between grace and freedom, as 'the obverse and reverse sides of a single process' (Hodgson, 'Essays', 48), helped shape English theology's continuing concern with the reconciliation of modern science and the claims of religion. 


@@@@@


doc= 58806


Hornby, Albert Sydney (1898-1978), grammarian and lexicographer, was born on 10 August 1898 at Melville Cottage, Garden Lane, Chester, the eldest of the four children of Joseph Sidney Hornby (1871-1940), publisher's agent, and his wife, Margaret Ann Kitchen (1872-1966). Joseph was a Methodist lay preacher and his son in due course married in the Primitive Methodist Chapel in Chester, though perhaps out of filial loyalty rather than from firm conviction. Hornby was never a regular churchgoer, and in later years he was a declared agnostic. Hornby attended Chester grammar school, and in 1919, after war service in the Royal Navy, entered University College, London, where he read English. He graduated in 1922, and the following year was recruited to teach English at the Oita Higher Commercial School on the island of Kyushu. Shortly after marrying Ida Louise Arnold (1896-1940) on 17 January 1924, Hornby set out with her on the long sea-journey to Japan. 
Hornby had been recruited to teach English literature, but he was quickly drawn to teaching language, recognizing that this was the more urgent need in Japanese schools and colleges. As he later recalled, 'I found that [my students] read with some understanding... but that their knowledge of the English language was very limited indeed.... they'd say to me, 'Where went you yesterday?' and that kind of thing' (Hornby and Ruse, 2). He therefore decided to concentrate on language and leave the teaching of literature to the Japanese professors. It was the same sure sense of prior need which led him to support the movement for the reform of English language teaching in Japan led by Harold E. Palmer, who had been appointed linguistic adviser to the Japanese government in 1922, and who a year later was made director of the newly established Tokyo Institute for Research in English Teaching (IRET). 
Though geographically remote from the centre of these developments, Hornby quickly began to acquire an understanding of linguistics, initially through reading. But he also started to correspond with Palmer, and 'through my correspondence with him I became more and more interested in linguistics, especially linguistic methodology' (Hornby and Ruse, 2). By 1931 Hornby was already publishing textbooks and was soon to contribute articles on linguistic themes to the IRET 'Bulletin'. Palmer was sufficiently impressed to invite him, in the spring of that year, to help compile a list of 'collocations', or set phrases of various kinds. This project, which had been initiated at IRET in 1927, but to which Hornby made a major contribution, culminated in 1933 in the publication of the 'Second Interim Report on English Collocations', the first linguistically based analysis of English phraseology ever to appear. In 1934, and at Palmer's instigation, Hornby moved to Tokyo, followed by his wife and two daughters, Phyllis and Margaret. Later he held two posts simultaneously, one at the government school of foreign languages in Tokyo, the other at the Tokyo higher normal school, a leading teacher training institution. 
As well as teaching, or supervising the teaching of others, at two centres, Hornby was now simultaneously engaged in research projects set up at the institute. Moreover, as Palmer's designated successor he eventually assumed other burdens as well. In March 1936 Palmer retired, and from one day to the next Hornby became 'de facto' head of research at the institute, editor of its 'Bulletin', and the inheritor of plans -- already tentatively discussed with the Tokyo publisher Kaitakusha -- for a monolingual dictionary for advanced learners, eventually published in 1942 as the 'Idiomatic and Syntactic English Dictionary (ISED)' and later, by Oxford University Press, as 'A Learner's Dictionary of Current English' (1948). 
The design of this dictionary and the leading role in its compilation and two subsequent revisions (Hornby's co-authors on 'ISED' were Edward Gatenby and Harold Wakefield) are without doubt Hornby's greatest achievements, and those for which he is chiefly remembered. Yet here we are faced by a curious paradox. Although it would be no exaggeration to say that lexical research begun in the late 1920s (including the work on collocations already referred to) gave birth to English as a foreign language (EFL) lexicography, Hornby and Palmer do not seem to have become aware until about 1936 that nothing other than an innovative 'dictionary' could draw together, satisfactorily for the student, the manifold details of structure and usage which the research had brought to light. 
The actual direction taken by IRET research into the vocabulary of English also gave particular shape and emphasis to the design of the new work. Although the needs of its users as readers were not neglected, Hornby came to lay particular stress on their needs as writers. This emphasis partly came about through the attention given at IRET to research on 'vocabulary control', a systematic attempt to identify those relatively few words which carry the main burden of everyday communication. Though the vocabularies delimited in this way varied from 1000 to 3000 items, they were alike in containing a nucleus of 'structural' words (prepositions, auxiliary verbs, articles, and so on) and of items which, while not structural, formed part of very many stock phrases. They included the 'heavy-duty' verbs 'come', 'go', 'put', 'set', and 'take'. Both these categories pose severe problems for learners attempting to write in English, and it is not surprising that information designed to help students overcome them should feature strongly in the new dictionary. 
Shortly after the bombing of Pearl Harbor in December 1941, British nationals were repatriated by the Japanese, in the first instance to the United States. As their mother, Ida, had died in 1940, Phyllis and Margaret Hornby were part of this early exodus, and were taken care of in America by a missionary family. In the meantime Hornby himself had been interned -- being confined in a German Jesuit monastery. Here he was well treated, and his friend and publisher Naoe Naganuma also did what he could to make conditions tolerable. Eventually Hornby was repatriated aboard the same Red Cross ship as the diplomatic staff. 
On his return to England in 1942, Hornby was recruited by the British Council and spent the rest of the war in Persia, teaching at the University of Tehran and at the Anglo-Persian Institute. It was in the council's offices in Tehran that Hornby met the vivacious and delightfully forthright Marian de la Motte (1899-1987), daughter of Vital de la Motte. They married on 14 July 1944. It was Marian who decided that A. S. Hornby would henceforth become Ash, the nickname by which he was later universally known. 
In 1945 Hornby was appointed to the headquarters of the British Council in London and to the not entirely congenial post of linguistic adviser. Remote from the classroom, and sensing that 'whatever knowledge I might possess was not being used in the right way', Hornby sought permission from the council to start up a periodical which, like the IRET 'Bulletin', would be devoted to problems of English language teaching (Hornby, 3). 'English Language Teaching' -- issued at low cost to make it accessible to the teachers of the third world with whom Hornby's sympathies chiefly lay, and with articles designed to appeal to teachers everywhere -- was duly launched under his editorship in October 1946. 'English Language Teaching' (or 'English Language Teaching Journal', as it later became) eventually acquired a reputation for combining expert practical advice with contributions from linguists written in a style accessible to the lay reader. According to his daughter Phyllis, Hornby was also at this time making a major contribution to the BBC series 'English by Radio' (for this reason often called 'Hornby by Radio'), though in her view he never received official credit for his leading role. 
In 1950 Hornby resigned as editor of 'English Language Teaching' to concentrate on full-time writing. His publisher, Eric Parnwell, had suggested that he might like to work in the country, producing smaller, lower-level dictionaries based on the major work but also preparing a number of language courses, including the 'Oxford Progressive English for Adult Learners', a three-volume course published from 1954 onwards. For variety, Hornby occasionally undertook a long lecture tour overseas for the British Council. During the earlier part of this period Hornby and his wife were living at Shermanbury, in Surrey, but they later moved to Appledore, in Kent, and later still to Willersey, in Worcestershire. At Willersey, especially, Hornby was able to indulge to the full a lifelong passion for gardening. 
In 1954 Hornby published 'A Guide to Patterns and Usage in English', a practical grammar whose approach to analysis and tabular style of presentation reflected the methods employed in the 'Advanced Learner's Dictionary' (as it was now named). The patterns were also a central feature of 'Oxford Progressive English' and of his practical coursebook for teachers, 'The Teaching of Structural Words and Sentence Patterns' (1959-62). 
The intense activity characteristic of Hornby in his fifties and sixties is somehow at odds with the genial but mild and self-effacing teacher and scholar who appears in photographs taken in an 'English by Radio' studio or during an overseas lecture tour. But a kind of quiet tenacity was needed to carry through the ambitious projects of the post-war years, a period in which he completed one radical revision of the 'Advanced Learner's Dictionary' (in 1963) almost single-handed, and, beyond the normal age of retirement, undertook a further revision of the major work (published in 1974) and an intermediate adaptation (the 'Oxford Student's Dictionary', 1978). 
Hornby seems to have been unaware of, or even to have played down, the part played by sheer professionalism in his remarkable career. Modesty goes some way to explain this, but also discernible is a quintessentially English suspicion of the expert, and of theory divorced from practice. Hornby saw himself as 'a simple teacher', yet this limiting description is belied by his linguistic scholarship (the 'Report on Collocations' is masterly in its overall plan and detailed structuring); his firm and enthusiastic commitment to applied research; and his pioneering editorship of 'English Language Teaching', one result of which was to bring to a readership of practising teachers the developing alliance between linguists and language-teaching professionals. As it happens, these various achievements all bear witness to his particular strength, an extraordinary ability to link theory and practice, and to bring each of his skills as lexicographer, grammarian, and teacher 'to bear succinctly and illuminatingly on the others' (Quirk, 1974). 
Hornby's influence on English language teaching has been further extended through the work of the A. S. Hornby Educational Trust, which he himself set up in 1961. This was a far-sighted and generous initiative whereby a substantial part of his income from royalties was set aside to improve the teaching and learning of English as a foreign language, chiefly by providing grants to enable teachers of English from overseas to come to Britain for advanced professional training. Thanks to the trust, hundreds of teachers have been able to develop their teaching expertise through British Council summer schools and postgraduate courses in linguistics and English as a foreign language at British universities. 
Hornby's pre-eminence in the field of learner lexicography and language teaching methodology was recognized towards the end of his life by the award of several honours. He was appointed OBE (1964) and made a fellow of University College, London (1975), and a master of arts of the University of Oxford. Shortly before his death from cancer on 13 September 1978, at the University College Hospital, the volume 'In Honour of A. S. Hornby', edited by Peter Strevens and with contributions by many of his friends and former colleagues, was presented to him to mark his eightieth birthday. 


@@@@@


doc= 58807


Hume, Ferguson Wright (1859-1932), author, was born at Powick, Worcestershire, on 8 July 1859, the second son of James Collin Hume (1823-1896), steward at the Worcestershire Pauper Lunatic Asylum, and his wife, Mary Ferguson (died 1867). Both parents were natives of Glasgow. In 1863 the family emigrated to New Zealand; James Hume founded the first private mental hospital in that country and was also a founder of Dunedin College. 
Fergus Hume was educated at the boys' high school in Dunedin before taking a law degree at Otago University. He then served his articles in the office of the attorney-general of New Zealand and was called to the New Zealand bar in 1885. In that year he moved to Melbourne, Victoria, where he took a job as a solicitor's clerk, but his aim was to become the author of plays for the stage. He thought the best way to attract the attention of theatre managers would be to write a successful book, so he: 'took advice of a leading Melbourne bookseller. I enquired what style of book he sold most of. He replied that the detective stories of [Emile] Gaboriau had a large sale... I determined to write a book of the same class, containing a mystery, a murder and a description of low life in Melbourne. (Knight)' The resulting novel, 'The Mystery of a Hansom Cab', was rejected by George Robinson, the leading Melbourne publisher, so in 1886 Hume had it privately printed in Australia and claimed that he sold 5000 copies in three weeks. The novel was dedicated to the novelist James Payn, then editor of the 'Cornhill Magazine', 'in grateful acknowledgement of his kind encouragement to the author'. Hume then sold, for $50, the rights of the novel to a group of London-based entrepreneurs, headed by Frederick Trischler, who promptly established their Hansom Cab Publishing Company in Ludgate Hill. The first London printing (1887) of 25,000 copies was sold out in three days, and subsequent printings were purchased by an eager public across the world. Many editions followed, but Hume did not benefit financially. He was now, however, established as the author of an international best-seller: by the time of his death its sales had reached 500,000. With its 'complex and highly surprising ending' (Knight), it was the first international detective novel, the Australian edition predating Conan Doyle's 'Study in Scarlet' (1887) by a year. Critics have questioned just why Hume's 'shoddy pot boiler... received vastly more contemporary attention than Doyle's 'Study in Scarlet'' and became, in the assessment of Willard Huntington Wright, 'the greatest commercial success in the annals of detective fiction' (Haycroft, 63). Such was the success of Hume's novel that a full-length parody, 'The Mystery of a Wheelbarrow, or, Gaboriam Gaborooed', by 'W. Humer Ferguson', was published in 1888. Hume had prudently retained for himself the dramatic rights of 'The Mystery of the Hansom Cab' and as a result benefited from the stage versions by the Australian playwright George Darrell, which had long and successful runs in Australia and London. 
In 1888 Hume sailed for England and, having settled in London, became a full-time writer. He still considered himself a New Zealand, and not an Australian, author. His best-seller, with its realistic expose of Melbourne high and low society, was sometimes less well received in the Antipodes, where some criticized how their societies were portrayed by 'one who is representing us in the Old Country' (Robinson and others, 249). Afterwards he wrote 140 novels, half of them mystery and detective stories, but none came close to matching the success of 'The Mystery of a Hansom Cab', which was reprinted and published in new editions through the twentieth century. He tried writing romances, starting with his second novel, 'Madame Midas' (1889), which again described Melbourne society and was one of his few books with Australian settings. This was reprinted in 1914 and 1985, but his romances were not particularly successful and, as he later complained, publishers would not hear of him writing anything but detective stories. His ambition to write for the stage continued, and he was the author of eight plays, including one for Sir Henry Irving, who died before the play could be presented. 
Although he travelled in Switzerland, France, and Italy, Hume lived and worked for the rest of his life in the London area. The last of his novels appeared in 1926, yet he is invariably remembered as a one-book author. Following a serious operation for a glandular problem he seemed, to some, to lose his power of writing. After retiring to the Rayleigh area of Essex, he concentrated on lecturing to young people's clubs and debating societies. A deeply religious man, he died of cardiac failure at his home, Rosemary, Grove Road, Thundersley, Essex, on 11 July 1932. 


@@@@@


doc= 58813


Keller, Hans Heinrich (1919-1985), broadcaster and writer on music, was born at Nusswaldgasse 13, Dobling, Vienna, Austria, on 11 March 1919, the son of the architect Fritz Keller (died 1939) and his wife, Grete Grotte (1883-1959); he had one half-sister, Gertrud Franey (died 1998). Raised in the well-to-do suburb of Dobling, he passed his Abitur at the local Landerziehungsheim (1935-8) while benefiting from involvement in his parents' cultural circle, which included the composer Franz Schmidt. He was imprisoned, interrogated, and released by the Nazis (he described himself as an 'unpious Jew'), an episode movingly recalled in his 'Vienna 1938' (published in 'The Listener' on 28 March 1974), and on 20 December 1938 he fled to join his relatives in England. After internment on the Isle of Man, he settled in London for the rest of his life and formed a partnership with the German artist Milein Cosman ('b'. 1921), whom he eventually married on 27 March 1961. 
A brilliant but unconventional writer (he was a self-styled 'anti-critic'), Keller drew on an unusual range of experience. In the 1940s he took his licentiate of the Royal Academy of Music, played violin in string quartets and orchestras, and later became a coach (or 'anti-coach') of string quartets; he reviewed film music, and in a book's worth of polemical notices, essays, and pamphlets related practice to (his own) theory; he began to champion the music of Benjamin Britten, on whom he edited an influential collection of essays (1952); he wrote music and dramas (though little remains) as well as the librettos for Benjamin Frankel's opera 'Marching Song' and Josef Tal's 'Der Turm'. He later taught composition and translated librettos; in 1949-52 he emerged as a forceful critic through his contributions to 'Music Review'; and with Donald Mitchell he also edited the lively 'Music Survey'. Indeed, such was the impact of his intense, witty, companionable, yet highly combative personality that in 1959 he joined the BBC at the suggestion of William Glock. There he worked for twenty years in various senior capacities and helped to establish the European Broadcasting Union; he also set new standards with his short talks, interviews, programme booklets, and extended analyses of classical chamber music. After his retirement from the BBC in March 1979 he became visiting professor at McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, which he revisited during a tour of Canada and the United States in 1980. Until 1985 he also coached string quartets at the Yehudi Menuhin School and the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, and spoke in many other venues. On 30 September 1985 the president of Austria awarded him the Ehrenkreuz fur Wissenschaft und Kunst, 1. Klasse, and on 23 February 1986 Channel 4 showed a posthumous documentary, 'The Keller Instinct'. 
His unpublished papers in the university library, Cambridge, show the origins of his thought. During the 1940s he worked closely with sociologists, and in his reactions to both their investigations into small-group psychology and his own into fire brigades, tank crews, clubs, schools, prostitutes, and string quartets he drew on an informed understanding of psychoanalysis. This he acquired partly through self-analysis and partly through the works of Sigmund Freud, Alfred Adler, Ernest Jones, Edward Glover, and J. C. Flugel. In addition, he developed a crystalline prose style in which paradox and aphorism held pride of place. For example, he wrote that 'Art arises where the arbitrary and the predictable are superseded by unpredictable inevitability' (Keller, 'Quotation', 25). He was thus well equipped to comment lucidly and provocatively on any issue of the day -- from the need to abolish capital punishment to Hitler, women's liberation, and the individual merits of members of the Brazilian football team. Some of these topics, together with a typically astute appraisal of the contemporary music scene, reappeared in Keller's book '1975 (1984 minus 9)' (1977). The psychosociological perspective also emerged in his exploration of the 'artistic personalities' of composers from Haydn to his own day, and in his analyses of opera (mainly by Schoenberg and Britten). His understanding of culture emerged in 'The Jerusalem Diary' (2001) and his sustained and formidable critique of critics and audiences found full expression in 'Criticism' (1987). 
Psychological concerns also informed his purely musical writings. Keller drew on the analytical models of Arnold Schoenberg (who had promoted a 'physiological', organic awareness rather than a dryly 'anatomical' one), and devised a series of fifteen 'functional analyses' of music, mainly by Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven, to show how 'latent' unity lay behind 'manifest' contrast. These Spenglerian demonstrations eschewed words on the grounds that musical and conceptual logic are unrelated. He devised a 'two-dimensional theory of music' to show how the 'foreground' of what composers did was projected against the 'background' of what they or others had done before ('form is the sum total of our expectations'); he then pursued this theory in all musical dimensions -- rhythm, pitch, key, timbre, and form. He also championed Schoenberg's twelve-note method of composing, and related classical to modern practice. His principal works were 'The Great Haydn Quartets: their Interpretation' (1986) and 'Stravinsky Seen and Heard' (in collaboration with Milein Cosman, 1982); he wrote voluminously on Mozart and Schoenberg in scattered articles, and sustained important columns on 'The new in music' and 'Truth and music'. A bibliography appeared in 'Music Analysis', 5.2/3 (1986), and was followed by selected 'Essays on Music' (1994). 
Hans Keller had a conspicuous appearance, with a thin, short-to-medium physique, a high forehead, an aquiline nose, a moustache, a measured, unfaltering diction, and penetrating eyes. According to his 'Times' obituarist: 'he could be aggravatingly contradictory and/or challenging, never allowing any statement to pass without a challenge from his active thoughts on the matter. Though superficially prickly, he was -- to those who knew him well -- kind and considerate. He was a great soccer enthusiast and loved to talk about the game almost as much as music. ('The Times', 7 Nov 1985)' He died childless from motor neurone disease at his home, 3 Frognal Gardens, Hampstead, on 6 November 1985 and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. He was one of many distinguished Austro-German emigres who enriched British musical culture in the post-war years. 


@@@@@


doc= 58814


Kennaway, James Peebles Ewing (1928-1968), novelist and scriptwriter, was born on 5 June 1928 at Kenwood Park, Auchterarder, Perthshire, the younger of two children of Charles Gray Kennaway (1894-1941) and Marjory, daughter of G. T. Ewing of Pitkellony, Muthill. Both parents were of Perthshire stock. His father was a wealthy lawyer who also acted as factor to several Perthshire sporting estates, while his mother had trained as a medical practitioner. Kennaway was educated at Cargilfield School in Edinburgh (1937-42) and at Trinity College, Glenalmond, Perthshire (1942-6), but the even tenor of his childhood was destroyed by his father's sudden death from tuberculosis of the kidney in January 1941. 
The death had a profound effect on the young Kennaway: he claimed that it gave him an early sense of mortality and awakened a need to experience life to the full. As he wrote to his mother in a letter in 1956, having seen his father die young he did not want to suffer the same fate. 'Just now I want to blaze, in every direction, right or wrong, just so I shan't sink with too much left undone, too much never tried, too many sensations missed.' 
After leaving school in 1946 Kennaway was called up for national service and was commissioned in the Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders, serving with the 1st Gordon Highlanders in Germany. In 1948 he entered Trinity College, Oxford, to read philosophy, politics, and economics and on graduating in 1951 became a publisher with Longmans, Green. On 6 October 1951 at St Mary Magdalen, Oxford, he married Mary St Joan Howard Edmonds ('b'. 1930), known as Susan, daughter of Bertram Eric Edmonds of Fairford, Gloucestershire, publisher. They set up home in north London and had four children: Emma ('b'. 1953), Jane ('b'. 1955), Guy ('b'. 1957), and David ('b'. 1959). 
While working as a publisher Kennaway had started writing fiction and had achieved modest success with 'The Dollar Bottom', which was published in the January 1954 issue of 'Lilliput'. Suitably encouraged, he completed his first novel, 'Tunes of Glory' (1956), which centres on the rivalry between two men from different backgrounds for the command of a highland infantry battalion. It was well received by the critics: writing in the 'Daily Mail' Peter Quennell forecast that Kennaway would 'take his place amongst the finest storytellers of the day'. In 1957 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. 
The novel's success brought financial as well as critical rewards and in April 1957 Kennaway turned down the opportunity to become manager of the Longmans, Green office in Hong Kong. Instead he decided to concentrate on writing and in 1961 published his second novel, 'Household Ghosts'. Set within the claustrophobic confines of an aristocratic Scottish family, it reveals the childhood fantasies and frustrated passions which lie behind an intense relationship between a brother and his sister, and her attempt to find with a lover the sexual satisfaction denied to her by her husband. During the same period Kennaway had begun a second career as a film scriptwriter and his first scripts included 'Violent Playground' (1958) and 'Tunes of Glory' (1960). 
Although Kennaway still considered himself to be primarily a novelist, scriptwriting provided more substantial financial rewards. His script for 'Tunes of Glory' proved that he could write commercially successful films, and in 1961 he was invited to work in Hollywood. The experience unnerved him in that it prevented him from concentrating on his novels. Also, away from his wife, he engaged in a number of casual affairs, claiming that an active sex life was the regenerative source of his literary ability. Later, in a diary entry, he characterized the split between the reliable family man and the philanderer as 'James et Jim, man and artist, wild boy and introvert'. 
In 1961 and 1962 the Kennaways travelled widely, living at different periods in California, Majorca, and Kashmir. On their return to London, Kennaway completed 'The Bells of Shoreditch' (1963), a novel about marital infidelity and scandal in the financial world. The following year his marriage was again shaken when Susan Kennaway began a sexual relationship with David Cornwell (the novelist John le Carre). The two men were friends and literary rivals. The discovery of the affair led to a period of intense anxiety on Kennaway's part. Throughout the experience, which came to an emotionally violent climax in January 1965 during a skiing holiday at Zell am See in Switzerland, Kennaway kept a detailed diary and notes. These were later edited and published by Susan Kennaway in 'The Kennaway Papers' (1981). From them it is possible to see the extent to which Kennaway was prepared to dramatize his own life in order to provide material for his fiction. His third novel, 'Some Gorgeous Accident' (1967), concerns a triangular relationship and many of its scenes are echoes of the relationship between himself, his wife, and le Carre. 
Following a period of separation, the marriage survived and in 1966 the Kennaways returned to live in Britain at the Manor House, Fairford, Gloucestershire. His other novels are 'The Mindbenders' (1963), 'The Cost of Living Like This' (1969), and 'Silence' (1972). He also continued to write for the cinema, including the script for 'The Battle of Britain' (1969) and 'Country Dance' (1970), based on his novel 'Household Ghosts'. 
Kennaway was killed in a motoring accident on 21 December 1968 while returning from London to Fairford. He was subsequently found to have suffered a heart attack at the time of the accident. He was buried in the churchyard of St Mary's, Fairford, Gloucestershire. 


@@@@@


doc= 58816


Knox, Archibald (1864-1933), designer and watercolour painter, was born on 9 April 1864, the fourth son of the seven children of Robert William Knox, marine engineer, and his wife, Ann, at Cronkborne, Tromode, Braddan, Isle of Man. His parents came from Scotland to the Isle of Man, where his father founded a reasonably successful marine engineering business. He was educated at Douglas grammar school where he was encouraged to take an interest in the Celtic sculptures of the island (then being studied by P. M. C. Kermode) which were much to influence Knox's designs. He trained at Douglas School of Art (1878-84), where he was student teacher until 1888. In 1892 he seems to have been working in the studio of M. H. Baillie Scott, the architect, who was then based in Douglas. In 1897 he left the island to teach in London, which he did off and on until 1912. 
It was during this period (perhaps through Baillie Scott) that Knox started working in commercial design. He apparently worked with Christopher Dresser and also with the Silver Studio, where his first works, which were based on Celtic motifs, seem to have been wallpapers for the exclusive Glasgow firm Wylie and Lochhead. The Silver Studio sold five of Knox's textile designs to the London firm of Liberty, and it was thus that he made the contacts which allowed him to embark on his major design work. Based on his long-time interest in Celtic ornament, Knox developed a series of designs for the embellishment of metalwork which became immediately popular. Until 1912, either through the Silver Studio or by direct commission, he was responsible for most of the designs in Liberty's 'Cymric' and 'Tudric' ranges -- perhaps as many as 5000 (major collections in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and the Silver Studio collections, University of Middlesex). Since Liberty insisted on anonymity from its designers Knox's full output is not known. (He also designed carpets and pottery.) Liberty continued to sell his designs until the 1930s. From 1904 he taught at Kingston School of Art, but was forced to resign in 1912 after the examiners complained about the style and product of his teaching. A number of his students resigned with him and founded the Knox Guild of Craft and Design, which continued as a design studio until 1939. He tried to make a new career in the United States, but failed and returned to teaching in the Isle of Man. 
Knox's designs take a central place in British art nouveau. His Liberty designs drew not only on his study of British Celtic motifs, but also on his interpretation of the continental versions of this style. The swirling interlace and stylized plant motifs which formed his stock-in-trade became popular again in the late twentieth century and his reputation burgeoned. While he understood the manufacturing process of the pewter and silver objects which he designed, he was always much happier with pen or pencil. Liberty was responsible for putting the designs out to be manufactured with firms such as W. H. Haseler of Birmingham; his work is thus perhaps unjustifiably criticized as lacking the finish of his continental contemporaries, who often worked more closely with the manufacturers. Examples of his designs applied to textiles and metalwork may be found in the Victoria and Albert Museum and the British Museum, London, and in the Manx Museum, Isle of Man. 
After his retreat to the Isle of Man, Knox continued to work. Perhaps the most remarkable products of these years were his monumental designs for tombstones (including that of Arthur Lasenby Liberty himself) and war memorials. The war memorial in the village of Onchan, Isle of Man, is particularly worthy of mention, and his biggest funerary monument, that to the novelist Hall Caine in Maughold churchyard, Isle of Man (although finished after his death by Winifred Tuckfield, one of the original members of the Knox guild), is both remarkable and original, being a tall, flat monolith, of fine concrete, with the lettering and figures (which are taken from the novelist's books) cast in low relief. The lettering on these monuments was his own -- elaborately Celticized art nouveau. Sometimes, however, his lettering became so exaggerated as to be virtually unreadable -- as in his painted manuscript, 'The Deer Cry' (1916, Manx Museum, Isle of Man). An inspired watercolourist (a major collection is in the Manx Museum), particularly of Manx landscapes and buildings, he was particularly adept in his treatment of stone and whitewashed walls which he tackled with a confidence seen in few twentieth-century artists in this medium, although interestingly he has been compared with Charles Rennie Mackintosh. He rarely signed his paintings as they were done for his own enjoyment. 
Knox was a shy and sensitive man, much admired by his students and by the schoolchildren he later taught in Douglas, although he had a terrible temper. Dapper, with a pointed beard, he appears to have made little money, but from time to time had family support. He never married. He died suddenly of heart failure at his home in Athol Street, Douglas, on 22 February 1933 and was buried in Braddan new cemetery, Isle of Man, with a headstone carved in Knox's own style by Thomas Quayle. 


@@@@@


doc= 58819


MacDiarmada, Sean (1883-1916), Irish revolutionary, was born in Kiltyclogher, co. Leitrim, probably on 26 January 1884 (his birth was officially registered as 29 March, but his baptism is recorded as having taken place on 29 January), the son of Daniel MacDermott (died 1913), a farmer, and his wife, Mary McMorrow. He was educated at Corradoona national school and, having twice failed to get into teacher training college, spent some time working in Scotland before returning to Ireland, where he learned bookkeeping and Irish at night school in Tullynamoyle, co. Cavan. 
In 1905 MacDiarmada moved to Belfast, where he worked as a tram conductor and barman and became active in politics, joining the Ancient Order of Hibernians and the Gaelic League. He helped to organize the Dungannon clubs, the precursors to Sinn Fein; for the latter he was party organizer in its (unsuccessful) campaign in the 1908 North Leitrim by-election. About this time he was drawn to the revived Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB). It is possible that he was sworn into the organization while still living at home, as his father was a member. He became a full-time organizer for the IRB in Dublin and enjoyed a strong friendship with Tom Clarke, alongside whom he was a prime mover in the power struggle for the leadership of the supreme council of the organization that took place in 1910-11. This battle was also over control of the IRB's journal, 'Irish Freedom', of which MacDiarmada became manager. This role, together with his secretaryship of the IRB and -- of most significance -- his membership, with Clarke, of its all-important three-man executive, put him in a powerful position. He and Clarke were responsible for creating the IRB military council, which planned the 1916 rising -- plans that were unknown even to the brotherhood's supreme council. 
In 1911 MacDiarmada organized demonstrations against loyalist displays during the king's visit. The following year he was left partially disabled by an illness often identified as polio, but which may have been tuberculosis of the right hip. His incapacity -- he walked with a stick thereafter -- was said to have sharpened his sense of purpose. He was instrumental in bringing the Gaelic League under the control of advanced nationalists in 1915, and his commitment to revolution received another boost when he was handed a four-month prison sentence with hard labour for his campaign against the recruitment of soldiers in Ireland for the British army in the First World War. 
MacDiarmada's highest profile in Irish nationalism was achieved as an organizer of and participant in the Easter rising of 1916; he was one of the seven signatories of the proclamation of the provisional government of the Irish republic. The nationalism which he had always believed in and promoted was that of active revolution and the 'blood sacrifice' approach of Padraic Pearse; in a speech to members of the IRB in co. Kerry in 1914 MacDiarmada declared that 'Irish patriotic spirit will die forever unless a blood sacrifice is made in the next few years' (Boyce, 308), with the clear inference that some would have to offer themselves as martyrs. At the Dublin post office in 1916, injuries to others left the direction of the fight in his hands, and the final dispatch from the garrison has been attributed to him. After surrender he was singled out for particular ill treatment by certain guards, and was fatalistic: 'There will be executions; I suppose I will be shot; but the executions will create a reaction in this country that will wipe out the slavish pro-English spirit' (Travers, 37). He was duly executed by firing squad at Kilmainham gaol on 12 May, thus gaining martyrdom status; he was unmarried. His grave is in Arbour Hill cemetery, Dublin. 
MacDiarmada was a popular figure, and an able recruiting sergeant for both the IRB and for the Irish Volunteers. He has been described as a man of charm, enthusiasm, and good looks, 'of average height, with strong, dark hair [and] well marked eyebrows over dark blue eyes' (Travers, 4). Latterly he wore a beard, but he reputedly borrowed a razor to shave with from a British soldier during his final incarceration, telling him, 'I have to make a nice corpse, you know' (Maclochlainn, 167). Appropriately for a former transport worker, the bus depot at Store Street, Dublin, was named after him in recognition of his role in 1916, though a full reappraisal of his significance had to wait until the 1960s when, in a series of radio lectures, F. X. Martin identified him as the 'mainspring' of the rising (Travers, 39). While the importance of his role in turning the IRB into a revolutionary unit was no longer in doubt by the early twenty-first century, he still awaited a full biographical study. 


@@@@@


doc= 58820


MacDonagh, Thomas Stanislaus (1878-1916), poet and critic, was born on 1 February 1878 in Cloughjordan, co. Tipperary, one of the eight children of Joseph MacDonagh (1834-1894), a schoolteacher, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Parker (died 1908), also a teacher. His parents were both Roman Catholics; his mother, formerly a protestant, had converted before her marriage. MacDonagh inherited his good humour from his father, his literary leanings from his mother, and from an early age displayed a lively imagination, delighting in jokes, riddles, and ghost stories. He also developed an interest in poetry and put together small books of rhymes. 
At fourteen MacDonagh was sent to Rockwell College, near Cashel, co. Tipperary, founded by the Holy Ghost Fathers, a French religious order. A junior scholasticate attached to the college prepared priests for missionary work. Academically, the school had a good record and MacDonagh was a conscientious though not outstanding student. In 1894, the year of his father's death, he decided to enter religious life. As a novice he wore the clerical garb of the order and taught English, French, and Latin to junior pupils, but in 1901 he abandoned his studies for the priesthood and left Rockwell. 
MacDonagh's next teaching post was at St Kieran's College, Kilkenny. There he joined the Gaelic League, receiving his 'baptism in Nationalism' (Parks and Parks, 8) and in 1902 he visited the Aran Islands to improve his command of spoken Gaelic. MacDonagh's first book of poetry, 'Through the Ivory Gate', had been published at his own expense in 1902. It was dedicated to W. B. Yeats to whom he had sent the manuscript, requesting advice. Yeats advised against publication because he felt that MacDonagh had not found himself as a poet. A second book, 'April and May', followed in 1903. Religion, nationalism, beauty, and nature were the dominant themes in these early efforts and were to recur in his later work. In 1903 he began teaching at St Colman's College, Fermoy, co. Cork. A sacred cantata, 'The Exodus', for which he wrote the lyrics, won the prize at the 1904 Dublin Feis Ceoil, and in 1908 he published another book of poetry, 'The Golden Toy'. 
In 1908 MacDonagh joined Patrick Pearse as assistant head teacher at the newly established St Enda's school for boys in Dublin, where all aspects of Gaelic culture were enthusiastically promoted and Irish plays and pageants were regularly performed. MacDonagh was himself a playwright but he made little lasting impact. 'When the Dawn is Come', performed at The Abbey in 1908, depicts an Irish rising against English rule and centres on the antagonism between two of the leaders. One reviewer described it as the 'first Sinn Fein drama' and hailed it as the best Abbey production for two years (Parks and Parks, 102-3). Pupils of St Enda's returned from a performance 'yearning for rifles' (ibid., 104). All told, however, the play was not deemed to be a success. 
By this time, in addition to his several volumes of poetry, MacDonagh had published articles in such journals as 'The Nation' (London), 'The Leader', and 'T. P.'s Weekly'. He was well known in Dublin literary and theatrical circles, with friends and acquaintances including Padraic Colum, James Stephens, George Russell (A. E.), Arthur Griffith, and James Connolly. His closest friends were Pearse and Joseph Plunkett. In appearance, MacDonagh was of stocky build with brown hair, grey eyes, a prominent nose, and a friendly expression. On formal occasions he wore a kilt. He was active on many fronts. In 1909 he was a founder member of the Association of Secondary Teachers of Ireland. He was also a member of both the Irish Women's Franchise League and the National Literary Society, but he had become disillusioned with the Gaelic League. 
In 1910 MacDonagh was awarded a BA, having studied part-time at University College, Dublin, and spent time in Paris studying French literature and philosophy. 'Songs of Myself' (1910), the title reflecting Walt Whitman's influence, included two of MacDonagh's best poems, 'John-John' and 'Envoi'. A year later he received an MA for his thesis 'Thomas Campion and the art of poetry' and with Colum, Stephens, and David Houston founded the monthly 'Irish Review'. Later in the year he was appointed lecturer in English at University College, Dublin. 
In 1910 MacDonagh's love affair with Mary Maguire (later to marry Colum) ended. A relationship with Muriel Gifford led to marriage on 3 January 1912. Muriel Gifford was one of twelve children of a mixed marriage and had been brought up as a protestant. MacDonagh considered that he and his wife were of the same religion, neither Catholic nor protestant, and they attended neither church nor chapel (Parks and Parks, 28). Her parents did not approve of the marriage, but the couple set up house at 32 Baggot Street near St Stephen's Green, later moving to 29 Oakley Road in Ranelagh, a southside suburb. A son, Donagh, was born in November 1912 and a daughter, Barbara, in 1915. 
MacDonagh's second play, 'Metempsychosis', was staged in the Theatre of Ireland in 1912. A satire on theosophy and reincarnation, it had as one of the central characters Lord Winton Winton de Winton, a caricature of Yeats. Reviews were poor. In the meantime the 'Irish Review' was plagued by money troubles and in 1913 Plunkett assumed the financial burden and replaced Colum as editor. 
During the momentous industrial dispute that shook Dublin in 1913 MacDonagh was a member of the Dublin Industrial Peace Committee. Giving evidence to an inquiry into disturbances during the dispute, he told of a street riot where he heard the 'continual rapping of [police] batons on people's heads' (Kee, 2.199). 

'Lyrical Poems' (1913) is MacDonagh's most accomplished work and combined a selection of old and new poems, most notably 'The night hunt'. His 'Yellow bittern', a translation of 'An Bunan Bui' by the eighteenth-century poet Cathal Bui Mac Giolla Ghunna, showed real poetic advance. However, MacDonagh never fully matured as a poet. He tended to rush into print and his work suffered from insufficient revision. Much of his poetry was obscure and baffling, especially his mystical poems. 
MacDonagh's MA thesis was published as 'Thomas Campion and the Art of English Poetry' in 1913. A treatise on English metrics and rhyme, it asserted that there were two main types of English verse: song verse and speech verse; a third type, chant, lay somewhere between the two. The assumption that Campion was of Irish extraction was strongly disputed. 
Through their involvement in amateur drama productions, MacDonagh and Plunkett became convinced of the need for a new professional theatre to stage Irish and continental drama. It was left to MacDonagh to get the project off the ground. Financed in large measure by Edward Martyn and managed by MacDonagh's brother John, the Irish Theatre finally opened in November 1914, but MacDonagh had little time for literary endeavour in the last two years of his life. Late in 1913 he joined the Irish Volunteers on their foundation and became a member of the central provisional committee. He wrote the 'Marching song of the Irish Volunteers' and, as commander of one of the four companies of the Dublin brigade, was active in overseeing the training of recruits. He also addressed recruiting rallies around the country and was involved in the Howth gun-running in 1914. 
When the volunteers split over attitudes to the war, the Redmondite majority became known as the National Volunteers. The minority Irish Volunteers appointed a new headquarters staff with MacDonagh as director of training. He was confident that Irish freedom would be secured by 'zealous martyrs', through peace, he hoped, but by war if necessary (Parks and Parks, 52). 
In 1915, the year that he was sworn into the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB), MacDonagh was a member of the committee that took charge of the funeral arrangements of the exiled Fenian Jeremiah O'Donovan Rossa, who had died in the United States. The IRB seized the opportunity to stage a militant nationalist pageant. The National Volunteers and the Irish Citizen Army took part. But it was the Irish Volunteers who fired the volley over the grave and Pearse who gave the oration. In a Rossa funeral souvenir, MacDonagh wrote of the volunteer's ideal 'that leads him now to battle, to sacrifice and to victory' (Parks and Parks, 55). 

'Pagans', based on the poem 'John-John', was presented at the Irish Theatre in 1915. A literary drama, it explored the conflict between the conventional and bohemian philosophies of life. It was not without merit but was ill served by an inferior production. 
MacDonagh took to turning up for classes at University College, Dublin, in uniform, complete with officer's sword. One of his students, Austin Clarke, remembered him placing a revolver on the desk during a lecture (Norstedt, 121). There were complaints and MacDonagh reverted to wearing civilian attire at work. 
By spring 1916 the IRB's plans for revolt were well advanced. Irish volunteer activities were stepped up. There were frequent marches through the streets of Dublin and, when plans were announced for Easter Sunday manoeuvres, MacDonagh instructed all volunteers to turn up with full equipment. 'Boys' he told the men directly under his command, 'some of us may never come back' (Kee, 2.270). On hearing of Roger Casement's arrest in Kerry, the volunteers' chief-of-staff Eoin MacNeill issued eleventh-hour instructions rescinding the orders for Easter Sunday. Confusion ensued and a military council that included MacDonagh met on Sunday and determined that the rising would proceed the following day. MacDonagh was one of the seven signatories of the proclamation of the provisional government read by Pearse outside the General Post Office at noon on Easter Monday. The rising, largely confined to Dublin, enjoyed little popular support. It quickly became clear that it would fail. MacDonagh, in command of the garrison at Jacob's biscuit factory which was near Dublin Castle, was initially reluctant to obey Pearse's order to surrender. Only when he was convinced that resistance was futile did he comply. 
Courts martial were held without delay and on Tuesday 2 May, MacDonagh was tried and found guilty. A priest heard his confession in his cell at Kilmainham gaol and he also received communion. His only other visitor was his sister Mary, Sister Francesca of the Sisters of Charity. In a farewell letter to his wife MacDonagh wrote, 'I am ready to die, and I thank God that I die in so holy a cause. My Country will reward my dust richly' (Parks and Parks, 70). At 3.30 am on Wednesday 3 May he was executed by firing squad. His body was buried in an unmarked grave in Arbour Hill barracks the same day. His sister-in-law Grace Gifford married Joseph Plunkett hours before he too was executed. 
MacDonagh's 'Literature in Ireland: Studies Irish and Anglo-Irish' was published posthumously in 1916 and advanced an inclusive theory of the Irish literary tradition. MacDonagh rejected Arnold's 'Celtic note' in favour of the term, the 'Irish mode'. At its best, he contended, Irish literature in English had its own unique qualities that drew on race and nationality and which echoed the patterns and rhythms of Gaelic speech and song. The Anglo-Irish literature that mattered was the work of first-generation English speakers of rural origin. MacDonagh borrowed freely from the ideas of others but the strength of his literary criticism derived from his synthesis of these ideas and his passionate advocacy of them. 'Literature in Ireland' broke new ground and continues to be of relevance. 
The poet Francis Ledwidge, a member of the British army who died at Ypres in 1917, wrote an elegy 'He shall not hear the bittern cry' for MacDonagh. A. E., who did not support the rising, also paid tribute in 'Salutation', while Yeats, in 'Easter, 1916', wrote of MacDonagh's unfulfilled promise. 
MacDonagh's widow, Muriel, was received into the Roman Catholic church at Easter 1917. She drowned in July of that year while swimming in the sea at Skerries, north of Dublin. The children were embroiled in a custody dispute between the MacDonagh and Gifford families that marred their childhood years. Thomas MacDonagh's son and a granddaughter continued the family literary tradition. 


@@@@@


doc= 58823


Minton, Herbert (1793-1858), pottery manufacturer, was born on 4 February 1793 in Stoke-on-Trent, the second son of ten children of Thomas Minton (1765-1836), engraver and pottery manufacturer, and Sarah, 'nee' Webb (1772-1856). Thomas Minton was born at Wyle Cop, Shrewsbury, and on leaving school became an apprentice engraver at the Caughley Works, Broseley, Shropshire, where he worked on the engraving of the famous 'willow' pattern, among others, under the supervision of Thomas Turner. He soon established himself as an engraver in London, and during that time married Sarah Webb; their first child was baptized in 1791. Afterwards they moved to Stoke, where in 1793 Thomas Minton founded the Minton pottery and porcelain factory in London Road. Early productions at Minton concentrated on underglaze blue-printed earthenware tableware, and about 1799 bone china was introduced. 
Herbert Minton was educated at Audlem grammar school, Cheshire, and at eighteen became involved with the Minton business as its representative. In 1817 he and Thomas Webb Minton, his elder brother, were taken into partnership. Thomas Webb was designated the clerical work, while Herbert, who arrived at work at five in the morning, approved design trials, undertook daily stocktaking in the warehouse, ordered bodies and glazes, and checked the factory accounts. 
During the 1830s Minton and the Gothic architect and designer Augustus Welby Northmore Pugin found that they shared an interest in inlaid clay medieval floor tiles, and had a strong desire to reproduce them. One of the problems that Minton had to overcome was the irregular contraction of clays that caused the inlaid pattern to become easily dislodged from the main body of the tile. Repeated failures seemed only to strengthen his resolve. Matthew Digby Wyatt, architect and designer, commented: 'He set to work with a thorough English determination to succeed, and with untiring energy and perseverance, notwithstanding repeated failures and many difficulties and obstacles which presented themselves in his successive experiments, at length succeeded in producing tiles very far superior to those of the ancients.(Minton archives, MS 31; 'Journal of the Society of Arts', 28 May 1858)' The combination of Pugin's designs and Minton's technical skill led to important commissions that included the houses of parliament; St Georges Hall, Liverpool; and Cheadle church, Staffordshire. Other important and ambitious tile schemes executed by the Minton factory were for the Capitol, Washington, DC; the Foreign Office, London; the royal dairy, Windsor; and the South Kensington Museum, London (now the Victoria and Albert Museum). 
Thomas Webb Minton had entered the church twelve years before his father's death in 1836, and though Herbert Minton had made a major contribution towards the success of the factory, Thomas Webb was named chief beneficiary of his father's estate; Herbert was awarded only the interest on $3000 and a quarter of the profits. Thomas Kirkby, a Minton artist, recalled a devastated Herbert Minton saying 'If it had not have been for my mother and my sisters, I would have given up the potting business' (Minton archives, MS 115). Thomas Webb Minton, after family consultation, donated $23,000 to enable the executors of Thomas Minton's will to fund a new partnership between Herbert Minton and John Boyle, a local potter, who both contributed capital themselves; however, on 21 November 1841 the partnership ended. 
Herbert Minton married Anne, the third daughter of John Hollins of Shelton, near Stoke-on-Trent, on 1 September 1819, and after her death, in 1841, he married Mary Brown. Isabella Stewart Fraser, 'nee' Leckie, became his third wife, following the death of Mary. Minton had no children, and in 1845 he was joined by two partners in the factory: Michael Daintry Hollins, his first wife's nephew, and Colin Minton Campbell, his own nephew. 
By the 1840s the Minton factory was producing a range of figures, ornamental ware, and encaustic floor tiles. During the mid- to late 1840s Herbert Minton developed Parian body (named after the Greek island of Paros) for statuary, and low-temperature lead glazes that Minton named majolica. Both majolica and Parian were launched at the Great Exhibition of 1851 and contributed greatly to Minton's being awarded the bronze council medal -- a most prestigious accolade -- for 'beauty and originality of design', the only one of its kind bestowed on an English manufacturer. 
The development of Parian led to Minton securing the services of the finest sculptors in England, France, and Italy, whose works created a new awareness among the workforce and the general public of classical and contemporary sculpture. The popularity of majolica, the most characteristic Victorian art form, with its vigorous modelling and vibrant glazes, remained constant until the 1880s, when there was a change in public taste and less demand for flamboyant ceramic pieces; however, its reputation is retained to this day as the most decorative pottery ever produced. 
Herbert Minton was chosen as Queen Victoria's personal escort at the Great Exhibition, and she wrote in her journal on 30 April 1851: 'we walked the whole round of the galleries. We saw beautiful china from Minton's factory and beautiful designs' (Gibbs-Smith, 16). On 22 May she made a return visit to the Minton stand and recorded: 'this is upon the whole the finest, everything for the table, bedroom sets, flower vases, all in the best taste' (ibid., 20). A reviewer in the 'Journal of the Society of Arts' (9 August 1858) commented: 'The verdicts of two international juries had assigned to Mr. Minton an European fame and the chief place among manufacturers of pottery since the first Wedgwood, no one has done so much to advance his art as Mr. Minton. Both at the London and Paris Exhibitions his works proved that individual enterprise was more than a match for state subsidies. (Minton archives, MS 26)' In 1856 Herbert Minton, Michael Daintry Hollins, and Colin Minton Campbell were granted the royal warrant 'to be manufacturers of china, earthenware, encaustic and plain tiles and tesserae at Stoke-upon-Trent in ordinary to Her Majesty'. 
Herbert Minton was well known for his philanthropic qualities. He lived for many years at Longfield Cottage, Hartshill, near Stoke, where in 1842 he built and endowed a church (one of Sir Gilbert Scott's early works) and schools for 1500 children, with houses for teachers, providing for their maintenance and for the education of the children. He built almshouses for the aged and infirm, and infirmaries for the sick. He donated $500 towards the erection of public baths; a future project was to build by public subscription a school of art and literature next to the public baths. 
On 1 April 1858 Herbert Minton died at his retirement residence, Belmont, Middle Woodfield Road, Torquay. He had been a magistrate, a lieutenant of Stafford, a member of the Society of Antiquaries, and a knight of the imperial order of the Legion d'honneur. He was buried at Trinity Church, Hartshill. As a tribute to his memory the school of art in London Road, Stoke-on-Trent, was erected by public subscription, and at Torquay it was proposed to add a spire to St Mark's Church. 
Probate records that Herbert Minton left under $70,000. On 22 March 1857 he wrote to his brother-in-law John Campbell stating that he had made his will and would show it to him soon. In that letter he encouraged Campbell to purchase 61/2 acres of land that was on the market from Mr Spode (who owned a ceramic manufactory in close proximity). Minton wanted to buy the land himself, but in addition to the substantial bequests set out in his will he had gifted the church and the school, and made alterations to his house that cost $3000, and consequently could not afford to buy the land. He also mentioned that he had taken out life insurance for $7000. Colin Minton Campbell, Minton's nephew, inherited the factory after his uncle's death, and it was Minton's wish that the land purchased from Spode would be available for Colin's use. 
At a discussion of the Society of Arts the interior decorator J. G. Crace (formerly A. W. N. Pugin's assistant) said of Minton: 'in fact, taking his productions altogether we had reason as Englishmen to be proud of our dearly departed friend. He had not only earned a reputation which would probably live as long as this country remained; but he had greatly aided in gaining for England the respectable position she had now attained in the arts.(Minton archives, MS 31; 'Journal of the Society of Arts', 28 May 1858)' 



@@@@@


doc= 58824


Mitford, Unity Valkyrie Freeman- (1914-1948), Nazi sympathizer, was born on 8 August 1914 at 49 Victoria Road, Kensington, London, the fourth of six exceptionally spirited daughters of David Bertram Ogilvy Freeman-Mitford (1878-1958), who succeeded as second Baron Redesdale of the second creation in 1916. Her mother was Sydney (1880-1963), eldest daughter of Thomas Gibson Bowles. She was chiefly educated at home by governesses. 'Her immense, baleful eyes, large, clumsy limbs, dead straight tow-coloured hair, sometimes in neat pig-tails but more often flowing loose, gave her the appearance of a shaggy Viking or Little John', according to her sister Jessica Mitford (Mitford, 'Hons', 16). This 'farouche' child, however, matured into a bold, generous, quick-witted, and amusing young woman. She was incapable of deviousness or dissimulation: her preferred occupation, she averred, would be gangster or airman; her besetting sin was boastfulness. She was an avid but discriminating reader, who memorized reams of esoteric poetry and created intricate collages. 
In June 1933 Unity Mitford joined the British Union of Fascists, which had been organized in the previous year by Sir Oswald Mosley, who later married her sister Diana ['see 'Mosley, Diana (1910-2003)]. Following Hitler's accession to power in 1933 she toured Germany in the company of Diana and the young tory politicians Nigel Birch (afterwards Lord Rhyl) and Victor Montagu, Viscount Hinchingbrooke. She settled in Munich in May 1934 in order to learn the German language. By reserving a nightly table in the Osteria Bavaria inn, where the Fuhrer often dined, and staring at him, she contrived a meeting on 9 February 1935: 'the most wonderful and beautiful day of my life' (Moyne and Guinness, 368). Thereafter she met Hitler on 140 occasions before the outbreak of war in 1939 -- finding him always sweet and unaffected. Her veneration of him was so absolute that she became a blindly fervent devotee of his political creed. 
On 22-23 June 1935 Mitford was guest of honour at the Nazi summer solstice celebrations where she addressed 200,000 people. Soon afterwards her short personal manifesto of antisemitism was published in 'Der Sturmer'. Thereafter, as a British peer's daughter, she was often photographed accompanying Nazi leaders at rallies, Bayreuth festivals, and the Olympic games of 1936. She and her father joined the Anglo-German Fellowship, and attended the Nuremberg rally of 1938 together with Robert Byron: Lord Redesdale, said Byron, 'treated the Nazi Party Conference as though it were a house party to which five hundred thousand rather odd and unexpected guests had turned up' (Ritchie, 38). Mosley described her as 'young, ingenuous, full of enthusiasm, in a way stage-struck by the glamour and panoply of the national socialist movement and the mass admiration of Hitler' (O. Mosley, 368). The fixity of her admiration for Nazidom was unreasonable: her conduct and conversation became exaggerated. She saluted the postmistress of Swinbrook, Oxfordshire, with raised hand, ''Heil' 'Hitler'!', collected Nazi trophies, chanted blackshirt rhymes about Jews, and agreed with her friend Julius Streicher that Jews should be made to eat grass. However, she had no influence on the Nazi inner circle, and stories that she was Hitler's mistress, or that she aspired to marry him, were untrue. She had love affairs with Erik Widemann, a member of the SS, and with Janos Almasy. 
In Britain, Mitford's antics were reported in popular newspapers. Her influence, though, was negligible. Her ardent defence of the Austrian 'Anschluss' sent on 5 March 1938 to Winston Churchill did not sway him; but after she reached Vienna on the same day as the Fuhrer (14 March), Hitler declared: 'They said England would be there to stop me, but the only English person I saw was on my side' (Moyne, 410). In May 1938 she provoked arrest in Czechoslovakia by wearing her swastika badge. 
Having often threatened suicide if Britain and Germany went to war, Unity Mitford shot herself with a pistol in the English Garden at Munich on 3 September 1939. She was unconscious for two months. German surgeons saved her life but were unable to extract the bullet from her brain. On Hitler's instructions she was moved to Switzerland, and then returned to England on 3 January 1940. Her mental and physical powers were impaired, and she lived under the unwavering protection of her mother. James Lees-Milne visited her in 1944 and reported that she: 'has become rather plain and fat, and says that she weighs 131/2 stone. Her mind is that of a sophisticated child, and she is still very amusing in that Mitford manner' (Lees-Milne, 146-7). She was saved from the dismal wreckage of her fantasies when the bullet wound in her brain became inflamed: she died unmarried, of meningitis, on 28 May 1948, at the West Highland Cottage Hospital, Oban. Her burial on 1 June was at Swinbrook, Oxfordshire. She is satirized as Eugenia Malmains in the novel 'Wigs on the Green' (1935) by her sister Nancy Mitford. 


@@@@@


doc= 58827


Moore, Thomas Sturge (1870-1944), writer and designer, was born at 3 Wellington Square, St Mary in the Castle, Hastings, on 4 March 1870, the eldest of the four sons (one of whom was the philosopher G. E. Moore) and four daughters of Daniel Moore (1840-1904), a physician, and his second wife, Henrietta, 'nee' Sturge (1839-1903). The family moved to Norwood in 1871, and he attended Dulwich College from 1879 to 1884, but, dogged by ill health, fell behind academically. In 1885 he enrolled in the Croydon Art School, where he lost his Baptist faith and where he met the artist Charles Shannon. After two years he transferred to Lambeth Art School; there Shannon's lover, Charles Ricketts, was a teacher. When Shannon and Ricketts moved into The Vale, Chelsea, in 1888, Moore rented workrooms there and they introduced him to artistic London at their 'Friday Evenings'. He contributed to their periodical 'The Dial', and helped to edit and translate a number of books for the Vale Press, which Ricketts started in 1894. In 1895 Moore's parents moved to Torquay, but he remained in London, living mainly off an annuity from an uncle. In 1893 he had privately published 'Two Poems', and in 1899 issued 'The Vinedresser and Other Poems', which impressed Laurence Binyon. Binyon introduced him to W. B. Yeats in 1899, and the two became lifelong friends. 
In 1885 Moore began regular visits to his French relatives and fell in love with his cousin Marie Appia, daughter of George Appia, a Lutheran minister. In 1895, however, she became engaged to his brother Harry, but he was training to be an Anglican clergyman and, assailed by religious scruples about her nonconformity, soon broke off the engagement. Moore declared himself in June 1897, but was rebuffed; he persisted and the two finally married in 1903. Their son Daniel was born in 1905, and their daughter Henriette (Riette) in 1907. 
Moore's developing interest in drama led to his association with a number of societies, notably the Literary Theatre Club, which he helped found in 1901 with Florence Farr and Ricketts, and resuscitated as a limited company in 1905. In April 1906 it staged his one-act 'Aphrodite against Artemis', based on the Phaedra-Hippolytus story. Although the play was savagely attacked by the reviewers, productions of Wilde's 'Salome' and 'A Florentine Tragedy' (in Moore's adaptation) followed in June 1906. He joined the Stage Society in 1908, shortly after appearing in its production of 'The Persians', and in 1912 was appointed to its council. 
Moore designed and illustrated books throughout his life (notably his own works and those of Yeats), and in May 1904 he was elected a member of the Society of Twelve, a group of wood-engravers and lithographers. He published books on Altdorfer (1900), Durer (1905), and Correggio (1906), and in 1910 formulated his aesthetic ideas in 'Art and Life'. His story 'A Platonic Marriage' was attacked by the Vigilance Society on its appearance in the 'English Review' in January 1911, but later that year he was elected to the Royal Society of Literature. In the following year he joined Harold Monro's Poetry Bookshop, and contributed 'A Sicilian Idyll' to the first volume of 'Georgian Poetry'. At this time he helped translate works by Rabindranath Tagore, then becoming popular in England. 
In 1919 Moore moved his family from 40 Well Walk, Hampstead, London, where they had lived since 1912, to Steep in Hampshire, where his children attended the progressive Bedales School. In the following year he was awarded a civil-list pension of $75 per annum and published 'The Powers of the Air', which propounds his aesthetic in mythological terms, and a play, 'Medea'. He gave classes in aesthetics at Bedales, and in 1929 these formed the basis of 'Amour for Aphrodite', in which he argued that beauty is an intrinsic value. The family had returned to Well Walk in 1927, where he began to keep open house on Friday evenings. His numerous volumes of poems were gathered into 'The Poems of T. Sturge Moore', issued in four volumes from 1931 to 1933, and a 'Selected Poems' appeared in 1934. His 'Judith' had been staged in January 1916, but there were no more performances of his plays until 'Psyche in Hades' in 1927 and 'Niobe' and 'Medea' in 1930. He underwent a Steinach rejuvenating operation in 1936, and at the outbreak of the Second World War moved to Dorking. He suffered from chronic ill health from 1942, and died in Windsor of kidney infection on 18 July 1944, following an operation. 


@@@@@


doc= 58828


Morton, Alan Lauder (1893-1971), footballer, was born at Skaterigg Farm, Jordanhill, Renfrewshire, on 24 April 1893, the youngest of five sons of William Storey Morton, colliery manager, and his wife, Mary Scott. His father did not like the idea of his sons playing professional football instead of pursuing a career. Morton did both. He signed for the famous Glasgow amateur team, Queen's Park, in 1913, to join his elder brother Bob, and, while playing for the amateurs, studied to become a mining engineer. 
Morton was already an outstanding footballing talent when he was signed by Rangers' new manager, William (Bill) Struth, as a professional in June 1920; in 1920 he won two international caps for Scotland against Wales and Ireland and was deprived only by injury of a cap against England. Coming from the amateur team, Morton was able to arrange his own financial terms with Rangers and, although his salary was never disclosed, it has been said to have been as much as $4000 a year, an immense sum for the time. Whatever the exact amount, it was undoubtedly the highest of any player in a decade in which Scottish football talent was thick on the ground. Moreover, he continued to work as a mining engineer; as the only Rangers player allowed to play part time, he avoided the daily routine of other professional players and trained only twice a week, on Tuesdays and Wednesdays. 
Known as the Wee Blue Devil after his performance against England in 1928, Morton shared with his fellow professional footballer of the 1920s Patsy Gallacher a slight build (5 ft 41/2 in., 9 stone 7lb) and an extraordinary ability to dominate much larger opponents; but there the comparison ends. Morton came from a different social class and joined a different team; he came from a solidly middle-class family and played for Glasgow Rangers, Scotland's premier establishment club. 
The Scottish talent of this time was displayed at its best in the famous 5-1 victory over England by the Wembley Wizards in 1928, a game in which Morton stood out in a diminutive forward line whose skilful attacking game has never been equalled; in Scotland he was supreme, matched only by Patsy Gallacher, but he was never tempted to follow such other talents as Hughie Gallacher and Alex James to England: Morton was too much a Rangers man. 
In the inter-war years Rangers dominated Scottish football, and it was in this time that their practice of not playing Catholic footballers became an unwritten policy. Under directors staunchly unionist in politics, royalist in sympathies, and active in freemasonry, Rangers stood in sharp contrast to their Old Firm rivals, the Irish-Catholic Glasgow Celtic. Morton appears to have been in complete sympathy with the ethos of the club and this, as well as his middle-class social credentials, allowed him to go straight from being a player to a position on the board of directors of Rangers after playing six games of the 1932-3 season. In 1933 he enjoyed the rare honour of being the only player invited by the Scottish Football Association to take part in its diamond jubilee dinner. 
Morton was Struth's first signing, and the two were instrumental in defining the Rangers' image in this period. In addition to an employment policy that was, like that of all major protestant firms in Scotland at this time, effectively anti-Catholic, Struth and Morton emphasized the social superiority of the protestant Scot in the way they dressed. This amounted almost to a fetish in the case of Struth; and Morton was known as the Wee Society Man for his dapper dress -- the business suit, the bowler hat, the leather gloves, and the rolled-up umbrella, characteristic of an insurance society collector. 
It was as a footballer, however, that Morton made his name, and this came from dedicated practice to hone his natural talent. In much the same way as young Donald Bradman practised with a golf ball and a cricket stump against a water tank, the young Morton practised chipping a ball through the delivery hole in the family coal cellar. On errands for his parents he was never without a ball as he dribbled it with one foot against the wall on the way to the shops, and dribbled with the other foot on the way back. The result was his remarkable confidence with both feet. He made his name as an outside left, and in addition to his uncanny ball control and dribbling, he perfected a cross that seemed to hang in the air and puzzled opposing defences -- probably more taken in by his reputation than the actual flight of the ball, although he did practise the then unfamiliar skills of imparting spin to the ball. 
Morton won an unprecedented thirty-one caps for Scotland. His career with Queen's Park was mainly during the years of the First World War, when he played in 247 competitive games. Between 1920 and his retirement in 1933 he played in 498 games for Rangers, won nine league championships and two Scottish cup medals. He was never as much as cautioned by the referee, and remained remarkably free from injury -- when he missed the 1926 international against England it became known as the one 'where Alan Morton did not play' -- and Scotland lost. 
Morton remained on the Rangers' board until shortly before his death, at his home, Marchmont, Victoria Place, Airdrie, on 14 December 1971. In the 1959 general election his sister was put forward to oppose Labour in one of its safest seats, Coatbridge and Airdrie, and such was the power of the Morton name that she lost by only 759 votes. Morton never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 58829


Obolensky, Alexander (1916-1940), rugby player, was born in Petrograd on 17 February 1916, the first son of Prince Sergey Obolensky, captain in the imperial horse guards, and his wife, Lubov Aleksandrovna Naryshkina. His family escaped from Russia in 1919, travelling from Riga on the 'Princess Margaret'. He was educated at Trent College and in 1934 entered Brasenose College, Oxford, where he took a fourth in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1938. 
Obolensky's talent for rugby was first recognized at Trent College, where he scored forty-nine tries in one season. At Oxford he won blues in 1935 and 1937, but missed the 1936 game against Cambridge University owing to injury. He won four England caps in 1936 and played club rugby for Rosslyn Park from 1936. 
Obolensky's fame, far greater and more enduring than that of many players with much longer international careers, rests firmly on a single match. His international debut, against New Zealand at Twickenham on 2 January 1936, is remembered as 'Obolensky's match' (Morgan and Nicholson, 217) for his two tries in a 13-0 victory: England's first ever win over New Zealand and its last until 1973. His second try, when he ran at an angle from his position on the right wing to score near the opposite corner, was called by his team-mate Peter Cranmer 'the most talked-about of my generation' (Cranmer, 10). Obolensky was still to be naturalized as a British citizen, a process completed a few weeks later. This led to an icy pre-match conversation with the prince of Wales (later Edward VIII), who asked him what qualified him to play for England. Obolensky replied: 'I am a student at Oxford University... 'sir'' (ibid.). After taking British nationality he requested no longer to be known as 'prince'. 
The rest of Obolensky's international career was, by comparison, an anticlimax. He received hardly a pass in three more matches in 1936 and, in spite of scoring seventeen tries -- believed to be a record for senior rugby -- against Brazil at Niteroi on a tour of South America in August 1936, was not selected in subsequent seasons. He remained a favourite with crowds at Rosslyn Park, who encouraged team-mates to 'give it to Obo' (Alston). 
The enduring image of Obolensky as 'a romantic figure capable of doing almost incredible things' ('Daily Telegraph', 1 April 1940) rests in part on his exotic background, but also on the pace and unorthodoxy demonstrated by his famous try at Twickenham. E. H. D. Sewell wrote that 'for a right wing to touch down several yards wide of the left-hand post was just one of those things that were not done' (Sewell, 232). Wilfred Wooller, who played against him for Cambridge, described Obolensky as 'a strongly built wing, with a low centre of gravity, [who] could move with breath-taking speed down the touchline' (Arlott, Wooller, and Edelston, 131). He was exceptionally fast -- timed at 10.6 sec. for the 100 yards -- and a pioneer in the use of lightweight boots. While not renowned as a defender, he saved a draw for Oxford in the 1935 varsity match with a tackle on the opposite wing. The Welsh international Vivian Jenkins called him 'a real White Russian Parisian type who loved to celebrate -- truly one of the lads' (Frost, 79). He was reported to prepare for matches by consuming a dozen oysters. A more serious side was reflected in his contribution to the book 'Be Still and Know: Oxford in Search of God' (ed. K. Briant and G. Joseph, 1936) and his disagreement with the Oxford Union's vote not to 'Fight for King and Country'. 
Commissioned in the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve in May 1938, Obolensky was called up on the outbreak of war in 1939. He died when his plane crashed at Martlesham, Suffolk, on 29 March 1940. The first England rugby international to die in the Second World War, he was buried in Ipswich cemetery on 2 April 1940. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 58831


O'Duffy, Eimar Ultan (1893-1935), writer and political economist, was born on 29 September 1893 at 26 Gardiner Place, Dublin, the elder son of Kevin Emmet O'Duffy, a prominent dentist, and his wife, Pauline, 'nee' Campbell. His grandfather John O'Duffy had been the founder (with others) of the Dublin Dental Hospital, while his father would become dentist-in-ordinary to the lord lieutenant of Ireland, which gave the family entry to Dublin Castle society. His grandfather's house was on fashionable Rutland Square (now Parnell Square), and Eimar too was reared in a large Georgian mansion, 85 Harcourt Street. The scenes of childhood in his novel 'The Wasted Island' (1920) reflect in detail the atmosphere of this period of his life. 
Eimar was sent in 1903 to the Jesuit school Stonyhurst College, Lancashire, where many upper-class Irish Catholics sent their sons to be educated and to acquire better accents. He went on to University College, Dublin, in preference to an English university, matriculating in summer 1911. There he studied for the bachelor in dental surgery degree. 
O'Duffy joined the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB) and was active in the Irish Volunteers as an adjutant with the 2nd battalion. He was also director of supply and communications for the Dublin brigade. His slight British accent was resented by some. He wrote 'A military causerie' for the republican movement's weekly paper, the 'National Volunteer', from 6 October 1914. 
With the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 O'Duffy's father threatened to disown both sons if they did not join up. The younger, Kevin Emmet O'Duffy, was commissioned in September 1914 but Eimar refused to join the British army and was expelled from the family home. From now until 1920 he lived in lodgings in the Rathmines area. 
At college O'Duffy was known for his light satirical topical verse and for his contributions to the Literary and Historical Society, the college debating forum, where he won a silver medal for debating in 1915-16. He had his early plays -- 'The Walls of Athens', 'The Phoenix on the Roof', and 'Bricriu's Feast' -- produced by Edward Martyn's Irish Theatre but another play, 'If I Were You', was refused by the Abbey. His interview with the widow of the late exiled Fenian O'Donovan Rossa appeared in the 'Irish Volunteer' (7 August 1915). 
O'Duffy's association with Bulmer Hobson and J. J. O'Connell, when the Irish Volunteers split, led to his involvement in trying to prevent the Easter rising of 1916. He was one of Professor Eoin MacNeill's messengers in the hectic days before the rising began, being sent up to Belfast by Bulmer Hobson to ensure that the volunteers there would obey the orders of MacNeill, and not those of Pearse and the inner core of IRB members who plotted the rising. During Easter week O'Duffy remained in hiding from the authorities in Belfast. He returned to find Dublin in public and private turmoil. During the rising his grandfather John O'Duffy, then eighty-one, was shot while walking in Moore Street, and died of his wounds in Jervis Street Hospital. O'Duffy's younger brother, by then promoted to lieutenant with the 7th Royal Munster Fusiliers, had been killed at Suvla Bay on 6 August 1915, the first day of the landings during the Gallipoli campaign. These deaths led to a reconciliation with his father, but Eimar was not allowed to wear his volunteer uniform at home in Harcourt Street. 
O'Duffy qualified as a dentist in spring 1917 (with second-class honours) and became a member of the British Dental Association. At first he practised with his father in Harcourt Street, then set up on his own at 8 Fitzwilliam Street in 1919. He gave up his practice before August 1920 to devote himself to his writing. 
For a period O'Duffy worked as a teacher at Father Sweetman's famous school, Mount St Benedict's, near Gorey, though by 1920 he thought of himself as an author rather than as a dentist or teacher. He published 'A Lay of the Liffey and other Verses' in 1918 and edited 'A College Chorus' -- 'a collection of Humorous Verses by the students of University College' -- in 1919. By October 1919 he had completed a largely autobiographical novel about the years leading up to 1916, which was printed in Dublin late in 1919. It was published in February 1920 as 'The Wasted Island'. Dedicated to O'Duffy's mother, the novel deals with the emotional and political development of a young Irishman much like himself. Woven into his account of political developments was his contempt for many aspects of the Irish literary movement, its lack of ambition, its amateurism, and contentment to do things on a small scale. The events of the rising left O'Duffy embittered at what he saw as the futile gesture of 'schemers'. The 'Irish Book Lover' noted in its review that 'the author denounces the falsehood and treachery towards their comrades, of the extremists who rushed into the rebellion. Here, as elsewhere, he is remarkably outspoken, but the whole tone of the books is marked by clear and independent thinking' ('Irish Book Lover', 11/8, March 1920, 82). 
On 16 August 1920 O'Duffy, then living at 4 Williams Park, Rathmines, married Cathleen Patricia ('b'. 1891/2), daughter of John Cruise O'Brien, a solicitor; they had two children. Further novels followed. 'Printer's Errors: a Comedy of Dublin Manners' (1920) satirized many of his associates in the small theatrical world of the city; 'The Lion and the Fox' (1921) was a historical novel; and 'Miss Rudd and Some Lovers' (1923) was a comic novel set in a Rathgar boarding-house during the troubles. These books made him little money, however. 
O'Duffy supported the Anglo-Irish treaty (December 1921) from a Liberal point of view and as a result he was employed for a period during 1922 in the new department of external affairs, then headed by Desmond Fitzgerald. In winter 1922-3 he edited with Bulmer Hobson and P. S. O'Hegarty seven issues of the 'Irish Review', in which he printed his own review of Joyce's 'Ulysses' (9 December 1922). It was one of the few commentaries on the novel to appear in the Irish press. 
O'Duffy was actively disliked by many. Asked on one occasion to take the chair at the Literary and Historical Society at University College, Dublin, he was barracked by the students and had to withdraw. Justice Cahir Davitt, a college contemporary, recalled that those on the left disliked him because of the positions he had taken up as an editor of the 'Review', while the nationalists shunned him because of his role in 1916 and for his opinions in 'The Wasted Island'. 
O'Duffy's short sharp manner was due in large part to the ulcer which he developed as a young man. Yet to Cahir Davitt he was 'a quiet little man whom I knew only as an ex-schoolmaster who had published some poems, one of them worthy of more notice than it has received'. 
The O'Duffys were living in Daffodil Cottage, Orwell Road, Rathgar, when in late 1924 O'Duffy lost his job in external affairs. That autumn, early in October, a few weeks after the birth of their daughter, they left Ireland and moved to Paris, where O'Duffy had taken a post on the night staff of the European edition of the 'Chicago Tribune'. They lived in an apartment in the rue Byron, in the 8th 'arrondissement', behind the Etoile. In summer 1926 O'Duffy obtained a post in the Liberal publications department (then at 41 Parliament Street, London). The family lived first at 82 Woodland Gardens, Muswell Hill, and then at 25 Leaside Avenue, Fortis Green, a short distance away. 
After three years in preparation, the first of O'Duffy's Cuanduine trilogy, his satire on modern Ireland, was published in 1926. 'King Goshawk and the Birds' was a critical success and immediately reprinted. In 1927 a short play, 'Romulus and Remus', was published under his pen-name Oliver Sidgwick in a volume entitled 'Short Plays for Small Stages', produced by the Liberal publications department. The second volume of the Cuanduine trilogy, 'The Spacious Adventures of the Man in the Street', appeared in 1928, while a revised version of 'The Wasted Island' was published in 1929. 
Between summer 1929 and autumn 1931 O'Duffy turned from literature to journalism. He was a publicity agent to the Lloyd George Liberals (1931-5) for a period, but not in any way that brought him personally to the public attention. Indeed his support of the group made him redundant at the Liberal publications office. A political pamphlet poem, 'National Christmas', was published in a limited edition of a hundred signed copies at Christmas 1931 by Blue Moon Books. Yet he was popular among the Irish colony in London and wide journalistic connections as he 'wrote in a sparkling style on the most abstruse problems of economics and finance' ('Irish Times'). 
It was while working out his satires that O'Duffy developed his ideas of financial reform and he became absorbed with the money theories of the social credit apostle Major C. H. Douglas. Social credit appealed to O'Duffy and many others between the wars as providing an escape from the morass of depression and poverty without resort to nationalization or socialism. In his enthusiasm O'Duffy published a series of books on financial and social reform: 'Life and Money' in 1932, 'Machinery: Captor or Liberator?', 'The Procrustean Fallacy', and 'The Leisure State', all in 1932. He was a founder member of both the Leisure Society and the Prosperity League. In 1934 he made a very successful lecture tour of various towns in Norway at the invitation of a Norwegian businessmen's group interested in social credit. 
At the end of 1931 the O'Duffys moved out of London to 65 Kings Road, Byfleet, near Cobham, in Surrey. At this time O'Duffy acted as a reader for various publishers and he also published a series of detective thrillers: 'The Bird Cage' (1932), 'The Secret Enemy' (1933), and 'Head of a Girl' (1935). These did not do much to retrieve a literary reputation already in decline. He was also working on a musical comedy in three acts which was to be called 'Let's be Modern'. The last of the Cuanduine trilogy, 'Asses in Clover', was published in 1933. He finished what was to be his final novel, the thriller 'Head of a Girl', at Byfleet in October 1934. 
O'Duffy had been eking out a living as a freelance journalist, but the reunification of the Liberal Party brought him back to the Liberal publications office at the end of 1934. The family then moved to 64 Portland Avenue, New Malden, Surrey. 
Brian O'Duffy recalled that his father was 'quite short, probably 5'6" or so [...] nearly all our male friends were noticeably taller than he was. He was slim and lightly built' (private information). He had delicate features and wore glasses. 
While writing his later books O'Duffy was in almost continual pain. Following an operation on a perforated duodenal ulcer, he died a few days later on 21 March 1935 at St Anthony's Hospital, Cheam, Surrey. Though his health had obviously been failing, his sudden death 'was a loss almost as unexpected as it was widely lamented' ('New English Weekly'). His remains were interred in the cemetery at Morden, Surrey. He was survived by his wife. 
Though it had been announced for publication in 1934, an autobiographical book, 'The portrait gallery', which contained some unflattering remarks about friends and relatives, was withdrawn by his own wish and the materials later destroyed. After his death O'Duffy's books went quickly out of print and interest in him did not revive until the 1960s. O'Duffy's was an uneven career. Dying in his early forties, O'Duffy had hardly fulfilled his promise, and even his admirers have to admit that his reputation rests precariously on the trilogy of Cuanduine satires, on his plays, and most of all on 'The Wasted Island', which though flawed was one of the most moving recreations of developments in Ireland during the years between 1900 and 1916. To his political friends in the social credit movement Eimar O'Duffy had been 'a highly valued and spirited colleague' (private information); and despite his faults and his early death, he survives as one of the most significant Irish writers of the later years of the Irish literary revival. 


@@@@@


doc= 58833


O Rathaille, Aodhagan (d. 1729), Gaelic poet, was born in Sliabh Luachra, co. Kerry, where his family leased lands from the MacCarthy family at Scrahanaveele, a little over 10 miles east of Killarney. Nothing is known of his parents, but it is suggested that his father may have been from co. Cavan and that he married a woman from the Sliabh Luachra area. The MacCarthys were an old Gaelic family who were, at the time of O Rathaille's birth, subtenants of Sir Nicholas Browne, viscount of Kenmare. It would appear that O Rathaille was born into a position of privilege and that he was educated at Captain Eoghan MacCarthy's house at Headford, where he would have been tutored in the manner of the Gaelic professional poets of previous centuries. It seems certain that he would also have spent a good deal of time in Glenflesk, at the castle of the O'Donoghues, themselves a notable literary family, and in the big houses of the remaining Gaelic aristocracy in east Kerry and west Cork. As well as giving him training as a poet, this privileged background gave O Rathaille a knowledge of English, Latin, perhaps a little Greek, and a familiarity with the literature of post-Renaissance Europe. 
O Rathaille's world was to collapse into chaos, however, after the battle of the Boyne in 1690. Sir Nicholas Browne, who had supported the Jacobite cause and the Catholic King James in the Williamite wars, had his estate confiscated and tenants such as the MacCarthys and the O Rathailles were evicted from their homes. In his poem 'Creachta Chrich Fodla' ('The wounds of the Land of Fodla'), O Rathaille laments the demise of the MacCarthy family and beseeches God to come to the assistance of 'majestic gentle-mannered Erin' who is portrayed as being ravished by 'foreign churls'. Another poem 'An Milleadh d'imthigh ar Mhor-shleachtaibh na hEireann' ('The ruin that befell the great families of Erin') portrays Ireland 'As a land which wolves have spitefully devoured, a land placed in misfortune and subjection, beneath the tyranny of mercenaries and robbers'. It was against this background of upheaval that, about 1708, O Rathaille found himself and his family having to move to the area of Corca Dhuibhne in west Kerry where he wrote his great lyric 'Is Fada Liom Oiche Fhirfhliuch' ('The drenching night drags on'). Here, he portrays himself as being reduced to eating 'dogfish and periwinkles' and he rages against the sound of the waves which crash below him at night during a storm, crying at the end: 'Were Help to come again to fair Erin, I would thrust thy discordant clamour down thy throat.' In this poem he equates his own desperate plight with the plight of the Gaelic nation as a whole and this is echoed in his later work. It should be noted, however, that the autobiographical reading of this poem, and of O Rathaille's work as a whole, has recently been questioned by B. O Buachalla and it is probable that O Rathaille was never reduced to anything like the grinding poverty suggested here. 
In the years that followed O Rathaille, then moving between counties Kerry, Cork, and Limerick, composed a number of 'aisling' or vision poems. Typically in 'aisling' poetry the poet encounters a beautiful but distressed woman-queen who awaits the return of the rightful Stuart king to free her from bondage and, often, she leaves the poet with a message that help is imminent. The 'aisling' was to become the most popular form among eighteenth-century Gaelic poets, but O Rathaille was perhaps the greatest practitioner of the genre, transcending as he did what, in the hands of lesser poets, was often a repetitious formula. One of his earliest 'aislingi' was 'Gile na Gile' ('Brightness most bright'), a remarkable poem in which the beautiful maiden tells the poet 'of one returning by royal right', later referred to as 'a man most fine, thrice over, of Scottish blood' who will free her from 'that black, horned, foreign, hate crested crew'. The overall atmosphere of the poem, however, is one of despair and there is a feeling of great anxiety throughout the poem which does not indicate any great hope on the part of O Rathaille that the Pretender was in fact about to come to Ireland's aid. By way of contrast, 'Tionol na bhFear Muimhneach' ('The assembly of the men of Munster') tells of the poet's vision of the nobles of Munster preparing for the Jacobite invasion and the return of 'the wanderer without a blemish... to his rightful place in his full power and pure beauty'. In 'Maidin sul smaoin Titan a chosa do luadhaill' ('One morning ere yet Titan had thought to stir his feet') the poet encounters a group of other-worldly women who light three candles 'of indescribable light' on a hilltop to guide the return of the Stuart pretender to 'rule and defend the triple realm' of Ireland, England, and Scotland forever. 'Mac an Cheannai' ('The redeemer's son') is perhaps his best-known 'aisling' and it may date from as late as 1722. It is also the only one of his 'aisling' poems in which he adheres quite rigidly to the usual formula and it is written in a more popular metrical form. In this 'aisling ghear' or 'bitter vision', however, there seems to be no hope of the Pretender returning to the aid of 'the maiden mild whose name was Eire' and, indeed, at the end of the poem the poet himself informs the maiden that her 'redeemer' is in fact dead at which she herself is seen to expire. It has been suggested by Owen Dudley Edwards that the Mac an Cheannai referred to here was James FitzJames, duke of Berwick, who undermined the Jacobite cause by refusing to join the 1715 rising and by vanquishing Spanish arms during the War of the Spanish Succession. This would undoubtedly explain O Rathaille's disillusionment in Mac an Cheannai and it also indicates that, as well as having a deep knowledge of Jacobite popular culture, he had a fine awareness of contemporary European politics and the Jacobite cause. 
O Rathaille wrote one prose work, some time about 1713, a satire on the upstarts who had made good in the wake of the dispossession of the MacCarthys and of O Rathaille's own people. This work is entitled 'Eachtra Thaidhg Dhuibh Ui Chroinin' ('The adventure of Tadhg Dubh O Croinin') and purports to describe a gathering of upstarts in Kerry to discuss the repression of the remaining Gaelic nobility of the area which, in the end, descends into violence and bloodshed. The 'Eachtra' is heavily indebted to a famous seventeenth-century prose satire entitled 'Pairlement Chloinne Tomais' and it provides interesting insights into O Rathaille's view of those who were making good under the new order. 
In 1720 Sir Valentine Browne inherited the lands of his father and O Rathaille was furious to find that he was not treated with any more favour by Valentine than he was by upstarts such as Tadhg Dubh O Croinin. He wrote of his feelings towards Valentine in 'Vailintin Brun' in which he accused Sir Valentine of having 'usurped the rights of the noble MacCarthy'. 
O Rathaille seems to have ended his days in the Sliabh Luachra area of his youth, and his great valedictory poem is entitled 'Cabhair Ni Ghairfead' ('I will not call for help'), popularly known as 'An File ar Leaba a Bhais' ('The poet on his deathbed'). Here he portrays himself as close to death and states that he will no longer ask Valentine Browne or anyone else for help but will follow his beloved MacCarthys, who were his people's princes 'since before the death of Christ', to the grave. O Rathaille died in 1729 and was buried in Muckross Abbey in Killarney, burial place of the MacCarthys. 


@@@@@


doc= 58835


Khan, Muhammad Iftikhar Ali, nawab of Pataudi (1910-1952), cricketer, was born in Pataudi in the Punjab on 16 March 1910, the elder son of Muhammad Ibrahim Ali Khan, the nawab of Pataudi (died before 1927). The princely area of Pataudi, of which he was formally installed as ruler in December 1931, comprised some 53 square miles near Delhi with a population of nearly 19,000. He was educated at the Aitchison Chiefs' College, Lahore, where he was coached by the Oxford blue M. G. Slater. After arriving in Britain in 1926 as a boy of sixteen, his cricket education was further enriched with coaching by the Kent and England batsman Frank Woolley. 
Pataudi went up to Balliol College, Oxford, in 1927 and two years later won his university cricket blue. In the 1931 season he scored 1307 runs for the university at an average of 93 and entered the record books through his batting in that year's match against Cambridge. On the first day A. Ratcliffe of Cambridge set a new record for the fixture by scoring 201. Pataudi assured his exhausted colleagues that it would not last twenty-four hours and kept his word by scoring 238. His record still stands. The innings displayed his splendid eye for a cricket ball, the fluency of his stroke play, and his ability to score all round the wicket. 
Pataudi toured Australia in 1932-3 as part of Douglas Jardine's infamous 'bodyline' tour, becoming the third of the remarkable trinity of Indian princes (after Ranjitsinhji and Duleepsinhji) to play for England. On his debut in the first test at Sydney in December 1932 he scored 102, a slow but valuable innings that helped England secure a ten-wicket victory. But he found relations with Jardine difficult, and after a poor performance in the second test was dropped. His next, and last, appearance for England was against Australia at Trent Bridge in June 1934. The brevity of his test career was despite the fact that in 1933 and 1934 he scored prodigiously for Worcestershire, hitting three double hundreds in 1933 and achieving an average of 91.33 a year later. 
By then in poor health, Pataudi returned to India, where he was already part of a continuing web of intrigue to choose a cricket captain. For fifteen years he was seen in India as the captain across the water, a cricketing version of Banquo's ghost at the Indian captaincy table. He could have led India in 1932, when the country made its test debut at Lord's, but after playing in one of the final trials he withdrew his name. More than a year before India's 1936 tour of England he accepted the Indian captaincy, only to change his mind, ostensibly on health grounds. In fact, as he privately disclosed, he could not face leading a side to 'please each community... and the rich patrons of the game' (Bose, 'History', 100). In 1939 he married Sajida Sultan, second daughter of Sir Hamidullah Khan, the nawab of Bhopal. It was possibly the influence of his father-in-law that caused him suddenly before India's 1946 tour of England to emerge out of virtual retirement to claim the crown of the captaincy; at a time when the future of princes in an independent India was at stake, Bhopal thought it important that the team should be led by a princely figure. But although he scored heavily on the tour, averaging 46.71, Pataudi's highest score in the three test matches was 22 and he averaged just 11.00. His captaincy not only failed to live up to extravagant Indian hopes but also attracted well-merited English criticism. 
India's independence a few months after the tour saw Pataudi lose his small principality, and thereafter he worked for the Indian foreign office. However, he still hankered after playing cricket and in November 1951 MCC approved his application to play for Worcestershire in 1952, which would have coincided with an Indian tour of England. But on 5 January 1952, while playing polo in Delhi, he had a heart attack and died. He had three daughters and a son, Mansur Ali, an eleven-year-old schoolboy in England at the time of his father's death, who was left to fulfil his father's ambitions and become one of India's best-loved captains. 


@@@@@


doc= 58839


Ramensky, Johnny (1905-1972), safe-breaker and gaolbreaker, was born in Glenboig, Lanarkshire, on the outskirts of Glasgow, the only son in the family of three children of Lithuanian immigrants. His father, a Lanarkshire coalminer, died while Ramensky was still a child, and he was brought up in poverty by his mother, who had lost an arm in an accident. He left school at fourteen, and worked in the mines for a brief period before the family moved to Glasgow, settling in a tenement block in the Gorbals. He sold newspapers in the streets of Glasgow, but drifted into crime, and was sent to Polmont borstal, near Falkirk, in 1921, at the age of sixteen, and again in 1922, this time for eighteen months. When he came out, he and another former inmate turned to safe-breaking, putting to use the expertise he had acquired while handling explosives down the mines. 
In 1934 Ramensky was caught breaking open a safe in a bakery in Aberdeen. As he began serving his prison sentence in Peterhead prison, his wife, Daisy ('nee' McManus), died of a heart attack, in December 1934, and, refused permission to go to her funeral in Glasgow, Ramensky made the first of his five escapes from Peterhead. He was caught trying to cross the bridge at Ellon, 15 miles away, and as a punishment was shackled for weeks to the wall of his cell, in solitary confinement. John McGovern, MP for Shettleston, took up his case with the home secretary, and the shackles were removed: Ramensky was the last man in Scotland to be shackled in a prison cell, as well as the first to escape from Peterhead prison. 
After his release Ramensky returned at once to safe-breaking, but his methods of blowing safes were easily identifiable, and he was convicted in 1938, and sentenced to five years in prison. However, in 1942, a few months before he was due to be released, he was taken to the War Office and asked to enlist in the army, as his skills with explosives were needed. He was trained as a commando at Achnacarry Castle, Inverness-shire, and, promoted to the rank of sergeant, he taught commandos how to blow safes, before being parachuted behind enemy lines several times to break open safes and steal military plans and secret documents. As the Eighth Army moved across north Africa he broke into safes ahead of the front line, including that at Rommel's headquarters, and when the allies captured Rome his commando unit blew fourteen safes in foreign embassies in one day. In Germany it was Ramensky who opened the strongroom and safes at Goering's headquarters in the Schorfheide. 
Ramensky, who had changed his name to Ramsay, was demobilized in 1945 with the Military Medal. But within days he broke into a jeweller's shop in York, robbed the safe, and was sentenced to five years in prison. Freed in 1950, after seven days he was arrested again after blowing a safe at Cardonald post office, near Glasgow, and given another five-year sentence. At this point he began secretly writing his memoirs, although this was forbidden under the 'Official Secrets Act', and, hoping to find a publisher, he escaped from Peterhead in 1952 but was again captured at Ellon Bridge, and the manuscript was impounded and destroyed. 
When he was released in 1955, Ramensky married a widow from the Gorbals, Mrs Lilly Mulholland, but he then robbed a bank in Oban, and was arrested for a raid on a bank in Rutherglen. Although his war record had been taken into account before, this time Lord Carmont, in the Glasgow high court, imposed a sentence of ten years' preventive detention, and he was sent back to Peterhead prison. In 1958 he escaped three times: after the third escape, which involved hiding under the floorboards of the doctor's surgery for a week before escaping over the wall, an inquiry was set up into how a known escaper could escape three times in one year. 
Ramensky served nine years of this sentence. On his release in 1964 he got a job as a labourer, but after a break-in at Woolworths in Paisley he was sent back to gaol for two years. In 1967 he blew open a safe at Rutherglen and began a four-year gaol sentence, and in 1970 he fell off a roof while escaping from a safe-breaking in Stirling, and spent three months in hospital before going back to prison. Released in 1972, he was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment after being caught hiding on the roof of a large shop in Ayr in an attempt to break in: during his final court appearance his solicitor said he had been on more roofs than the legendary fiddler. 
Johnny Ramensky died on 4 November 1972 in Perth Royal Infirmary after collapsing in Perth prison. Hundreds of mourners attended his funeral in St Francis's Chapel in the Gorbals. He had become a legend. Two popular songs were written about him in the 1950s: the actor Roddy McMillan wrote and recorded 'Set Ramensky Free', and the Labour MP Norman Buchan wrote 'The Ballad of Johnny Ramensky'. He was known as Gentle Johnny because he was never violent, and his repeated prison escapes won him much public sympathy: at one point he was likened to Robin Hood escaping from the castle of the sheriff of Nottingham. A compulsive safe-breaker, Ramensky found it impossible to give up his safe-blowing activities after the war, driven by what his lawyer, Nicholas Fairbairn QC, was to describe as a lifelong compulsion to break into whatever he was out of and out of whatever he was inside. Ramensky, sentenced to more than fifty-eight years in gaol, spent over forty years in prison: most of his adult life. 


@@@@@


doc= 58841


Rattenbury, Alma Victoria (1897/8-1935), accused murderer, was born probably in Prince Rupert, British Columbia, Canada, the daughter of a goldmining prospector named Wolfe (who subsequently disappeared) and his wife, Elizabeth, reputedly a relative of W. G. Grace. After her mother's remarriage Alma took her stepfather's surname of Clarke. She was educated in Kamloops and Toronto. From an early age she showed musical talent and reputedly was a soloist with the Toronto Symphony Orchestra at the age of seventeen. Later she composed sentimental ballads under the name of Lozanne. 
In 1914 Alma married Calendon Robert Radclyffe Dolling (1890?-1916), nephew of the earl of Caledon, an Anglo-Irishman. On the outbreak of the First World World he enlisted in the Royal Welch Fusiliers and she worked in the War Office. After his death in action she joined the Scottish Women's Hospital attached to the French Red Cross as a stretcher-bearer, during which time she was twice wounded and awarded the Croix de Guerre with star and palm. In peacetime she met Captain Thomas Compton Pakenham (1893-1957), a kinsman of the earl of Longford. In 1920 Alma was cited as a co-respondent in Pakenham's divorce and she married him in 1921. After separating from Pakenham and returning to Canada, Alma earned her living by giving music lessons and writing sentimental songs. 
In Canada, Alma met Francis Mawson Rattenbury (1867-1935), who had established a successful architectural practice in Victoria and whose marriage was moribund. In 1925 Alma divorced Pakenham and was cited as co-respondent in Rattenbury's divorce. They married later that year, but the scandal of the divorce forced them to leave Victoria. A child, John, was born in 1928 and shortly afterwards they settled in Bournemouth at the Villa Madeira, 5 Manor Road. The marriage was happy but celibate after the birth of John. Alma, whose songs were sung by Richard Tauber and Frank Titterton as well as being broadcast by celebrated bandleaders such as Ambrose, was in 1932 diagnosed with tuberculosis. Her moods became volatile, and her habits more intemperate. 
In 1934 Rattenbury engaged as a chauffeur and handyman George Percy Stoner ('b'. 1916). Stoner and Alma soon became lovers, with Rattenbury acting as a 'mari complaisant'. After his seduction, Stoner changed from being an unassuming youth to a self-asserting character. On 24 March 1935 the Rattenburys mooted a visit to Bridport. Stoner, when he heard of this proposal, became agitated lest conjugal relations be resumed. At 1.30 a.m. on 25 March the police were summoned to Villa Madeira; Rattenbury had been taken to Strathallen Nursing Home with head injuries, and foul play was suspected. They found Alma highly excited, incoherent, and intoxicated. She repeatedly declared that she had attacked her husband with a mallet. 
Alma found herself in prison with no clear recollection of what had happened. She did not remember signing or reaffirming her confession but refused to reject it. In her infatuation with Stoner she assumed responsibility for what had happened. After Rattenbury's death on 28 March Stoner was arrested and admitted hitting Rattenbury with his mallet. On 29 March he and Alma were charged in the Bournemouth police court. The director of public prosecutions decided to proceed with the case against both the accused, each being a self-confessed murderer. He did not charge them with conspiracy, as there was no evidence of collusion. Each was to be charged individually with murder but in the same indictment, so that they were tried together. Alma was cajoled by Daphne Kingham, Pakenham's sister, into withdrawing her confession because it would haunt her two sons for all their lives. Mrs Kingham threatened that if Alma would not protect her children, she must not expect anyone to care for them if she was convicted. A few days before the trial Mrs Kingham brought Christopher Pakenham to see his mother and this broke Alma's resistance. 
The joint trial, which opened on 27 May at the central criminal court before Sir Travers Humphreys, was the criminal sensation of the year. Alma was offered up to $3500 for her story, then a considerable sum, which she refused. Following a clear direction from the judge, the jury were out for less than an hour before acquitting Alma but convicting Stoner (31 May). Mrs Kingham took Alma away but the press besieged the flat. Her doctor took her to a nursing home pursued by journalists. Alma was physically and mentally ill. Her grief, misery, and shame for her children and Stoner were indescribable. On 4 June she bought a kitchen knife, took a train to Bournemouth, and on the Avon riverbank near Christchurch she drove the knife into her breast six times, three times penetrating her heart. She left scraps of paper, none containing a confession, the last of which said 'If I only thought it would help Stoner I would stay but it has been pointed out too vividly that I cannot help him -- and that is my death sentence' (Napley, 211). When Stoner learned of her death, he wept. 
Alma Rattenbury was buried on 8 June 1935 at St Peter's Church, Bournemouth. The conduct at her funeral was disgraceful: flowers were taken from her grave as souvenirs. At first flowers were also taken from the garden of Villa Madeira but others subsequently forced an entry and stole various objects, including children's toys, letters, and photographs. After hearing of Alma's death, Stoner made a statement to the effect that he was not guilty. His appeal was turned down but a petition was launched and Stoner was reprieved. He served seven years before being released to serve in the army during the Second World War. Several television dramas have since been based on the story and Terence Rattigan's 'Cause celebre' (1977) was based on the Stoner-Rattenbury murder trial. 


@@@@@


doc= 58843


Russell, John Francis Stanley, second Earl Russell (1865-1931), politician, motorist, and litigant, was born at Alderley Park, Cheshire, on 12 August 1865, the eldest of the three children of John Russell, Viscount Amberley (1842-1876) (eldest son of the first Earl Russell, previously Lord John Russell), and his wife, Katharine Louise (Kate) Russell, Viscountess Amberley, daughter of the second Baron Stanley of Alderley. Bertrand Arthur William Russell (1872-1970), who succeeded as the third Earl Russell, was his younger brother. 
In infancy Russell lived at Rodborough Manor, near Stroud, Gloucestershire, owned by his paternal grandfather, and then from 1870 at Ravenscroft (now Cleddon Hall), above Trellech in the Wye Valley, Monmouthshire. There he did much as he wished, exploring the countryside barefoot and, in accordance with his parents' democratic ideals, played with the servants' children on equal terms. Both his parents were agnostics and Russell never attended church. Following his father's death in January 1876, he became Viscount Amberley. On his grandfather's death, in 1878, he became Earl Russell. 
Although Russell's father had wanted his sons brought up as agnostics the boys were placed in the care of his mother, Countess Russell, and other relations at Pembroke Lodge in Richmond, Surrey, where he found the atmosphere of moral rectitude and piety, 'a nightmare'; he ran away twice (Russell, 'My Life', 33). He was educated by a succession of governesses and tutors until the age of twelve and then, in 1878, went to R. S. Tabor's School in Cheam, followed by Winchester College, where he spent four years. He entered Balliol College, Oxford, in October 1883, and though he never graduated he regarded his two years at Oxford as the happiest of his life. He voluntarily withdrew from the university in May 1885 after the master of Balliol, Benjamin Jowett, accused him of 'disgusting conduct in writing some scandalous letter' (ibid., 107). Russell denied wrongdoing and refused to be punished, but never entirely escaped the shame of the 'Oxford incident'. He next lived with a tutor in a suburban semi-detached house in Hampton and made the first of two extended visits to the USA, where he made the acquaintance of Walt Whitman and George Santayana. He was the first Englishman Santayana encountered and the two became lifelong friends. 
In his early twenties Russell moved to Broom Hall, Teddington. Building on his childhood interests in science and engineering, and experience gained as an adolescent when he helped electrify Hatfield House, he set up an electrical contracting business with the electrical engineer James Swinburne. He later established his own company with offices in Queen Victoria Street, works at Walham Green, and a branch in Cambridge. He found it difficult to compete, however, and after three years abandoned the enterprise at considerable financial loss. For many years he was chairman of the marine engineering firm Plenty & Co of Newbury, and with varying degrees of success was associated with other businesses. 
In 1890 Russell took up residence at Amberley Cottage on the Thames near Maidenhead. He intended it to be a marital home but his first wife, Mabel Edith Scott (1869-1908), whom he married on 6 February 1890, left him exactly three months later, and never lived there. She was the daughter of Sir Claud Edward Scott, fourth baronet, and his wife, Maria Selina, 'nee' Burney. Protracted litigation followed the marital break-up, including demands for judicial separation and restitution of conjugal rights. In court in 1895 Russell found himself accused of an 'abominable offence' with an unnamed male (actually a maths teacher called Herbert Roberts) and of 'disgraceful conduct' with other men (Russell, 'My Life', 198 and 202; Moorehead, 45). He prevailed in most of these actions, but his demand for a judicial separation on the ground of his wife's cruelty was denied by the House of Lords in 1897 ('The Times', 17 July 1897). When Mabel's mother, Lady Scott, libelled Russell, alleging sexual relations with men, Russell prosecuted her and two of her associates. They were convicted and sentenced to eight months' imprisonment ('The Times', 13 Oct 1896; 9 Jan 1897). 
Following the 'Local Government Act' of 1894 Russell was persuaded to stand for Cookham parish council, and was elected and made chairman. He then became a district councillor, serving as a Progressive, poor law guardian, and Berkshire JP. From 1895 to 1904 he also sat on London county council as a Progressive, initially for West Newington, then as an alderman. Russell served on several committees and took a particular interest in asylums. Admitted to Gray's Inn in 1899, he was called to the bar in 1905 and practised for about five years. 
While still married to his first wife Russell met Mrs Marion (Mollie) Somerville ('nee' Cooke). In 1899 they travelled to the USA to obtain Russell a divorce and lived at Glenbrook, Nevada, to fulfil the state's six-month residence requirement. Days after the divorce they married in Reno, even though Mollie was still married to her second husband, George Somerville. In May 1900 they returned to England and Russell persuaded Mabel, with a large financial inducement, to sue for divorce. In June 1901 Russell was arrested for bigamy on the ground that while his American marriage was valid, his divorce was not. He was tried by his peers in the House of Lords, convicted in July 1901, and imprisoned for three months in Holloway as a criminal of the first division, a status that afforded him numerous privileges. Russell thought his offence purely technical and his conviction 'hypocritical tosh'; he believed he was victimized because he was a radical and an unbeliever (Russell, 'My Life', 283 and 289). In 1911 he gained a free pardon. His second marriage was formalized at Holborn register office on 31 October 1901, three days after his divorce from Mabel. 
Russell sat in the House of Lords for some forty-four years. At first he had little interest in the upper house though gradually became involved in committee work. In 1902 he introduced a bill which provided for divorce after one year's separation, provided consent was mutual. The Lord Chancellor 'danced with rage' at this prospect and described the measure as an 'outrage', the peers unanimously denied it a second reading (Russell, 'My Life', 324; 'The Times', 2 May 1902). Undaunted, Russell persevered with the cause of divorce reform, not least through his Divorce Reform Society and as a witness before the royal commission on divorce and matrimonial proceedings (1912-13). He also espoused such unpopular causes as prisoners' and Gypsies' rights, and during the war decried the brutal treatment of conscientious objectors. Lord Birkenhead thought him a fine debater, though when Santayana saw Russell in action he found him 'platitudinous and partial' (Santayana, 'The Middle Span', 75). Outside the Lords he proclaimed himself an 'ardent feminist' and often addressed women's suffrage meetings. 
Russell had a long-standing interest in motoring and spoke in the House of Lords on motoring matters as early as 1903 and consistently thereafter. He championed the motorist, whom he believed was over-taxed and victimized by the police, but also favoured severe penalties for drunk drivers. Motor cars appealed to his wanderlust and love of things mechanical. His first vehicle was a 21/2 horsepower Benz. In America he bought a Haynes-Apperson car which he shipped back to Britain. Many other vehicles followed and in 1924 he claimed to have driven over 200,000 miles ('The Times', 20 Feb 1924). As chairman of the London county council's highways committee he obtained the registration plate A1 after the 'Motor Car Act' 1903 made licensing compulsory. He later relinquished it because it became too well known to the Surrey police, notorious for their speed traps. He joined the Automobile Club of Great Britain and Ireland (RAC from 1907) early in its existence, served on all its committees, and acted as a steward in the 1903 Gordon Bennett race. He also was prominent in the Automobile Association from its first days but resigned when it became too 'cautious and respectable and refused any longer to fight the police' over speed traps (Russell, 'My Life', 295). As a barrister he obtained many briefs through his motoring connections and defended many motorists. He also served with the army motor reserve. 
In 1915 Russell's second marriage ended in divorce on the grounds of his desertion and adultery ('The Times', 13 July 1915). Mollie's 'price' was $400 a year for life which, after Russell's death, his brother was obliged to pay. On 11 February 1916 Russell married the widowed novelist Elizabeth von Arnim, who had been his lover for several years. Before her wedding Elizabeth doubted the wisdom of proceeding, and almost immediately afterwards fled. Following a brief reconciliation she left for good in 1919, though there was no divorce. She left a hostile depiction of him and their marriage in her novel 'Vera' (1921). All Russell's marriages were childless, though he acquired several step-children. 
From 1921 Russell was an active supporter of Marie Stopes's Society for Constructive Birth Control and, as such, one of the earliest of its few aristocratic champions. For many years he was a member of the Fabian Society and Labour Party. In 1929 he was appointed under-secretary of state at the India Office and parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Transport in the second Labour government (1929-31). He distinguished himself as a delegate at the round table conference on constitutional reform in India in 1930-31 and was responsible for piloting the 'Road Traffic Bill' 1930 through the Lords. 
As a youth Russell was tall and slim with 'abundant tawny hair' (Santayana, 'The Middle Span', 51), but in later life became 'a big burly man with a florid complexion and steel-blue eyes, who moved slowly and carefully' (Moorehead, 190-91). From childhood he loved cats and dogs and one of von Arnim's reservations about marrying him was his habit of sleeping with seven dogs on his bed. After dabbling with Buddhism he jettisoned all religious belief. His biography, 'My Life and Adventures', appeared in 1923. He died on 3 March 1931 at the Hotel Noailles, Marseilles, while returning home from the French riviera where he had been recuperating from a severe attack of influenza. He had suffered from heart trouble for some time. After cremation at the St Pierre cemetery in Marseilles, his ashes were returned to England, where they were scattered on the Sussex downs near Telegraph House, Harting, which had been his home for some thirty years. There was no religious service and mourning was not worn. Though some of his business ventures were lucrative, by 1921 he described himself as 'bankrupt'. He left his scanty personal effects to Amy Elizabeth Otter, his executrix, whom he had met at the London county council. 


@@@@@


doc= 58844


Russell, Hastings William Sackville, twelfth duke of Bedford (1888-1953), evangelical Christian and pacifist, was born on 21 December 1888 at Cairnsmore House, Minnigaff, Kirkcudbrightshire, the only child of Lord Herbrand Arthur Russell, later eleventh duke of Bedford (1858-1940), and his wife, Mary Du Caurroy Russell (1865-1937) ['see under 'Russell, Herbrand Arthur], daughter of the Ven. W. H. Tribe, archdeacon of Lahore. His childhood was lonely. His father was forbidding, aloof, and autocratic; his mother (the famous Flying Duchess, who was to take up aviation in her sixties) was deaf, short-tempered, and dismissive of anything short of perfection. He shared, however, his parents' interest in wildlife, and was later to produce publications on birds of the parrot family. 
In 1893, when his father became duke, Russell took the courtesy title of marquess of Tavistock. At Eton College (1905-7) he was bullied and unhappy. At Balliol College, Oxford (1907-11), where he obtained a fourth in history, he developed the strong evangelical Christian beliefs that were to dominate the rest of his life. In 1912, at his father's wish, he joined the Middlesex regiment but, hating the experience, resigned his commission. At the outbreak of the First World War he refused to rejoin the regiment, and his father disinherited him; they did not see each other again for twenty years. Through Robert Whitwell, an Oxford don interested in the YMCA, he became in 1914 a helper at a camp near Portsmouth, where he worked for five years (his bad eyesight saving him from military service). On 21 November 1914 he married Whitwell's daughter, Louisa Crommelin Roberta Jowitt (1893-1960). They were to have two sons and one daughter. 
From 1919 Tavistock immersed himself in Christian and social work. Concerned at the effects of the economic situation, he became a supporter of social credit, on which he wrote extensively. His personal life, meanwhile, suffered. In 1935 he and his wife separated, after a highly public lawsuit in which she had unsuccessfully sued for restoration of conjugal rights; and in 1939 he disinherited his elder son because of what he saw as an unsuitable marriage. 
In 1938-9, campaigning against the approaching war, Tavistock became associated with the pro-Nazi and antisemitic fringe, becoming in 1939 president of the openly antisemitic British People's Party (whose programme included monetary reform and peace with Nazi Germany). Its general secretary was John Beckett, co-founder of William Joyce's National Socialist League. Like many pre-war pacifists Tavistock may have acted through naivety; his letters and memoirs betray ignorance of the implications of antisemitism. After the outbreak of war he became chairman of the British Council for a Christian Settlement in Europe, with Beckett as secretary, and also took part, in late 1939, in secret meetings with Oswald Mosley and representatives of other extremist organizations. In January 1940 certain peace proposals were conveyed to him via the German legation in Dublin. Tavistock, despite official scepticism, went to Dublin, and returned with peace terms that were ridiculed by the press, which stressed his 'fascist' connections. He remained convinced that a real chance had been thwarted by governmental apathy. 
On 27 August 1940 Tavistock succeeded his father as twelfth duke of Bedford. Throughout the war, in numerous pamphlets and in the House of Lords, he continued his peace campaign, attacking Churchill's belligerence, and 'the attempt, by the moneylending financiers and big business monopolists, to destroy the relatively sane financial system of the Axis Powers' ('Hansard 5L', 2 June 1942). His internment was often demanded (and considered seriously by the war cabinet), but never activated. 
After the war, with John Beckett, Bedford revived the British People's Party, drawing in various members of pre-war organizations such as the Imperial Fascist League and the Nordic League; it had little success. On 9 October 1953 he died of gunshot wounds, described by the coroner as accidentally inflicted, on his Endsleigh estate in Devon. After a funeral at Efford, Plymouth, on 14 October, his ashes were interred in the family vault at Chenies, Buckinghamshire. 
Described by his son as 'the loneliest man I ever knew' (John, duke of Bedford, 86-7), Bedford appears to have been an unworldly, sincere, but opinionated man, whose naivety led him into association with people and ideas that blended ill with his very real Christian ideals. 


@@@@@


doc= 58847


Ryder, Samuel (1858-1936), seed merchant and golf sponsor, was born on 24 March 1858 at Walton-le-Dale near Preston in Lancashire, the first son of Samuel Ryder (1823/4-1904), a gardener, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Martin (1822/3-1904), a dressmaker. He had three elder and two younger sisters and two younger brothers. He attended Owens College in Manchester to train as a teacher but, unlike his brother James, failed to complete the course because of ill health. Instead he joined a Manchester shipping firm and later his father's business, which had progressed from a market gardening enterprise to a combination of nurseryman, florist, and seed merchant. However, his father would not accept his ideas and he left to work for a London seed merchant. 
On 20 November 1890 Ryder married Helen Mary, known as Nellie (1864-1955), daughter of William Barnard, a tailor and draper. Two daughters, Marjorie and Joan, were born in 1893 and 1895. His daughters were infants when Ryder hit on the idea that was to make his fortune, the selling of packets of seeds through the post. In itself this was not new, as two companies already did so, but their prices varied between 1 and 10 shillings a packet. Ryder opted for a different market by advertising his seeds at only a penny a packet and set up his business in St Albans to take advantage of the town's railway connections. He began in a small way, keeping the seeds in a shed in the garden of his terraced house, where he prepared the catalogues and packets. Within a decade, after several moves to larger premises, over 2000 orders were being dealt with daily by almost a hundred staff. In 1922, with his brother James who had retired from teaching, he developed another successful venture, Heath and Heather, which specialized in herbs. Ryder became a wealthy man, owning property around St Albans, and making generous loans and donations to the local grammar school, his church, and several charities. In 1933 he brought his younger daughter Joan on to the board and after his death she took on the day-to-day management of the companies. 
A committed Christian, Ryder became a junior Sunday school teacher in Sale when aged seventeen and in 1911 he was appointed president of the Mid-Hertfordshire Sunday School Union. He was an enthusiastic supporter of the project to build Trinity Congregational Church in St Albans, which opened in 1903, and of which he was a deacon. Also in that year, as a member of the Liberal Party, he was elected to the local council. He became mayor of St Albans in 1905 and continued to serve as a councillor until 1916. 
Another period of ill health led indirectly to the creation of the Ryder cup, a trophy for a biennial international golf match. Aware that his doctor had advised open-air exercise, Ryder's friend and preacher at Trinity Congregational Church, Frank Walker, introduced him to golf in 1908. He became addicted, joined the local Verulam club, where he served on the greens committee for twenty years and became captain in 1911 after heading the subscription list for debentures to finance the expansion of the course. Two more years as captain followed in the late 1920s; both came after he made large donations to improve the club premises. 
As a low handicap player himself Ryder had a high regard for professional golfers, and sympathized with the fact that they often had to forfeit their club pay when away playing in tournaments. Hence when Heath and Heather first sponsored a tournament in 1923 he ensured that all forty-eight competitors received at least $5 for playing so that none went home out of pocket. Ryder was also a golfing patriot and in 1924 he sponsored a 72-hole four-ball match between two Americans and two British players, one of whom was Abe Mitchell (1887-1947). In 1925 he appointed Mitchell as his personal golf tutor; as Ryder was now sixty-seven this was a sinecure designed to allow Mitchell time to practise and compete effectively against the Americans who were beginning to dominate the open championship. In June 1926 he funded an international match at Wentworth between British and American professionals before the latter played in the qualifying rounds for that year's open. This stimulated him to propose a regular event between representatives of the British and American professional golfers' associations, the two leading groups of golfers in the world. For this he offered the Ryder cup, a 100 guineas gold trophy with the figure of Abe Mitchell on top, which was won by the Americans at the first match, held at Worcester, Massachusetts, in June 1927. Ryder attended the first two matches held in Britain and presented his trophy to the winning British captains in April 1929 at Moortown and June 1933 at Southport. 
By this time Ryder's health had deteriorated significantly. In an unavailing attempt to improve it he visited his elder daughter, who had migrated to Rhodesia. He died of pneumonia on 2 January 1936 at the Langham Hotel, Portland Place, London, the customary Christmas holiday residence of the Ryder family. He was buried at St Albans Trinity Congregational Church, St Albans, with his favourite golf club, his mashie, in his coffin. Although he left money for his household staff, his will did not include any charitable bequests because he had preferred to make them 'during my lifetime, as calculated to be of greater benefit to all concerned, than awaiting until after my death' (Murgatroyd and Booth, 23). 


@@@@@


doc= 58849


John Shakespeare (b. in or before 1530, d. 1601) did not continue Richard's occupation. By the time he married Mary Arden (some time between November 1556 and 1558), he had established himself in Stratford as a glover and whittawer (a dresser of light-coloured leather). He lived in Henley Street, buying a house and garden there in 1556 and starting to buy further property in town. In this he might well have been helped by his wife's inheritance: in Robert Arden's will of November 1556 she was named one of the two executors and supervised the substantial inventory of his goods and moveables in December 1556 after his death. She also inherited the valuable estate in Wilmcote known as Asbies, land that on her marriage came to her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 58850


Sharp, Sir Percival (1867-1953), schoolteacher and educational administrator, was born on 12 September 1867, at Bishop Auckland, co. Durham, the son of Henry Sharp, a grocer, and his wife, Catherine. He attended Edward Walton's endowed (public elementary) school, Bishop Auckland, and at the age of thirteen was apprenticed as a pupil teacher. He moved on to Homerton College, Cambridge, where he was top student of his year. On 28 March 1891 he married Janet ('b'. 1867/8), daughter of Thomas Henderson McLaren, with whom he had three sons. As a certificated teacher he held posts in West Hartlepool, Croydon, and Hull where he taught at the central higher grade school. After a short period of headship in Hull, he became headmaster of Bowerham School, Lancaster's first board school. 
In 1903 Sharp was appointed inspector of schools in St Helens and subsequently director of education and in 1914 moved to Newcastle in a similar capacity. In 1919 he was invited to become Sheffield's first director of education, a post which he held until 1932. He was first elected to the executive committee of the Association of Education Committees (AEC) in 1911, and, except for a two-year break, was an active member of the executive for the rest of his life. The Association of Education Committees was set up in 1904 to represent the interests of the newly created education committees to government, and both chairs of committees and directors of education were normally in membership of the association. In its early years most of the education committees in the boroughs and urban districts joined the association, but it was not until the late 1940s that county education committees came in. The reorganization of local government in 1974 led directly to the association's demise in 1977. Sharp was the honorary secretary of the association from 1925 to 1932, when he was appointed as the association's first full-time secretary, a position he held until the end of 1944. 
Sharp's long life was devoted to the state education service, and particularly to enhancing the role of the local education authorities within it. After the passing of the 1902 'Education Act', the Board of Education under Sir Robert Morant's leadership, tried to keep the newly created local education authorities (LEAs) firmly under its own control. Several of the directors of education in the large industrial cities resisted and were determined to raise the status of the chief officers of LEAs. Spurley Hey (Manchester), James Graham (Leeds), and Sharp, affectionately termed the Three Musketeers by contemporaries, took a leading part in this and by the end of the 1920s had largely succeeded in their objective. Later, board officials complained that in the 1920s the balance of power had passed to the LEAs and that the department's own position had been belittled (Cooke and Gosden, 50). 
For about twenty years Sharp was at the helm at the AEC, and was effectively the voice of the LEAs. He was the driving force behind the setting up of a national office in London, and he also conducted the negotiations which brought the journal, 'Education', under the association's control. He had a formidable reputation as an organizer, a forceful speaker, and writer, although some saw his manner as dictatorial. Lord Eustace Percy, a former president of the Board of Education, referred to him as the AEC's 'chief professional henchman' who was 'a little combative bull-terrier of a man' (Percy, 122). His successor as secretary to the AEC, Bill Alexander, pointed out that 'he loved a fight and no one can deny he was a bonny fighter' ('Education', 13 Feb 1953, 261). Sharp was also described as 'a pedagogic gnat on the loins of the minister of education' ('Education', 24 Nov 1944, 643). In 1944 Sharp recalled 'the time when to approach the board of education was like laying a profane hand on the Ark of the Covenant', but took pride in the fact that 'now the association's advice was not only welcomed but sought' (ibid., 643). At times Sharp irritated the board's officials, acquiring a reputation for making public material they regarded as confidential, and he never enjoyed the same measure of confidence among them as Alexander did after the war. 
Throughout his career Sharp took a strong interest in teachers' pay. In his early days as a teacher he negotiated with Croydon school board for a pay rise for his colleagues. He was involved with the Burnham committee from its inception in 1919, serving as secretary to the local authorities' panel on that body from 1925 to 1944. He helped to frame the original Burnham pay scales, and later expressed the view that the work of this committee 'had revolutionised the economic condition of vast numbers of teachers' ('Education', 5 Jan 1945, 14). In 1949 he resigned in protest from Burnham when the committee was forced by government to reject a pay rise for teachers which he believed was merited. 
During the Second World War, Sharp was involved in the negotiations which led up to the 1944 'Education Act'. He had little option but to fight for the continued existence of part 3 education authorities which had been set up by the 'Education Act' of 1902 as authorities for elementary education in non-county boroughs with populations over 10,000 and in urban districts with populations over 20,000. The AEC stood to lose a large number of members if they were abolished. There was, by this time, widespread agreement that these authorities had outlived their usefulness and Sharp lost this battle. At this time, Sharp also served on the Norwood committee which reported to the Board of Education on the curriculum and examinations in secondary schools. The committee provided much of the rationale for the post-war tripartite system of secondary schooling. There is no evidence to suggest that Sharp played a leading role on the Norwood committee, and he was quite content to subscribe to the prevailing view that there should be differentiation between types of secondary schools. His main interest was to ensure that local education authorities retained control of the proposed new secondary modern schools which he tended to see as former senior elementary schools (TNA: PRO, Ed. 136/378, note of meeting, 11 Aug 1943). He saw no reason why these schools, even if they were secondary in name, should be given the same kind of independence afforded to the grammar schools. 
In 1938 Sharp was knighted for his services to education. From humble origins he came 'to the top the hard way' and tended, at least in his later years, 'to look at education always rather from the extinct pupil-teacher point of view' (Percy, 122). He was invariably a forceful negotiator, and 'a tough nut' which is well illustrated by the fact that he travelled from Falmouth to London for AEC executive meetings when he was in his eighties. He attended his last executive on 30 January and died at his home, Kinbrae, Gyllyngvase Road, Falmouth, Cornwall, on 8 February 1953. 


@@@@@


doc= 58851


Shaw, Martin Edward Fallas (1875-1958), composer, was born on 9 March 1875 at 3 High Street, Kennington, London, the eldest of the nine children of James Shaw (1842-1907), church organist, and his wife, Charlotte Elizabeth James, who had trained as a pianist. A startling birthmark on the left of his face did not make him shy. Brought up in Belsize Park, where he attended a local private school, Martin became organist at Emmanuel Church, Hampstead, in 1895 and entered the Royal College of Music. He liked his tutor, C. V. Stanford, but lacked application and dropped out after two years. 
Shaw made friends with the theatre reformer Edward Gordon Craig in 1897. Together they mounted an innovative production of 'Dido and Aeneas' for the Purcell Operatic Society in 1900, yet the professional theatre was slow to engage them. Writing incidental music for occasional plays generated very little income for Shaw, who lost his church job in 1903. Though gruff with strangers, he was exuberant among fellow bohemians in Chelsea, where he sported a sombrero, sandals, and cloak. Ralph Vaughan Williams gave him casual work researching old tunes for the 'English Hymnal' (1906). Then he conducted for Isadora Duncan, the American dance pioneer (and lover of Craig), on two European tours. 
In 1908 Shaw took to the organ loft of St Mary the Virgin, Primrose Hill. Plainsong and chanting suited Percy Dearmer, the unconventional high-church vicar there, who decried sentimental nineteenth-century music. Shaw agreed, sometimes likening the popular hymns of Sir John Stainer, Joseph Barnby, and J. B. Dykes to overripe bananas. The two men sought to revive the purity of earlier sacred song, compiling 'The English Carol Book' in 1913; in the same year Shaw co-founded the Summer School of Church Music. He also collaborated with Mabel Dearmer on musical plays for children, including 'Brer Rabbit'. 
Shaw joined the army in 1914 but was soon discharged owing to bouts of near blindness indirectly caused by diabetes. Fervently patriotic, he campaigned against performances of German music and secured his commercial breakthrough with 'Six Songs of War' (1914). His marriage on 24 July 1916 further revitalized him. His wife, Joan Lindley Cobbold ('b'. 1890), was a music teacher from a Suffolk county family. He happily let her manage their lives and turn him into a countryman: a spare, clean-shaven figure in tweed suit and gaiters whose non-musical passions were woodcutting, riding, and farm work (an activity then still possible in Hampstead). Their three children, John, Diccon, and (Mary) Elizabeth, were born between 1917 and 1923. 
Shaw emerged as an artistic crusader: England had to free herself from the musical despotism of Germany. German composers after Bach had taken the path that ended in hysterical emotionalism, and all Europe had followed in the nineteenth-century. But good English music could grow only from wholesome English roots: folk-song and the Elizabethan masters. Vaughan Williams and Holst led the way. Shaw aimed to take English 'national' music to ordinary English people in theatres, schools, and churches, so that they could learn to prefer it. He started by launching the League of Arts in 1918 to provide music for victory celebrations. 
Inspired by 'The Beggar's Opera', Shaw composed stage works in ballad opera style with lyrics by Clifford Bax. 'Mr Pepys' ran for five weeks at the Royalty Theatre, Soho, in 1926. 'The Thorn of Avalon' (1931) mixed Glastonbury legends with May day revels. His final offering, the wistful 'Philomel', flopped in 1932. 
More rewarding was Shaw's career as a prolific arranger of choral music for schools. It helped that his brother Geoffrey Shaw (1879-1943), himself a composer, worked for the Board of Education as an inspector of music classes. 'The Motherland Song Book', 'Songs of Britain', and 'Girl Guide Hymns and Tunes' contained traditional airs such as 'A frog he would a-wooing go' and 'My bonny cuckoo'. If the settings sounded bland, it had to be conceded that Shaw was catering for amateurs. His artistry is clearer in recital ballads like 'Song of the Palanquin Bearers'. 
Shaw made his greatest impact on church music. From 1920 to 1924 he was organist at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, and he directed the music for Maude Royden's fellowship services until 1936. Two classic publications disseminated his repertory. 'Songs of Praise' (1925), edited by Shaw, Vaughan Williams, and Dearmer, replaced Victorian hymns with Tudor and folk-based ones. 'The Oxford Book of Carols' (1928) consisted of the trio's choice of traditional religious songs plus new carols by English composers. 
With missionary zeal Shaw toured the country, explaining the superiority of 'Songs of Praise' to 'Hymns Ancient and Modern'. He also composed a stream of anthems and services. Whereas the Victorians favoured triple time and lush chromatic harmonies, Shaw employed quadruple time or irregular groupings and stark quasi-modal harmonies. His works were easy enough for average congregations to sing yet 'progressive' enough to satisfy the fastidious. The growth of Anglo-Catholicism increased demand for liturgical music, and his 'Anglican Folk Mass' (1918) spread far and wide. 
The archbishop of Canterbury awarded Shaw (and his brother) the Lambeth doctorate of music in 1932. The diocese of Chelmsford employed him as its director of music from 1935 to 1944. A pillar of the church music establishment, he remained too dogmatic about 'Englishness' to get on well with his counterparts Walford Davies and Sydney Nicholson. To 'cultured' Anglicans between the wars, he was a saviour of hymnody and arbiter of taste. 
Shaw's activities grew more localized after he left London for Essex in 1936. Half a dozen new choral pieces still appeared each year, notably 'The Redeemer' (1944) and 'God's Grandeur' (1948). He retired to Suffolk in 1946, became an OBE in 1955, and was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Music shortly before he died at his home, Long Island House, Southwold, on 24 October 1958. After cremation his ashes were interred at Southwold. His wife survived him. 
By the end of the twentieth century, the music of Martin Shaw was not much prized. His foes in the cosmopolitan camp had always disparaged it, while even enthusiasts for 'English pastoralism' tended to assume that anything Shaw did, Vaughan Williams could have done better. They preferred to honour him for making the church a haven for other composers of broadly the same school until the 1970s. Certain parishes continued to sing his services, and many more the hymn tunes 'Little Cornard' and 'Marching'. His secular solo songs -- the least didactic of his works -- retained most critical esteem. 


@@@@@


doc= 58854


Simpson, Thomas (1937-1967), racing cyclist, was born on 30 November 1937 at Station Street, Haswell, co. Durham, the youngest of the six children of Thomas Simpson, a conveyor worker in a coal mine who became a glassworker and later a storekeeper, and his wife, Alice Cheetham. He was brought up in Harworth, Nottinghamshire, and as a boy he joined Harworth district cycling club where he was nicknamed Four-Stone Coppi after the Italian champion. While working as a draughtsman in a Retford glassworks he won a bronze medal in the team pursuit at the Melbourne Olympics (1956) and a silver in the individual pursuit at the Cardiff British Commonwealth and empire games (1958). With stamina belied by his fragile appearance, he won his first professional world road championship in 1959 at the Zandewoort circuit in the Netherlands. On 3 January 1961 he married Helen Margaret Sherburn ('b'. 1939/40), whom he met when she was working as an au pair in France, the daughter of Frank Sherburn, produce merchant. They had two daughters. In 1961 he won the tour of Flanders, the first classic win by a Briton for sixty-five years. Other classic victories followed including Bordeaux-Paris, Paris-Nice, Ghent-Wevelgem, Milan-San Remo, and, in 1965, the tour of Lombardy. 
Tommy Simpson was world professional road race champion in 1965 and was voted BBC sports personality of the year. But an injured leg, broken on a family skiing holiday, meant that he missed most of the following season and was unable to exploit his title commercially. Aged twenty-nine, he saw the 1967 tour de France, the world's greatest cycle race, as his last remaining chance to make big money out of the sport. On 13 July 1967, during the thirteenth stage, 133 miles from Marseilles to Carpentras, after remounting twice Simpson finally collapsed in high temperatures half a mile from the summit of the virtually shadeless Mont Ventoux. Attempts at resuscitation failed. His was the first known drugs-related death of a British sportsperson. Although the official cause of his demise was given as dehydration and exhaustion, it was later acknowledged that Simpson, like many other cyclists, had been using amphetamines. Taking such drugs was well established among long-distance racing cyclists in the days when there were no dope controls. Indeed attempts to introduce drug tests in 1966 had been fiercely opposed by leading cyclists, including five times tour winner Jacques Anquetil, who argued that professionals could not cope with their long season without resort to stimulants. 
As a mark of respect, the fourteenth stage from Carpentras to Sete was a slow procession with Barry Hoban, a member of Simpson's team, the predetermined winner. A memorial stone was erected near the Ventoux summit, where each year cycling fans still leave mementoes in tribute to a fallen champion. Hoban later married Simpson's widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 58855


Smith, Sydney Goodsir (1915-1975), poet and playwright, was born on 26 October 1915 in Wellington, New Zealand, the son of Sir Sydney Alfred Smith (1883-1969) and his wife, Catherine Goodsir Gelenick (1866/7-1962). In 1928 his father became professor of forensic medicine at the University of Edinburgh; he himself was educated there and at Oriel College, Oxford, where he gained a third class in modern history in 1937. During the Second World War he taught English to Polish troops. By the late 1940s he had emerged as the leading figure of the second wave of the Scottish literary 'Renaissance', and over the ensuing decades he gained a reputation as a convivial and cultured presence in the legendary 'writers' pubs' of Edinburgh, as well as in more conventionally scholarly circles. 
Smith's earliest collections of poetry include 'Skail Wind' (1941), 'The Wanderer and other Poems' (1943), 'The Deevil's Waltz' (1946), and 'Selected Poems' (1947). Although he was not a native speaker of Scots, Smith succeeded in developing a convincing idiom based on the speech which he heard in the pubs and in the streets, enriched by his absorption of the great medieval Scots makars (makers, poets). The consequent range of registers, from the vernacular to the highly ornamented and stylized, was an invaluable resource for a poet concerned with sudden and contrasting changes of mood and feeling. The sequence 'Under the Eildon Tree' (1948) comprises twenty-five poems invoking the great lovers in history, legend, and literature, and setting them beside the poet's own love life; the poems alternate between passion and disillusionment, toughened by Smith's irreverent wit, his abiding awareness that the sublime and the ridiculous are interdependent. 
Smith became one of the foremost virtuosi of twentieth-century Scottish poetry, often at his most workmanlike when most playful; he delighted in the plasticity of language, in Joycean verbal pyrotechnics. This is most marked in his semi-novelistic prose work 'Carotid cornucopius' (1947), which has been compared to 'Finnegans Wake' (1939). The wordplay of 'Under the Eildon Tree' is frequently of a macaronic nature; indeed, the sequence amply demonstrates that Smith's love of language was by no means limited to Scots, and testifies to his wider European frame of cultural reference. He translated poems by Tristan Corbiere and Aleksandr Blok into Scots, and his celebrated 'The Grace of God and the Meth-Drinker' is the Edinburgh Grassmarket's equivalent of the tatterdemalion grotesqueries of a Villon or a Baudelaire: '
There ye gang, ye daft 

And doitit dotterel, ye saft 

Crazed outland skalrag saul 

In your bits and ends o winnockie duds 

Your fyled and fozie-fousome clouts 

As fou's a fish 
(S. G. Smith, 'Collected Poems', 1975)' Smith's reputation grew during the 1950s. He belonged to the group of poets who were associated, as contributors and editors, with the Scottish literary magazine 'Lines Review' (published 1952-98). 'The Aipple and the Hazel' (1951), 'So Late into the Night' (1952), 'Cokkils' (1953), 'Omens' (1955), 'Orpheus and Eurydice' (1955), 'Figs and Thistles' (1959), and 'The Vision of the Prodigal Son' (1960) bore testimony to a prolific decade as a poet. In addition, he was active as a literary critic and editor. His pamphlet 'A Short Introduction to Scottish Literature' appeared in 1951; he edited 'Robert Fergusson, 1750-1774: Essays by Various Hands' (1952) and 'Gavin Douglas: a Selection from his Poetry' (1959). A lifelong admirer and student of Robert Burns, he co-edited (with James Barke) the bawdy 'Robert Burns: the Merry Muses of Caledonia' (1959). In 1966 he followed this up with 'A Choice of Burns's Poems and Songs'. 
In 1959 Smith and his poet friends C. M. Grieve (Hugh MacDiarmid) and Norman MacCaig were installed as the 'club bards' of the newly founded 200 Burns Club. In addition to MacDiarmid and MacCaig, Smith's immediate literary circle included Tom Scott and the Gaelic poet Sorley MacLean. He edited, with Kulgin Duval, 'Hugh MacDiarmid: a Festschrift' to mark that poet's seventieth birthday in 1962. 
Smith's political passions -- left-wing, nationalist -- were counterpointed by a man-of-the-world scepticism; he allowed them full sway in his verse play, 'The Wallace' (1960), which dramatizes the revolt and capture of Scotland's national hero. It was revived by the Scottish Theatre Company at the Edinburgh International Festival of 1985, and is likely to remain Smith's most controversial work. His other plays included 'Collickie Meg', based on characters from 'Carotid cornucopius', and 'The Stick-up', which the Scottish composer Robin Orr turned into an opera; it was performed by the national company, Scottish Opera. In 'The Twa Brigs', composed in 1964 to mark the opening of the Forth Road bridge, the poet makes a plea for greater communication, tolerance, and love between people, but the roguish humour offsets any tendency towards moralizing. Another Scottish composer, William Wordsworth, made a musical setting of this poem for a performance in 1973, while a third, Ronald Stevenson, maintained that he had to restrain himself from setting one Smith poem after another. Smith was no narrow litterateur, but a man who embraced all the arts or was embraced by them. 
Later sequences and collections included 'Kynd Kittock's Land' (1965), 'Fifteen Poems and a Play' (1969), and 'Gowdspink in Reekie' (1974), the last volume to appear in Smith's lifetime. With his customary loving mockery, 'Kynd Kittock's Land' celebrates the contradictions of his adopted Edinburgh: '
This rortie wretched city 

Sair come doun frae its auld hiechts. 

' Smith was a melancholy clown. He was variously nicknamed the Kilted Kiwi, or -- more frequently and affectionately -- the Great Auk. An accomplished artist in his own right, he was for many years the art critic of 'The Scotsman'. 
In 1938 Smith had married Marion Elise Welsh (1906-1966) and on 28 December 1967 he married a schoolteacher, Hazel Elizabeth Simpson Williamson (1928-2004). He died suddenly, at the Royal Infirmary in Edinburgh, on 15 January 1975; at the time a volume of his 'Collected Poems' was in production. It was seen through the press by Tom Scott and published later that year, with an introduction by Hugh MacDiarmid. Smith was buried in Dean cemetery, Edinburgh, on 19 January, and a bronze plaque, bearing his likeness in profile, was affixed to the outer wall of his former residence, 25 Drummond Place, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 58857


William Hardel (d. c.1248), deputy to Peter de Rivallis, who ran the mints and exchanges of London and Canterbury from 1234 until his death, was an important royal clerk who also served as controller of the wardrobe. But it was the master of the mint who directed day-to-day production, and whose developing combination of financial experience and practical metallurgical knowledge made him the chief mint worker during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. 
Although William I had retained most of the Anglo-Saxon moneyers who had served his predecessors, the Plantagenets often looked abroad for their senior mint staff. The central part played by 


@@@@@


doc= 58858


Henry of Frowick (d. 1286?), a leading citizen of London, was made assayer at the London mint in 1247, and promoted moneyer in 1248. Henry owned property in various parts of the city, and rose to the rank of alderman and sheriff. He married Isabel, daughter of Thomas of Durham, another alderman and sheriff, with whom he had six sons and three daughters. 
There were strong family and professional links binding all these mint workers together. Ralph of Frowick had been moneyer at London from 1218 until after 1222, and 


@@@@@


doc= 58859


Roger Frowick (fl. 1292-1327), goldsmith and moneyer, was active from 1292. Exchanger at the London mint from 1297 to 1327, Roger was involved in city politics as alderman of Langbourn ward from 1312 to 1324, served as assessor of the fifteenth in 1313, and is known to have mixed socially, as well as professionally, with John Sandale. John Hardel, appointed keeper of dies in 1247, was no doubt related to William Hardel, warden of the mint and exchange at that time. 
Not surprisingly, many moneyers were goldsmiths. 


@@@@@


doc= 58860


Adam of Bentley (fl. 1230-1246), sheriff of London in 1246, is a case in point. Appointed moneyer in 1230, he and his wife, Maud, had an interest in a house in Friday Street, which appears in the wills of several Bentley goldsmiths into the fourteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 58861


Richard Bachelor (fl. 1235), another goldsmith, paid 100's'. to have the die of Richard of Necton in 1235, but it is not clear whether he received it. Bachelor owned property in the parish of St Andrew, Holborn, later released by his widow, Isabella, and son, Thomas. 



@@@@@


doc= 58862


David of Enfield (d. c.1260), a citizen and goldsmith, was also one of the consortium. He had a son and two daughters, and is most often recorded in the property transactions of his children, which reveal his ownership of half a shop in Cheap, in the parish of St Peter, and a tenement in St Sepulchre, probably consisting of three houses and a shop. He also owned a stone house in Wodestrete in the parish of St Michael, Wood Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 58863


Richard Bonaventure (fl. 1250-1260) was a citizen and goldsmith, married to Hawise, with whom he had two known sons and a daughter. He witnessed a deed giving land in Aldersgate for a dowry on the occasion of a marriage involving a goldbeater, and the other witnesses included William of Gloucester, Henry of Frowick, and David of Enfield. In 1253 Bonaventure was holding property fronting on Cheapside in the parish of St Vedast, which was a centre for goldsmiths and the location for the London mint before its establishment in the Tower. He also bought a shop further east in Cheapside, and rented accommodation in Gutter Lane, known also as Guthrens Lane, a centre for the purest assays of silver in England. Indeed the property records of the consortium indicate that they all occupied property within a quarter mile of Old Change, which lay east of St Paul's running north into West Cheap. 
This group of moneyers seems to have operated successfully until June 1260, when a judicial inquiry was set up under Hugh Bigod (died 1266), justiciar of England, and John Mansel (died 1265), Henry III's principal adviser. They were to hear moneyers' pleas and to amend errors in the mint. Apparently there were many errors and defects in the exchange of London, with contention among the moneyers and possible damage to the king. The upshot was that William of Gloucester was replaced as warden in January 1262, and thereafter the wardens' accounts begin to concern themselves with the profits of the foundry for the first time. It then becomes apparent that there was a significant margin of about 3died in the pound between the sums charged to the merchant for mintage and the actual costs of the operation. This margin -- the profits of the foundry -- was after 1262 claimed by the crown, but before this date had fallen to the moneyers, and made them very rich. 
William surrendered the wardenship, but he continued to hold office as royal goldsmith, and as keeper of the works of the shrine of St Edward, a mark of royal favour which even survived his involvement, with much of the city, on the side of the barons and Simon de Montfort. After the battle of Evesham in 1265 he was imprisoned at Windsor, but was soon restored to royal favour, and to his work at Westminster. His privileged position was confirmed in 1267. In 1268 he and Henry of Frowick were executors of a colleague's will, and in the same year he was sent to France on urgent royal business. He died in 1269. 
Perhaps as a result of the excesses of Gloucester's moneyer consortium, there followed a general tightening up. Under Edward I the old distinction between the exchange and mint was reactivated with the warden of the exchange collecting the royal seigniorage, supervising the purchase of bullion and issue of new coin, and checking up on the master moneyer, who took charge of all aspects of minting according to a detailed written indenture. The earliest surviving indenture for a master of the mint, dated 1279, is that of 


@@@@@


doc= 58864


Lapinus Roger (fl. 1292-1331), a Florentine, who succeeded to his uncle's post as assayer and exchanger at Canterbury in 1292, and subsequently also worked at London when his brother Philip was dismissed for faulty record keeping. In due course he was to hold the senior post of master of the mint at both London and Canterbury. In addition to, or perhaps as a consequence of, his professional services he also acquired some 300 acres of marsh in Kent. It is not clear if this land was a deliberate investment of the profits of commerce, or security for an unpaid debt, but in either case it illustrates both his great prosperity and his attachment to Kent. He married a Kentish woman and was admitted a freeman of Canterbury, where he worked for Edward I, Edward II, and Edward III. Roger's conduct seems to have been exemplary, and although he quarrelled with the influential treasurer, Walter Langton (d. 1321), over wages, no charges of misconduct were ever suggested. Though occasionally deprived of office as a consequence of political changes during this period, he was consistently reinstated, and in addition was frequently called on to resolve crises at the London mint. In 1331 he was put in charge of an exchange at Dover. His son Robert also subsequently became a moneyer at Canterbury, the third generation of this family employed at the mint there. 
Another long-serving foreigner was 


@@@@@


doc= 58865


Samuel Beale (1803-1874), had adopted a commercial career and was engaged in several successful ventures -- banking, railways, and ironworks. He was instrumental in founding the Birmingham and Midland Bank in 1836 (later the Midland Bank), of which he later became a director. He was also closely associated with the Midland Railway, being a director and chairman from 1844 to 1864. As well as taking an active role in the public life of Birmingham (he was mayor in 1841), he also sat as member of parliament for Derby (1857-65), a town with strong links with the Midland Railway Company. He died on 11 September 1874. 
William John Beale, choosing law as a profession, qualified as a solicitor in 1837, the same year in which he married Martha Phipson. He entered into partnership with Thomas Colmore, a relative of his father's third wife, Ann. The subsequent success of the firm illustrates the significance of family connections as a source of business and the contribution of prominent solicitors in public life. 
In addition to managing the Colmore estates, Beale became legal adviser to the Midland Railway. From the mid-1840s this part of the firm became extensive and the large amount of parliamentary work associated with railway promotion led to the establishment of a separate London office. The success brought by railway work attracted large commercial and financial concerns as clients. Though a staunch Liberal and, like the rest of the family a prominent member of the Unitarian denomination, W. J. Beale did not take a large, visible role in local affairs. The exception to this was his philanthropic activities in connection with the general hospital and the organization of the triennial music festivals. He purchased a small estate at Dolgellau in north Wales, building a residence there in 1867: it was here that he died on 21 May 1883. 
Three of William John's four sons entered the legal profession. The eldest, 


@@@@@


doc= 58866


Curtis, Ian Kevin (1956-1980), musician, was the only son and eldest child of Kevin Curtis, a detective officer in the Transport Commission police, and his wife, Doreen, 'nee' Hughes. He was born on 15 July 1956 in the Memorial Hospital, Old Trafford, Manchester. The family lived in Hurdsfield, on the outskirts of Macclesfield, and Curtis attended Trinity Square primary school, Macclesfield, Hurdsfield junior school, and, from 1967, the King's School, Macclesfield. When he was sixteen he met Deborah Woodruffe. They married at St Thomas's Church, Henbury, on 23 August 1975; their daughter, Natalie, was born on 16 April 1979. 
Curtis early formed an ambition to make a career in music. In 1973 his family moved to New Moston, Manchester, and he soon ceased to attend the local college, preferring to work in a record shop and to attempt, unsuccessfully, to run his own second-hand record stall. In need of money, however, he began employment at a local office of the Ministry of Defence, transferring after a few months to the Manpower Services Commission and in 1977 to the employment exchange in Macclesfield. After a period living in Oldham, Curtis and his wife returned to Macclesfield, to 77 Barton Street, in May 1977. 
Having never abandoned his ambition, in the spring of 1976 Curtis met Peter Hook, Bernard Sumner, and Terry Mason, three friends who allowed Curtis to join their incipient band as the singer. Although still learning to play their instruments, the band gave their first performance, under the name Warsaw, on 29 May 1977 at the Electric Circus, Manchester. Stephen Morris became their drummer that summer. Their first appearance on vinyl followed that October, a single track on 'Short Circuit', a 10-inch compilation of upcoming Manchester bands. Now renamed Joy Division, the band cut their first record -- an EP called 'An Ideal for Living' -- in December 1977. The new name, a reference to the group of female prisoners used by the Nazis as prostitutes for the army, raised eyebrows in the media throughout their career. Joy Division owed their first television appearance, performing 'Shadowplay' on Granada Television's 'Granada Reports' in September 1978, to its presenter, Tony Wilson. When Wilson started his influential Factory record label, the group contributed two tracks to its first offering, the EP 'A Factory Sample', released in January 1979. 
On 27 December 1978 Curtis had his first recognizable epileptic fit, at a time when Joy Division's profile was rapidly rising, with their debut London performance. At the end of January 1979 they recorded the first of their two sessions for the BBC Radio 1 disc jockey John Peel. Their first album, 'Unknown Pleasures', appeared in June 1979, a happy collaboration with producer Martin Hannett (1950-1991), who helped to establish Joy Division's trademark sound, giving prominence to Hook's lead guitar style of bass-playing, introducing then innovative effects on the drums, and making spare but effective use of new technology in the form of synthesizers and syndrums. Coupled with Curtis's low, sonorous voice, Joy Division's music evolved into one of intense, portentous rhythms and melodies that were, at their best, haunting. At the end of August 1979 Curtis left his civil service job, as Joy Division embarked on a national tour supporting the Buzzcocks. The single 'Transmission' was released that October. 
Epilepsy, continual performing, and drugs combined to exacerbate Curtis's volatile, often depressive, temperament. Guilt and emotional confusion may also have played a part. He had begun an affair with Annik Honore, a Belgian he seems to have met first while performing in Brussels, and increasingly shunned his wife. Joy Division toured Europe in January 1980 and began preparations for an American tour later in the year. In March 1980 the band recorded their second album, 'Closer', and their most successful single, 'Love Will Tear Us Apart'. By this time, some of Curtis's lyrics, plangent cries of depression and desperation, suggested a deepening blackness of mood. The pressures of performing were provoking more frequent epileptic fits. As Curtis continued his relationship with Annik Honore, his wife began divorce proceedings. Returning briefly to the house that he had shared with her, 77 Barton Street, Macclesfield, in the early hours of Sunday 18 May 1980 Ian Curtis hanged himself. The previous evening he had watched Werner Herzog's 'Stroszek', a film about a man who kills himself rather than choose between two women. He was cremated at Macclesfield crematorium on 23 May 1980. His memorial stone, erected by his widow, bears the words 'Love Will Tear Us Apart'. 
Curtis's desire for the limelight was confessional. His stage performances displayed the contrasts in a character that was generally quiet and polite, yet capable of bouts of depression or anger. His manic dancing -- perhaps unwittingly parodizing his epileptic fits -- counterpointed his melancholic lyrics. Curtis helped Joy Division to capture a 'Zeitgeist'. The group's presentation of itself was as brooding and enigmatic as their singer's own persona: their reluctance to give interviews suggested sullenness as often as it deepened their mystique; they deliberately omitted the names of their songs from the outside of their album covers, Peter Saville's monochrome designs for which spawned a thousand T-shirts; and their use of images of 1940s totalitarianism kicked against the comfortable, middle-class background from which Curtis, at least, had sprung. At the heart of the group's success, though, was a music that, while often dour, immediately appealed. While the remaining members of Joy Division gained continued if not greater success under their apt new name, New Order, Curtis's death triggered a long succession of cover versions of the group's songs: 'Love Will Tear Us Apart' had been recorded by at least seventeen different artists by the end of the century, including P. J. Proby and Paul Young. More subtle, yet more profound, was an influence on many features -- from musicianship to style and demeanour -- of a host of groups that sprang up in the aftermath of the punk rock transformation of popular music. While Curtis's suicide, when on the brink of commercial success, seemed to mirror the deaths of other cult figures of late twentieth-century youth, such as Jim Morrison and Janis Joplin, the story of his life, uncovered in the biography 'Touching from a Distance' by his widow, Deborah, tells of a deeply personal struggle of a timeless and tragic kind. Deborah Curtis's book also formed the basis for a biographical film, 'Control' (2007), by Anton Corbijn. 


@@@@@


doc= 58867


Sir Robert McAlpine, second baronet (1868-1934), born at Forth, Lanarkshire, on 17 October 1868, studied mathematics and chemistry at the University of Glasgow in 1886-7; he continued into 1888, studying civil engineering, but left before the end of the academic year. Robert proved to have an aptitude for engineering and site management. His brother 


@@@@@


doc= 58868


Hoste, Dirick (c.1588-1663), merchant and financier, was born in Middelburg, Netherlands, the son of Jacques Hoste ('b'. 1545), a merchant, and his wife, Barbara Henricksen. His father and grandfather had fled Oudenarde in Flanders for religious reasons in the wake of the 'Wonderyear' of 1566 -- the failed protestant insurrection in the Netherlands. The family settled in London in 1567, then around 1580 moved to Middelburg in Zeeland, where Dirick and his twin brother, Jacques, were born. By 1607 Dirick had arrived in London and on 12 October 1613, at Austin Friars, he married Jane van Meteren or Desmaistres (1596-1661), the daughter of the wealthy immigrant London brewer James van Meteren. They lived in Abchurch Lane, near London Bridge. Despite his family's roots in the cloth trade Hoste focused on general overseas trade. In 1615 he became a member of the East India Company, and by 1625 he belonged to a group of Dutch and Flemish merchants who supplied the king of Spain with gunpowder, cordage, and iron for his ports in Africa. His many international trading contacts made it easy for him to operate as a successful banker and financier, and among his customers were the royal physician Sir Theodore de Mayerne and the Spanish ambassadors to London. According to John Aubrey, the Spanish customs farmers who financed the Catholic imperial armies in the Netherlands and Germany during the Thirty Years' War kept their cash on deposit with him. Considering Hoste's strong commitment to the Calvinist cause, this is somewhat surprising. From the outset he was an active member of the Dutch Reformed church in London, where he was elected deacon in 1627. A year later he was promoted to the eldership, thus following in the footsteps of his father, who had regularly served the reformed church in Middelburg in this capacity between 1597 and 1605. He was prominently involved in two of the major collections for persecuted Calvinist brethren abroad -- in 1630 he was one of four elders responsible for the second English collection for refugee Calvinists from the German palatinate, while in 1643 he was among the four parliamentary commissioners appointed to raise funds for suffering Irish protestants in the Netherlands. In this latter enterprise he was joined by the City radical and colonizer Maurice Thomson, with whom he had already co-operated closely in the mercantile field. 
Hoste played a major role within the Dutch Reformed church in London for at least two decades. In 1646 he was chosen, together with the minister Cesar Calandrini, to negotiate with the Independent and Baptist leaders Sidrach Simpson and William Kiffin on behalf of the church. In 1649, on account of his excellent relations with the speaker of the House of Commons, William Lenthal, and the radical London mercer Colonel Edmond Harvey, he was able to help the many weavers within the Dutch community who had come under attack from the Weavers' Company. In addition he found time to publish, in an English translation, 'Of Death, a True Description' (1629), written by his friend and consistorial colleague Jacob Cool. During the civil war and interregnum, in 1643-5 and again in 1651-2, he lived in Middelburg, where he owned several houses. By 1654, however, he had retired permanently to his country house in Mortlake in Surrey. Of his thirteen children only four survived childhood: Joanna, who married Peter vander Put; James, who married Elizabeth Sleigh; Theodorus, who married Anne Chilcott; and Mary, who married Sir Stephen Langham. Hoste died a wealthy man in Mortlake in March 1663, and was buried there on 24 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 58872


Parr family (per. c.1370-1517), gentry, played a leading role in Westmorland in the fifteenth century. The family was founded by Sir William Parr (c.1350-1404), who held one-eighth of the vill of Parr in the parish of Prescot, Lancashire. In May 1370 Parr was pardoned his part in a murder because he was going overseas in the service of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster. Parr remained in Gaunt's service until the duke's death, first as a soldier, and later as a trusted member of the ducal retinue. It was probably under Gaunt's aegis that about 1380 Parr married Elizabeth Roos (died 1392x6), the heir of her grandfather Thomas, although the Parrs themselves were later to tell another story. According to Sir William Parr (d. 1547) one of his ancestors was clerk of the kitchen to Lord Roos, fell in love with his daughter, and married her against her father's wishes. However the marriage was achieved, it was to establish the Parrs as a force in the north-west, bringing William a quarter of the barony of Kendal, including the castle, on Thomas Roos's death in 1390. By then Parr was one of Gaunt's knights bachelor, receiving an annual fee of $50. His closeness to Gaunt was to be marked by further patronage, including land in Gascony, and he was one of the duke's executors. On Gaunt's death Richard II took him into his service, a move perhaps aided by Parr's second marriage (before October 1396) to Margaret, widow of the Cheshire knight Lawrence Dutton, who had been a retainer of Richard II's father, Edward, the Black Prince. 
In spite of his Lancastrian background, Parr did not benefit particularly from the accession of Henry IV, although he became one of the king's knights. He died on 3 October 1404, leaving as his heir his son John Parr (c.1382-1408), who at about this time married Agnes Crophill (1371-1436). She was a considerable heiress, and although she already had a son from her first marriage to Sir Walter Devereux (died 1403), which meant that any children with Parr were unlikely to inherit, she brought Parr a life interest in her estates, including Weobley, Herefordshire, as well as her Devereux dower. The Parrs, however, scarcely had time to benefit from the marriage. John died on 25 July 1408, leaving as his heir his son with Agnes, Thomas ['see below'], who was less than a year old. Any chance of further family advancement was thus inevitably postponed. Within ten days of John's death, his son's wardship had been disposed of by the crown, and in 1413 it passed to Sir Thomas Tunstall of Thurland, Lancashire, who married the heir to his daughter Alice, presumably before his death in 1415. 
When Sir Thomas [i] Parr (1407/8-1461) entered his inheritance in 1429 he thus had to rebuild the family's influence, but he started with the advantage of an estate worth between $80 and $100 p.a. For the next thirty years Thomas successfully built up his authority in Westmorland, although curiously he did not use his influence to secure suitable brides for his three sons, who were all still unmarried at his death. Within a year of his coming of age Thomas was escheator of Cumberland and Westmorland, and he was knighted about the same time. He was returned to parliament six times as knight of the shire for either Cumberland or Westmorland. From 1435-6 he was acting as under-sheriff of the latter county for its hereditary sheriff, Thomas, eighth Baron Clifford, which gave him a major role in the administration of the shire. Parr became involved in a long-running dispute with Sir Henry Bellingham of Burneside, who in 1441 complained that he could not get justice against Parr because 'the coroners of the same Shire bene his meynyall men' (Storey, 77). The quarrel continued, and in February 1445 Bellingham's men were reported to have attacked Parr in London, where he was attending parliament, with the intention of killing him. Only in 1449 was their feud settled. 
Parr also extended his landed influence by leasing royal estates in the county. His greatest acquisition was two-thirds of the crown's share of the barony of Kendal, which he leased in 1438. This more than tripled his income, and he cannot have been pleased when, in 1443 (half-way through the term of his lease), the lands were granted to John Beaufort, duke of Somerset. The grant did, however, bring Parr into closer contact with Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury, who was made steward of the lands by his cousin Somerset in 1444. By the 1450s Parr was one of the earl's leading retainers, and with the coming of civil war followed Salisbury into the Yorkist camp. He was with the earl at Bloreheath and Ludlow in 1459, which led to his attainder in the Coventry parliament, and he was evidently with the earl at the battle of Wakefield at the end of 1460, for several chroniclers list him among the dead. He survived the battle, however, to enter the service of Edward IV, and died at the end of November 1461. 
Unlike his father, Parr left an adult heir, and one who already stood high in the king's favour, so there was no break in the family's ability to benefit from the Yorkist victory. Sir William Parr (1434-1483) worked closely with his younger brother John Parr ['see under 'Parr, Sir William] (his heir until his death in 1475) to maintain the family's influence in the north-west, and -- a new departure -- at court. Their efforts paid off, and William came closer than any other Parr to securing possession of the crown's share of the barony of Kendal (representing half the total barony), which had been used throughout the earlier part of the century to endow members of the royal family. In 1471, as a reward for his loyalty to Edward IV in the crisis of 1470-71, William was granted the reversion of the third part of the crown share, held by the dowager duchess of Bedford -- a reversion that materialized less than a year later. The crown also brokered an agreement whereby Margaret Beaufort, the holder of the other two-thirds, granted the land to Parr in return for $190 p.a. 
William was surely close to being ennobled as lord of Kendal, and his prospects of advancement looked even brighter in 1483 when Richard, duke of Gloucester, with whom Parr had been associated throughout Edward IV's second reign, became king. It must have seemed a crushing blow when Parr himself died at the end of the year, leaving a five-year-old as the head of the family, without even an adult uncle to steer the family fortunes: John had died in 1475 and the youngest brother, Thomas [ii], on 14 April 1471. The minority did at least mean that, when Richard III was defeated at Bosworth in 1485, the Parrs were able to avoid the penalties that might have followed too close an attachment to his cause, but the family was clearly vulnerable, and it was a shrewd move by William's widow, Elizabeth Fitzhugh (1462- 'c'.1505), to marry Nicholas Vaux (d. 1523) of Harrowden, Northamptonshire, who had grown up in the household of the new king's mother, Margaret Beaufort. The marriage, accomplished by 1487, was arranged by Margaret, whose own territorial interests in Kendal (ceded to Sir William Parr in 1471) had now been restored by Henry VII. The marriage drew Margaret's potential rivals into her own circle, while offering them protection. 
From the Parrs' perspective, Elizabeth's marriage reaped rewards, although it meant a shift of interest for the family. Vaux secured good marriages for all his stepchildren, but within his own sphere of influence rather than in the north-west. Sir Thomas [iii] Parr (1478-1517) and his younger brother William Parr (c.1480-1547) grew up in the Tudor court circle, and Thomas in particular was an early intimate of Henry VIII, although he was not to live long enough to enjoy the full benefits of royal favour. When Thomas entered his inheritance in 1499 the family's gains from Yorkist patronage had been resumed by the crown, but Thomas's own acquisitions more than compensated for their loss. In 1508 he married Maud, the younger of the two daughters and coheirs of Sir Thomas Green of Greens Norton, Northamptonshire. Green had been a friend of Nicholas Vaux, who married the elder daughter himself. In 1513 Thomas inherited, through his mother Elizabeth, a moiety of the Fitzhugh lands. There was apparently some discussion of Thomas's becoming Lord Fitzhugh, but the Dacres (the recipients of the other moiety) moved to block the proposal on the grounds that they were descended from the senior heiress, and nothing came of the idea. 
Thomas's northern interests remained important to him. His first major piece of royal patronage, secured from Henry VIII just a month after his coronation, was the stewardship of the king's share of Kendal, and he continued to purchase land in Westmorland to round off his holdings there. He also seems to have valued his status as patron of Jervaulx, which came to him from the Fitzhughs. But his choice of burial place reveals the family's shift of interest. Earlier Parrs had presumably been buried in their chapel in Kendal parish church, but Thomas and his wife (who died on 1 December 1531) sought burial in the church of the Blackfriars, near their London home. 
Thomas [iii] Parr must have been a strong candidate for ennoblement had he lived longer. However, his son William Parr (1513-1571) was created Baron Parr in 1539, earl of Essex in 1543 (on the same day, 23 December, that his uncle, Thomas's brother William, was created Baron Parr of Horton), and finally marquess of Northampton in 1547. Both men owed their elevation to the marriage, some five months earlier, of Thomas's daughter Katherine (1512-1548) to Henry VIII. The family arms were argent, two bars azure, a bordure engrailed sable, and their motto 'Amour avecque loiaulte'. 


@@@@@


doc= 58873


Parr family (per. c.1370-1517), gentry, played a leading role in Westmorland in the fifteenth century. The family was founded by Sir William Parr (c.1350-1404), who held one-eighth of the vill of Parr in the parish of Prescot, Lancashire. In May 1370 Parr was pardoned his part in a murder because he was going overseas in the service of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster. Parr remained in Gaunt's service until the duke's death, first as a soldier, and later as a trusted member of the ducal retinue. It was probably under Gaunt's aegis that about 1380 Parr married Elizabeth Roos (died 1392x6), the heir of her grandfather Thomas, although the Parrs themselves were later to tell another story. According to Sir William Parr (d. 1547) one of his ancestors was clerk of the kitchen to Lord Roos, fell in love with his daughter, and married her against her father's wishes. However the marriage was achieved, it was to establish the Parrs as a force in the north-west, bringing William a quarter of the barony of Kendal, including the castle, on Thomas Roos's death in 1390. By then Parr was one of Gaunt's knights bachelor, receiving an annual fee of $50. His closeness to Gaunt was to be marked by further patronage, including land in Gascony, and he was one of the duke's executors. On Gaunt's death Richard II took him into his service, a move perhaps aided by Parr's second marriage (before October 1396) to Margaret, widow of the Cheshire knight Lawrence Dutton, who had been a retainer of Richard II's father, Edward, the Black Prince. 
In spite of his Lancastrian background, Parr did not benefit particularly from the accession of Henry IV, although he became one of the king's knights. He died on 3 October 1404, leaving as his heir his son John Parr (c.1382-1408), who at about this time married Agnes Crophill (1371-1436). She was a considerable heiress, and although she already had a son from her first marriage to Sir Walter Devereux (died 1403), which meant that any children with Parr were unlikely to inherit, she brought Parr a life interest in her estates, including Weobley, Herefordshire, as well as her Devereux dower. The Parrs, however, scarcely had time to benefit from the marriage. John died on 25 July 1408, leaving as his heir his son with Agnes, Thomas ['see below'], who was less than a year old. Any chance of further family advancement was thus inevitably postponed. Within ten days of John's death, his son's wardship had been disposed of by the crown, and in 1413 it passed to Sir Thomas Tunstall of Thurland, Lancashire, who married the heir to his daughter Alice, presumably before his death in 1415. 
When Sir Thomas [i] Parr (1407/8-1461) entered his inheritance in 1429 he thus had to rebuild the family's influence, but he started with the advantage of an estate worth between $80 and $100 p.a. For the next thirty years Thomas successfully built up his authority in Westmorland, although curiously he did not use his influence to secure suitable brides for his three sons, who were all still unmarried at his death. Within a year of his coming of age Thomas was escheator of Cumberland and Westmorland, and he was knighted about the same time. He was returned to parliament six times as knight of the shire for either Cumberland or Westmorland. From 1435-6 he was acting as under-sheriff of the latter county for its hereditary sheriff, Thomas, eighth Baron Clifford, which gave him a major role in the administration of the shire. Parr became involved in a long-running dispute with Sir Henry Bellingham of Burneside, who in 1441 complained that he could not get justice against Parr because 'the coroners of the same Shire bene his meynyall men' (Storey, 77). The quarrel continued, and in February 1445 Bellingham's men were reported to have attacked Parr in London, where he was attending parliament, with the intention of killing him. Only in 1449 was their feud settled. 
Parr also extended his landed influence by leasing royal estates in the county. His greatest acquisition was two-thirds of the crown's share of the barony of Kendal, which he leased in 1438. This more than tripled his income, and he cannot have been pleased when, in 1443 (half-way through the term of his lease), the lands were granted to John Beaufort, duke of Somerset. The grant did, however, bring Parr into closer contact with Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury, who was made steward of the lands by his cousin Somerset in 1444. By the 1450s Parr was one of the earl's leading retainers, and with the coming of civil war followed Salisbury into the Yorkist camp. He was with the earl at Bloreheath and Ludlow in 1459, which led to his attainder in the Coventry parliament, and he was evidently with the earl at the battle of Wakefield at the end of 1460, for several chroniclers list him among the dead. He survived the battle, however, to enter the service of Edward IV, and died at the end of November 1461. 
Unlike his father, Parr left an adult heir, and one who already stood high in the king's favour, so there was no break in the family's ability to benefit from the Yorkist victory. Sir William Parr (1434-1483) worked closely with his younger brother John Parr ['see under 'Parr, Sir William] (his heir until his death in 1475) to maintain the family's influence in the north-west, and -- a new departure -- at court. Their efforts paid off, and William came closer than any other Parr to securing possession of the crown's share of the barony of Kendal (representing half the total barony), which had been used throughout the earlier part of the century to endow members of the royal family. In 1471, as a reward for his loyalty to Edward IV in the crisis of 1470-71, William was granted the reversion of the third part of the crown share, held by the dowager duchess of Bedford -- a reversion that materialized less than a year later. The crown also brokered an agreement whereby Margaret Beaufort, the holder of the other two-thirds, granted the land to Parr in return for $190 p.a. 
William was surely close to being ennobled as lord of Kendal, and his prospects of advancement looked even brighter in 1483 when Richard, duke of Gloucester, with whom Parr had been associated throughout Edward IV's second reign, became king. It must have seemed a crushing blow when Parr himself died at the end of the year, leaving a five-year-old as the head of the family, without even an adult uncle to steer the family fortunes: John had died in 1475 and the youngest brother, Thomas [ii], on 14 April 1471. The minority did at least mean that, when Richard III was defeated at Bosworth in 1485, the Parrs were able to avoid the penalties that might have followed too close an attachment to his cause, but the family was clearly vulnerable, and it was a shrewd move by William's widow, Elizabeth Fitzhugh (1462- 'c'.1505), to marry Nicholas Vaux (d. 1523) of Harrowden, Northamptonshire, who had grown up in the household of the new king's mother, Margaret Beaufort. The marriage, accomplished by 1487, was arranged by Margaret, whose own territorial interests in Kendal (ceded to Sir William Parr in 1471) had now been restored by Henry VII. The marriage drew Margaret's potential rivals into her own circle, while offering them protection. 
From the Parrs' perspective, Elizabeth's marriage reaped rewards, although it meant a shift of interest for the family. Vaux secured good marriages for all his stepchildren, but within his own sphere of influence rather than in the north-west. Sir Thomas [iii] Parr (1478-1517) and his younger brother William Parr (c.1480-1547) grew up in the Tudor court circle, and Thomas in particular was an early intimate of Henry VIII, although he was not to live long enough to enjoy the full benefits of royal favour. When Thomas entered his inheritance in 1499 the family's gains from Yorkist patronage had been resumed by the crown, but Thomas's own acquisitions more than compensated for their loss. In 1508 he married Maud, the younger of the two daughters and coheirs of Sir Thomas Green of Greens Norton, Northamptonshire. Green had been a friend of Nicholas Vaux, who married the elder daughter himself. In 1513 Thomas inherited, through his mother Elizabeth, a moiety of the Fitzhugh lands. There was apparently some discussion of Thomas's becoming Lord Fitzhugh, but the Dacres (the recipients of the other moiety) moved to block the proposal on the grounds that they were descended from the senior heiress, and nothing came of the idea. 
Thomas's northern interests remained important to him. His first major piece of royal patronage, secured from Henry VIII just a month after his coronation, was the stewardship of the king's share of Kendal, and he continued to purchase land in Westmorland to round off his holdings there. He also seems to have valued his status as patron of Jervaulx, which came to him from the Fitzhughs. But his choice of burial place reveals the family's shift of interest. Earlier Parrs had presumably been buried in their chapel in Kendal parish church, but Thomas and his wife (who died on 1 December 1531) sought burial in the church of the Blackfriars, near their London home. 
Thomas [iii] Parr must have been a strong candidate for ennoblement had he lived longer. However, his son William Parr (1513-1571) was created Baron Parr in 1539, earl of Essex in 1543 (on the same day, 23 December, that his uncle, Thomas's brother William, was created Baron Parr of Horton), and finally marquess of Northampton in 1547. Both men owed their elevation to the marriage, some five months earlier, of Thomas's daughter Katherine (1512-1548) to Henry VIII. The family arms were argent, two bars azure, a bordure engrailed sable, and their motto 'Amour avecque loiaulte'. 


@@@@@


doc= 58874


Parr family (per. c.1370-1517), gentry, played a leading role in Westmorland in the fifteenth century. The family was founded by Sir William Parr (c.1350-1404), who held one-eighth of the vill of Parr in the parish of Prescot, Lancashire. In May 1370 Parr was pardoned his part in a murder because he was going overseas in the service of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster. Parr remained in Gaunt's service until the duke's death, first as a soldier, and later as a trusted member of the ducal retinue. It was probably under Gaunt's aegis that about 1380 Parr married Elizabeth Roos (died 1392x6), the heir of her grandfather Thomas, although the Parrs themselves were later to tell another story. According to Sir William Parr (d. 1547) one of his ancestors was clerk of the kitchen to Lord Roos, fell in love with his daughter, and married her against her father's wishes. However the marriage was achieved, it was to establish the Parrs as a force in the north-west, bringing William a quarter of the barony of Kendal, including the castle, on Thomas Roos's death in 1390. By then Parr was one of Gaunt's knights bachelor, receiving an annual fee of $50. His closeness to Gaunt was to be marked by further patronage, including land in Gascony, and he was one of the duke's executors. On Gaunt's death Richard II took him into his service, a move perhaps aided by Parr's second marriage (before October 1396) to Margaret, widow of the Cheshire knight Lawrence Dutton, who had been a retainer of Richard II's father, Edward, the Black Prince. 
In spite of his Lancastrian background, Parr did not benefit particularly from the accession of Henry IV, although he became one of the king's knights. He died on 3 October 1404, leaving as his heir his son John Parr (c.1382-1408), who at about this time married Agnes Crophill (1371-1436). She was a considerable heiress, and although she already had a son from her first marriage to Sir Walter Devereux (died 1403), which meant that any children with Parr were unlikely to inherit, she brought Parr a life interest in her estates, including Weobley, Herefordshire, as well as her Devereux dower. The Parrs, however, scarcely had time to benefit from the marriage. John died on 25 July 1408, leaving as his heir his son with Agnes, Thomas ['see below'], who was less than a year old. Any chance of further family advancement was thus inevitably postponed. Within ten days of John's death, his son's wardship had been disposed of by the crown, and in 1413 it passed to Sir Thomas Tunstall of Thurland, Lancashire, who married the heir to his daughter Alice, presumably before his death in 1415. 
When Sir Thomas [i] Parr (1407/8-1461) entered his inheritance in 1429 he thus had to rebuild the family's influence, but he started with the advantage of an estate worth between $80 and $100 p.a. For the next thirty years Thomas successfully built up his authority in Westmorland, although curiously he did not use his influence to secure suitable brides for his three sons, who were all still unmarried at his death. Within a year of his coming of age Thomas was escheator of Cumberland and Westmorland, and he was knighted about the same time. He was returned to parliament six times as knight of the shire for either Cumberland or Westmorland. From 1435-6 he was acting as under-sheriff of the latter county for its hereditary sheriff, Thomas, eighth Baron Clifford, which gave him a major role in the administration of the shire. Parr became involved in a long-running dispute with Sir Henry Bellingham of Burneside, who in 1441 complained that he could not get justice against Parr because 'the coroners of the same Shire bene his meynyall men' (Storey, 77). The quarrel continued, and in February 1445 Bellingham's men were reported to have attacked Parr in London, where he was attending parliament, with the intention of killing him. Only in 1449 was their feud settled. 
Parr also extended his landed influence by leasing royal estates in the county. His greatest acquisition was two-thirds of the crown's share of the barony of Kendal, which he leased in 1438. This more than tripled his income, and he cannot have been pleased when, in 1443 (half-way through the term of his lease), the lands were granted to John Beaufort, duke of Somerset. The grant did, however, bring Parr into closer contact with Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury, who was made steward of the lands by his cousin Somerset in 1444. By the 1450s Parr was one of the earl's leading retainers, and with the coming of civil war followed Salisbury into the Yorkist camp. He was with the earl at Bloreheath and Ludlow in 1459, which led to his attainder in the Coventry parliament, and he was evidently with the earl at the battle of Wakefield at the end of 1460, for several chroniclers list him among the dead. He survived the battle, however, to enter the service of Edward IV, and died at the end of November 1461. 
Unlike his father, Parr left an adult heir, and one who already stood high in the king's favour, so there was no break in the family's ability to benefit from the Yorkist victory. Sir William Parr (1434-1483) worked closely with his younger brother John Parr ['see under 'Parr, Sir William] (his heir until his death in 1475) to maintain the family's influence in the north-west, and -- a new departure -- at court. Their efforts paid off, and William came closer than any other Parr to securing possession of the crown's share of the barony of Kendal (representing half the total barony), which had been used throughout the earlier part of the century to endow members of the royal family. In 1471, as a reward for his loyalty to Edward IV in the crisis of 1470-71, William was granted the reversion of the third part of the crown share, held by the dowager duchess of Bedford -- a reversion that materialized less than a year later. The crown also brokered an agreement whereby Margaret Beaufort, the holder of the other two-thirds, granted the land to Parr in return for $190 p.a. 
William was surely close to being ennobled as lord of Kendal, and his prospects of advancement looked even brighter in 1483 when Richard, duke of Gloucester, with whom Parr had been associated throughout Edward IV's second reign, became king. It must have seemed a crushing blow when Parr himself died at the end of the year, leaving a five-year-old as the head of the family, without even an adult uncle to steer the family fortunes: John had died in 1475 and the youngest brother, Thomas [ii], on 14 April 1471. The minority did at least mean that, when Richard III was defeated at Bosworth in 1485, the Parrs were able to avoid the penalties that might have followed too close an attachment to his cause, but the family was clearly vulnerable, and it was a shrewd move by William's widow, Elizabeth Fitzhugh (1462- 'c'.1505), to marry Nicholas Vaux (d. 1523) of Harrowden, Northamptonshire, who had grown up in the household of the new king's mother, Margaret Beaufort. The marriage, accomplished by 1487, was arranged by Margaret, whose own territorial interests in Kendal (ceded to Sir William Parr in 1471) had now been restored by Henry VII. The marriage drew Margaret's potential rivals into her own circle, while offering them protection. 
From the Parrs' perspective, Elizabeth's marriage reaped rewards, although it meant a shift of interest for the family. Vaux secured good marriages for all his stepchildren, but within his own sphere of influence rather than in the north-west. Sir Thomas [iii] Parr (1478-1517) and his younger brother William Parr (c.1480-1547) grew up in the Tudor court circle, and Thomas in particular was an early intimate of Henry VIII, although he was not to live long enough to enjoy the full benefits of royal favour. When Thomas entered his inheritance in 1499 the family's gains from Yorkist patronage had been resumed by the crown, but Thomas's own acquisitions more than compensated for their loss. In 1508 he married Maud, the younger of the two daughters and coheirs of Sir Thomas Green of Greens Norton, Northamptonshire. Green had been a friend of Nicholas Vaux, who married the elder daughter himself. In 1513 Thomas inherited, through his mother Elizabeth, a moiety of the Fitzhugh lands. There was apparently some discussion of Thomas's becoming Lord Fitzhugh, but the Dacres (the recipients of the other moiety) moved to block the proposal on the grounds that they were descended from the senior heiress, and nothing came of the idea. 
Thomas's northern interests remained important to him. His first major piece of royal patronage, secured from Henry VIII just a month after his coronation, was the stewardship of the king's share of Kendal, and he continued to purchase land in Westmorland to round off his holdings there. He also seems to have valued his status as patron of Jervaulx, which came to him from the Fitzhughs. But his choice of burial place reveals the family's shift of interest. Earlier Parrs had presumably been buried in their chapel in Kendal parish church, but Thomas and his wife (who died on 1 December 1531) sought burial in the church of the Blackfriars, near their London home. 
Thomas [iii] Parr must have been a strong candidate for ennoblement had he lived longer. However, his son William Parr (1513-1571) was created Baron Parr in 1539, earl of Essex in 1543 (on the same day, 23 December, that his uncle, Thomas's brother William, was created Baron Parr of Horton), and finally marquess of Northampton in 1547. Both men owed their elevation to the marriage, some five months earlier, of Thomas's daughter Katherine (1512-1548) to Henry VIII. The family arms were argent, two bars azure, a bordure engrailed sable, and their motto 'Amour avecque loiaulte'. 


@@@@@


doc= 58875


Parr family (per. c.1370-1517), gentry, played a leading role in Westmorland in the fifteenth century. The family was founded by Sir William Parr (c.1350-1404), who held one-eighth of the vill of Parr in the parish of Prescot, Lancashire. In May 1370 Parr was pardoned his part in a murder because he was going overseas in the service of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster. Parr remained in Gaunt's service until the duke's death, first as a soldier, and later as a trusted member of the ducal retinue. It was probably under Gaunt's aegis that about 1380 Parr married Elizabeth Roos (died 1392x6), the heir of her grandfather Thomas, although the Parrs themselves were later to tell another story. According to Sir William Parr (d. 1547) one of his ancestors was clerk of the kitchen to Lord Roos, fell in love with his daughter, and married her against her father's wishes. However the marriage was achieved, it was to establish the Parrs as a force in the north-west, bringing William a quarter of the barony of Kendal, including the castle, on Thomas Roos's death in 1390. By then Parr was one of Gaunt's knights bachelor, receiving an annual fee of $50. His closeness to Gaunt was to be marked by further patronage, including land in Gascony, and he was one of the duke's executors. On Gaunt's death Richard II took him into his service, a move perhaps aided by Parr's second marriage (before October 1396) to Margaret, widow of the Cheshire knight Lawrence Dutton, who had been a retainer of Richard II's father, Edward, the Black Prince. 
In spite of his Lancastrian background, Parr did not benefit particularly from the accession of Henry IV, although he became one of the king's knights. He died on 3 October 1404, leaving as his heir his son John Parr (c.1382-1408), who at about this time married Agnes Crophill (1371-1436). She was a considerable heiress, and although she already had a son from her first marriage to Sir Walter Devereux (died 1403), which meant that any children with Parr were unlikely to inherit, she brought Parr a life interest in her estates, including Weobley, Herefordshire, as well as her Devereux dower. The Parrs, however, scarcely had time to benefit from the marriage. John died on 25 July 1408, leaving as his heir his son with Agnes, Thomas ['see below'], who was less than a year old. Any chance of further family advancement was thus inevitably postponed. Within ten days of John's death, his son's wardship had been disposed of by the crown, and in 1413 it passed to Sir Thomas Tunstall of Thurland, Lancashire, who married the heir to his daughter Alice, presumably before his death in 1415. 
When Sir Thomas [i] Parr (1407/8-1461) entered his inheritance in 1429 he thus had to rebuild the family's influence, but he started with the advantage of an estate worth between $80 and $100 p.a. For the next thirty years Thomas successfully built up his authority in Westmorland, although curiously he did not use his influence to secure suitable brides for his three sons, who were all still unmarried at his death. Within a year of his coming of age Thomas was escheator of Cumberland and Westmorland, and he was knighted about the same time. He was returned to parliament six times as knight of the shire for either Cumberland or Westmorland. From 1435-6 he was acting as under-sheriff of the latter county for its hereditary sheriff, Thomas, eighth Baron Clifford, which gave him a major role in the administration of the shire. Parr became involved in a long-running dispute with Sir Henry Bellingham of Burneside, who in 1441 complained that he could not get justice against Parr because 'the coroners of the same Shire bene his meynyall men' (Storey, 77). The quarrel continued, and in February 1445 Bellingham's men were reported to have attacked Parr in London, where he was attending parliament, with the intention of killing him. Only in 1449 was their feud settled. 
Parr also extended his landed influence by leasing royal estates in the county. His greatest acquisition was two-thirds of the crown's share of the barony of Kendal, which he leased in 1438. This more than tripled his income, and he cannot have been pleased when, in 1443 (half-way through the term of his lease), the lands were granted to John Beaufort, duke of Somerset. The grant did, however, bring Parr into closer contact with Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury, who was made steward of the lands by his cousin Somerset in 1444. By the 1450s Parr was one of the earl's leading retainers, and with the coming of civil war followed Salisbury into the Yorkist camp. He was with the earl at Bloreheath and Ludlow in 1459, which led to his attainder in the Coventry parliament, and he was evidently with the earl at the battle of Wakefield at the end of 1460, for several chroniclers list him among the dead. He survived the battle, however, to enter the service of Edward IV, and died at the end of November 1461. 
Unlike his father, Parr left an adult heir, and one who already stood high in the king's favour, so there was no break in the family's ability to benefit from the Yorkist victory. Sir William Parr (1434-1483) worked closely with his younger brother John Parr ['see under 'Parr, Sir William] (his heir until his death in 1475) to maintain the family's influence in the north-west, and -- a new departure -- at court. Their efforts paid off, and William came closer than any other Parr to securing possession of the crown's share of the barony of Kendal (representing half the total barony), which had been used throughout the earlier part of the century to endow members of the royal family. In 1471, as a reward for his loyalty to Edward IV in the crisis of 1470-71, William was granted the reversion of the third part of the crown share, held by the dowager duchess of Bedford -- a reversion that materialized less than a year later. The crown also brokered an agreement whereby Margaret Beaufort, the holder of the other two-thirds, granted the land to Parr in return for $190 p.a. 
William was surely close to being ennobled as lord of Kendal, and his prospects of advancement looked even brighter in 1483 when Richard, duke of Gloucester, with whom Parr had been associated throughout Edward IV's second reign, became king. It must have seemed a crushing blow when Parr himself died at the end of the year, leaving a five-year-old as the head of the family, without even an adult uncle to steer the family fortunes: John had died in 1475 and the youngest brother, Thomas [ii], on 14 April 1471. The minority did at least mean that, when Richard III was defeated at Bosworth in 1485, the Parrs were able to avoid the penalties that might have followed too close an attachment to his cause, but the family was clearly vulnerable, and it was a shrewd move by William's widow, Elizabeth Fitzhugh (1462- 'c'.1505), to marry Nicholas Vaux (d. 1523) of Harrowden, Northamptonshire, who had grown up in the household of the new king's mother, Margaret Beaufort. The marriage, accomplished by 1487, was arranged by Margaret, whose own territorial interests in Kendal (ceded to Sir William Parr in 1471) had now been restored by Henry VII. The marriage drew Margaret's potential rivals into her own circle, while offering them protection. 
From the Parrs' perspective, Elizabeth's marriage reaped rewards, although it meant a shift of interest for the family. Vaux secured good marriages for all his stepchildren, but within his own sphere of influence rather than in the north-west. Sir Thomas [iii] Parr (1478-1517) and his younger brother William Parr (c.1480-1547) grew up in the Tudor court circle, and Thomas in particular was an early intimate of Henry VIII, although he was not to live long enough to enjoy the full benefits of royal favour. When Thomas entered his inheritance in 1499 the family's gains from Yorkist patronage had been resumed by the crown, but Thomas's own acquisitions more than compensated for their loss. In 1508 he married Maud, the younger of the two daughters and coheirs of Sir Thomas Green of Greens Norton, Northamptonshire. Green had been a friend of Nicholas Vaux, who married the elder daughter himself. In 1513 Thomas inherited, through his mother Elizabeth, a moiety of the Fitzhugh lands. There was apparently some discussion of Thomas's becoming Lord Fitzhugh, but the Dacres (the recipients of the other moiety) moved to block the proposal on the grounds that they were descended from the senior heiress, and nothing came of the idea. 
Thomas's northern interests remained important to him. His first major piece of royal patronage, secured from Henry VIII just a month after his coronation, was the stewardship of the king's share of Kendal, and he continued to purchase land in Westmorland to round off his holdings there. He also seems to have valued his status as patron of Jervaulx, which came to him from the Fitzhughs. But his choice of burial place reveals the family's shift of interest. Earlier Parrs had presumably been buried in their chapel in Kendal parish church, but Thomas and his wife (who died on 1 December 1531) sought burial in the church of the Blackfriars, near their London home. 
Thomas [iii] Parr must have been a strong candidate for ennoblement had he lived longer. However, his son William Parr (1513-1571) was created Baron Parr in 1539, earl of Essex in 1543 (on the same day, 23 December, that his uncle, Thomas's brother William, was created Baron Parr of Horton), and finally marquess of Northampton in 1547. Both men owed their elevation to the marriage, some five months earlier, of Thomas's daughter Katherine (1512-1548) to Henry VIII. The family arms were argent, two bars azure, a bordure engrailed sable, and their motto 'Amour avecque loiaulte'. 


@@@@@


doc= 58876


Williams, Margaret Lindsay (1888-1960), portrait and historical subject painter, was born on 18 June 1888 at 33 Gordon Road, St John, Cardiff, the elder of two daughters of Samuel A. Williams, shipbroker of Barry Dock, and his wife, Martha Margaret Lindsay, who was of Scottish descent. 
Educated privately at home first in Cardiff and then in Barry, where the family moved when she was nine, Margaret Lindsay Williams showed great talent as a painter from a very young age. In 1902, aged thirteen, she entered Cardiff Art School as a student; she competed successfully in competitions and local eisteddfodau, culminating in her winning the school gold medal in art in 1904. In 1905 she went to the Pelham Street School of Art in Kensington, which was run by the academicians Arthur Cope and George Clausen and by J. Watson Nicholl, to prepare for the Royal Academy entrance examination. In 1906, aged eighteen, she entered the Royal Academy Schools, where she was soon recognized as a brilliant student, winning four silver medals, the Creswick prize for landscape (1910) and the academy's greatest prize, the gold medal in art in 1911 for a large historical painting, 'The City of Refuge' (priv. coll.). She was, at twenty-three, the youngest student to win the gold medal and the first Welsh artist to do so. She completed her studies with travels in France, Italy, and Holland, a tour she undertook on the advice of her favourite teacher and her single greatest influence, John Singer Sargent. 
Margaret Lindsay Williams was an elegant and fine-looking woman with dark hair and large brown eyes. There was nothing of the bohemian about her. The academic and formal style of her painting divorced her from the avant-garde world of contemporary art and she mixed little with her fellow artists. She was a very private person, whose life was dedicated to her work. Her native city of Cardiff was extremely proud of her. She remained in Wales during the First World War, having been turned down as an official war artist on the ground that women were not allowed at the front. It was during the war that her career began to blossom and she received major commissions, which led to such works as 'Care of Wounded Soldiers at Cardiff Royal Infirmary during the Great War' (1916; University Hospital of Wales Healthcare Trust, Cardiff), commissioned by the industrialist Sir William James Thomas, one of Wales's leading benefactors; 'David Lloyd George Unveiling the Historical Sculpture in City Hall Cardiff' (1918; Cardiff city hall), commissioned by Alderman J. C. Meggitt, a south Wales businessman, and 'Welsh National War Service in Westminster Abbey' ('c'.1921; law courts, Cardiff), which was presented to the city by Lord Glanely. The execution of the latter two paintings, containing as they did 114 and 150 small portraits respectively, made stringent demands on her but her portraitist's skills, capturing each individual likeness, give these works an energy unusual in such large formal paintings. 
It is as a society painter and royal portraitist that Williams made her reputation. By the early 1920s she had moved permanently to London. There, for the most part, she abandoned the large historical works that had been seminal to her early career and concentrated her efforts on portrait painting. She produced commissioned portraits of Queen Alexandra, Queen Mary (exh. RA, 1938), the young princesses Elizabeth and Margaret, and at least five portraits of Elizabeth II. Her other sitters included the American president Warren Harding, Henry Ford, and Field Marshal Slim. In style her portraiture was somewhat conservative but her painterly skills, reminiscent of Sargent's, lift many of these likenesses above the level of mere competence. Having chosen portraiture, at which she was highly skilled, as her metier, Margaret Lindsay Williams was unusual among women artists in that she made a successful living from her work. 
Williams's links with Wales became more tenuous over the years, but she remained a lifelong Welsh Congregationalist. She died, unmarried, on 4 June 1960 at her home, 108 Hamilton Terrace, St John's Wood. Her funeral took place on 10 June at Windsor Road Congregational Church in Barry and she was buried in the town's cemetery on the same day. 


@@@@@


doc= 58878


Jameson, John (bap. 1740, d. 1823), Irish whiskey distiller, was baptized on 5 October 1740 in Alloa, Clackmannanshire, one of the children of William Jameson ('b'. 1718) of Alloa, and his wife, Helen Horne, of Thormaneau, Kinross-shire. In 1768 he married Margaret (1753-1815), eldest daughter of John Haig, whisky distiller, of The Gartlands, Alloa, and his wife, Margaret Stein, of Kennetpans, Clackmannanshire, from another important lowland distilling family, the first regular exporters of Scotch whisky to London. They had eight sons and eight daughters. Jameson was sheriff-clerk of Clackmannanshire from about 1770 until his death. 
Some time in the late 1770s Jameson visited Dublin, a flourishing centre of production of Irish whiskey despite the heavy excise duties, and about 1780 he bought a share in a small distillery in Bow Street, which according to a tradition repeated by Alfred Barnard, who toured the Irish distilleries in the 1880s, belonged to three wealthy men, a baronet, a general, and an 'honourable'. Jameson later established two of his sons, John and William, in the business. By 1800 the younger John Jameson was running the distillery, and after his marriage in 1802 to Isabella, daughter of John Stein, who also had a distillery in Bow Street, he took this over too. The title John Jameson & Son dates from 1810. By then the firm was operating a 1256 gallon still, and by 1821 it was the second largest distillery in Ireland. William Jameson ran another of John Stein's distilleries, in Marrowbone Lane, which became Jameson and Stein in 1802, with a 1206 gallon still. William died in 1802, and left his distillery to a third and younger brother, James, later a director and deputy governor of the Bank of Ireland, and the firm became James Jameson & Co. A fourth of Jameson's sons, Andrew, who had a small distillery at Enniscorthy, co. Wexford, was the grandfather of Guglielmo Marconi, inventor of wireless telegraphy. The Jamesons continued to marry members of the Haig family: Jameson's grandson John Jameson married Anne Haig, and two of their sons, including the eldest, another John Jameson, went on to marry daughters of John Haig of Fife. James Jameson's grandson also married a Haig. 
The Jamesons became the most important distilling family in Ireland, despite rivalry between the Bow Street and Marrowbone Lane distilleries. John Jameson senior died on 3 December 1823. 


@@@@@


doc= 58879


Thornton, Alicia (fl. 1804), horsewoman, is of uncertain lineage (her name is sometimes given as Alicia Meynell), the daughter possibly of a Norwich watchmaker or an Essex landowner. Her fame rests very largely on a race she rode, side-saddle over 4 miles, at Knavesmire at the 1804 York races. It was proclaimed in 'The Times' of 14 August as 'unprecedented in the annals of the turf', and was run before what was probably the century's biggest crowd attracted by a sportswoman. Her opponent was her brother-in-law Captain T. Flint, and the match appears to have arisen after she had beaten him in an informal gallop. The stake was 500 guineas a side, but there was said also to be a large side-bet made by the wealthy landowner Colonel Thomas Thornton, described as her husband, whose horse Vinigrillo she was riding. 'The Times' of 28 August claimed that there was well over $2 million depending on the match. 
On the race day Alicia was a striking sight in her close-fitting leopard-coloured jacket with blue sleeves and cap, and with a buff skirt enveloping her side-saddle. Although Flint had demanded that she should ride always on his left side, so inhibiting her use of the whip, she led for most of the race: 'her 'close-seated' riding astonished the beholders, and inspired a general confidence in her success' ('Sporting Magazine', August 1804, 227). After 3 miles, however, her saddle girth slipped, she could not keep up the pace, and then her horse went lame, to the disappointment of most of the crowd. Some days later, on 1 September, a letter appeared above her name in 'The Times', complaining of Flint's discourtesy and challenging him to a rematch. This never took place as Thornton refused to pay the 1000 guineas side-bet, maintaining that the wager was purely nominal, to heighten interest: York was then trying desperately to draw back the crowds it had lost with the recent ending of public hangings on the course on the morning of the races. 
Subsequently, at the next year's meeting, in August 1805, the captain horsewhipped the colonel, who later took him to court -- and won. This incident took place immediately after Alicia had ridden again, this time beating the best-known jockey of the day, Frank Buckle, albeit with a considerable weight advantage. Again her riding amazed spectators, and stage imitations of her feats followed. Her performances also raised considerable interest in the sporting press on the problems of riding side-saddle, with one eminent breeches maker intriguingly claiming that 'by means of a simple contrivance, he could remove all objections to a lady's sitting astride' ('Sporting Magazine', September 1804, 281). As for Alicia, she seems to have disappeared from public view. Although she was referred to in court and elsewhere as Mrs Thornton there are strong doubts about her true marital status. She was said to have eloped with a soldier in 1806. Colonel Thornton was reported to be a widower when he married, in July 1806, Eliza Cawston of Mundon, Essex, described, more soberly than Alicia ever was, as 'an accomplished lady of some fortune' (Egan, 133). 


@@@@@


doc= 58880


Coppin, Louisa (1845-1849), supposed ghost, was born on 7 September 1845 at Ivy House, 34 Strand Road, Londonderry, the third child of Dora (died 1866) and 
Coppin had had several paranormal experiences and his daughter Louisa, or Little Weesy as she was known, began her extraordinary posthumous career in October 1849, five months after her death at Ivy House on 27 May 1849 from gastric fever. She allegedly appeared to her family as 'a ball of bluish light', revealing the position of Sir John Franklin's lost polar expedition by means of 'writing on the wall', stating: ''Erebus' and 'Terror', Sir John Franklin, Lancaster Sound, Prince Regent Inlet, Point Victory, Victoria Channel' and 'a complete Arctic scene' (Skewes, 1889, 74-5). The Admiralty ignored this advice, but a desperate Lady Franklin proved receptive to this unorthodox guide when approached by Captain Coppin in May 1850 and went on to direct searches to the south, as Weesy had suggested, previous searches having been too far north. 
The story of Little Weesy was not made public until 1889, thirteen years after Lady Franklin's death, when J. Henry Skewes, vicar of Holy Trinity, Liverpool, published a verbose, inaccurate, and sensationalist book entitled 'Sir John Franklin, the true secret of the discovery of his fate: a 'Revelation', 'A little child shall lead them''. Its first edition was reviewed in the 'Pall Mall Gazette' of 9 May 1889, which provoked Admiral Sir Leopold McClintock to write denying any influence of Weesy's apparition upon his largely successful 'Fox' expedition three decades earlier. Both McClintock and Sophia Cracroft, Lady Franklin's niece, were anxious to state that paranormal advice had never been heeded in the Franklin search. Skewes's second edition of 1890 included a supplement which proved that it had; but by quoting a letter from W. Parker Snow of the 'Prince Albert', published in the 'Morning Star' of 19 October 1860 to support his claim, he unwittingly also showed that he had enormously embellished Weesy's message to fit the facts retrospectively. This embellishment included the use of place names such as Victoria Channel, which were not in use until after Weesy's apparent message. Miss Cracroft was even quoted by Skewes as suggesting to William Coppin in the 1850s that the story should be published by Charles Dickens in 'Household Words' -- an idea which he wisely vetoed on grounds of family privacy. 
No relevant correspondence with Captain Coppin, nor the vital chart drawn by his daughter Ann, supposedly on Weesy's instructions, exists among Lady Franklin's papers at the Scott Polar Research Institute, though other documents there confirm the use of other mediums. Moreover, Ann Coppin had been presented with a book inscribed: 'in memory of her deep sympathy in the Arctic expedition. From her sincere friend, Jane Franklin, Nov., 1863' (Skewes, 1890, 313). As Lady Franklin's biographer, Frances Woodward, summarizes her faith in psychics: 'there is reason only to grieve that a fine mind should be thus prostrated' (Woodward, 267). It therefore appears certain that the more conventionally Christian Sophia Cracroft deliberately destroyed all primary evidence of Weesy's role, probably at the time of her aunt's death in 1875. 
William Coppin died aged almost ninety, on 17 April 1895, and was interred with the rest of his family, including Louisa, in the graveyard of St Augustine's Church, Londonderry. Ivy House, which he had built in 1840, and where the Weesy apparitions took place, was demolished in 1994, despite the efforts of the Foyle Civic Trust to save that historic site. 


@@@@@


doc= 58882


Atwell, (Una) Winifred (c.1913-1983), pianist and entertainer, was born on 27 April 'c'.1913 in Jubilee Street, Tunapuna, near Port of Spain, Trinidad, the only child of a chemist, Frederick Monroe Atwell (died 1958), and a district nurse, Sarah Elizabeth (died 1962). Winifred began playing the piano at the age of four and within a couple of years she was giving Chopin recitals at charity concerts. As a young woman she worked in her father's chemist shop, and he insisted that she took a degree in pharmacy. However, in her spare time she entertained friends and continued to take part in charity concerts. 
After performing in Trinidad's Services Club during the war, Winifred went to New York to study piano technique with the celebrated classical pianist Alexander Borovsky. In 1946 she went to Britain, determined to become a concert pianist, and studied at the Royal Academy of Music. She supported herself by working in the evenings playing the piano in dance-halls and clubs. On 9 June 1947 she married Reginald (Lew) Levisohn, a variety artiste who gave up his stage career to become her manager. Encouraged by Lew, Winifred turned her attention to playing ragtime music and became one of Britain's most popular entertainers. 
Winifred's breakthrough came in 1948 at a charity concert at the London Casino. She was almost completely unknown before the curtain rose but, after captivating the audience with her ragtime music, she found herself taking several curtain calls. In 1951 she signed a contract with Decca, and in 1952 she appeared in the first royal variety performance for the new queen, Elizabeth II. To a rapturous reception Winifred closed her act with 'Britannia Rag', a number she had composed specially for the occasion and which reached number five in the pop charts. 
In the bleak post-war years a party was not complete without Winifred's records being played, and they sold in their millions. In 1954, when she topped the British pop charts with 'Let's have another Party', she became the first black recording artist to reach number one. By 1954 she had also become the first artiste from Britain to have three million-selling hits: 'Black and White Rag' (1952), 'Let's have a Party' (1953), and 'Let's have another Party' (1954). Between 1952 and 1960 she had no less than eleven top ten hits and at the end of the twentieth century she was the most successful female instrumentalist ever to have featured in the British pop charts. At the peak of her popularity her hands were insured at Lloyds for $40,000 -- a vast sum in the early 1950s -- and her fan club had more than 50,000 members. She was also one of the few entertainers to have their own television series on both the BBC and ITV. 
Winifred never made a secret of the fact that her heart lay with classical music. Despite her success with ragtime music, she never lost sight of her original ambition to become a concert pianist. In 1954 her exquisite recording of the eighteenth variation from Rakhmaninov's 'Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini' reached number nine in the pop charts. On 28 November 1954 Winifred packed the Royal Albert Hall as a soloist, accompanied by the London Philharmonic Orchestra, playing Grieg's piano concerto and George Gershwin's 'Rhapsody in Blue'. 
Though Winifred attempted to keep up with a new trend in popular music -- rock and roll -- it hastened the end of her career in the charts. Also, by the mid-1950s, she faced competition from other successful (white) pianists, including Joe 'Mr Piano' Henderson, Russ Conway, and Mrs Mills. However, she was one of the most successful and beloved entertainers of her time, as well as the first Caribbean artiste to become a household name in an era when black performers in Britain had more chance of success if they were American. 
In the 1950s Winifred Atwell's carefree, happy-go-lucky records were always being played. In the severity of the post-war years she was one of Britain's most successful and best-loved entertainers. Her warm personality and glamour were just what the British public needed, and she was always consistent, rarely attempting to do anything outside her speciality. Audiences knew what to expect from her, and she never let them down. 
By the 1960s tastes in popular music had changed rapidly and Winifred's manic style of piano playing, with its famous 'tinny' bar-room sound, went out of fashion. Happily, Winifred had become well known abroad. Her first Australian tour in 1958-9 lasted thirteen months. Her popularity with Australian audiences was so great that, when her record sales began to fall in Britain, she emigrated to that country with her husband. Winifred never completely recovered from the death of Lew in 1978. Three years later she became an Australian citizen; she died from a heart attack in Sydney on 27 February 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 58883


Connor, Edric Esclus (1913-1968), actor and singer, was born on 2 August 1913 in the village of Mayaro, Trinidad, the son of Edwin Connor, shoemaker and small farmer. At sixteen he won a scholarship from the Trinidad government railway to study engineering at the Victoria Institute, Port of Spain, where he won the Stephen gold medal for mechanical engineering. In his spare time he studied Caribbean folk singing. During the war he worked on the construction of the American naval air base in Trinidad and saved enough money to move to Britain. In 1944 he left Trinidad, intending to continue his engineering studies at South-east Essex Technical College, but he carried with him some notes on Caribbean folk music. He had already presented a series about Caribbean folk music on Radio Trinidad and on his journey to Britain he carried letters of introduction to the BBC. Two weeks after his arrival he made his debut on BBC radio in 'Calling the West Indies', a programme for listeners in the Caribbean. His appealing voice and charming personality made a deep impression. 
From 1945 to 1947 Connor was featured in the popular music series 'Serenade in Sepia' with Evelyn Dove, and its success led to a television version in 1946. In the early post-war years he became a popular television personality in BBC music and variety programmes, but perhaps his most important appearances were those involving the promotion of Caribbean music and dance. In 1951 he organized many concerts for the Trinidad All Steel Percussion Orchestra during its ten-week stay, including its debut at the Festival of Britain celebrations at London's South Bank. He married a Trinidadian law student, Pearl Cynthia Nunez ['see 'Mogotsi, Pearl Cynthia Connor- (1924-2005)], in London on 26 June 1948. Many years later she described her husband as 'a contained, disciplined person. Charming and soft-spoken. He was rarely agitated. He always gave the impression of being at ease. He was an independent man who believed in pulling his weight. He was an avid student. A self-made person. He read widely. He had a great collection of books on all sorts of subjects. He embraced literature, music and so on. (Bourne, 98)' In 1952 Connor made his film acting debut in 'Cry, the Beloved Country', based on Alan Paton's novel about apartheid in South Africa. During the next decade, he played featured roles in a number of British and American productions, including the harpooner Daggoo in 'Moby Dick' (1956) and Balthazar in 'King of Kings' (1961). In 1958, when Paul Robeson turned down the role of Gower in Shakespeare's 'Pericles' for the Stratford Memorial Theatre, he recommended Connor for it. Connor thus became the first black actor to appear in a Shakespeare season at Stratford upon Avon. This proved to be one of the high points of his career in the theatre. 
Though Connor succeeded in almost everything he set out to do, there were some doors that remained firmly closed. As his wife, Pearl, explained: 'He took the opportunity to go to America and train in opera. He had this marvellous baritone, and in America he learned about technique... [but] in those days they had no room for people like Edric. It wasn't even thought about at that time, that a black actor from the Caribbean could ever perform in the opera houses of Britain. Yet, though he sung the roles of Amonasro in 'Aida' and King Boris in 'Boris Godunov' in Europe, Edric was never asked to sing at Covent Garden. It was very frustrating for him. (Bourne, 105-6)' Connor also wanted to become a television producer and director at a time when no black person could be found behind the camera, except as a scene shifter. His wife recalled: 'He trained with the BBC. This gave him a qualification but, after he completed his training, he wasn't given the opportunity to direct in film or television. Not one BBC assignment came his way' (Bourne, 108). Determined to become a film-maker, in the early 1960s he directed a series of short films about the Caribbean which he funded himself with help from the British Film Institute. They included 'Carnival fantastique', a documentary about the famous Trinidad carnival. Connor was Britain's first black film director, but he faced opposition from people in the film industry who categorized him as a singer, and would not take him seriously. In the early 1960s Connor and his wife were instrumental in forming the Negro Theatre Workshop, a company of thirty black actors. 
Connor suffered a stroke and died at the National Hospital, St Pancras, London, on 16 October 1968. He was survived by his wife, Cynthia, and their two children, Geraldine Connor, a theatre director and composer, and Peter. As a Caribbean performer in Britain he had been a trailblazer, an artist touched with greatness, and an inspiration to those who followed. His wife recalled: 'He saw himself as an ambassador for Trinidad... we black people were being judged all the time so we felt we had to show our best... but he died much too young. He hadn't achieved everything he wanted to do. But he moved into this country and took every opportunity he had here... to make a lasting mark so that those who came after him would know that it was possible. (Bourne, 112)' 



@@@@@


doc= 58884


Foresythe, Reginald Charles (1907-1958), jazz pianist and composer, was born on 28 May 1907 at 15 Hetley Road, Shepherd's Bush, London, the son of Charles Albert Foresythe, a Yoruba (Nigerian) barrister, and his wife, Charlotte Annie Falk, an Englishwoman of German descent. The family lived in the small west African community in the Shepherd's Bush area of London. Foresythe received a public school education, and studied piano and composition. Throughout his life Foresythe used his upper-class British accent to achieve some measure of acceptance in an otherwise racially segregated world. In the 1930s in Britain he won respect in jazz circles for such bold and dazzling compositions as 'Serenade for a Wealthy Widow', 'Garden of Weed', 'Berceuse for an Unwanted Child', 'The Autocrat before Breakfast', 'Greener the Grass', 'Melancholy Clown', and 'Dodging a Divorcee'. In 'Just Jazz 3' Charles Fox says: 'Foresythe's music frequently possessed wit as well as sophistication, charm as well as ingenuity, and certainly nobody in this country worked harder to expand the boundaries of jazz' (Traill and Lascelles, 30). 
On a visit to New York in 1937 Foresythe composed the music for some of the songs in that year's 'Cotton Club Parade', a lavish revue with a cast headed by Ethel Waters and Duke Ellington. With lyrics by Andy Razaf, Foresythe contributed the rhumba 'Chile: a South American Fantasy', performed by Duke Ellington's vocalist, Ivie Anderson, and 'Taps is Tops', performed by the Nicholas Brothers. In America in the 1930s, jazz giants such as Louis Armstrong and Fats Waller admired Foresythe and recorded his compositions. Earl Hines used Foresythe's 'Deep Forest' as a signature tune on his first radio series. Charles Fox recorded: 'When I spoke to Hines about Foresythe he remembered him well, and agreed that if he had only stayed in the United States, instead of returning to Britain, he might easily have become an influential and important figure in jazz. Over here, of course, his ideas were considered to be 'too far out' even by many musicians; he was looked on, in fact, as something of a musical eccentric. The result was that a very talented jazz composer failed to live up to his early promise. (Traill and Lascelles, 30)' When the American singer Elisabeth Welch made London her home in 1933, she began looking for an accompanist. She recalls in 'Brief Encounters: Lesbians and Gays in British Cinema, 1930-71': 'When I arrived in London I was offered cabaret and variety engagements, but I didn't know anyone who could accompany me. I was given Reggie's name and of course I'd heard about him in America and Paris. He was a sweet, simple, charming person. His appearance was always immaculate and elegant. He loved good food and talked with that wonderful English upper-class accent. When we made fun of his accent, he didn't mind at all. He had a great sense of humour about himself. We all loved him. I used to go almost two or three times a week to see him perform his famous 'New Music' at the 400 Club, a very chic place in Leicester Square. Reggie was a 'confirmed bachelor'. I do not recall a woman ever being associated with him. I know he had liaisons with men, but they were always very discreet. (Bourne, 41)' At the height of his popularity Foresythe made several guest appearances in British films, including 'Calling the Tune' (1936), for which he composed 'Evergreen Restaurant' and performed it as a piano solo in the film. On his return to London from New York, Foresythe worked in Mayfair clubs until the outbreak of the Second World War. Over age for active service, he volunteered for the RAF anyway. In 1941 he became an intelligence officer in the RAF and served in north Africa. 
In the 1930s Foresythe had been ahead of his time, but after the war time seemed to have passed him by. He was soon leading bands in obscure west country hotels and playing solo piano in drinking clubs in London's Soho and Kensington. His career ended in obscurity and alcoholism. He died, aged fifty-one, on 23 December 1958 from heart failure after a fall at his home at 174 Sussex Gardens, Paddington, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 58885


Hutchinson, Leslie Arthur Julien (1900-1969), cabaret entertainer, was born on 7 March 1900 on the Caribbean island of Grenada, the son of George Hutchinson and Marianne Simm Turnbull; he was of mixed African, Caribbean, Indian, Scottish, and French ancestry. His father, a local businessman (a hatter and dry-goods merchant), played the organ in church, and Leslie operated the handpump for him. By the age of twelve Leslie had shown talent for playing the piano. After leaving school he joined the civil service, but at the age of sixteen Hutch, as he became known, left Grenada for New York. He later recalled that he arrived: 'with a few dollars and a lot of ambition. I became an elevator boy [but] in the Winter of 1917 I was without a job and absolutely broke. So I offered my services as a pianist at private parties. And that's how it all started. (Breese and Palmer)' After turning professional he was so alarmed by the Ku Klux Klan during an engagement in Palm Beach that he decided to leave America for good. In Paris, where he went to study the classical piano, Hutch played in Joselli's bar, where he was adopted by the rich and famous, and met Cole Porter, the songwriter who was to become his friend and musical 'alter ego'. Hutch became the best-known interpreter of Cole Porter's songs, and there was even a joke that said Hutch knew the lyrics before Porter had written them. 
In 1927 Hutch was invited by Britain's top theatrical impresario, C. B. Cochran, to appear at the London Pavilion in the revue 'One Dam Thing After Another', with music and lyrics by Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart. Hutch accompanied the star of the show, Jessie Matthews, in its big hit -- 'My heart stood still'. During the next three years he appeared in three more West End revues for Cochran: Noel Coward's 'This Year of Grace', Cole Porter's 'Wake Up and Dream', and 'Cochran's 1930 Revue'. Hutch's trademark was a white handkerchief which he used to mop his brow. As a singing pianist cabaret entertainer, he was befriended and lionized by the pre-war rich and famous. Charlotte Breese described the legend -- and some of the tensions in Hutch's life -- in 'Salutations', a BBC Radio 2 tribute broadcast on 11 September 1993: 'Hutch was a remarkably elegant man. Outwardly he conformed entirely and he became part of the set that were his clients. He was certainly invited to their houses at weekends although of course it would have been different at official functions in London where he was still expected to enter by the tradesmen's entrance. For a man with as much pride as Hutch it must have been extraordinarily humiliating. He was a walking threat in a kind of way because he was so good-looking. ('Salutations')' In London, Hutch performed in society nightclubs such as the Cafe de Paris, Cafe Anglais, and Quaglino's. He was equally loved by the ordinary public, and became a top-of-the-bill attraction in music-halls all over the country. In 1930 he made his film debut with a guest appearance in the musical 'Big Business' (1930). Hutch enlivened several other British films of the 1930s and 1940s with his guest appearances, as well as a number of Pathetone Weekly and New Sound Pictorial films. With regular radio broadcasts and many recordings his popularity grew throughout the 1930s, and during the war years he gave many concerts for the armed forces. In 1942 he reappeared in a West End revue after an absence of more than a decade. This was 'Happidrome', and in 1943 he was featured in the screen version. Also in 1943 he took part in 'Seventy Years of Song', a variety spectacular staged at the Royal Albert Hall by Cochran for the Toc H war relief fund. 
After the Second World War Hutch's sophisticated style of performing, so popular with the pre-war smart set, was no longer in fashion, and his health was deteriorating. Though he continued performing (he returned to, and remained at, Quaglino's in 1954) he only occasionally recaptured the level of popularity he had enjoyed in pre-war Britain. In 1953 he was Roy Plomley's guest on the popular BBC radio programme 'Desert Island Discs', and in 1964 he realized his ambition to play an acting role when he appeared as a jazz musician in a British television drama called 'A Really Good Jazz Piano'. His wife Ella Byrd (1894/5-1958), whom he married in New York and with whom he had at least one daughter, died in Hampstead in 1958. Hutch himself died on 18 August 1969 in New End Hospital, Hampstead. His 'Times' obituarist noted his 'fanatical' devotion to the game of cricket, and deemed him 'the ideal artist for the relaxed hour after dinner' ('The Times'). 


@@@@@


doc= 58886


John Sotheby (1740-1807). The Sothebys stemmed from Pocklington in Yorkshire, where a nineteenth-century wall plaque in the local church of All Saints details the family members. A bookish interest can be traced back to James Sotheby (1682-1742), a keen collector of manuscripts and incunabula, and to William Sotheby (1757-1833), a poet and author. Three generations of the Sotheby family were to be associated with the celebrated auction house which was subsequently established; two centuries later the firm still bore their name. 
The family's involvement in auctioneering came about through the marriage of John Sotheby (1703-1775) to Anne, sister of Samuel Baker (1711-1778), a young bookseller. Baker began in business on his own in 1733 and started holding book auctions in 1744. Even sixty years after they had been introduced into England from the Netherlands, auctions were still a relatively unusual method of selling books. Although Baker eventually faced strong competition in London, his firm flourished. In 1767 he took George Leigh (1742-1816) into partnership. Baker died in 1778; Leigh continued as a partner in the firm until his own death in 1816. 
Baker, whose own marriage was childless, left a share of the business to his nephew, John Sotheby (1740-1807), the only child of his sister and John Sotheby. Born in 1740, the younger John Sotheby married Elizabeth Cotton (daughter of Thomas Cotton and Mary Barnett) on 6 September 1770 at St George's, Bloomsbury. He joined his uncle's auction house at the age of thirty-eight on the latter's death. A serious but competent administrator, he worked very harmoniously with George Leigh: in fact they issued a fixed-price catalogue under the names Leigh and Sotheby as early as 23 July 1778. 
In the last two decades of the eighteenth century under the joint management of Leigh and John Sotheby, the firm's sale catalogues became noticeably more elegant and the detail of the cataloguing improved greatly. The frequency of sales went up too and prices, particularly for manuscript material and prints, rose. By the end of the century the firm needed assistance to deal with the increased workload. In the summer of 1800 it arrived in the form of John Sotheby's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 58889


Stevens, Bernard George (1916-1983), composer and teacher, was born on 2 March 1916 at 82 Holmleigh Road, Stamford Hill, east London, the son of George Stevens, a foreman metalworker, and his wife, Nellie Louise Martin. He received early encouragement from the composer Harold Samuel (who gave him free lessons) and attended Southend High School for Boys during the tenure of Arthur Hutchings (later professor of music at Durham University); he then read English at St John's College, Cambridge (1934-7), before reading for a MusB degree under Edward Dent and Cyril Rootham. From 1937 he studied at the Royal College of Music, London, as a Leverhulme scholar with R. O. Morris (composition), Arthur Benjamin (piano), Gordon Jacob (orchestration), and Constant Lambert (conducting), and also took some lessons independently with Sir Donald Tovey. In 1940, while at the college, he won the Parry prize for composition with a violin sonata written for Bertha Minnie Pells, a student at the Royal Academy of Music. Stevens then served in the Royal Army Pay Corps for six years and was initially stationed in London during the blitz. 
During the war Stevens wrote a violin concerto for Max Rostal, but the work that brought him into prominence was his 'Symphony of Liberation', op. 7, which won first prize in the 1945 victory symphony competition run by the 'Daily Express'. It was first performed on 7 June the following year by the London Philharmonic Orchestra conducted by Malcolm Sargent (one of the judges of the competition; the others were Arthur Bliss and Constant Lambert). However, Stevens had been a member of the Communist Party since 1943, and as soon as this became public knowledge his official success was over. It cannot be doubted that his political leanings and championship of other left-wing activists told heavily against the promotion and reception of his work, despite determined efforts to ensure that it was comprehensible and accessible. He was sustained by his marriage to the violinist Bertha Minnie Pells, whom he married in 1946, and remained a member of the party until prompted to resign by the Soviet invasion of Hungary in 1956. 
As a member and later a vice-president of the Workers' Music Association (WMA), Stevens assisted his fellow composer Alan Bush with the WMA Singers in the first three World Festivals of Youth in Prague (1947), Budapest (1949), and Berlin (1951). After Bush's opera 'Wat Tyler' had been nominated a prizewinner at the 1951 opera competition to mark the Festival of Britain, Stevens conducted its first concert performance, with the composer at the piano. Stevens's own entry for the competition, a three-act work entitled 'Mimosa' with a libretto by Montagu Slater, was left incomplete, although he later collaborated with Slater on a song cycle 'The Palatine Coast', op. 21 (which incorporated some of the musical ideas of the larger work), and in 1948 wrote the music for the film 'Once a Jolly Swagman', based on Slater's novel. In the same year he was appointed to a professorship of harmony, counterpoint, and composition at the Royal College of Music, a post he held until 1981 while combining this work with a similar post at the University of London from 1967; he gained the Cambridge MusD degree in 1968. As successor to his former professor R. O. Morris, he was responsible for a number of Morris's own pupils and for many of the new generation of composers, including Michael Finnissy, who remembered Stevens as exceptionally well informed: 'what he taught were not methods but principles' (Brougham, Fox, and Pace, 7). 
In 1952, after living in Chelsea and Belsize Park, London, Stevens and his wife settled at The Forge, Great Maplestead, Essex, where he remained for the rest of his life. His daughter Catherine, born on 30 October 1952, became a professional viola player and was the dedicatee of his unaccompanied 'Improvisation' for the instrument. Much of Stevens's output consisted of chamber music, notably a 'Theme and Variations' (1949) in one movement for string quartet, which closes with a fugue based on an entirely new subject. Another influence, that of the Elizabethans, is manifest in his 'Fantasia on Giles Farnaby's Dream' for piano and 'Fantasia on a Theme of Dowland' for violin and piano (both 1953) and 'Introduction, Variations, and Fugue on a Theme of Giles Farnaby' for orchestra (1972). Other important works include a cello concerto for William Pleeth (1951), a piano concerto for Kendall Taylor (1955) which was fully revised before his death, a second symphony, a 'Dance Suite' for orchestra (1957), influenced by Bela Bartok and dedicated to Edmund Rubbra, and two cantatas, 'The Pilgrims of Hope' (1956), to words by William Morris, and 'Et resurrexit' (1969), dedicated to the memory of Randall Swingler, whose final poem provides most of the text. Stevens also wrote an illuminating chapter on the Soviet Union for Howard Hartog's 'European Music in the Twentieth Century' (1957). Following his rejection of Marxism, he sought solace in the rarefied spirituality espoused by the Jesuit priest and scientist Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, and in 1981 he set John Donne's 'Death be not proud' for a concert celebrating the centenary of de Chardin's birth. 
Cancer had been diagnosed by 1978, but progress of the disease was slow and left Stevens time to complete his one-act chamber opera 'The Shadow of the Glen' (1979, based on the play by J. M. Synge), much of which was written in Minorca. He died, survived by his wife, on 3 January 1983 in the Essex County Hospital, Colchester, and was cremated at Chelmsford. Before interment, a memorial service was held at Great Maplestead with readings and music, including a transcription of Stevens's own 'Elegiac Fugue on the Name Geraldine' (1981), written in memory of Geraldine Swingler (died 1980). 


@@@@@


doc= 58894


Talbert, Bruce James (1838-1881), architect and designer, was born in Dundee, the son of a merchant, James Talbert. On leaving Dundee high school he was apprenticed first to a woodcarver called Millar and then to the architect Charles Edwards. His only known work in that area was heraldic decoration in the Kinnaird Hall, Dundee, now demolished. In 1856 Talbert moved to Glasgow, where he worked in two architectural practices: W. N. Tait of Govan and, from 1860, Campbell Douglas and Stevenson. During his time with the latter he was awarded two prizes: the Architectural Design medal and, in 1862, the Edinburgh Architectural Association medal, for a perspective drawing of a church belfry. In the same year he moved to Manchester to work for the cabinet-makers Doveston, Bird, and Hull. This proved a turning point in his career as a commercial designer, and within a short time his range of interests began to widen. Soon afterwards he took up a post in Coventry, designing silver and wrought-iron work for Francis Skidmore's Art Manufactures Company. He was employed as an 'architectural and perspective draughtsman and colourist' at 4 guineas a week (as advertised in 'The Builder', 18 Oct 1862) and his work included making detailed drawings from Sir George Gilbert Scott's designs for the gates of the Albert Memorial and the screen in Hereford Cathedral, one of the major exhibits of the 1862 International Exhibition (now in the V&A). This is likely to have been Talbert's last salaried position, as there is evidence that he had already begun to work on a freelance basis before leaving Coventry for London in 1865 or 1866. 
Talbert's reputation as a gifted and versatile designer began to develop. He succeeded in winning the competition for a new masthead for the 'Building News', which also published a number of his designs. In 1867 the prestigious firm of cabinet-makers Holland & Co. commissioned him to design their stand at the Paris Exhibition, for which they were awarded the silver medal. At the time he was also supplying designs to the ecclesiastical firm of Cox & Sons and, possibly, to Gillows of Lancaster. In the same year he published the first volume of his book 'Gothic Forms Applied to Furniture, Metal Work and Decoration for Domestic Purposes'. The second volume was published in 1868 at Dundee, where he had returned to recover from a period of ill health. Dedicated to the architect G. E. Street, the publication was not the first book published to offer advice on the decoration of domestic interiors (C. L. Eastlake's 'Hints on Household Taste' had appeared between 1864 and 1866) but proved more influential than its predecessors, as it was 'not so much addressed to the public as to the furniture trades' (Day, 194). It advised on the decor for each room in the house, including stained glass, furniture, carpeting, and drapery for decorating walls, ceilings, and floors. His overall aesthetic view even extended to the user, whose 'ever changing curves' he believed would provide adequate contrast to the horizontals and verticals of the static decoration. 
The book became influential with cabinet-makers, furnishers, and interior designers in Britain and America, and Talbert's 'style became immediately the fashion' (Day, 194). His favoured style was based on medieval decoration of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, as can be seen in his furniture designs of that time. He cautioned against copying medieval decoration, believing that it gave furniture an undesirable monumental character. Instead he rescaled gables, coves, columns, and trefoil arches, using angular brackets, trestles, and spindles, which he believed displayed honest construction regardless of functional form. 
By 1870 Talbert had returned to London, and it was there that he set up a design studio with a number of assistants. Despite this he continued to list himself as an architect. He lived and worked from a number of different addresses, but in 1875 moved to 5 Euston Square, where he settled for the rest of his life with his wife, Amy Adkins, the daughter of a Birmingham maltster, whom he had married in the previous year. There he produced an enormous number of designs for many different manufacturers and shops. As well as for Holland & Sons and Gillows he also produced furniture designs for Marsh, Jones, and Cribb, of Leeds, and for the London shops Collinson and Lock, and Jackson and Graham, for whom he designed the 'Juno' cabinet (V&A), which was a prizewinner at Paris in 1878. Of framed construction, his later furniture was decorated with pierced work, low-relief carving, geometric inlays, and occasional small enamels. He disliked veneer and the glossy finishes produced by French polish and staining. 
Throughout the 1870s Talbert designed for many forms of the decorative arts. He worked briefly with Daniel Cottier, an old friend from his Glasgow days whose business produced furniture, stained glass, and tiles, and he continued to design metalwork, including Cox & Sons' prize-winning Society of Arts entry in 1870, and cast iron for the Coalbrookdale Company. 
In 1876 Talbert published his second book on interior design, 'Examples of Ancient and Modern Furniture, Metalwork, Tapestries, Decoration etc'. This shows a marked change in the style advocated, from the Gothic of his earlier publication to a number of later historical influences, including 'Old English', Queen Anne, and Jacobean -- his favourite. The book finally established Talbert as one of the major commercial designers of the nineteenth century, 'recognised as the first man in his profession and various firms in London and the provinces competed for designs from his pencil' ('Cabinet Maker and Art Furnisher', 2, 1 July 1881, 5). 
Talbert's interests were not restricted to three-dimensional objects, and he designed a wide range of repeating patterns for wallpapers and textiles. He was astute in recognizing potentially fashionable trends and produced some of the most characteristic aesthetic movement designs of the 1870s and 1880s. These included his sunflower wallpapers for Jeffrey & Co. (one of which won a gold medal in Paris in 1878) and a series of designs for woven silks. Though little is known today about Talbert's work for textile manufacturers this became a lucrative part of his studio's output. He sold designs for carpets to Brintons of Kidderminster, and for silk and woollen curtains and portieres to Cowlishall, Nichol & Co. of Manchester, J. W. and C. Ward of Halifax, and Templetons of Glasgow. All reveal the harmony of pattern and colour advocated in his publications. The silks made by Warners of Spitalfields, London, are quite different, and, like his wallpapers, show the influence of Japanese design, but depicted in a particularly British way with natural background foliage such as willow. He also designed embossed leathers and flocked papers as well as velvets and stamped plushes, examples of which have survived as upholstery on dining chairs. 
It is not known how much of his studio's output of textile designs was Talbert's own work. George C. Haite, George Charles, and Henry W. Batley were assistants who became popular and successful designers in their own right after they had left Talbert's employment. It is also doubtful that Talbert could have produced the bulk of designs credited to him in the later part of the 1870s, for on 28 January 1881 he died, of alcoholism, at his home in Euston Square. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 1 February. He left his modest estate to his wife, Amy, who sold the house and contents in May of the same year. His artistic legacy proved far greater. His obituary in the 'Building News' (reprinted in the 'Cabinet Maker') claimed that 'he made a name as a designer of furniture which has not been equalled in England since the days of Chippendale and Adams ['sic']' ('Cabinet Maker and Art Furnisher', 1 Aug 1881, 24-5). This reputation did not diminish with his death, especially within the trades that he worked for. Manufacturers continued to use his designs, and his publications proved essential reading for new designers. Examples of his designs, furniture, and textiles are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


