@@@@@


doc= 58897


Davie, Cedric Fredric Thorpe (1913-1983), composer, was born on 30 May 1913 at 4 Eliot Vale, Lewisham, London, the elder of the two sons of Thorpe Davie (died 'c'.1954), singing teacher and a Glaswegian, and his wife, Gladys Louise Butcher (died 'c'.1954). From his earliest years Thorpe Davie, as he too was known, showed his father's artistic commitment and determination; he won a Caird scholarship to the Scottish National Academy of Music, Glasgow, where he gained the first-year piano prize. His development and promise were recognized through a second Caird award in 1932, which enabled him to study initially with Harold Craxton at the Royal Academy of Music, London. Thorpe Davie, however, nurtured creative ambitions and moved to the Royal College of Music in 1933 to study theory, orchestration, and composition with R. O. Morris, Gordon Jacob, and Ralph Vaughan Williams while continuing piano tuition with Egon Petri. He then used his scholarship for further studies with Zoltan Kodaly in Budapest and Yryo Kilpinen in Helsinki, with a visit to Sibelius when in Finland. 
Some of Thorpe Davie's early pieces were performed by his father's choir. A student piano trio constituted his official opus 1, but in 1935 the 'Phantasie quartet' for strings (winner of the Cobbett prize) and the choral and orchestral 'Dirge for Cuthullin' (awarded the Sullivan prize) first established his reputation as a composer. The latter work was dedicated to Margaret Russell Brown (died 1974), whom he married on 23 March 1937. 
In 1936 Thorpe Davie was appointed to teach music theory at the Scottish National Academy of Music. While there he affirmed his love of Scotland, a lifelong passion traced through diverse work from the 'Fantasy No. 1 on Scottish Tunes' (1937) to the treatise 'Scotland's Music' (1980). Thorpe Davie became a leader in Glasgow's musical life, supporting contemporary work and encouraging adventurous programming. The war years saw him in the city's fire service and establishing contact with the Orcadian author Robert Kemp, then seeking a score for a BBC radio programme, 'Scotland at War'. Their collaboration in 1943 encouraged Thorpe Davie to write further for radio broadcasts and for films, a field in which he was frequently to provide -- with characteristic integrity -- music of a Scottish flavour. 
Thorpe Davie's links with the composer and musicologist Howard Ferguson, dating from their student days, can be attributed to shared Celtic roots as well as shared academic and practical musical interests. Thorpe Davie's concerto for piano and string orchestra (1944) predates that of Ferguson by seven years and must have exerted an influence in its form and spirit. Through Ferguson, he met Gerald Finzi: their friendship led to regular correspondence and musical liaison, leading St Andrews University eventually to acquire Finzi's manuscript eighteenth-century editions (for which Thorpe Davie compiled a scholarly catalogue). 
In 1945 Thorpe Davie's career began to blossom. His symphony, placed second in the 'Daily Express' victory music competition, was premiered at the Royal Albert Hall, and he was appointed master of music at St Andrews University. Here he became a pivotal figure, founding the department of music in 1947 and becoming reader in 1956 and professor in 1973. In common with Finzi, Thorpe Davie showed active interest in eighteenth-century music. Arrangements of songs for productions of the ballad operas 'The Gentle Shepherd' and 'The Highland Fair' (staged at the Edinburgh Festival in 1949 and 1952 respectively) established his partnership with the director, Tyrone Guthrie. In 1948 their renowned production of Sir David Lindsay's play 'Ane Satyre of the Thrie Estaitis' made Thorpe Davie's name as a theatre composer. Commissions followed for Shakespeare productions -- 'Henry VIII' (1949), 'King Lear' (1950), and 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1951). In addition, Thorpe Davie was a prolific composer in the film world, completing twenty-four scores, including four for Walt Disney. Further recognition followed with 'Flowers from the Rock', written for the twenty-first birthday of Princess Margaret, and a coronation march, 'The royal mile', as a result of which he was appointed OBE in 1954. 
Enthused by his Scottish heritage, Thorpe Davie composed 'Variations on a Theme of Sir Alexander Mackenzie' (1949) and a choral work, 'Ode for St Andrew's Night' (1950). He also wrote music for Robert Burns's dramatic cantata 'The Jolly Beggars' (1954). Thorpe Davie considered another of his choral works -- a setting of verse by the Scots poet Alastair Reid ('Directions for a Map', 1955-6) -- to be perhaps his best work. In 1964 he composed a second 'Fantasia on Scotish Tunes' (the title using the traditional spelling) to commemorate the opening of the Forth road bridge, and he was joint compiler of 'The Oxford Scottish Song Book'. His last major work, a suite based on eighteenth-century Scots fiddle tunes, celebrated the bicentenary of Edinburgh's New Town (1967). By then -- in common with the previous experience of Ferguson -- Thorpe Davie felt his essentially tonal expressive idiom had grown outmoded, and so determined to concentrate his energies on his academic work. 
From his university base Thorpe Davie exerted wide influence, demonstrating the dedication to amateur and youth music-making that had been revealed in his earlier writing for the National Youth Orchestra of Great Britain and the National Youth Brass Band of Scotland. He chaired the music panel of the Scottish Certificate of Education Examination Board (1966-71) and the music committee of the Scottish Arts Council, also acting as a member of the Arts Council of Great Britain (1968-73). Awards in tribute to his work included honorary fellowships from the Royal Academy of Music (1949) and the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama (1978) and an LLD degree from Dundee University (1969). 
Predeceased by his wife in 1974, Thorpe Davie lived from 1978 in retirement at Dalry, Kirkcudbrightshire, pursuing his enthusiasm for hillwalking. A lover of cats, crosswords, malt whisky, and Scottish country dancing, and possessed of a great (if slightly eccentric) sense of humour, he died, following a heart attack, on 18 January 1983 at Dalry. He was cremated at Ayr. 


@@@@@


doc= 58898


Turner, Victor Witter (1920-1983), social anthropologist, was born on 28 May 1920 at 13 Riverside Road, Cathcart, Glasgow, the only child of Captain Norman Turner (1895-1975), electrical engineer and officer in the Royal Flying Corps during the First World War, and Violet, 'nee' Witter (1889-1966), repertory actress and a founder of the Scottish National Players. Turner was baptized into the Congregational church and received his earliest education at the Montessori School, Belmont Crescent, Glasgow (1925-6), before going to the Glasgow Academy (1926-31). When his parents divorced, the eleven-year-old Turner accompanied his mother to live with her parents, who had retired from Glasgow to Bournemouth: Arthur Witter (died 1935) was English; his wife, Jeanie Witter ('nee' Johnston), Scottish. Turner's estrangement from his father was to be lifelong. While attending Bournemouth grammar school (1931-8) Turner developed interests in Latin and Greek classical literatures and in poetry writing, which were reflected in his initial choice of degree subject. 
Turner studied English language and literature at University College, London, from 1939 until drafted for war service in 1941. As a conscientious objector and non-combatant, he volunteered between 1941 and 1946 to serve in 104 bomb disposal squad, 8 company, Royal Engineers. On 30 January 1943 he married Edith Lucy Brocklesby (Edie) Davis ('b'. 1921), with whom he had four sons and one surviving daughter. They established their first home in a Gypsy caravan outside Rugby, where he was based. Turner's earliest publications (1943-4) were poems published in the magazine 'Oasis', which he helped to start with a wartime friend, John Bate (E. Turner, 'Bibliography'; private information). 
By the time he returned to University College in 1946 Turner had resolved to become an anthropologist and transferred into the department of anthropology which had been established in the previous year by Daryll Forde. After graduating in 1949, he moved that year, initially as a research assistant, to the University of Manchester, where Max Gluckman was establishing an outstanding centre of anthropological research with particular interests in central and southern Africa. The left-leaning ethos of the place would have been conducive to Turner's communist beliefs. Between 1950 and 1954 Turner was a research officer of the Rhodes-Livingstone Institute -- an appointment arranged by Gluckman, who encouraged him to research among the Ndembu, a branch of the Lunda people of Zambia (then Northern Rhodesia), on account of their complex ritual life. Research carried out between December 1950 and February 1952 and between May 1953 and June 1954 was written up in a series of publications about the Ndembu that established Turner's early reputation as an outstanding fieldworker and ethnographer. 
In 1955 Turner completed the doctorate subsequently published as 'Schism and Continuity in an African Society: a Study of Ndembu Village Life' (1957). The book's extended 'social dramas' -- units of disharmonic social process -- illustrated and explained the recurrent processes, to do with matrilineal descent and choice of residence, that lay behind the splitting of Ndembu village communities. By systematically exploring the phases of social drama (norms breached, mounting crisis, redress to limit that crisis, and recognition of the new outcome) Turner reinvigorated the Manchester school's existing concern with disputes and their resolution by embedding these processes in extended and lively case studies. Having resigned from the British Communist Party in 1957 (Deflem, 4), in May 1958 Turner was received into the Catholic church: 'After many years as an agnostic and monistic materialist I learnt from the Ndembu that ritual and its symbolism are not merely epiphenomena or disguises of deeper social and psychological processes, but have ontological value, in some way related to man's condition as an evolving species, whose evolution takes place principally through its cultural innovations. ('Revelation and Divination', 31)' Studies of ritual processes predominated in Turner's ensuing publications. His interest in local exegesis was evident in his celebrated portrait of a key informant: 'Muchona the Hornet' (1959). However, Turner's unwillingness to restrict symbolic analysis to the terms of conscious local models was apparent from the essays on the symbolism of Ndembu rituals of initiation and affliction written between 1958 and 1966 that were collected, together with 'Muchona', in 'The Forest of Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu Ritual' (1967). Among the most influential ethnographies written by the outstanding generation of social anthropologists trained immediately after the Second World War, 'The Forest of Symbols' renewed symbolic analysis in anthropology and provided an important step towards Turner's own later work. Turner (who described himself as a 'comparative symbologist') argued that dominant symbols condense diverse meanings that cluster around two poles: the physiological and the normative. For instance, the white sap of a tree may evoke both maternal nurturance and the more abstract ideas of matrilineal solidarity and dispute. Turner's discussion of the 'liminal' period in rites of passage that had been famously analysed by Arnold van Gennep (1909) -- whom Turner read in 1961, and again in 1963 (E. Turner, 'From Ndembu to Broadway', 7-8) -- as an extended period 'betwixt and between' formal statuses, highlighted the ambiguities, paradoxes, and confusion of customary categories universally typical of liminal status. Turner noted that there existed an authoritative relation between neophytes and their instructors, but among neophytes relations were commonly egalitarian. 
Composition of the essays in 'The Forest of Symbols' straddled Turner's move from the UK to the USA. After appointment as a fellow of the Center for Advanced Behavioral Sciences at Palo Alto in California 1961-2, while he was working on 'The Drums of Affliction' (1968), Turner left the University of Manchester (where since gaining his doctorate he had been successively Simon research fellow 1957-9, lecturer, 1959-61, and senior lecturer, 1962-3) to join the anthropology department of Cornell University as professor (1964-8). This was a particularly productive period, recognized by the award of the Rivers memorial medal of the Royal Anthropological Institute in 1965: aside from completing 'The Forest of Symbols' and 'The Drums of Affliction', Turner accepted an invitation to deliver the Lewis Henry Morgan lectures at the University of Rochester in April 1966. The ensuing publication, 'The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-Structure' (1969), demonstrated his use of Ndembu analysis as a springboard to universal concerns. The first half of the book, roughly corresponding to the lectures delivered, begins with an intensive analysis of an Ndembu women's fertility ritual; initially through other Ndembu case studies, next in comparative sub-Saharan terms, Turner proceeds to argue the co-presence in African societies of two forms of sociality corresponding to the dictates of social structure and to those of 'communitas' -- an egalitarian repudiation of structure. In pre-industrial societies communitas is particularly -- but not solely -- associated with liminal states. The remainder of 'The Ritual Process' explores forms of communitas in more complex societies: 'Together [structure and communitas] make up one stream of life; the one affluent supplying power, the other alluvial fertility' ('Ritual Process', 128, Penguin [Pelican] edition, 1974). 
The linked concepts of communitas (based in shared humanity) and the 'liminoid' (times and spaces outside normal social process) energized Turner's later works. Between 1968 and 1977, when professor of social thought and anthropology on the University of Chicago's 'Committee on Social Thought', Turner researched for and collected the essays published as 'Dramas, Fields, and Metaphors: Symbolic Action in Human Society' (1974). His interests ranged widely from pilgrimage sites in Mexico, Ireland, and England -- presented as functional equivalents of rites of passage in less complex societies -- to the historical production of myth and symbol in medieval England and during the Mexican Revolutionary War. 
From 1977 until his death in Charlottesville, Virginia, on 18 December 1983, following a second heart attack, Turner was William R. Kenan professor of anthropology and religion at the University of Virginia. Travelling widely, he pursued his interests in theatre and performance studies, in pilgrimage, and in the 'liminoid' in complex, post-industrial societies -- for which he sought a neurological as well as social basis. Some of these later works were written jointly with his wife, Edith L. Turner, whom Turner had never failed to acknowledge as an influence and co-worker in earlier writings. After a requiem mass at Holy Comforter Church, Charlottesville, on 21 December, Victor Turner was cremated at Harrisonburg, Virginia. At home, family and friends re-enacted a 'full-scale Ndembu funeral for a tribal chief... with drums, masked dancers, ritual, and large quantities of beer and spirits' (Turner and Turner, 16; Willis). Turner's ashes were placed on the peak of the island of Barra, Scotland, the home of his mother's McNeil ancestors. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 58899


Turpin, Randolph Adolphus (1928-1966), boxer, was born on 7 June 1928 at his parents' home, 6 Willes Road, Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, the youngest of five children (three boys and two girls) of Lionel Fitzherbert Turpin, an iron-moulder at a gas stove works, and his wife, Beatrice Elizabeth Whitehouse. Lionel Turpin was a native of British Guiana who moved to Britain during the First World War, joined the infantry, and was gassed on the Somme; he eventually died from his injuries in 1929. Beatrice Turpin, a white Englishwoman, supported the family by working at a succession of low-paid jobs to eke out a meagre pension. In 1931 she married Ernest Manley, and the family settled in Warwick, where Randolph attended the West Gate council school. 
Growing up in the face of racial prejudice, the Turpin boys learned to use their fists in self-defence. Randolph's elder brothers Dick and Jackie became 'booth fighters', putting on exhibition bouts at fairs and carnivals for a fistful of pennies tossed into the ring by spectators. Dick turned professional in 1937 and eventually (28 June 1948) became British middleweight champion, the first boxer of colour to hold a British professional title. Jackie became a ranked fighter in the featherweight division. Randolph's career began in 1942, when he joined the boxing section of the Leamington boys' club, started by a local policeman as a means of keeping youngsters out of trouble. He made his amateur debut in March 1942, and subsequently fought more than 100 bouts, gaining national junior titles in 1943 and 1945. In 1945 he gained the Amateur Boxing Association welterweight championship. He meanwhile worked as a builder's labourer before volunteering in December 1945 for the Royal Navy, where he served as a cook at the Portsmouth naval base. In June 1946 he was a member of a British team that boxed against a United States squad selected by the Amateur Athletic Union. Shortly afterwards, in September 1946, he turned professional under the management of George Middleton. He married, on 25 January 1947, at St Peter's Roman Catholic Church, Leamington Spa, Mary Theresa ('b'. 1927/8), daughter of Matthew Paul Stack, a laboratory worker, and sister of Michael Stack, also a boxer. Their son was born later that year, but they separated in 1948. 
Turpin left the navy in March 1948, and won all eight of his professional fights in the following year. Training at the Nelson gym, above a gelatine factory in Warwick, he used a regime of weight training to develop his body strength which, together with his long reach, made him a formidable fighter. On 17 October 1950 he won the British middleweight championship with a five-round victory over Croydon truck driver Albert Finch. His career really took off, however, when he sensationally knocked out Dutchman Luc van Dam in only 48 seconds at the Harringay arena on 27 February 1951, to take the European middleweight championship. By then his brawling, swinging, and slashing fighting style had earned him the publicity tag of the Leamington Licker. Subsequent victories inside the distance saw him matched with champion Sugar Ray Robinson for the world title at Earls Court, London, on 10 July 1951. The American, the four-to-one favourite, and only once defeated in 133 fights, was drained by a hectic European tour, and went down to a fifteen-round points defeat, in front of 18,000 wildly cheering British fans. As the first British fighter to hold the world middleweight title since Bob Fitzsimmons in 1891, Turpin became a national hero. 
Turpin's reign lasted for only sixty-four days. In the rematch before 61,370 spectators at New York polo grounds on 12 September 1951, when Robinson was back to his best condition and sharpness, Turpin lost on a technical knock-out in the tenth round. He went on to fight in the heavier division, stopping Don Cockell in the eleventh round on 10 June 1952 to win the British and empire light heavyweight titles. On 21 October 1953 he challenged Carl (Bobo) Olson at Madison Square Gardens for the vacant world middleweight crown. Turpin's defeat on a unanimous points decision after a controversially casual preparation -- disregarding advice, he had organized his own training -- marked the beginning of the decline in his fighting career. His first marriage had, meanwhile, been dissolved in June 1953 and on 15 November 1953 he married Gwyneth Price ('b'. 1925/6), who had watched his workouts at Gwrych Castle, Denbighshire. She was the daughter of Robert Owen Price, a Welsh hill farmer. They had four daughters. 
Although his reflexes were becoming slower, Turpin continued to fight at the highest level until his knock-out by the Trinidadian Yolande Pompey at Birmingham on 9 September 1958. In the following month he announced his retirement. He worked as a car-breaker in a Leamington scrap metal yard and from 1959 helped to run his wife's transport cafe. In 1961 British boxing officials refused to let him be a sparring partner for Terry Downes, then the British middleweight champion, because of the cumulative impact of ring beatings on his mental and physical state. By then most of his fight earnings, rumoured to have been $100,000, had gone, frittered away on high living (he acquired fast cars and was a sharp dresser), failed business ventures, and, perhaps most of all, the hangers-on who exploited his generous nature. 'I was fleeced right, left and centre by those around me', he complained ('The Times', 18 May 1966). Incidents involving women also punctuated his career: an assault charge brought by his first wife was dismissed in March 1948; an allegation of rape in 1953 was settled out of court in New York two years later; and he was cited in a divorce petition (Birtley, 99-105). In 1962 he was declared bankrupt with tax debts of $17,000. He took to circus wrestling to raise funds, but these earnings in turn led to further tax demands. 
Turpin died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the heart at Gwen's Transport Cafe, 9-11 Russell Street, Leamington Spa, on 17 May 1966. His wife survived him. Conducting his funeral service, Eugene Haselden observed that 'At the height of his career Randolph was surrounded by those who regarded themselves as friends and well-wishers. But he was deserted by many as he lost his position and money' (Birtley, 145). American magazines such as 'Newsweek' and 'Time' dismissed the British boxer as a shell of a man who had wound up as a cook at his wife's cafe. The 'Illustrated London News' (28 May 1966), however, recognized Turpin as 'the most exciting fighter raised in Britain for a generation'. A bronze statue of him was unveiled in Warwick in 2001 bearing an inscription which recalled his historic victory over Robinson: 'In palace, pub and parlour, the whole of Britain held its breath'. 


@@@@@


doc= 58900


Petre, (Edward Oswald) Gabriel Turville- (1908-1978), Icelandic scholar, was born on 25 March 1908 at Bosworth Hall, Husbands Bosworth, Leicestershire, younger son of Lieutenant-Colonel Oswald Henry Philip Turville-Petre (1862-1941), high sheriff of Leicestershire, and his wife, Margaret Lucy, 'nee' Cave (died 1954). He was educated at Ampleforth College and in 1926 entered Christ Church, Oxford, where he read English, taking a third in 1930, before working for a research degree (BLitt, 1936). After some years spent teaching and studying in Iceland, Germany, and Scandinavia, he returned to Oxford as Vigfusson reader in ancient Icelandic literature and antiquities in 1941. He held this post, having been given the title of professor in 1953, and elected to a studentship of Christ Church in 1964, until his retirement in 1975. He also held honorary appointments at the universities of Leeds, London, and Melbourne. In 1943, he married Joan Elizabeth Blomfield ('b'. 1911), herself a distinguished scholar in the field of Old Norse-Icelandic studies, and they had three sons. 
Gabriel Turville-Petre became interested in Iceland and its medieval literary culture when still a child, and his links with Iceland, both professional and personal, remained strong throughout his life. He formed close friendships with Icelandic scholars, among them Einar Olafur Sveinsson, who wrote an affectionate memoir in the Festschrift for Turville-Petre's seventieth birthday, praising his command of modern Icelandic, his devotion to Icelandic culture, and the contribution he made to the growth of Icelandic studies in Britain. He was lektor in English in the University of Iceland, 1936-8, and served also as British pro-consul in Reykjavik during this time. In 1956 he was awarded the title of officer of the order of the Falcon, and commander in 1963, prestigious honours conferred by the president of Iceland, and received honorary degrees from the universities of Iceland (1961) and Uppsala (1977). He was elected FBA in 1973. 
Turville-Petre's achievement and influence as a scholar of Old Norse-Icelandic studies can hardly be overestimated. One of the earliest of a large number of articles in scholarly journals, his 'Notes on the intellectual history of Icelanders' ('History', 27, 1942) was a decisive intervention setting straight the vague misconceptions then current among English-speaking scholars about Icelandic literacy and scholarship after Iceland's conversion to Christianity in AD 1000. Turville-Petre definitively dispelled romantic assumptions about late Germanic pre-literacy in Iceland, and his piece remains an authoritative summary of early Icelandic literary history. His edition of 'Viga-Glums saga' (1940), based on his BLitt thesis, drew on what was already a remarkable range of learning, especially with regard to textual criticism (demonstrating the complex literary prehistory of a saga which had been both shortened and lengthened before being written down in its extant form), pagan religion, and Icelandic topography, which he had explored first-hand during his many visits to Iceland. 
Turville-Petre's later works reflect these strengths. His 'Myth and Religion of the North' (1964) is the best account of Old Norse-Icelandic mythology in English, especially valuable because it presents a comprehensive survey of mythological references in Icelandic and related literatures without attempting to impose narrative pattern or religious cohesion on the material. 'The Heroic Age of Scandinavia' (1951) is a similarly compendious and judicious account of a period whose sources mostly date from much later times, and derive from fictionalized texts. But his major contribution to Old Norse-Icelandic studies is his 'Origins of Icelandic Literature' (1953; 2nd edn, 1967), in many ways an expansion of his 1942 article on Icelandic intellectual history, which seeks to show the roots of Icelandic saga writing -- one of the most remarkable literary phenomena of the middle ages -- in the earliest Christian literary productions of medieval Iceland. In its epilogue, his measured assessments of what constitutes excellence in the Icelandic canon have formed the taste of generations of later readers. 
Knowledge of Irish and Welsh, in addition to medieval and modern Icelandic, other Scandinavian languages, and German, enabled Turville-Petre to draw illuminating parallels between early Celtic verse, especially the poetry of the Irish 'filid', and Old Norse-Icelandic 'drottkvaett', the intricate and cryptic court poetry which flourished in Iceland and Norway from about AD 800 to AD 1200. Articles published throughout his career, some bringing together these two difficult kinds of early poetry, and others formulating his conviction that the literary qualities of skaldic verse might have particular appeal for late twentieth-century readers, culminated in his anthology of skaldic verse, 'Scaldic Poetry' (1976). This volume too is an impressive blend of his scholarly gifts -- the careful editing of often corrupt strophes, with translations and explanatory notes -- and, in his choice of poets and poems, his opinion-forming authority, born of a lifetime's study of and delight in this literature. 
A selection of Turville-Petre's papers was published as 'Nine Norse Studies' (1972) and presented to him by the Viking Society for Northern Research, of which he was an honorary life member, and whose scholarly journal, the 'Saga Book', he had jointly edited for many years. The papers in 'Nine Norse Studies' give a good indication of the range and quality of his scholarship. Notable among them are pieces on the poetry of the Icelandic skald Gisli Sursson, on the cult of Odinn, and his still celebrated 'On the poetry of the scalds and of the filid', translated from an Icelandic version first published in 1954. 
During his career at Oxford, Gabriel Turville-Petre was the influential teacher of many generations of Old Norse-Icelandic scholars. His command of the subject was such that his students only had to listen to learn, but although his authority was extraordinary, he was always courteous and kindly, and never derided the shortcomings of either his students or other scholars in the field. None the less, his standards were deeply rigorous and he expected from his students the absolute commitment to scholarship he had himself. He died on 17 February 1978, of cancer, at The Court, The Croft, Old Headington, Oxford, his home since 1948. At Oxford, an annual prize for distinguished work in Old Norse-Icelandic studies by a graduate or undergraduate is given in his name, and the room which houses the university's collection of books in the subject is named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 58902


Wallace, William Francis Stuart (1860-1940), composer and writer on music, was born at 62 Regent Street, Greenock, on 3 July 1860, the first son of James Wallace (1826-1904), a prominent Scottish physician and surgeon, and his wife, Mary Cecilia Williamson. Educated at Fettes College in Edinburgh, he won a trustees' exhibition to Edinburgh University. This he later resigned, and he entered Glasgow University where he graduated MB and MCh in 1886. In Vienna, Paris, and Moorfields he studied ophthalmology before returning to Glasgow to take his MD in 1888. He practised medicine briefly in London, but his attraction to music led him to terminate his medical career in 1889 when he studied for two terms under A. C. Mackenzie and F. W. Davenport at the Royal Academy of Music. The decision to study music served to aggravate a volatile relationship with his father, who was ambitious for his son. His time at the Royal Academy of Music constituted his only period of formal training; after that he worked independently. 
In the early 1890s Wallace began to produce a series of orchestral and vocal works including the scena 'Lord of Darkness' (1890), the suite 'A Scots Fantasy' (1891), 'An American Rhapsody' (1891), and also 'The Lady from the Sea' (1892), based on Henrik Ibsen's play. However, it was his first symphonic poem, 'The Passing of Beatrice' (arguably the first modern British work in the genre), based on canto xxxi from Dante's 'Paradiso' in 'The Divine Comedy', that made the greatest impression at its first performance at the Crystal Palace on 26 November 1892 under August Manns. With Howard Orsmond Anderton, Wallace assisted Granville Bantock, a fellow Royal Academy of Music student, with the production of the 'New Quarterly Musical Review' from May 1893 until February 1897. Bantock also did much to promote Wallace's music, first at a concert in London on 15 December 1896, and later at The Tower, New Brighton, where Bantock was musical director. At The Tower not only did Wallace have the opportunity to conduct entire concerts of his own work (particularly in 1898 and 1899) but, as Bantock's rehearsal conductor, he gained much experience from directing the music of other composers. 
During a holiday in Hilders, Switzerland, in 1895, he met Ottilie Helen McLaren (1875-1947), daughter of John, Lord McLaren (1831-1910), judge of the court of sessions, MP, and lord advocate. In spite of Ottilie's being fifteen years younger, they fell in love and became engaged. Lord McLaren insisted that Wallace's income as a musician should be no less than $600 a year before he and Ottilie could marry, a condition which prolonged their engagement for nine years. They were finally married on 11 April 1905 in St Giles' Cathedral, Edinburgh. Ottilie studied sculpting in Edinburgh under James Pittendrigh MacGillivray, before working in Paris under Auguste Rodin between 1897 and 1901. Her separation from Wallace provoked a sizeable correspondence between them -- Wallace wrote almost daily -- which Wallace preserved in a series of small books, covered with white vellum and fastened with coloured ribbon, now preserved in the National Library of Scotland. 
For much of his creative life as a composer Wallace remained independent of musical institutions and societies. Later, however, he was a committee member of the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music and served as honorary secretary of the Royal Philharmonic Society and the Society of British Musicians in the years before the outbreak of war. During the war he returned to the medical profession, first as an eye specialist at the military hospital in Colchester before moving to the ophthalmic department in London's Second General Hospital. For five months Wallace was an inspector of ophthalmic centres in the eastern command and in 1919 he retired as a captain in the Royal Army Medical Corps. In 1924, at the invitation of John Blackwood McEwen, he joined the staff of the Royal Academy as a professor of harmony and composition, a post he retained until the year before his death. Though based in London, he and Ottilie bought a retirement home, Westport House, in Malmesbury, where he died on 16 December 1940 from bronchitis and the effects of Parkinson's disease. 
External stimuli, be they Scottish, British, or more broadly European, were essential to Wallace's musical sensibility as he freely declared in his paper 'The scope of programme music' for the Musical Association on 9 May 1899. This is evident in his output of six symphonic poems, 'The Passing of Beatrice' (1892), 'Amboss oder Hammer' (1896), 'Sister Helen' (1897), 'Greeting to the New Century' (1901), 'Sir William Wallace AD, 1305-1905' (1905), and 'Villon' (1909), and his largest work, the 'Creation Symphony', begun in 1896 but not performed until 1899 at New Brighton. Several other symphonic poems including 'Asperges', 'The Covenanters', and 'The Forty-Five' (all 1898) were unfinished, as was a three-movement choral symphony based on texts from 'Ecclesiastes'. Wallace's musical language was heavily informed by Liszt, Wagner, and the progressivist spirit of late nineteenth-century Europe, and this preoccupation gave rise to his books 'Richard Wagner as he Lived' (1925) and 'Liszt, Wagner, and the Princess' (1927). It was also fuelled by his friendship with Granville Bantock, and set him apart from what he perceived as the more conservative, Brahms-orientated disposition of the Royal College of Music and the ancient universities. Unintimidated by his contemporaries he openly criticized the college in a letter to 'The Times' in 1904 over the administration of the patron's fund. He nevertheless found a common cause with Charles Villiers Stanford in the 'Copyright Act' of 1906. 
Wallace's interest in the theatre (and Christian conviction) resulted in a mystery play, 'The Divine Surrender' (1893), with incidental music (only the vocal scene 'The Rhapsody of Mary Magdalene' survives), a prelude to Aeschylus's 'The Eumenides', and an unperformed lyric tragedy in one act, 'Brassolis' (1896), as well as music for Shakespeare's 'Romeo and Juliet' (1896) and Maurice Maeterlinck's 'Pelleas et Melisande' (1897). Dubbed 'A Protean Spirit' in 'Musical Opinion' in 1920, Wallace evinced a broad interest in literature, drama, the visual arts, and science. He habitually mixed with painters such as Norman Hirst, Edwin James, Augustus John, Sholto Johnstone, James Douglas, and Detmar Blow -- together they briefly formed a circle called the Anonymous Academicians -- and later he was well acquainted with the 'Glasgow Boys' -- the Irish painter John Lavery, and the sculptors John Tweed and Alfred Gilbert. He was active as a writer for the 'National Review', 'The Musician', and the 'Royal Academy of Music Club Magazine', wrote a set of short stories, 'The Lighter Life' (1896), and authored two books, 'The Threshold of Music' (1908) and 'The Musical Faculty' (1914), in which he examined the physiological and psychological properties of music. He also contributed to the third edition of 'Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians' (1927-8) and as a translator his work included Richard Strauss's 'Feuersnot' and Frederick Delius's 'A Mass of Life'. 


@@@@@


doc= 58903


Watkins, Vernon Phillips (1906-1967), poet, was born on 27 June 1906 at Lloyds Bank House, Talbot Street, in the mining town of Maesteg, in the Llynfi valley, Glamorgan, the second of the three children of William Watkins (1872-1949), bank manager, and his wife, Sarah (1876-1975), daughter of James Phillips of Sarnau, Carmarthenshire. His maternal grandfather, a devoted Congregationalist, came from a family which owned land in Carmarthenshire; towards the end of his life he lived at Goleufryn in Picton Terrace, Carmarthen, a house celebrated in his grandson's poem 'Returning to Goleufryn'. Both Watkins's parents were Welsh-speaking but, in the fashion of their time and class, they did not pass the language on to their children; of Welsh literary tradition Watkins, as a mature poet, was able to use only the legendary figure of Taliesin in the setting of his beloved Gower peninsula. Two years after their son's birth the family moved back to Bridgend, Glamorgan, where William Watkins had been based, and made their home at Quarella, a house (demolished during the 1970s) on the outskirts of the town. Watkins's father belonged to a Brecknockshire family which had settled in Gwaelod-y-Garth, a village just north of Cardiff. (On 31 December 1938 Watkins listened to a radio programme, broadcast from the village, about the Welsh folk-custom of the Mari Lwyd, a form of wassailing, which he used as the basis for a long poem.) In 1912 the Watkins family left Bridgend for Llanelli, in Carmarthenshire, and, after about a year, moved to Swansea, where William Watkins took charge of the Wind Street branch of Lloyds Bank, a post in which he remained until his retirement twenty-three years later. For the first ten of these the family lived in Eaton Grove (later part of Eaton Crescent) in the Uplands area of the town. 
In 1916, at the age of ten, Vernon Watkins entered Swansea grammar school but was not to meet its most famous pupil, Dylan Thomas, who was eight years younger, until 1935. At the age of eleven he was sent by his socially ambitious parents to Tyttenhanger Lodge, a preparatory school in Seaford, Sussex, and then in 1920 to Repton School in Derbyshire. At Repton, where the headmaster was Dr G. F. Fisher (later archbishop of Canterbury), he was confirmed into the Anglican church, which he never thereafter left. A dreamy, shy, and gentle lad already preoccupied with the inner life of the poet, and with aesthetic notions inspired by Rupert Brooke, he was regularly bullied by older boys, but as a sixth-former won a degree of popularity by excelling at tennis and cricket. In June 1924 he was awarded the Howe verse prize, the Lancelot Saye prizes for French and German, and the Schreiber prize for prowess in those languages. For Repton's quatercentenary in 1957 he wrote a sequence of poems entitled 'Revisited Waters' which, though almost totally lacking in autobiographical detail, recalled the idyllic nature of his last eighteen months at the school and made it clear that, for him, poetry was the only shield he had against impermanence, one of the major themes of his writing. In its terminal letter of May 1968, after Watkins's death, the school referred to him, somewhat cautiously, as 'perhaps the best poet Repton has had'. 
Watkins entered Magdalene College, Cambridge, as a pensioner in October 1924, to read modern languages. But although his academic results at the end of his first year were satisfactory, he found the college a grave disappointment, particularly in its emphasis on language and criticism at the expense of literature. In a heated interview he told the master, A. C. Benson, that his only interest was in writing poetry; when Benson expressed scorn for this declaration, Watkins immediately left the college. This rash decision was to cause him great unhappiness. His father would not allow him to go for a year's stay in Italy, and, in the autumn of 1925, he became a junior clerk in the Butetown branch of Lloyds Bank in Cardiff, and took lodgings at 73 Connaught Road. 
Two years later, deeply depressed by his daily routine, and yearning for the Arcadian life of Repton, Watkins suffered the first phase of a nervous breakdown after witnessing an accident in the street outside his lodgings for which he felt he was somehow to blame. He returned to Repton the next day, visited such boys as still remembered him, attended chapel, and then burst into Dr Fisher's study, accused him of 'destroying youth', tried ineffectually to assault him, and was taken to a nursing home in Derby. This crisis brought about what Watkins called 'a revolution of sensibility'. From that point on his life's work would be preoccupied with 'the conquest of Time', by which he meant the immortalization of his memories of Repton and the validation of all that he had known and loved there. After convalescence, he returned to his parents' home in Gower. In due course his father was able to arrange for his transfer to the St Helen's branch of Lloyds Bank in Swansea, so that he could live at home, and it was there that he was to spend the rest of his career as 'the oldest cashier at Lloyds'. 
Watkins's first volume of poetry, 'Ballad of the Mari Lwyd', appeared in 1941 after he had left the bombed town of Swansea for service in the RAF police. When Philip Larkin heard him lecture in Oxford in 1943 Watkins wore a flight sergeant's stripes and was billeted at New Bradwell, Buckinghamshire. On 2 October 1944, at St Bartholomew-the-Great in London, he married Gwendoline Mary Davies ('b'. 1923) of Harborne, Birmingham, whom he had met at Bletchley where they both had been working in RAF Intelligence; Dylan Thomas was to have been the bridegroom's best man, but failed to turn up for the ceremony. The Watkinses made their home first on Glanmor Hill in the Uplands area of Swansea, then at The Garth, Pennard Cliffs; they had four sons and a daughter. In her memoir 'Portrait of a Friend' (1983), Gwen Watkins gave an account of her husband's relationship with Dylan Thomas, whom he loved unreservedly (but not erotically), even after Thomas had died, and whom she described as 'the most important person in his life'; Thomas's letters to Watkins were published in 1957. 
Among Watkins's books of poetry published during his lifetime were 'The Lamp and the Veil' (1945), 'The Lady with the Unicorn' (1948), 'The North Sea' (translations from Heinrich Heine, 1951), 'The Death Bell' (1954), 'Cypress and Acacia' (1959), and 'Affinities' (1962). His 'Fidelities' (1968), 'Uncollected Poems' (1969), 'Selected Verse Translations' (1977), 'The Breaking of the Wave' (1979), 'The Ballad of the Outer Dark' (1979), and several selections, all appeared posthumously. His poetry is formal, highly crafted, metaphysical, and unorthodox in its Christianity, but relentless in its symbolism and its emphasis on the role of the poet and the immortal nature of his art. Watkins was intransigent in his opposition to any exegesis of his work and did not expect recognition during his lifetime. A memorial volume edited by Leslie Norris was published in 1970 and his 'Collected Poems' appeared in 1986. 
Shortly after his retirement from the bank in 1966 Watkins was awarded an honorary DLitt by the University of Wales and was a Gulbenkian scholar at the University College of Swansea. At the time of his death in Seattle, during a second visit as professor of poetry at the University of Washington, his name was being canvassed, with others, for the poet laureateship left vacant by the death of John Masefield. He died of a heart attack on the university's tennis court on 8 October 1967, after a two-hour game of doubles; his ashes were buried in the churchyard of St Mary, at Pennard, near Swansea, where a memorial was erected to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 58904


Wilenski, Reginald Howard (1887-1975), art critic and historian, was born at 16 Upper Westbourne Terrace, Paddington, London, on 7 March 1887, the son of Abraham Arthur Wilenski, merchant, and his wife, Alice ('nee' Simeon), of 16 Upper Westbourne Terrace, Paddington. The surnames suggest a Polish ancestry, and Jewish descent on both his father's and mother's sides. Elected a foundation scholar at St Paul's School, London, he won the John Watson art prizes three years running, in 1902-5 (a fellow premiate in 1904 was Eric Kennington). He won the Smee science prize in 1903; and in 1904 both the Truro prize, for an essay on epic poetry, and the Butterworth prize for English literature. His headmaster observed in his final report that Wilenski was 'very rigorous and capable, has shown power in a great many directions', but added that 'if he were to read for Moderations with profit, he must apply himself to Classics' (private information). Wilenski left St Paul's in July 1905 and went up to Balliol College, Oxford, to read classics, but stayed only a year before leaving, without a degree, to study painting in Munich and Paris. He returned to London in 1909. 
He exhibited at the International Society, the Royal Society of Portrait Painters, and the Salon d'Automne, Paris, but achieved no reputation as a painter, although he always described himself as 'artist and art critic'. He presumably enjoyed financial support from his father, since on 5 August 1914 he married, at Kensington register office, Marjorie Isold Harland (1889-1965), a university graduate and daughter of Robert Wilson Harland, civil engineer. By now Wilenski 'pere' described himself as of independent means, and lived at Maida Vale. Wilenski spent the years of the First World War in the War Office intelligence department. 
After the war Wilenski devoted himself to art criticism and wrote exhibition reviews for the 'Evening Standard' between 1923 and 1926. Encouraged by the publisher Geoffrey Faber, Wilenski wrote his first polemical book, 'The Modern Movement in Art' (1927), in which he saw the modern movement as a return to the architectural or classical idea, especially in the work of the cubists and their followers (he ignored German expressionism, Dada, and surrealism). French critics had earlier made a similar claim. Wilenski considered the study of art history useful only in so far as it shed light on contemporary art, and all his books were aimed at the interested, educated layman. Perhaps his best didactic book is 'The Meaning of Modern Sculpture' (1932), where he attacked those who thought the ancient Greek sculptors were the 'first and last to achieve perfection'. He called this the 'finality-complex' and was adept at inventing categories and catch-phrases, which, allied to a pithy style and short sentences, proclaimed his journalistic skills. He defended contemporary sculptors' search for fresh inspiration from non-classical sources. 
Wilenski wrote substantial historical surveys of Dutch, French, and English painting in 1929, 1931, and 1933 respectively, to coincide with the large-scale Royal Academy winter exhibitions of those national schools held in 1929, 1932, and 1934. These all followed a similar pattern: the span covered by each exhibition was broken down into periods, and Wilenski wrote a general introduction, followed by a more detailed discussion of individual artists and their works. He adopted the same approach for 'Modern French Painters' (1940), and for his two-volume 'Flemish Painters, 1430-1830' (1960), the last a carefully researched synthesis of known material presented in layman's language. These popular volumes ran to many revised editions. He ventured into psychological analysis in 'John Ruskin: an Introduction to Further Study of his Life and Work' (1933), and suggested Ruskin's madness had begun, not in old age, but in early manhood. 
Wilenski, if less influential and profound than Roger Fry, or less infectiously enthusiastic than Clive Bell or Herbert Read, nevertheless provided soundly based, well-illustrated accounts of subjects not catered for elsewhere at that time. In 1945 he began editing the 'Faber Gallery' series of paperbound coloured picture albums, with eminently readable introductions by either himself or other notables, as in 'Florentine Paintings', by Kenneth Clark; some forty titles eventually appeared under his editorship. 
Wilenski became a special lecturer in art at Bristol University (1929-30), and a special lecturer in the history of art at Manchester University (1933-45); Manchester University conferred an honorary MA on him in 1938. A press censor from 1939 to 1941, Wilenski also served in the BBC European Services in 1941-4. He was appointed chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1967. 
Wilenski died of bronchopneumonia at Marlow Cottage Hospital, Buckinghamshire, on 19 April 1975, and was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 58905


Williams, Waldo Goronwy (1904-1971), poet, was born on 30 September 1904 at the Board School House, Prendergast, Haverfordwest, Pembrokeshire, one of the five children of John Edwal Williams (1863-1934), schoolmaster, and his wife, Angharad Elizabeth (1875-1932), daughter of John Jones of Llangernyw in Flintshire, a brother of Sir Henry Jones, professor of natural philosophy at Glasgow University. His mother, although of Welsh stock, had been born and brought up at Market Drayton in Shropshire, and English, her first language, was also the language of their home. Both parents were staunch Baptists, pacifists, and members of the Independent Labour Party; among Edwal Williams's heroes were Shelley, Tolstoy, Whitman, and Keir Hardie. 
In 1911 the family moved to Mynachlog-ddu in the Preseli hills, and five years later to Llandysilio, where the father had been appointed headmaster of the primary school. This move north of the landsker (the line dividing the English-speaking south of Pembrokeshire from the Welsh-speaking north) was to prove decisive in the making of the poet: Williams learned Welsh from his playmates in the village and it was the language in which all his creative writing would be done. From the Preseli communities, economically marginal but with a rich culture, he also acquired the sense of neighbourhood, social co-operation, compassion for the underprivileged, and independence of judgement which were to remain with him for the rest of his life. 
Waldo (some of the great poets of Wales are known by their first names) received his secondary education at the grammar school in Narberth, and in 1923 went to the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, where he was to read English and where, in the company of Idwal Jones, he began writing light verse, especially limericks and parodies, some of which are memorable; he also immersed himself in the work of the English Romantic poets during his time at Aberystwyth. For the next thirteen years he lived a peripatetic life, working as a 'permanent supply' teacher at primary schools in the north and south of his native county. 
On 14 April 1941 Waldo married Linda Llewellyn (1911-1943), a primary school teacher, and they made their home at Cas-mael (Puncheston), where he was acting headmaster. In the year following, having registered as a conscientious objector despite being too old for military service, he appeared before a tribunal at Carmarthen, to which he made a statement beginning, 'I believe all men to be brothers, and to be humble partakers of the Divine Imagination that brought forth the world, and that now enables us to be born again into its own richness, by doing unto others as we would others to do unto us.' He was released from military service unconditionally. Shortly afterwards, under pressure from an education authority which disapproved of his stand against war, he left Pembrokeshire to take up a post at the grammar school in Botwnnog in Caernarvonshire. There, in May 1943, when she was only thirty-two, tragedy struck: after a brief illness his wife, Linda, died. 
The Second World War weighed heavily on Waldo's mind. The loss of life on both sides of the conflict caused him profound and permanent grief, challenging his belief in the essential goodness and brotherhood of all men, while nearer to home the War Office was ravaging the Pembrokeshire countryside by building aerodromes and artillery ranges. In 1945, partly in an attempt to recover from the shock of his wife's death, he left Wales to take up teaching posts in Huntingdon and Wiltshire, but returned to Pembrokeshire five years later. He was employed as a tutor by the extra-mural department of the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, from 1951 to 1963, and thereafter taught Welsh as a second language at primary schools in Pembrokeshire; he had a special rapport with children, who responded readily to his genial personality and eirenic ways. He joined the Quakers in 1953. 
The explosion of atomic bombs over Hiroshima and Nagasaki caused Waldo to write some of his most anguished poetry. While living in England he also wrote a number of poems about Welsh nationhood, such as 'Preseli', 'Cymru'n un', and 'Cymru a Chymraeg', which are among the most powerful expressions of cultural nationalism in the language; they have often been quoted, especially when young members of Cymdeithas yr Iaith Gymraeg (the Welsh language society) have been tried for acts of non-violent resistance to the authority of the British state. The poet was deeply suspicious of the state and the technocratic instruments of its power over the individual, as can be seen from 'Brenhiniaeth a brawdoliaeth' ('Sovereignty and brotherhood'), a lecture showing the influence of Berdyaev and published in 1956. Although by no means a politician by nature, he was a zealous member of Plaid Cymru and, persuaded by his friend the veteran nationalist D. J. Williams, stood as the party's candidate in Pembrokeshire at the general election of 1959, polling 2250 votes. 
During the late 1950s Waldo announced, as a protest against the war in Korea, that he would refuse to pay his income tax, and on this account (he owed $15 4's'.) he served two six-week prison sentences in 1960 and 1961; some of his property was distrained and he chose to be declared bankrupt in order to avoid further tax demands. Only when he had made his point would he allow his poems to be brought together in book form; he had always been careless with his manuscripts and the book was at proof stage, compiled by friends, before he knew of the plan to publish it. Apart from a small collection of delightful poems for children, 'Cerddi'r plant' (1956), written in collaboration with his friend E. Llwyd Williams, 'Dail pren', which appeared in the same year, was the only book of his to be published during his lifetime. A larger, fine edition also containing later work was brought out by Gwasg Gregynog in 1992, and a selection of his poems in English translation by Tony Conran appeared under the title 'The Peacemakers' in 1997. 
The sixty-seven poems in 'Dail pren' display an astonishing range of styles and subject matter. In 'Mewn dau gae', perhaps Waldo's greatest poem, he describes the apocalyptic moment when, in a neighbour's fields, he realized that all men and women are, above all else, brothers and sisters; the poem ends with a vision of 'the exiled king' who comes to reclaim his kingdom, the rushes parting where he treads. Other poems, such as 'Cofio' and 'Geneth ifanc', the latter about a girl whose skeleton, dating from about 2500 BC, he had seen in the museum at Avebury, but influenced by the death of his thirteen-year-old sister Morfudd in 1915, employ traditional forms that have helped to make them popular as recitation pieces. His patriotic verse, rooted in his robust sense of community, is linked to universal themes that rely not on abstraction but on a real love of humankind. 
Waldo died at St Thomas's Hospital in Haverfordwest on ascension day, 20 May 1971, and was buried four days later with his parents and wife in the graveyard of the Baptist chapel at Blaenconin near Mynachlog-ddu, where his grave bears the inscription 'Gwyn eu byd y tangnefeddwyr' ('Blessed are the peacemakers'). Waldo, the best-loved Welsh poet of the twentieth century, is commemorated by a rough-hewn stone which was erected at Rhos-fach, just outside the village, in 1978. 


@@@@@


doc= 58907


Winthrop, Fitz John (1639?-1707), colonial governor, was the eldest son of John Winthrop (1606-1676) and Elizabeth Reade (died 1672), the daughter of Edmund and Elizabeth Reade of Essex. The balance of probability suggests he was born on 14 March 1639 in Boston and not, as often asserted, in 1638 in Ipswich, Massachusetts. He was brought up in New London, Connecticut. In 1657 he was sent to England and in 1658 received a commission in a regiment commanded by his uncle Thomas Reade. As such he accompanied the regiment on its march from Scotland into England under General George Monck, who promoted him captain. He remained in England until 1663. During that time he lost his loyalty to puritanism and would ever after consider New England crude and unformed. For example, he never became a communicant in a Congregational church after returning to Connecticut. Back in New London he managed his father's businesses, built his own estate, and immersed himself in local concerns. About 1670 he began an affair with a young neighbour, Elizabeth Tongue (1652-1731), with whom he had a daughter, Mary, in 1671. Winthrop at first denied paternity but eventually came to love his 'deare child' ('Letters', 306). He and Elizabeth Tongue never married and had no more children, but he shared his home with her and made decent provision for her in his will. 
In 1674, as a major in the Connecticut militia, Winthrop was sent to stop the Dutch, who had seized Manhattan Island and were extending their rule over Long Island. At Southold he repulsed a Dutch landing party, a victory that gave him an ineradicable military reputation in New England. He was, however, unnerved by his taste of fire and urged to be relieved from an assignment 'which I find too heavy for me' (Trumbull and Hoadly, 2.56). The next year, during King Philip's War, a major conflict between American Indians and colonists, he declined active command, pleading illness. He had indeed a history of poor health, including recurrent seizures, but it must be suspected that he had little stomach for leading men once more into combat. 
Winthrop supported the efforts of the Stuart kings after 1684 to replace elected colonial governments with appointed royal officials. His business activities were intercolonial and he was involved in legal disputes that could only be resolved by the privy council. Most of all, he considered New Englanders unruly, 'eyther from principles of too fond familiarity or not remembering the rule abroad' (Fitz John Winthrop to [indecipherable], 15 Feb 1698, Winthrop MSS, Massachusetts Historical Society). He advised Connecticut to surrender its charter and when the New England colonies were merged into the dominion of New England, he accepted appointment as a councillor and major-general. The dominion, however, collapsed in a series of rebellions in 1689. Winthrop disapproved of these uprisings but realized that 'there is noe striveinge against the streame of popular resolution' ('Correspondence', 498). 
When the political confusion of the revolution of 1688 allowed the French in Canada to launch devastating raids against New York and New England, those colonies combined their militias in 1690 for an expedition against Montreal. Foolishly, Winthrop accepted command of the force but, when he encountered difficult logistical problems, he quickly abandoned the march far short of its goal, without having encountered the enemy. New York was ready to hang him for treason, but Connecticut commended him for doing all that was humanly possible. 
Winthrop was more successful as a diplomat. As agent for Connecticut he was in England from 1693 to 1698; there he obtained a confirmation of the Connecticut charter and defended the colony against charges that it was not pulling its weight in the wars against the French. On his return home he was rewarded with election as governor, a position he held by annual re-election for the rest of his life. In that office he led the Connecticut people into active participation in the English struggle for North America by reminding them repeatedly that their unique degree of self-government demanded an equal measure of imperial responsibility. In November 1707, during a short stay in Boston, he suddenly fell ill and died within days on 27 November. Cotton Mather preached his funeral sermon and 'a vast concurse of People' accompanied his body to the churchyard at King's Chapel, where he was buried alongside his father and grandfather on 4 December ('Diary of Samuel Sewall', 1.581). 
Reared as a puritan, arrogant and snobbish in his youth, Winthrop grew affable as he aged. Distrustful of popular government, he was a popular governor. Attached to his own interests and to the interests of New London and Connecticut, he yet remained the faithful servant of an embattled empire. 


@@@@@


doc= 58909


Young, Andrew John (1885-1971), poet and clergyman, was born on 29 April 1885 at the Highland Railway Station, Elgin, Moray, the youngest of the four children of Andrew John Young (1845-1939) and Maria (1845-1925), daughter of Robert Adams, a commercial clerk in Glasgow. His father, from Perthshire, was the respected stationmaster at Elgin, but he took employment in insurance and the family moved to Edinburgh when Andrew was one and a half. Young attended James Gillespie's School and the Royal High School, where he was distinguished as an athlete rather than a scholar. He read moral philosophy at Edinburgh University from 1903 to 1907. In Edinburgh he befriended the brother artists W. W. and S. I. Peploe, and spent two summers in France learning to appreciate church architecture. While at university his older brother, a doctor, disappeared in Singapore having probably committed various criminal acts. This greatly distressed their father, a deeply religious man, and Andrew came close to a nervous breakdown. Thereafter, pressed by his father, he prepared for the ministry in the United Free Church of Scotland at New College, Edinburgh, where John Baillie, the theologian, became a lifelong friend. Throughout these early years Andrew Young was writing poetry. Some early verses, 'Songs of Night', were published by his father in 1910. 
Completing his studies in 1912, Young became an assistant at Wallace Green church in Berwick upon Tweed before obtaining a charge as minister at the United Free church at Temple in Midlothian (1914-19). Andrew had earlier met Janet Green (1883-1969), a lecturer at Jordan Hill training college in Glasgow, and they married on 8 September 1914. Their son, Andrew, was born in 1915 and their daughter, Alison, in 1922. Young, inclined to be a pacifist, worked in YMCA camps in France towards the end of the First World War. Thereafter he became minister at the Presbyterian church in Hove (1920-38), a position he secured after an inspired sermon. During the 1920s and 1930s Young wrote a succession of slim volumes of short reflective verses, seven of which were published between 1920 and 1931 by a bookseller friend, J. G. Wilson. He also wrote longer religious dialogues such as 'Boaz and Ruth' (1920). His reputation as a poet of the first rank was made in the thirties with 'Winter Harvest' (1933), meditations on religion and nature. While in his early works he had shown influence of Swinburne and later Georgianism, in this collection he found a distinctive voice which was enhanced by his intimate knowledge of botany. He consolidated his reputation with his 'Collected Poems' (1936), and the modern mystery play 'Nicodemus' (1936), with incidental music by Imogen Holst. 
In the late 1930s Young shared with George Bell, bishop of Chichester, his admiration for episcopalianism. He and Bell, who was very interested in modern poetry, were brought together in connection with a memorial to the poet Edward Thomas. Early in 1939 Young converted to the Church of England and in 1941 he obtained the rural parish of Stonegate, Sussex, where he remained until his retirement in 1959. He was made a canon of Chichester Cathedral (1948), and thus had a living at Yapton near Arundel until his death. 
An amateur botanist, it was said that Young had seen for himself practically every British plant. He shared his highly specialized botanical knowledge in two entrancing books which illuminate both the man and his poems: 'A Prospect of Flowers' (1945) and 'A Retrospect of Flowers' (1950). They describe the extraordinary trouble he took to see individual species. He might plan holidays to coincide with the flowering of a particularly rare plant, or delay an appointment to see an interesting flower, as he explained in 'Spiked Rampion': '
At Uckfield; three good miles to walk 

Watch creeping close on one o'clock; 

Why did I linger in that lane? 

' Young's knowledge of and regard for the natural landscape of Britain formed the basis for the notable 'A Prospect of Britain' (1956). Another book, 'The Poet and the Landscape' (1962), and an entrancing series of prose poems, 'The New Polyolbion' (1967), further these topographical themes. 
Young's nature poems are remarkable: they are usually both concise and thought-provoking, yet striking in their range. They are about all kinds of flora and fauna, and about places he loved throughout the length and breadth of Britain, from 'The Falls of Glomach' ('Rain drifts forever in this place') to a 'Cornish Flower Farm': '
Here where the cliff rises so high 

The sea below fills half the sky. 

' His poetry was also often about suffering and death, and the culmination of his religious verse was 'Into Hades' (1952) and 'A Traveller in Time' (1958), two longer poems, which appeared separately at first, but which were brought together later as 'Out of the World and Back' (1958). Iain Crichton Smith, the poet and critic, found some of Young's early work clumsy, but spoke of a fresh, precious 'union of precision, wit and strangeness' in his lyrics, 'essentially and idiosyncratically Young' (Crichton Smith). 
Young's circle of friends included fellow poets Christopher Fry, Ted Walker, John Arlott, and Leonard Clark, his literary executor, who edited his verse and published, 'Prospect of a Poet' (1957), a book of tributes to him. He was honoured with an honorary degree of LLD by the University of Edinburgh in 1951, the Royal Society of Literature conferred an honorary fellowship on him, and he received the Queen's medal for poetry in 1952. 
Young, who was physically sturdy and powerful, was described as being 'mistaken for a farmer up in town for the day'. He was also 'rather a paradox, at once an uncommunicative man and a man of wit'. He was always an eloquent preacher and able to socialize as ministers must, but he was by nature both solitary and taciturn. He enjoyed being an English clergyman, yet he remained Scottish in other ways, rather Calvinistic, for example, and one who never lost his Scottish accent. His wife, who had forgone a promising career in education, faithfully supported him, but Andrew's temper, a product perhaps of self-doubt, sometimes placed a strain on family relationships. Yet before Janet Young died on 12 March 1969 after a difficult illness, Andrew faithfully looked after her. Thereafter he preferred to live alone, causing his family much anxiety. After a fall he was obliged to enter various nursing homes, and he died peacefully at Ravenna House, Bognor Regis, on 25 November 1971. His funeral service was conducted at Chichester Cathedral. He was cremated and his ashes were scattered in the cathedral grounds. Young's poetry and his essays place him in the highest class of writers about the countryside, but few such writers display affection for the qualities of such very different landscapes as Andrew Young. It is perhaps to his disadvantage that he was strictly neither a Scottish nor an English author, but he was British in a sense that few are. His daughter Alison and son-in-law Edward Lowbury wrote an affectionate and authoritative critical biography, 'To Shirk No Idleness', published in 1997. Memorial plaques were unveiled at the parish church in Stonegate and, on 1 October 1981, on the site of his birthplace in Elgin. 


@@@@@


doc= 58912


Kettlewell, (Henry) Bernard Davis (1907-1979), ecological geneticist and entomologist, was born on 24 February 1907 in Howden, Yorkshire, the only son of Henry Kettlewell, a merchant, and his wife, Kate Davis. He received his education at Old College, Windermere, and then at Charterhouse School, in Surrey (1920-24). He read medicine and zoology at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge (1926-9) and then did clinical training at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, qualifying as a medical practitioner (MB BChir) in 1935. In the following year he married Hazel Margaret Wiltshire, the daughter of Sir Frank Wiltshire, the town clerk of Birmingham. The marriage was close and affectionate and they had two children. 
During the Second World War Kettlewell worked as a doctor and anaesthetist in and around London but in the late 1940s, perhaps with the approach of the National Health Service, he decided to give up the further practice of medicine. The family emigrated to South Africa in 1949, where for three years Kettlewell carried out extensive field research into locust control at Cape Town University while at the same time amassing a large collection of Lepidoptera which he later presented to the British Museum. (In time his contributions would form an essential part of the national Rothschild-Cockayne-Kettlewell Collection, a major resource for the study of natural variation and inheritance.) 
Kettlewell's South African experiences marked the beginning of a pattern in his scientific life which seemed to suit both his professional interests and his personality, which was outgoing and full-blooded; this led him to engage in sometimes maddening but good-natured controversy with his peers when he fairly thought a point to be of scientific importance. He undertook early research expeditions to the Belgian Congo, to Mozambique, to the Kalahari, and to South Africa's Knysna Forest, where he continued to assemble vast amounts of information about insects, particularly moths. 
From early manhood Kettlewell had an unusual combination of talents and habits which served him well in his chosen profession. He devised and carried out field experiments and collection techniques ('mark-release-recapture') which were admirable for their ingenuity and requirements for diligence. An example of his rare combination of skills occurred when he was able to prove, by means of radioactive testing, that a moth he had caught had been affected by a particular nuclear test explosion. His principal hobbies (shooting, growing hybrids, and devising novel lobster traps) suggest that his different personality traits were intertwined whether at work or at play and that he was constantly seeking to join facts and theories wherever he roamed. 
In 1952 Kettlewell returned to England (typically for him, by driving the entire Cape Town to Alexandria part of the journey), in order to accept a Nuffield Foundation research post in the genetics laboratory at Oxford University, working under his friend Edmund Brisco Ford, whom he had met in 1937 while both were at an ecological site. Oxford was to be Kettlewell's base for the rest of his life. From the end of the 1950s until 1974 he maintained close connections with the Oxford department of zoology, while carrying on an extensive scientific correspondence with hundreds of other leading evolutionists and entomologists throughout the world. Between 1965 and 1974 he was also closely involved with the Iffley Graduate Society (from 1966 Wolfson College). 
While he continued to work at Oxford with sustained energy Kettlewell also travelled abroad numerous times to give lectures to professionals and to lay persons alike, wrote more than sixty articles for specialist journals (such as 'Heredity') and for those intended for a broader public (such as 'Nature' and 'Scientific American'), made a number of pioneering films about insects and evolution, and wrote a very readable book about Darwin (with Sir Julian Huxley), in the now familiar format of the scientific illustrated biography, written by experts for the public. Meanwhile he was writing scholarly works which were considered to be classics by his peers, notably a paper in 1959 written around a theme he called 'Darwin's missing evidence', providing elegant proof of the reversal of melanism when pollution in an area became diminished and thus showing the force of natural selection in the presence of inheritable variations. 
Kettlewell's fame steadily grew and he obtained medals and awards as diverse as the USSR's Darwin medal (1959), the Czechoslovakian Mendel medal (1965), and a doctoral degree from Oxford. He was tireless in his pursuit of first-hand knowledge, undertaking expeditions to Alaska, Ecuador, Iceland, the South Caspian, Madeira, and St Kitts, as well as visiting Brazil and lecturing frequently in the United States and Canada. 
Kettlewell's scientific importance will always rest principally upon his pioneering work in industrial melanism, including aposematic melanism, in which the 'Biston betularia' peppered moth was the principal object of his studies and experiments. As early as 1955 (and again in 1965), by a series of painstaking field experiments, involving tens of thousands of observations, he was able to prove that those moths which did not match their ecological backgrounds were much more likely to be taken by birds. He understood that enhanced viability was probably based not just upon natural behavioural selection but upon some underlying genetic, pre-adaptive mechanism. He left unresolved the central question of how dominance modifiers could be maintained in a population in the absence of melanic polymorphism, except by mutation. This question anticipated the later unresolved dialogue between the proponents of neutral molecular random drift evolution (Motoo Kimura, in Japan) and those who still favoured neo-Darwinistic selectionism. 
In 1973 Kettlewell's life's work was brought together in his principal published work, 'The Evolution of Melanism: the Study of a Recurring Necessity', in which he meticulously narrates his evidence, his reasoning, and his conclusions, starting with possible biblical references to colouring as a sign of inedibility (and hence likelihood to survive) and ending with his latest experiments done in the field and even with the dietary preferences of his household cat. He was able to carry out the most difficult and extensive experiments under the watchful eyes of his peers and produce stately expositions of his findings, but was also gifted at devising everyday examples of proof, meaningful to anyone. 

'The Evolution of Melanism''s thought-provoking subtitle was a characteristic reminder that nature is constantly evolving and that the search for evidence and understanding requires continuous study, to be approached with the vigour, diligence, partisan commitment, and open imagination exemplified by Bernard Kettlewell. Like that other great truant from medicine, Charles Darwin, Kettlewell's results, as well as his methods, illustrate the related propositions that there need not be a barrier between the gifted amateur and the specialized academic and that important and lasting science is done by those who can combine the best elements of those seemingly opposite approaches. Kettlewell died at his home, the vicarage, Steeple Aston, near Oxford, on 11 May 1979, possibly from an accidental overdose of medication to relieve pain from an injury sustained during an experiment. He was survived by his wife and son. 


@@@@@


doc= 58913


Thomas, Sybil Margaret, Viscountess Rhondda (1857-1941), suffragette, was born at 52 Norfolk Square, Brighton, on 25 February 1857, the fourth daughter in the family of five daughters and five sons of George Augustus Haig (1820-1906), merchant and landowner, and his wife, Anne Eliza Fell (died 1894) of Pen Ithon, Radnorshire. Her father was descended from the Haigs of Bemersyde, an ancient Scottish border family, to which Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig also belonged. On 27 June 1882, aged twenty-five, she married, in the billiard room at Pen Ithon, David Alfred Thomas (later created Viscount Rhondda) of Ysguborwen, Glamorgan (1856-1918), Liberal MP for Merthyr Boroughs (1888-1910), and leading south Wales industrialist. Her husband's political career meant that she spent much time in London but their main home was a large house and estate at Llan-wern, Monmouthshire. The couple had only one child, Margaret Haig Thomas, who, as Lady Rhondda, became a prominent businesswoman and Britain's leading equal rights feminist in the inter-war years. 
The life of Sybil Thomas was overshadowed by the glittering careers of both her husband and her daughter. Usually depicted as quiet and conventional, this small, attractive woman put conscience before propriety, held firm opinions of her own, and was highly regarded by her contemporaries. Her obituary notice in the 'Western Mail' (12 March 1941) described her as 'A woman of strong but pleasing personality' and noted her wide contribution to life in South Wales. In fact she made a significant contribution to the Liberal women's organization in Wales, to the women's suffrage movement, and to the First World War effort, as well as playing a key role in shaping her daughter's career. 
In the 1890s Sybil Thomas was president of the Welsh Union of Women's Liberal Associations (established 1891) and during her tenure the union pursued a strongly feminist and pro-suffrage agenda. As a Liberal and the wife of a prominent man, she was associated with the moderate wing of the suffrage movement, the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, under the leadership of Millicent Fawcett. The other Haig women, including her sisters Janetta and Lotty and cousin Florence, favoured Mrs Pankhurst's militant Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU): both Janetta and Florence had been imprisoned for acts of violence. When her daughter, Margaret, announced her intention of joining the suffrage procession to Hyde Park on 21 July 1908, Sybil decided to accompany her on the grounds '(a) she did not think an unmarried girl should walk unchaperoned through the gutter, (b) because she believed in votes for women' (Mackworth, 'My World', 118). Her mixed motives show a nice balance between her adherence to convention and to principle. Thereafter Sybil became more closely associated with the WSPU, entertaining Mrs Pankhurst and holding fund-raising events at Llan-wern. In 1913 she acted as treasurer to Sylvia Pankhurst's East London Federation of the WSPU. In 1914 she deliberately sought imprisonment by holding a public meeting outside the houses of parliament: on her refusal to pay a fine the magistrate sentenced her to one day's imprisonment. 
During the First World War Lady Rhondda, as she became after D. A. Thomas's elevation to the peerage in 1916, chaired the women's advisory committee of the National Savings Committee. She gave over part of the house at Llan-wern as a hospital, and she travelled extensively with her husband in carrying out his duties for the government, notably as food controller (1917-18). Following her husband's promotion to a viscountcy in 1918 she became Viscountess Rhondda. She was appointed a dame commander in the Order of the British Empire in 1920 for her wartime services. 
Viscountess Rhondda played a key, but largely unacknowledged, role in shaping her daughter's life. It was she who suggested that her husband should take Margaret into his business, a large conglomerate of coal, shipping, and publishing interests, as his private secretary, and it was she who was most supportive of Margaret's suffrage activities. She survived her husband, who died in July 1918, for twenty-three years, for much of which she continued in public and philanthropic work. She died at her home, Llan-wern Park, Newport, Monmouthshire, on 11 March 1941, and was buried at Llan-wern on 14 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 58917


Davison, George (1855-1930), photographer, political activist, and patron of the arts, was born in Kirkley, Suffolk, on 19 September 1855, the fourth child of William Davison (1816-1889), a shipwright and carpenter originally from Sunderland. His mother, Eliza, 'nee' Miller (1825- 'c'.1900), supplemented the family income by taking in boarders, and his sisters Annie and Lizzie helped their mother as they expanded this business to the house next door. George, early recognized as the most promising child, did well at elementary school in Lowestoft before going on to the church foundation secondary school, St John's, Lowestoft. He continued his studies at evening classes and had passed the second-division civil service examination for boy clerk before he was twenty. 
In 1874 Davison moved to work at the Exchequer and Audit Office in Somerset House, and lodged in north London. He met Susannah Louisa Potter ('b'. 1858?), the daughter of James Potter, a manufacturer, probably at an Islington church function, and they married in Finsbury Chapel in the City of London on 2 June 1883. They set up home at 10 Battersea Rise, near Clapham Junction, with his sister Annie and brother William occupying the ground floor. A son, Ronald, was born in 1884 and a daughter, Ruby, in 1889. 
Davison seems to have taken up photography in 1885; in the same year was started the prestigious Camera Club, of which he shortly became assistant honorary secretary. Evidently his work was well regarded, for the club voted him a testimonial in November 1887. He was a member of the Photographic Society of Great Britain (PSGB), later -- from 1886 -- the Royal Photographic Society. He was soon elected to its executive council and became deeply involved in the artistic debates about photography then current. In 1887 he attacked the notion of photographic composition by rules, and over the next couple of years espoused the cause of naturalism, as proposed by his then friend Philip Henry Emerson and opposed by Henry Peach Robinson. Relations deteriorated when Emerson, irked at the increasing praise for Davison's work, rubbished his pictures in a review of November 1889; Davison's cause was thereupon taken up by Robinson. In November 1890 Davison read a paper to the Society of Arts entitled 'Impressionism in photography'; Emerson, who had by this time repudiated his earlier naturalistic views, replied in vitriolic and personally offensive terms, calling Davison a 'clerkly personage' who should be 'cut' by any gentleman. In the meantime Davison's picture 'An Old Farmstead' (1888), taken with a pinhole camera to produce a 'soft focus', had won a prize at the PSGB exhibition of 1890. Retitled 'The Onion Field', it became his most famous photograph, and was fairly typical of his impressionist style. 
More controversy followed, and with further-reaching results. Davison was invited to show examples of his work at the PSGB exhibition of 1891, but they were removed on a technicality after six days by the organization's secretary. Davison, Robinson, and ten other members resigned to form a 'bohemian club' that later became the renowned photographers' collective the Linked Ring. This was run along democratic lines with no president and a rotating chairman; as honorary secretary, Davison was the Ring's sole official. In February 1894 he resigned for business reasons and was presented with another testimonial. 
The turning point in Davison's professional life came in 1889 when George Eastman -- impressed with his organizational abilities and, very probably, with the dignity with which he emerged from his spat with Emerson -- appointed him a director of the British branch of the Emerson Photographic Materials Company. In 1897 he became a full-time assistant manager, in 1899 he was appointed deputy managing director, then the following year took over as managing director. The initial salary of $1000 was modest, but Davison took full advantage of share options, becoming the second largest shareholder in Kodak (as the company became) after Eastman himself. By the time Eastman asked him to resign in 1912, Davison was a millionaire, and he used his wealth to promote his leftist political ideals as well as to enhance his personal comfort. He had by then given up photography; examples of his work are preserved at George Eastman House, Rochester, New York state, and at the National Museum of Photography, Film, and Television in Bradford (including the collection of the Royal Photographic Society). 
In 1906 Davison commissioned George Walton, a Linked Ring connection who had designed the PSGB exhibition of 1897, as well as Kodak exhibitions and shop interiors, to draw the plans for a mansion, Wern Fawr, to be built at Harlech, north Wales. In 1907-8 Walton designed for Davison a luxurious houseboat called the 'Log cabin', which was used for excursions for Linked Ring members, as well as the White House at Shiplake, near Henley-on-Thames. This Davison made over to his wife, along with an ample income, when they parted in 1913; his anarchist-socialist views and boundless hospitality were never appreciated by his family. 
Davison retreated to Wern Fawr, taking with him as housekeeper Florence Annie Austin-Jones, known as Joan (1897?-1955), who had been the secretary of the Liverpool-based Linked Ring member and Kodak representative Malcolm Arbuthnot. They were later married. Wern Fawr became an extraordinary centre for the arts; it had a much-admired music room, and Davison's hospitality to many of the leading English musicians of the period was unstinting. Visitors included the composer Sir Granville Bantock and his students from Birmingham, the composer and conductor Sir Eugene Goossens, and the pianist Cyril Smith. Davison owned an array of player pianos and aeolian organs, which were played by the photographer Alvin Langdon Coburn, another Linked Ring member, and by the composer and pianist Josef Holbrooke. To the surprise and consternation of the locals he also played host to the Margaret Morris dancers, who floated over the sand dunes in filmy costumes. 
Davison aided several socialist projects, including the study centre at the White House, Ammanford, south Wales; the Central Labour College in London, a breakaway from Ruskin College, Oxford; and the famed Chopwell Communist Club in co. Durham (which was Labour rather than Marxist). He allegedly handed out leaflets at the meetings of George Ballard's Workers' Freedom Group, and at one such assembly met the great revolutionary Peter Kropotkin. In 1912 he funded the launch of a magazine, 'The Anarchist', in premises near the Glasgow offices of Kodak. It failed, closing in the following year, and thereafter Davison kept his philanthropic activities under direct control. 
At Wern Fawr Davison played host to various political groups; the Whiteway Commune from near Stroud came for holidays and there were summer schools for the Freedom group and visitors from Fabian schools nearby. A story is related that, at one such gathering, the concert pianist Harriet Cohen played 'Chopsticks' with George Bernard Shaw. Davison also arranged free holidays in Harlech for deprived children from the vicinity of his latterly acquired London home, at 32 Holland Park. 
Davison's own health -- and that of his young daughter Doreen ('b'. 1921) -- led him to relocate his family to a new house, Chateau des Enfants, near Antibes, France. Wern Fawr was sold in 1924 and became Coleg Harlech, a local education centre. In Antibes, Davison continued to welcome his musical friends and children for holidays; four were officially adopted. His house in Holland Park was also sold, but he continued to visit Britain. In 1930 he was taken ill at Exeter and, provoking the outrage of the 'Evening News', to which wealthy left-wingers were anathema, hired a train to take him to London, where he was reconciled with his son. Thence he proceeded on a special coach on the Blue Train to Antibes, where he died at Chateau des Enfants on 26 December 1930. Following the cremation at Marseilles, his ashes were interred at Antibes. 
One of the most influential photographers before the First World War, Davison is often remembered for the wrong reasons. The journalist and independent MP Horatio Bottomley attacked him as a Bolshevik corrupter of youth, yet nothing was further from the truth: he was an anarchist who abhorred the use of violence and a communist before the word was associated inevitably with Marxism. 


@@@@@


doc= 58918


Hollyer, Frederick (1838-1933), photographer and art publisher, was born on 17 June 1838 at 34 Penton Place, Clerkenwell, London, the youngest son of Samuel Hollyer, assistant sealer to the first Lord Brougham, the lord chancellor, and his wife, Mary Ann Hudson. Like his father and two of his brothers, he was trained as a reproductive engraver in mezzotint, and he engraved two paintings by Edwin Landseer, 'The Shepherd's Grave' (1868) and 'The Shepherd's Chief Mourner' (1869). He began his career in photography about 1860 and was elected a member of the Photographic Society of London in 1865. He was also a member of the Solar Club, founded by G. Wharton Simpson and H. P. Robinson in 1865. In the 1860s he photographed a series of drawings by Simeon Solomon, 'A Dream of Love in Sleep'. In this early work he used wet collodion glass-plate negatives and printed on unglazed salted paper, but he began printing in platinum as soon as the process became available in the mid-1870s. 
In 1873 Hollyer moved from Kentish Town in north-west London to a studio in Pembroke Square, Kensington. He was commissioned in the 1870s to photograph the paintings of Frederick Leighton; he also photographed many of those of Edward Burne-Jones in different stages of production. With its delicacy of tone and matt paper surface, the platinotype produced facsimiles of drawings by artists such as Burne-Jones so perfect as to be later mistaken for originals. He soon became well known for these art reproductions of the work of other contemporary English artists such as Albert Moore, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Ford Madox Brown, Holman Hunt, Frederick Sandys, and George Richmond, as well as the old masters. 
Hollyer's platinum prints of paintings are said to have been so subtly evocative as to have suggested modifications to the painters. G. F. Watts credited them as largely responsible for bringing to the notice of the general public both his own work and that of Rossetti and Burne-Jones. At the turn of the century his platinum reproductions were praised as equalling the mezzotint in richness but surpassing it in fidelity to the original and thereby preserving the individual expression of the painter. Catalogues of 'platinotype reproductions of pictures' exhibited at Hollyer's studio and later at the Dudley Gallery in London were issued regularly from 1893 to 1911, and again after 1918. These art reproductions, some as large as 40 inches by 30, are now found in art collections worldwide. 
For thirty years, beginning in 1882, Hollyer's studio was reserved on Mondays for portraits, which he considered to be his creative work. In 1892 he became a member of the Linked Ring Brotherhood, a group which aspired to artistic photography and held exhibitions independent of the Photographic Society. Most of his work exhibited at the salons of the Linked Ring consisted of portraits or figure studies. He married Mary ('b'. 1838/9) and by 1906 their eldest son, Frederick Thomas Hollyer, had joined the business, with a series of photographic reproductions of portrait paintings from The Hague. In 1913 Hollyer retired from his studio at 8-9 Pembroke Square, Kensington, and left his two sons, Frederick Thomas and Arthur Samuel, in charge of the business. In 1920 he compiled for his daughter Eleanor three small albums of platinum portraits, of prominent artists, writers, and statesmen from the previous decades of his career -- including William Morris, W. B. Yeats, Lord Kelvin, and General Smuts -- which are now in the collection of the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. Frederick Hollyer died on 21 November 1933 in Blewbury, Berkshire, at Meers Parcel, the home of his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 58919


Howlett, Robert (1830-1858), photographer, was the son of the Revd Robert Howlett, Church of England clergyman, of Longham, Norfolk. He only comes to notice three years before his premature death in 1858; nothing is known of his mother, early life, education, or training. During his brief career he produced some of the most significant photographs of the period, most notably his portrait, 'Isambard Kingdom Brunel and the Launching Chains of the Great Eastern', made during the closing months of 1857. 
Although he is known to have taken photographs as early as 1852, Howlett first came to notice working as a photographer for the Photographic Institution in New Bond Street, London. Established by Joseph Cundall and Phillip Delamotte in 1853, the Photographic Institution quickly became the leading establishment for the commercial promotion of photography through exhibitions, publications, and commissions. It may be presumed that Howlett joined the company after Delamotte left to take up his appointment as professor of drawing at King's College, London. 
1856 -- the year in which Howlett is first mentioned in the photographic press -- was extremely busy for him: during the course of the year he sent prints to the annual exhibitions of photographic societies in London, Manchester, and Norwich. Among the work he submitted were two landscape studies, 'In the Valley of the Mole, Mickleham' and 'Box Hill, Surrey', which are likely to have been taken the previous year. In the same year he undertook the first of a number of commissions for Queen Victoria and Prince Albert, who regularly called upon the services of the Photographic Institution. Apart from copying the works of Raphael for Prince Albert's comprehensive art historical study, Howlett also made a series of notable portraits of soldiers who had distinguished themselves during the Crimean War. These were exhibited the following year at the Photographic Society of London's annual exhibition under the title 'Crimean Heroes' and are now frequently confused with the series taken by Joseph Cundall. Despite the ascendancy of photography there were growing fears about the stability and permanence of prints, many of which were showing signs of premature fading. It is within this context that Howlett published 'On the various methods of printing photographic pictures upon paper with suggestions for their preservation' (1856). 
In common with many other London establishments the Photographic Institution also operated a studio where Howlett made a significant number of portraits. Doubtless through Cundall's intimate connections within the world of publishing and fine art, a number of the most eminent artists of the day came to be photographed. Howlett's portraits of W. P. Frith, F. R. Pickersgill, J. C. Horsley, and Thomas Webster were among a larger group exhibited at the Art Treasures Exhibition in Manchester in 1857. It was Frith who commissioned Howlett to photograph crowd scenes at the 1856 Derby from the roof of a cab for use as preliminary studies for his 1858 painting 'Derby Day'. 
Howlett's most memorable series of photographs, and ones which are now regarded as epitomizing the spirit of Victorian engineering and endeavour, are those he made of the steamship the 'Great Eastern'. The vessel was designed by Isambard Kingdom Brunel and built by Messrs Scott, Russell & Co. at Millwall, on the banks of the Thames. The single largest engineering enterprise of the period, its protracted launch nearly defeated everyone involved, including Brunel, whose posture, gaze, and muddied clothes transmit the sense of difficulty and impending failure in Howlett's portrait. Paradoxically, this portrait has since assumed iconic status, standing as it now does for all that was heroic and noble during the Victorian period. 
Robert Howlett died, unmarried, of a fever on 2 December 1858 at his lodgings at 10 Bedford Place, Campden Hill, Kensington, London. It was thought by colleagues that his untimely death had been brought about by the fatal combination of overwork and his imprudent use of poisonous photographical chemicals. 


@@@@@


doc= 58921


Mortimer, Francis James (1874-1944), photographer, writer, and editor, was born at 9 Ordnance Row, Portsea, Portsmouth, on 27 November 1874, the only son and second of the two children of Francis Charles Mortimer (1849-1909), a dental surgeon of Scilly Isles descent, and his wife, Clara Ann, 'nee' Dyer (1853-1909). A frail tubercular child, Mortimer only began his formal education aged ten at Portsmouth grammar school and later took evening classes at the local art school. One of his many prizes in children's art exhibitions was a box camera and in 1888 he became a junior member of the Portsmouth Photographic Society (of which his father was one of the founders). Sir Arthur Conan Doyle was a fellow member. Mortimer later became the society's secretary and president. He also played the banjo and, later, the pianola, regarding it as the 'camera of music'. There were strong theatrical, journalistic, and collecting urges on both sides of the family. His father wrote for theatrical publications and collected books, medals, china, and coins. His mother's father, a surgical instrument maker by trade, wrote pantomimes for Portsmouth Theatre Royal and started the first amateur dramatic society in Portsmouth. 
In 1891 Mortimer became an articled clerk to the solicitor Albert Besant, the brother of the novelist and historian Sir Walter Besant, and passed his Law Society exams in 1895. He preferred his journalism, design, and photography to his day job, so when his firm went bankrupt, he decided that photography, rather than the legal profession, would be his future. From 1895 to 1899, working as a freelancer, he had cartoons published in 'The Idler' and 'Photographic News' and photographs in a variety of publications. In 1899 and 1900 he won silver and bronze medals in the All England Crystal Palace poster competition and exhibition and in 1901, 'The Poster' magazine awarded him first prize for a three-colour poster design. He began to design professionally, joined the Poster Academy, and contributed to the magazine. He also amassed a large collection of Japanese woodblock prints by Hokusai and Hiroshige, used as wrapping paper for Japanese imports, which he exhibited at the Camera Club in London in 1913. His large collection of posters was also exhibited at the Camera Club in London in 1915. 
In 1901 Mortimer spent time with relatives on the Scilly Islands, rediscovering his Scillonian roots and experimenting with photographing the sea. With a lifeline tied around him, he would go 'big wave-hunting' often losing his camera apparatus in the crashing waves. Marine photography always fascinated him and he became its best-known exponent. One of his most famous marine photographs was the 'Wreck of the Arden Craig', taken off the Scilly Isles in January 1911. 
In 1902 Mortimer moved to London to pursue his journalistic and photographic careers, having been invited by Alfred Horsley Hinton, editor of 'Amateur Photographer', to write illustrated articles for the publication and also to submit photographs for 'Photograms of the Year'. In 1904 he became assistant editor at the 'British Journal of Photography', moving to edit 'Photographic News', 1906-8. On 19 December 1905, at Clapham parish church, he married Lavinia or Queenie (1878-1930), the youngest child of a Polish engineer, Benjamin Romer, of Portsea. They had two daughters. 
On Hinton's death in February 1908 Mortimer became editor of the merged 'Amateur Photographer' and 'Photographic News', a position he retained until his death. His opening issue (12 May 1908) featured the magazine's first pictorial cover. He also took over editorship of the 'Dictionary of Photography' and wrote, revised, and edited books including 'Magnesium Light Photography' (1906), 'Oil and Bromoil Process' (1909), 'Photography for the Press and Photography for Profit' (1914), and 'Kodak Bromide Pictures by Someone who Makes Them' (1917). From 1912 to 1944 he was editor of 'Photograms of the Year' in succession to Henry Snowden Ward. He contributed the entry 'Photographic Art' for the fourteenth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1929). 
Mortimer had joined the Royal Photographic Society (RPS) in 1904, was made a fellow in 1905, a council member in 1908, and an honorary fellow in 1918 before finally becoming president (1940-42) while also president of the rival organization, the Camera Club (1938-44). He was awarded the society's silver progress medal, its highest honour, in March 1944 a few months before his death. He had more one-man exhibitions at the RPS than any other photographer. 
On 20 May 1908 Mortimer became a member of the Linked Ring Brotherhood, a secession group of photographers who had resigned from the RPS in 1892 and formed their own organization, henceforth exhibiting annually at their own very successful photographic salon. Mortimer's pseudonym within the Linked Ring was Bromoiler, given his expertise in the bromoil process. The photographic salon of 1908, featuring a preponderance of supposedly avant-garde work by American members of the Linked Ring, caused widespread dissatisfaction among the more pictorially inclined British Links whose work had been rejected. Mortimer quickly organized a salon des refuses, held at the Little Gallery in the offices of the 'Amateur Photographer' at 52 Long Acre in Covent Garden, showing the 128 rejected exhibits by the fifty-three more conventional British photographers. 
This set off a chain of events which caused, with much antagonism and vituperation, the break up of the Linked Ring in 1910 after all the American members, led by Alfred Stieglitz, resigned and the remaining British members, led by Mortimer, reformed as the London Salon and exhibited from 1910, with Mortimer as honorary secretary. A vitriolic and abusive correspondence, printed in the British photographic press, ensued between Stieglitz, the undisputed leader of American photography, and Mortimer, who was rapidly becoming the unchallenged British leader. After this date American and British photography veered widely apart as Stieglitz took his inspiration from contemporary fine art, straight photography, and modernism while British photography settled back into the embrace of a more conventional and patriotic pictorialism. 
Too old for active service, Mortimer worked during the First World War as a photographic intelligence officer and special constable. He sold 1000 copies of his naval photograph 'The Empire's Watchdogs' for 1 shilling each, the proceeds going to the prince of Wales's National Relief Fund, and wrote famously stirring and patriotic editorials in 'Amateur Photographer'. He photographed a much reproduced series on women's war work and his famous 1917 photograph, 'The Gate of Goodbye', a combination print from several negatives made at Victoria Station, became a classic image of the First World War and was eventually hung in the newly founded Imperial War Museum. 
Mortimer worked tirelessly as an editor, writer, photographer, exhibitor, and judge, establishing photography's credentials not only in Britain but also around the world. He was awarded over 400 medals for his own photography and sat on a wide variety of committees. From 1926 to his death he made many radio broadcasts on photography, reproduced in 'The Listener', and ventured into television from 1939 to 1943. Always photographing, he also worked under the pseudonyms of Francis Jay and Margaret Le Gallienne, producing rather fey images of nude nymphs. Following the death of his first wife, he married, on 24 June 1931, Lucy Embling 
(Gloria; 'b'. 1896)
, widow of Charles E. Dawson and only daughter of James Embling Dart (1872-1938), a retired civil servant. 
In 1942 Mortimer was made a CBE for his contribution to the role of photography during the Second World War. He was struck in the explosion of a flying bomb while travelling to his office at 9.30 a.m. on 23 June 1944. He continued to the office, finished editing that week's issue of 'Amateur Photographer' and then collapsed. Despite apparently making a promising recovery he died a month later on 27 July 1944 at the London Clinic nursing home, 20 Devonshire Place, London. An obituary summarized him, slightly gracelessly, as 'The most potent force in British photography since the death of Alfred Horsley Hinton in 1908' ('The Times', 31 July 1944). 


@@@@@


doc= 58922


Nicholls, Horace Walter (1867-1941), photographer, was born on 17 February 1867 at Post Office Terrace, Cambridge, the eldest son of Arthur Nicholls, photographer, and his wife, Charlotte Maria, 'nee' Johnson, both from Norfolk. Arthur's father was John Nicholls, of Newnham Grove, Grantchester, architect and restorer of historic buildings. In 1879 Arthur moved to the Isle of Wight, where he had a studio at 17 High Street, Sandown. 
By the age of fourteen Horace Nicholls was his father's apprentice, and about 1884 he was apprenticed to a Huddersfield chemist. About 1887 he worked in Chile, but returned to England about 1889 and joined the Cartland Studio in Windsor as a photographic assistant. In 1892 he went to Johannesburg and joined James F. Goch's studio in Pritchard Street. He returned in 1893 and married, at Windsor on 11 October, his former employer's cousin Florence ('b'. 1866/7), eldest daughter of George Holderness, baker, of Peascod Street; they had two sons and three daughters. They went to Johannesburg where Nicholls became manager of the Goch studio. With his usual hyperbole and self-promotion, Nicholls called himself 'the Johannesburg Photographer'. He prospered and was joined by his brother Stanley (died 1970), who became a leading South African photographer. Nicholls did portraits and local scenes, including the races, and also 'tricks' learned from his father: composite printing, multiple exposures on one negative, and photomontage. He published two small albums, 'Johannesburg' (1896) and 'Stirring Events in Johannesburg, 1896'. 
In 1899, during the opening phase of the South African War, Nicholls was photographer for the London-based weekly 'South Africa', accredited as a war correspondent. He went to Ladysmith and photographed battle and scenes in the town. He escaped by the last mail train before the siege, then was in Natal and Cape Colony. Despite the competition he sold to British publications including the 'Illustrated London News', 'The Graphic', 'Navy and Army Illustrated', and 'With the Flag to Pretoria'. He brought his family back to England, where he arrived on 30 December 1899. In the following spring he gave lectures in London and the provinces, gaining press publicity, and privately exhibited his photographs to Princess Christian of Schleswig-Holstein. In May he photographed the men of the 'Powerful' at Windsor Castle. Leaving his family behind, he returned in June to South Africa, where he photographed in the Orange River Colony and Transvaal. At Pretoria he interviewed and photographed Lord Roberts who, according to Nicholls's publicity, 'complimented Mr. Nicholls on his work' (Buckland, 122). In September 1900 he returned to England, where he published some of his photographs in 'Uitlanders and Colonists who Fought for the Flag, 1899-1900' and others as 'Memorable Incidents and Striking Features of the South African Campaign: a Series of Historic Pictures', carbon prints priced at between one half and two guineas and advertised as intended to 'appeal to the artistic sense of the most fastidious' (undated prospectus, H. W. Nicholls file, IWM), which continued profitable for years after the war. In June 1901 he and his family returned to South Africa. The war established him as a known photographer, with useful London contacts. He was briefly manager of Davies Bros. Studios in Johannesburg, but he and his family finally returned to England in August 1902. 
Working from his suburban home, 9 Amherst Avenue, Ealing, with his studio at the top, Nicholls was a freelance photojournalist, a self-styled 'press photo artist', doing his own developing and printing, and selling to the London press. He photographed events of the social season and other scenes of Edwardians, rich and poor, at play -- the Derby, Ascot, Henley, Lord's, the Eton wall game, Goodwood, Cowes, the Riviera, Chamonix -- with strong, sometimes dramatic images of individuals and crowds, including young women sea-bathing. He sometimes used a camera so designed that his subjects did not know they were being photographed. He made photomontages, transposing persons and backgrounds: he added numerous umbrellas to his photograph of a wet Derby day. He charged 10's'. 8died or 21's'. per photograph, depending on size and subject, and gained a comfortable middle-class income. Publications to which he contributed included 'The Times', 'Manchester Guardian', 'Illustrated London News', 'The Graphic', 'Black and White', 'Daily Sketch', 'Daily Mirror', 'Penny Pictorial', 'The Bystander', 'The Tatler', 'The Referee', 'Sphere', 'Sunday Companion', and 'South Africa'. 
By the First World War Nicholls was middle-aged. He wanted to be a war photographer at the front but was not accepted. Offering his services to Wellington House, the British overseas propaganda headquarters, in 1916 he wrote that 'the chief aim of my work in Photography is pictorial effect in preference to photographing anything and everything' (letter to Ivor Nicholson, 7 September 1916, H. W. Nicholls file, IWM). He worked briefly as a National Service Department substitution officer in Hounslow. From 1917 he was an official photographer of the Department (later Ministry) of Information, taking photographs of the 'home front' for 'propagandist purposes' in the United States and elsewhere; some were supplied to the British press. His subjects included army recruits, working women, munitions factories, shipbuilding, and J. L. Garvin and other leading newspaper editors. His wartime photographs were among his finest, though presenting 'the official view of the Home Front' (Carmichael, 63). His own elder son, George Arthur Nicholls (1894-1917), was killed on the western front in April 1917. 
In March 1917 the war cabinet announced the formation of a national war museum. One of the latter's subcommittees assembling material was the women's work subcommittee, chaired by Lady Norman, which decided to compile a 'series of photographs for record purposes' (Griffiths, 4) of women's 'substitution' of men workers. In August 1918 Nicholls and another Ministry of Information photographer, G. P. Lewis, were seconded to the subcommittee, and for it photographed working women. Nicholls covered mostly the London area. In 1919 the subcommittee ended. Nicholls stayed on at the Imperial War Museum, heading its darkroom and responsible for its collection of negatives, including his 2300 of the home front. He photographed scenes at the museum and, for its collection, London war memorials. While employed there he also did freelance photography for newspapers and journals, though inferior to his earlier work. In 1936 he moved to 7 Trent Road, Worthing, Sussex, and died there, of diabetes, on 28 July 1941. His photographs have since been much reproduced in various books, though his 'tricks' necessitate their use with caution as historical sources. Cecil Beaton used his photographs when designing for 'My Fair Lady'. His younger son, Sidney (1907-1977), became an actor, known as Anthony Nicholls. 


@@@@@


doc= 58924


Jones, (Holroyd) Anthony Ray- (1941-1972), photographer, was born at Wookey House, Wookey Hole, near Wells in Somerset on 7 June 1941. He was the youngest of three sons of Raymond Ray-Jones (died 1942), a fine art printer and painter, and his wife, Effie Irene Pearce, a physiotherapist. Following the early death of his father, the family moved constantly during the early years of his life and eventually settled in Hampstead, London, in 1951. Ray-Jones was then sent to Christ's Hospital in Horsham, Sussex, but hated his schooling bitterly and was at the time temporarily deaf in one ear. 
After leaving school in 1957 Ray-Jones went to the London College of Printing, where he studied graphic design. It was there that he became interested in photography and was especially influenced by social documentary photography of the time, and the work of Bill Brandt. Following his graduation in 1961 Ray-Jones was awarded a scholarship to Yale University School of Art for a graduate design programme. During this time he began to concentrate more fully on photography and more importantly encountered Alexey Brodovich (1898-1971), one of America's most creative forces in design and art direction at that time. During his final year at Yale, Ray-Jones joined Brodovich's avant-garde class called the 'design laboratory' in New York. The class, held in Richard Avedon's studio, had previously been attended by such eminent American photographers as Irving Penn, Robert Frank, and Garry Winogrand. 
In 1963 and 1964 Ray-Jones covered street parades in New York, and the black community in New Haven, Connecticut. His work at this time was strongly influenced by the confrontational, realistic, and at times surrealistic work of contemporary photographers such as Diane Arbus, Lee Friedlander, and Garry Winogrand. After gaining his masters in fine art in 1964 he joined Brodovich as associate art director of the influential photographic magazine 'Sky' and until his return to Britain in 1966 he also undertook a large amount of commercial work. 
Once back in England Ray-Jones started to work on his long cherished ambition: a published project on the social customs and idiosyncrasies of the British during their leisure time. He wanted this to be an 'important statement about British society' ('Personal Views', 31-2), and one which explored the class system and different geographic areas of the country. The majority of this work was done during 1966 and 1967 and was eventually published as 'A Day Off: an English Journal' (1974). It is for this work that he is most famous. 
The black and white photographs were carefully constructed, tightly controlled, and witty with an inclination towards the bizarre. His work could be both extraordinarily complex and subtle, and his skilful insight into British class systems and social codes anticipated the work of later British photographers such as Martin Parr. Though focusing on the foibles of human nature there is a tenderness and respect in this work which leaves his subjects' dignity intact. He wrote, 'I have tried to show the sadness and the humour in a gentle madness that prevails in people' (Ehrlich, 30). As Ray-Jones was not technically gifted most of his printing was done by John Benton-Harris. The project was shown at the Institute of Contemporary Arts, London, in 1969 in his first British solo show. Recognition also came with exhibitions abroad including 'Current report 2' at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, and a group show at the Rencontres Gallery in Paris. 
Ray-Jones had to take on commercial work to fund his projects. He worked for the 'Radio Times', 'Harper's Bazaar', 'The Observer', and the 'Sunday Times'. 'The Happy Extremists', a colour project dealing with British eccentrics, was supported by the 'Sunday Times' and published by them in October 1970. He was, however, seen to be a 'difficult' photographer in the commercial market -- often uncompromising and unwilling to let art directors and picture editors have control over his work. This resulted in him becoming blacklisted from many publications and in effect damaged his career. 
In 1967 Ray-Jones met and married Anna Coates and became involved with the photography magazine 'Creative Camera', edited by Bill Jay. For the following years he continued to work on his project concerning the British and much of 1970 was taken up with commercial work for Manplan, on commissions for the 'Architectural Review'. During this time he twice tried to become a member of the prestigious photo agency Magnum. On both attempts he was rejected. 
In 1971 Ray-Jones returned to America to take up a post as visiting lecturer at the San Francisco Art Institute within their department of photography, despite having no teaching experience. During vacation time he was employed extensively on commercial work and also pursued personal projects -- many of which were shown in the retrospective exhibition of his work, 'The English seen', at San Francisco Museum of Art in 1974. 
In February 1972 Ray-Jones developed leukaemia. Almost immediately he returned to England with his wife and on 13 March 1972, aged only thirty, he died in the Royal Marsden Hospital in London. He was cremated at St John's crematorium, and was survived by his wife. The National Museum of Film, Photography, and Television in Bradford acquired the entire Ray-Jones archive in 1993. This archive includes not only his photographic work but also his prolific notes and journals. 


@@@@@


doc= 58925


Tripe, Linnaeus (1822-1902), photographer and army officer in the East India Company, was born on 14 April 1822 at 4 St Aubyn Street, Plymouth Dock (renamed Devonport in 1824), the ninth of the twelve children of Cornelius Tripe FRCS (1785-1860), surgeon, JP, and alderman of Devonport, and his wife, Mary Fincham (1786-1842), the daughter of James and Martha Fincham of Plymouth Dock. Mary Tripe founded the Royal British Female Orphan Asylum, Devonport, in 1839. Tripe was educated in classics and mathematics at the Devonport classical school, before joining the East India Company's army (which was to become the Indian army) in April 1839. He served with the 12th Madras native infantry, retiring in 1875 as a full colonel. In August 1875 he was granted the honorary rank of major-general, land forces. 
Tripe took his earliest surviving photographs in the vicinity of Devonport about 1853, while on furlough in England. In December 1854 he photographed the temples at Halebid and Belur in Mysore during leave from his regiment at Bangalore; the 1855 Madras Exhibition jury recommended purchase of these photographs for the East India Company's court of directors, which had recently declared its interest in the new art of photography. In June 1855, on the recommendation of Lord Dalhousie, governor-general of India, Tripe was appointed photographer to the government of India's mission to Ava in Burma. Bad weather, Tripe's ill health, and ceremonial duties reduced his working time during the four-month mission to thirty-six days, but he made more than 200 photographs, primarily of temple architecture, at the Burmese capital of Amarapura and sites along the Irrawaddy River, and at Rangoon, capital of British-occupied Pegu. Back in Bangalore, he produced fifty copies of an untitled portfolio containing 120 of the Burma views, his first major photographic work, for the government of India in early 1857. 
In March 1857 Tripe became official photographer to the Madras presidency. After completing some minor work, he left Bangalore in December 1857, transporting his photographic equipment in bullock carts, on a 700-mile expedition to photograph temples, palaces, landscapes, and public works in the Salem district, Srirangam, Trichinopoly, Madura, Pudukkottai, and Tanjore. In May and June 1858 at Madras, he photographed the Elliot marbles, sculptures recovered from the ruined Buddhist stupa at Amaravati. On his return to Bangalore in July, he worked unremittingly for twenty months printing his negatives and producing thirty-five to seventy copies of the ten large photographic albums, two stereograph albums, and one photographic scroll ordered by the Madras government. His album 'Photographs of the Elliot Marbles, and other Subjects, in the Central Museum, Madras', produced in 1859, remains a valuable documentary resource. His photographic reputation mainly rests on the images contained in the nine large albums completed in 1860: 'Photographic Views in Madura, Parts I to IV'; 'Photographic Views in Tanjore and Trivady'; 'Photographic Views of Poodoocottah'; 'Photographic Views of Ryakotta and other Places, in the Salem District'; 'Photographic Views of Seringham'; and 'Photographic Views of Trichinopoly'. 
While pressing on with this work, Tripe learned in June 1859 that Sir Charles Trevelyan, the new governor of Madras, had ordered the photographic establishment closed as a matter of economy, when the publications in progress were completed. Tripe proposed various alternatives to closure of the establishment, and was strongly supported by the Hon. Walter Elliot, a member of the governor's council, who wrote: 'He is, without question, the ablest Artist in this part of India, and his zeal and love of his art, coupled with his known disinterestedness and modesty, afford ample guarantee that the fullest justice will be done to the prosecution of the experiment, which I have recommended. (Dewan and Sutnik, 17)' But the governor was unmoved, the army requested Tripe's return to military duty, and the photographic establishment was broken up in April 1860. Tripe's health was broken as well, and he returned to England on sick certificate later that year. In September 1862 he wrote to the secretary of state for India, offering to undertake further photographic work for the Madras government; the offer was curtly declined. His last known series of photographs was taken privately about 1870 at Kasur-do Hill, near the isolated frontier post of Tonghoo, British Burma, where he was stationed with his regiment. 
Tripe returned to England in 1873. In later years he collected shells and corals, and two shells which he found in China and the Philippines ('c'.1890) became British Museum holotypes. He died, unmarried, of senile decay and acute prostatitis at his home, 3 Osbourne Villas, Stoke, Devonport, on 2 March 1902 and was buried on 6 March in the Plymouth cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 58926


Turner, Benjamin Brecknell (1815-1894), photographer, was born on 12 May 1815 at 31-2 Haymarket, London, the eldest son of Samuel Turner (1784-1841) and Lucy Jane Fownes (1786-1870). He was apprenticed to his father at the age of sixteen as a tallow chandler and later ran the family firm of Brecknell, Turner Ltd, which made candles, soap, and saddle soap. The factory and shop were at 31-2 Haymarket. However, Turner is best-known as a pioneering amateur photographer of the 1850s. According to family tradition, he took up William Henry Fox Talbot's calotype process in 1849 -- but it was probably seeing the display of photographs at the Great Exhibition of 1851 that sharpened his ambition. Turner assembled a majestic album of his photographs from the years 1852-4 and opened the sequence with two remarkable views of the interior of the Crystal Palace in Hyde Park taken in March 1852 -- when Paxton's iron and glass structure had been emptied of exhibits before being dismantled and rebuilt at Sydenham. Turner's photographs capture the light-filled interior's revolutionary scale and elegance of engineering. His finesse in composing subjects, and adroit handling of a large camera, is witnessed by the other photographs in the album, now in the Victoria and Albert Museum. His characteristic subjects were English abbeys, castles, cottages, and farms. Many of his finest photographs were made in or around the Worcestershire village of Bredicot, where he married Agnes Chamberlain (1828-1887) on 17 August 1847. They and their eight children spent many summers at Bredicot Court, the Chamberlain family home. 
Unlike nearly all other British photographers, Turner remained faithful to Talbot's calotype process for most of his career. However, after beginning with small negatives at the start of his career (1849-51) Turner's later paper negatives were on a heroic scale -- usually about 26 by 38 cm. Turner exhibited regularly and with critical success from 1852 onwards, when six of his photographs appeared in the world's first ever purely photographic exhibition, organized by the Society of Arts in London. His paper (rather than glass) negatives -- almost always printed on albumen-coated papers -- gave a broad, textured handsomeness to his photographs of the canonical picturesque subjects -- vernacular architecture, farm carts and implements, rick yards, and ivy-clad ruins. The collection of some 250 paper negatives by Turner preserved by the Royal Photographic Society (and now in the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television, Bradford) demonstrates that he was not merely a 'straight' photographer: he compensated for the shortcomings of his negatives by adding pencilled foliage details, for example, or blacking out skies with Indian ink. About 1855 he built a glasshouse above the family home and business premises in the Haymarket and made portraits of friends, relatives, business associates, and fellow photographers. For these he used the wet collodion on glass process introduced in 1852. He also experimented with collodion negatives for landscape subjects in 1856 but the results lacked the charm of his works from paper, to which he immediately returned. 
Turner had a high reputation among critics, connoisseurs, and collectors in the 1850s. His work was constantly praised by reviewers of the time. He exhibited at the Universal Exhibition held in Paris in 1855 -- a major milestone for photography in France -- and was awarded a bronze medal. Turner was a founder member and later a vice-president of the Photographic Society of London (founded 1853). He was also an honorary secretary and treasurer of the Photographic Club, within the society, which produced large and beautiful albums of photographs in 1855 and 1857. Members used the albums as a means of exchanging their works. Turner organized the 1857 album. These albums are now treasured by students of photography, as are Turner's own prints and negatives; they are to be found in the great museums around the world. Turner died at 133 Tulse Hill, Brixton, London, on 29 April 1894. The first exhibition devoted to his work took place in April 2001 at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 58929


Middleton, Yevonde Philone (1893-1975), photographer, was born Yevonde Philone Cumbers on 5 January 1893 at The Cottage, St Julian's Road, Streatham Common, London, the daughter of Frederick Cumbers, a director of Johnstone and Cumbers, manufacturers of printing inks, and Ethel Westerton. In 1899 the family moved to Bromley in Kent. Educated with her sister Verena both at home and at a succession of day schools and boarding-schools, at fourteen Yevonde finally found a school which suited her: Lingholt, a progressive boarding-school at Hindhead in Surrey. Two years later the sisters were sent to a convent school in Verviers in Belgium; again unhappy, Yevonde instigated a move to Paris where she and Verena studied at the Sorbonne and lodged at a supervised boarding house for women students. At seventeen and 'finished', Yevonde returned to the family home in Bromley. 
In 1910 while still a student on the continent, Yevonde joined the women's suffrage movement, and on her return to Britain she continued to promote female emancipation. In defiance of her genteel upbringing she decided to take up a profession and, after seeing an advertisement for a photographer's apprentice in 'The Suffragette', settled upon photography. She approached Lallie Charles, one of the leading portrait photographers of the day, and was accepted for three years' tuition at Charles's studio at 39A Curzon Street in London's Mayfair. Six months before completing her apprenticeship, and only ever having taken one photograph, Yevonde left Charles's employ and -- in 1914, with a loan from her father -- opened her own studio at 92 Victoria Street, London. 
Madame Yevonde, as she called herself, began by imitating Lallie Charles but quickly developed her own signature style. She used dramatic lighting against a dark background and printed on sepia-toned platinotype paper to give a more modelled effect. In 1916 she temporarily gave up her studio to work as a land girl. After her return to photography, Yevonde's portraits of celebrities began to appear regularly in society magazines, such as 'The Bystander', and the new fashion magazines. Her reputation was such that in 1922 she was commissioned to take the official engagement portrait of Lord Louis Mountbatten and Edwina Ashley (now in the National Portrait Gallery). 
In 1921 Yevonde moved into larger premises at 100 Victoria Street. In that same year she became the first woman to address the congress of the Professional Photographers' Association. She was given as her subject 'Photographic portraiture from a woman's point of view', and chose to discuss the work of women photographers past and present. Her claim that women made better portraitists than men caused a minor controversy when her lecture was published in the 'British Journal of Photography' (29 April 1921). She later lectured on photography as a profession for women at the second annual conference of the Business and Professional Women's Federation held in Paris in 1936. 
The 1920s saw Yevonde producing creative figure compositions in addition to her commercial portrait work. Examples appeared in the society and fashion journals, in 'Photograms of the Year' for 1921 and 1923, and at leading photographic exhibitions. She was also making her name in the new field of advertising photography with her distinctive series of advertisements for Eno's Fruit Salts. It was in the 1930s, however, that she began to produce the photographs for which she is best remembered. In the early 1930s Yevonde began to work with Dr D. A. Spencer's Vivex colour process, building upon her earlier mastery in monochrome of costume, staging, and lighting effects to create intensely vibrant portraits and still lifes. In 1932 she mounted at the Albany Gallery in London a one-woman exhibition of her work, said to be the first in England to include colour portrait photographs. In 1933 she moved to a new studio at 28 Berkeley Square in Mayfair. There she exhibited her 'Goddesses and Others' photographs in 1935. The costumes worn by society women to a charity fancy-dress ball provided the starting point for this series of inventive and often surrealist tableaux, the props for which included a stuffed bull's head, rubber snakes, and a revolver. The sitters for these dramatically modern reinterpretations of classical female icons included Mrs Anthony Eden, the Hon. Mrs Bryan Guinness (Lady Diana Mosley), and the duchess of Wellington. 
Yevonde was committed to colour photography at a time when it was not considered a serious medium of expression. She did, however, receive some contemporary recognition for her work in this field. A number of the images from the 'Goddesses' series were identified in 'The Times' as 'among the best direct colour photographs we have seen' (11 July 1935), and two of Yevonde's photographs taken aboard the 'Queen Mary' for 'Fortune' magazine in 1936 were shown in the exhibition 'Photography 1839-1937' at the Museum of Modern Art in New York. In 1940 she was elected as a fellow of the Royal Photographic Society for her work in colour photography. 
The end of the 1930s was significant for Yevonde not only because of the approaching war: her husband, the playwright and journalist Edgar Charles William Middleton ('c'.1895-1939), whom she married on 13 February 1920, died in April 1939. A year later the Vivex factory closed, bringing to an end her work in colour. In 1940 Yevonde published her frank and self-deprecating autobiography 'In Camera'. She also produced one of her last works in colour: an allegorical self-portrait in which the photographer, distinctively dark-haired and snub-nosed, holds up a black and white negative (Yevonde Portrait Archive). 
After her husband's death Yevonde moved from their London home at 3 Dr Johnson's Buildings in the Inner Temple to Dolphin Square in Pimlico, and then, to escape the bombing of London, to Farnham in Surrey. After the war she moved back to the capital, to 33 Bedford Gardens in Kensington, and in 1955 she moved her studio to 16A Trevor Street in Knightsbridge. Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, working in black and white, she continued to photograph leading artists, actors, and writers and to exhibit her work. In June 1973 the Royal Photographic Society mounted a one-woman exhibition celebrating Yevonde's sixty years as a portrait photographer. Two years later, on 22 December 1975, she died of breast cancer in St Stephen's Hospital, Fulham, in London. The main archive of her work is held at Compton, Hampshire, with smaller collections in the National Portrait Gallery and the Royal Photographic Society collection at the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television, Bradford. 


@@@@@


doc= 58930


Jacqueline, 'suo jure' countess of Hainault, 'suo jure' countess of Holland, and 'suo jure' countess of Zeeland (1401-1436), princess, was born at The Hague, on or shortly before 16 July 1401, the only daughter of Guillaume (VI), count of Hainault, of Holland, and of Zeeland (1365-1417), and of Marguerite (1374-1441), eldest daughter of Philip the Bold, duke of Burgundy. She thus embodied a Burgundian dynastic coup: the double union between the houses of Valois-Burgundy and Wittelsbach-Holland, made in April 1385. Her Wittelsbach ancestry explains frequent references to her as Jacqueline of Bavaria. In June 1406 Jacqueline was betrothed, and on 6 August 1415 married, to Jean, duke of Touraine ('b'. 1398). Jean succeeded his elder brother Louis as dauphin that December, only to die in April 1417. 
The following August, three months after the death of her father, Jacqueline was betrothed to her first cousin John (IV), duke of Brabant (1403-1427). The marriage required a papal dispensation, which was vigorously opposed by Sigismund, king of the Romans, and only confirmed by Martin V in January 1418: the ceremony took place on 8 March. John, however, proved powerless to prevent Jacqueline's uncle, Johann of Bavaria, bishop-elect of Liege, from the forcible pursuit of his claim to Holland and Zeeland, territories long divided by factional politics. By November 1417 the bishop had resigned his see and set himself up as count in Dordrecht, precipitating civil war. John (IV) was unwilling to intervene, agreeing instead to a humiliating truce at Woudrichem in February 1419, the terms of which Jacqueline refused to accept. 
When, in April 1420, her husband mortgaged Holland and Zeeland and began to interfere with the management of her household, Jacqueline fled from Brussels to her mother's court in Hainault and began to seek outside assistance. In February 1421 she formally repudiated John (IV) and travelled to Westminster under a safe conduct granted by Henry V who had previously sent envoys to Le Quesnoy to gain her trust, and evidently saw her as a thoroughly useful ally. Jacqueline was provided with a monthly income of $100 on the dower estates of Henry's stepmother, Joan, and was invited to be godmother to the infant Prince Henry. Lured by the prospect of a European adventure, Humphrey, duke of Gloucester (1390-1447), temporarily abandoned his political ambitions in England in support of Jacqueline's cause. The couple may have married in 1422, but the event was clandestine, and although rumour attributed it to either 13 August or 25 October, after a dispensation had been obtained from the antipope Benedict XIII, neither date can be confirmed. All that can be said with confidence is that the marriage had taken place by the end of January 1423. In October 1424 they landed an army at Calais and swiftly moved to take possession of Hainault: however, they met opposition from Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy, who was now allied to John (IV) and determined to capture the Wittelsbach inheritance for himself. Johann of Bavaria's death in January 1425 gave Philip a freer hand to act against Jacqueline. He launched a counter-invasion of Hainault in April, as a result of which Humphrey abandoned his wife to Burgundian custody. Jacqueline was taken to Ghent to await a papal pronouncement on the validity of her marriages, but in September escaped to Gouda, where she rallied a faction against the Burgundians and renewed the Dutch civil war in alliance with the bishop of Utrecht. 
Jacqueline's entreaties for English aid went largely unanswered, however. Unwilling to offend Philip, the regency council preferred to negotiate a settlement rather than engage Burgundian forces. She was thus left powerless to prevent Philip's assumption of control in Hainault after the death of John (IV) in April 1427. She still maintained a strong position in North Holland, but this was irrevocably weakened in January 1428, when Martin V ruled that her marriage to John (IV) had alone been valid. Humphrey took this opportunity to abandon his costly adventure and to marry his mistress, Eleanor Cobham, in May: now deprived of the English bluff she had been playing, Jacqueline was forced to sue for peace. By the treaty of Delft in July she agreed to recognize Philip as guardian of and heir to all her territories, which were to be administered by a jointly appointed regency council. 
Jacqueline, however, refused to accept a quiet life: in the summer of 1432 she contracted a secret marriage with Frank van Borselen (died 1470), governor of Holland and Zeeland since 1430. This contravened the terms of the treaty, and Borselen was swiftly imprisoned: the situation was resolved only in April 1433, when Jacqueline agreed to an immediate abdication of all her territorial rights and had her marriage confirmed. Thereafter she retreated to her well-appointed castle of Teijlingen, where she was free to indulge a passion for hunting. According to Dutch tradition, she also took up pottery, fashioning a distinctive style of long-necked jar. 
Jacqueline died childless on 8 October 1436, after a long illness, presumed consumptive. She had requested burial in her lordship of Sint-Maartensdijk in Zeeland, but her mother insisted on a funeral held later the same month in the court chapel in The Hague, an arrangement which, for once, Jacqueline was unable to defy. Though biographers were later to romanticize her career, few have yet addressed her remarkable strength of character, or her utter refusal to act as a dynastic pawn. 


@@@@@


doc= 58931


Layard, Nina Frances (1853-1935), poet and archaeologist, was born on 20 August 1853 at Stratford Green, Essex, fourth child of Charles Clement Layard (1817-1895), Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Somes (1817-1886). In childhood an avid egg and shell collector, she lived at Wembley and Harrow rectories 1858-73, and attended a dame-school in Willesden, Middlesex. Of distinguished Huguenot ancestry, her father's cousins Sir A. H. Layard, E. L. Layard, and Lady Charlotte Guest were inspirational examples, and Matthew Arnold encouraged her earliest poetry. The family moving to Combe-Hay rectory, Bath, in 1873, she spent many solitary hours collecting, and despite having a weak constitution travelled round the world via New Zealand in 1878-9. She became aware of the fossil kingdom in 1882, and began serious collecting and reading under the guidance of Leonard Jenyns and John Ellor Taylor. 
Having published minor critiques of the theory of rudiments in evolution, Layard moved permanently, with private means, to Ipswich in 1889, presented the first paper by a woman to the Victoria Institute, and from 1890 to 1895 broke similar ground with the British Association. In this period, with Andrew Lang's help, her poetry was published to brief acclaim, and she met Mary Frances Outram (1862-1935), eldest daughter of Sir Francis Outram, of Pitlochry, from 1894 her constant companion. She commenced systematic archaeological work on Ipswich monastic sites (1898), winning honourable recognition. In 1902-5 she discovered and excavated a palaeolithic site in Ipswich analogous to Hoxne and Hitchin, advised by Sir John Evans and Boyd Dawkins, and was elected fellow of the Anthropological Institute (1902) and Linnean Society (1906). Her methodical rescue excavation of an Anglo-Saxon cemetery at Ipswich in 1906-7 received publication by the Society of Antiquaries (London), though at this time she was excluded (being a woman) despite Evans's attempted intervention. 
In 1907 Sir Ray Lankester established Layard as honorary curator of a room in Christchurch Mansion, Ipswich, where until 1920 she developed substantial prehistoric collections (which she popularized through press notices) by excavations in East Anglia and elsewhere, receiving encouragement from distinguished archaeologists, and inspiring several future prehistorians, including James Reid Moir and her anthropologist nephew John Willoughby Layard (1891-1974). A founder member of the Prehistoric Society of East Anglia (1908) and president (1921), Layard deliberated on the putative Tertiary implements in 1910-11, and was also an active officer of the Suffolk Institute of Archaeology in 1912-20. She was one of the first group of women to be made fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, 'honoris causa' (1921), and throughout the 1920s continued excavation and publication, studying continental sites, and developing international academic contacts. In her work she rebuffed anti-feminine prejudice by courtesy, thoroughness, excellence, and perseverance. Her excavations, publications, collections, and academic connections helped shape a rising generation of prehistoric discourse, bridging nineteenth- and twentieth-century outlook and method. Her early religious views, which prompted several initiatives in temperance and social reform, broadened through her studies towards a synthetic Christian spirituality. She worked until her last year, and died shortly after Miss Outram, in Ipswich Nursing Home, 57 Fonnereau Road, Ipswich, on 12 August 1935. They were buried in a shared grave in Kelvedon churchyard, Essex, on 15 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 58933


Brown, Basil John Wait (1888-1977), archaeologist and astronomer, was born at Bucklesham, Suffolk, on 22 January 1888, the only child of George Brown ('b'. 1863), journeyman wheelwright and farmer, and his wife, Charlotte, daughter of John Wait of Great Barrington, Gloucestershire. The Brown family was settled in Suffolk as husbandmen or farmers for several generations. Basil's parents moved to a small farming tenancy, Church Farm, Rickinghall Superior, Suffolk, when he was a few months old, and Superior remained his home throughout his life. As a boy he followed the plough, but from the age of five he began to spend hours studying astronomical books and charts which had belonged to his grandfather. After attending the village school until the age of twelve, he gained a certificate in drawing in 1902 through evening classes, and was awarded the Harmsworth self-educator diploma by examination in geography, geology, and astronomy in 1907. He subsequently acquired knowledge of Latin, Greek, French, German, and Spanish from textbooks and radio broadcasts. Rejected in November 1915 as medically unfit for military service, he instead volunteered for the Royal Army Medical Corps. On 27 June 1923 Brown married (Dorothy) May Oldfield (1897-1983), a domestic servant; she was the daughter of Robert John Oldfield, head carpenter on the Wramplingham estate. They settled at Church Farm, where they worked together, May running the dairy. When George Brown died Basil and May Brown kept the farm going until Basil's mother died a year or two later. Unable to make the farm pay, Basil undertook odd jobs, and in August 1935, after a brief stay at the School House, he and May moved into a rented cottage named Cambria in Rickinghall, their home for the rest of their lives. 
Brown had joined the British Astronomical Association in July 1918, and later assisted in the zodiacal light and aurorae, meteor, and history sections. He wrote articles on astronomy for 'English Mechanics' magazine, and corresponded with numerous continental astronomers ('Village handyman wins world fame', 'Daily Express', 15 Jan 1935). In 1928 he began writing his 'History of Astronomical Atlases, Maps and Charts', published in 1932 and reprinted in 1968. Brown studied borderline astro-archaeological works, and became interested in ancient alignments. Using these techniques, by compass and measurement, he located lost buildings at eight medieval moated sites, including one at Burgate, his father's birthplace. He identified Roman permanent settlements in north Suffolk, where they were not previously suspected, and traced ancient roads. Investigations of Roman industrial potteries led to the find of a kiln at Wattisfield in 1934. Its removal to Ipswich Corporation Museum in 1935 opened his formal contacts with Guy Maynard, its curator from 1920 to 1952, H. A. Harris, secretary of the Suffolk Institute of Archaeology, Ivan Moore, the Roman pottery specialist, and Rainbird Clarke. 
In 1932 Maynard and Reid Moir, president of the Ipswich Museum, completed several years' work on the Ipswich Castle Hill villa. Moir was an early luminary of the Prehistoric Society of East Anglia, and Maynard its secretary and editor from 1921. Together they assembled important lithic collections at Ipswich and developed international contacts. In 1935 Grahame Clark and Charles Phillips gained control of the society and effectively re-formed it as the (national) Prehistoric Society, operating from Cambridge. Refocusing the museum's archaeological efforts, Maynard supported a formal application from Brown to work for it on a contractual basis. Late in 1935 the Ipswich Museum and the Suffolk Institute jointly employed him at $2 per week for thirteen weeks at Stuston and at Stanton Chair, where he located a villa (one of the largest in the county). He excavated at Stuston, and at Scole with C. H. Gale in the spring of 1936. The Stanton project conducted for Maynard occupied three seasons each of about thirty weeks in 1936-8, attracting many visitors, with young people and students assisting. At Scole and Stanton the flying ace Wing Commander G. E. Livock, Major Gilbert Kilner of the Ixworth Cyder Factory, and J. B. Watson of the Wattisfield potteries became Brown's independent friends, supporters, and correspondents. His wages settled to $1 10's'. per week, as archaeological excavation became a source of livelihood for him, supplemented by insurance agency work. He also became a special constable (Eye division). 
Brown is famous as the original finder and excavator of the Anglo-Saxon ship-burial at Sutton Hoo near Woodbridge in south-east Suffolk ['see 'Sutton Hoo burial], which contained the spectacular regalia and other artefacts, symbolically placed, of an early seventh-century potentate. Its excavation ranks as one of the most significant archaeological discoveries made in the British Isles. Brown was appointed to excavate the site at the suggestion of Maynard when, in 1937, Mrs Edith May Pretty JP of Sutton Hoo House wished to investigate some mounds on her estate. Brown agreed to take on the task, and Maynard persuaded the Ipswich Museum committee to release him into Mrs Pretty's employ for June-August 1938, interrupting the Stanton season. Lodging with her chauffeur, and assisted by two estate labourers, Brown trenched across the centre of three mounds. All had contained important burials but were disturbed or plundered. Brown recognized sand stains as organic traces and identified complex ritual deposits. The first contained a cremation laid on a rectangular wooden tray, with goods including an iron battle-axe. In the second (the largest in circumference) many scattered iron rivets suggested the former presence of a ship. By analogy with the ship-burial uncovered at Snape in 1861 he interpreted a deep central feature as a buried boat of moderate size, with fragments of high-quality metalwork, glass, and weaponry on its floor (derived from a plundered burial deposit). Modern re-excavation suggests that a large ship had actually been placed over a sunken rectangular burial chamber. In August Brown resumed his Stanton work. Brown and Maynard formed the opinion that the burials at Sutton Hoo were Anglo-Saxon, though the axe was pronounced viking by two experts. Maynard wrote to the Manx Museum concerning ship-burial before the parties reconvened at Sutton Hoo in May 1939 to investigate the highest mound. Brown's assistants were William Spooner (gamekeeper) and John Jacobs (gardener), and within three days of trenching from the east they found ship-rivets. Instantly aware of their significance, Brown left them in position and began to expose sand stains representing the rising stem of an enormous buried ship. It was soon necessary to widen the trench as the great hull, an unprecedented archaeological challenge, started to emerge. Over the first month Brown began to define and hollow the near 90 foot extent of the ship, leaving a protective layer and packed bracken over exposed surfaces. Hearing of the Manx inquiry, Charles Phillips visited Maynard and the site on 6 June 1939; after immediate notification, representatives of the British Museum, the Office of Works, Cambridge University, Ipswich Museum, and the Suffolk Institute convened there three days later. Phillips was to take control in July, informally uniting the interests of the landowner and other authorities. Deferring to Mrs Pretty's rights, they also approved Brown's continuing work on the ship. Iron remains announced his arrival at the burial chamber (June 14) and by late June he had located the stern. Phillips took charge on 10 July and relations with Maynard rapidly became strained. As his team of Stuart and Peggy Piggott, and soon O. G. S. Crawford and W. F. Grimes, began discovering the famous treasures (21 July), Phillips effectively excluded the Ipswich interest. 
Brown as Mrs Pretty's employee continued to work on the ship, and stood independently from the conflicts which soon surrounded him. She recognized and admired Brown's personal sagacity, loyalty, perseverance, and discretion. He maintained steady correspondence with his wife. As the story reached the press (28-9 July), as the finds were packed and sent to London, as the ship's form was elucidated in all its details, and as the Sutton treasure trove inquest (14 August) received his expert witness, Brown was fully present throughout the excavation, though he did not work in the burial chamber. 'He was here at the beginning and he was here at the end', Mrs Pretty observed (private information). After Phillips left (25 August) and through the declaration of war (3 September 1939) Brown and Spooner covered the ship-form with hessian and infilled with cut bracken. A week later Brown returned to Rickinghall and to work at Stanton Chair. 
Briefly a NAAFI assistant in Bury St Edmunds, Brown then worked from 1940 to 1942 as a stoker at Culford School, making fortnightly visits home. From September 1942 he served with the Royal Observer Corps at Bury. Throughout the Second World War he found opportunities to excavate, often with children assisting. With Maynard's support, in 1947 he became regularly employed by Ipswich Museum, nominally as attendant, until his formal retirement in 1961. During those years he conducted many excavations and field-walked in various parts of Suffolk. They include notably the Roman pottery industries at Pakenham, West Stow, Wattisfield, and Calke Wood and their prehistoric environs, an Anglo-Saxon settlement at Grimstone End, a neolithic occupation with sherds and querns in Ipswich, and the last investigation of the Ipswich villa before a housing estate covered it. If the Sutton ship had demanded resourcefulness and delicacy, Brown could also apply the trowel vigorously when needed. While his techniques fell short of (best) modern standards they were none the less effective. He transferred his copious listings of Suffolk archaeological sites onto 6 inch maps, records which became the core of the county's sites and monuments record. His notebooks (with photographs and inscrutable crayon plans and drawings) and typed reports to the museum chronicle his many projects and investigations. These and his responses to all inquiries, often on his own account, led him far and wide, always by bicycle, so that his work set a pattern for a county archaeological field officer of later years. During the 1950s Basil and May were able to buy their house at Rickinghall. They had no children, but Brown liked to enthuse and instruct his teams of young helpers. He supported the unsuccessful British Schools Archaeological Guild in 1952-3. After his retirement members of the Suffolk Institute subscribed to a pension fund. He was still excavating at Rickinghall and Botesdale when in 1965 a heart attack or stroke ended his regular work. In 1966 and 1968 he took part in BBC programmes about Sutton Hoo. On the recommendation of the Sutton Hoo scholar Rupert Bruce-Mitford (who told Brown he would achieve immortality) he was awarded a civil-list pension in 1966. 
Brown was a true countryman, shaped in the living bond between himself and the shire lands under the starry heavens which formed his first study. From those remote depths to the remote lives preserved in archaeology at his feet, historical astronomy became a bridge between ancient experience and his own identity. In worsted working-suit, tie and cap, smoking a pipe, and with a strong Suffolk accent and intonation, he arose from an old rural order of life. He also created large stamp collections and was adept at chess. He felt honoured by fortune (if at times neglected by science) to have been the finder of Sutton Hoo, and sometimes visited the British Museum, finally in a wheelchair, to see the treasure. His garden shed at Rickinghall was a glory-hole of horseshoes, bottles, sundry finds, and memorabilia. He and May maintained lively conversation with their visitors, occasions coloured by Basil's whistling hearing-aid and chattering false teeth. He died at home on 12 March 1977, and was cremated at Ipswich crematorium on 17 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 58935


Moir, (James) Reid (1879-1944), archaeologist, was born at The Elms, Benslow, Hitchin, Hertfordshire, on 13 June 1879, the second son and youngest of five surviving children of Lewis Moir (1843-1912), a tailor, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Knowles (1841-1910). He was educated at Northgate School, Ipswich, leaving at sixteen to take up an apprenticeship with his father's outfitters' business in the Butter Market, Ipswich. He was never fully committed to his 'chosen' profession. 
Moir's 'amateur' pursuits in archaeology dominated his adult life. He did not become interested in archaeology until his mid-twenties, but he quickly made a name for himself locally and by 1910 had attracted international attention. In an audacious letter to 'The Times' in October of that year he claimed to have found irrefutable human artefacts beneath the East Anglian crag deposits, thus challenging the orthodox view of the antiquity of human beings in Britain and attempting to push it back into the tertiary period. This opinion plunged Moir into a fractious debate that lasted the rest of his life, but which also brought him the support and friendship of Sir Edwin Ray Lankester. 
On 3 March 1909 Moir married Mary Frances Moberly, a widow twelve years his senior; she was the daughter of Robert George Penny, an Anglican clergyman. The match was childless, although Mary had a daughter from her previous marriage. What should have been a comfortable life was jeopardized by Moir's neglect of the family business in order to concentrate on his archaeological researches; in 1912 his father actually gave him notice to quit, but died later that same year, leaving Reid instead central to the business's future. However Moir's continued lack of interest did nothing to improve his or its financial situation, both of which steadily declined. He yearned for full-time employment in palaeolithic archaeology, but none was to be had. 
Moir was a force in British palaeolithic archaeology for some thirty-five years. He was a prominent figure in the Prehistoric Society of East Anglia and at Ipswich Museum, acting as president for both institutions (1914-15 and 1932-3 and 1929 respectively). During this long career he published some 233 works, his earlier efforts being summarized in 'The Antiquity of Man in East Anglia' (1927). In 1937 his career was crowned by a coveted fellowship of the Royal Society, and in 1939 he delivered the prestigious Huxley memorial lecture at Imperial College, London. The 1930s also saw an upturn in his domestic affairs, when he was awarded a civil-list pension of $100 p.a. with an equal sum coming from Ipswich Museum, both for services to archaeology. 
Moir's work comprised two distinct elements, one dealing with evidence for pre-crag or tertiary man, the other with more mainstream palaeolithic archaeology. The first, never well received even in his own time, is now almost universally disregarded, his 'artefacts' discounted as natural and probably the product of marine environments; but in the second he made some genuine and lasting contributions to knowledge. He made several new discoveries -- for example the middle palaeolithic sites at Bramford Road and Constantine Road, Ipswich -- and undertook new investigations at important known localities, Hoxne, Brundon, High Lodge, and Foxhall Road being among the most famous. Even here, though, the maverick Moir is never far away. A colleague, the geologist Percy Boswell, depicted him as an ambitious, confrontational man who rushed into a series of over-optimistic and premature statements that simply invited attack: the pre-glacial age of the modern human skeleton from Ipswich, which later proved to be an intrusive burial, to cite but one example. Unfortunately, it is with the wilder claims, especially the pre-crag implements, that Moir is today most often, disparagingly, associated. 
Moir died of heart failure and coronary thrombosis on 24 February 1944 at his home, the Mill House, Flatford, East Bergholt, Suffolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 58936


Oppenheimer, Sir Francis Charles (1870-1961), diplomatist, was born on 17 December 1870 at 1a Russell Square, Bloomsbury, London, the oldest of seven children of Sir Charles Oppenheimer (1836-1900), City merchant and later British consul-general at Frankfurt am Main, and Bertha (died 1919), daughter of Leopold Goldbeck, a Frankfurt cloth merchant. Francis Oppenheimer (he adopted the middle name Charles on being baptized into the Church of England in November 1892) was educated at the 'Gymnasium' at Frankfurt, to which city his father had returned in 1875 for health reasons. In 1890 he went to Balliol College, Oxford, graduating with a second-class degree in jurisprudence in 1893. He was then articled to the chambers of Rufus Isaacs, later the marquess of Reading, and was called to the bar by the Middle Temple in 1895, though he never intended to pursue a legal career. From 1896 he spent four years in Paris as a painter. 
On his father's death in June 1900, Oppenheimer succeeded him to the unsalaried post of consul-general for the Prussian provinces of Hesse-Nassau and the grand duchy of Hesse and by Rhine, residing at Frankfurt. Between 1905 and 1912 he established for himself, through his commercial reports, a niche within the consular service which enabled him ultimately to transfer to the more prestigious diplomatic service. His friendship with his Oxford contemporary Arthur Ponsonby, then private secretary to the prime minister, and Sir Eyre Crowe, the Foreign Office's leading expert on German affairs, opened to him a direct channel of communication with Whitehall. The link with Crowe was particularly important for Oppenheimer's further career. The former appreciated the potential value of commercial reporting and the bearing of economic developments on politics. Having established a direct channel to the senior officials in Whitehall, it was the wide range and quality of the assiduously culled 'hard' data in his commercial reports, skilfully combined with political and diplomatic gossip, that established Oppenheimer's high reputation. Though largely and ostensibly concerned with economic, commercial, and financial matters, these reports were remarkable because of the link that Oppenheimer was able to make between economic developments and German domestic and foreign politics -- and their diplomatic and strategic implications for Britain. In September 1909, in response to an Admiralty enquiry, he submitted a lengthy memorandum on the efficacy of a naval blockade of the German coastline in a war with Germany, which reinforced the recommendation of the committee of imperial defence to dispatch an expeditionary force to France rather than to rely on blockading the enemy. He also reported on German preparations for financial mobilization for war and concluded with the strong recommendation that Britain should be equally well prepared. 
In the period between 1905 and 1912 Oppenheimer became known to a wider public. His printed commercial reports were frequently quoted in the press and in parliament; and David Lloyd George drew on Oppenheimer's memoranda on German social legislation when framing his own national insurance scheme. In October 1911 he praised Oppenheimer as 'one of the ablest consuls of the British empire' ('The Times', 16 Oct 1911). Nevertheless, it was also during this period that Oppenheimer found himself the target of a press campaign against Britain's representatives in Germany, whose loyalty was impugned because of their German names. Although he was born a British subject, to many of his contemporaries Oppenheimer cut a somewhat 'outlandish' figure and his German education had 'tinged [his] speech with a foreign accent' (Oppenheimer, 72). He took the unusual step of defending himself in a letter to 'The Times': 'As I was born in London, took my degrees at Oxford, and am a member of the English bar, it is hardly correct to count me among 'the foreigners'. If my family name does not sound English, I need hardly remind you that I share this disadvantage with a large proportion of the oldest families in England. ('Times Commercial Supplement', 23 Oct 1908)' His German-Jewish name was indeed a profound handicap for Oppenheimer. In 1911 the Foreign Office refrained from appointing him to the Paris consul-generalship for this very reason. These were ominous signs of what lay ahead of him. 
In January 1912 Oppenheimer unprecedentedly secured promotion to a post in the diplomatic service with his appointment as commercial attache for north-western Europe, with the rank of counsellor at the Berlin embassy. The outbreak of war in August 1914 marked a turning point in his career, cutting him off from the sources of information upon which his authority on German affairs had rested. In October 1914 he was sent as commercial attache to The Hague. It was symptomatic of his ambiguous position in the wartime diplomatic service that he was posted to the Dutch capital without any specific instructions. He decided to devise a system to disrupt the flow of contraband goods through the Netherlands to the central powers. His initiative led to the establishment in November 1914 of the Netherlands Overseas Trust, an ostensibly private company which, in the course of the war, became one of the cornerstones of Britain's blockade policy. In early 1915 he was transferred to Bern, where he helped to establish the Societe Suisse de Surveillance Economique on similar lines. By November 1915 Oppenheimer was back at The Hague, where he spent the remainder of the war. 
If in previous years Oppenheimer was sensitive about his German-Jewish family background, he now had good reason to be so. Throughout the war, and from January 1917 with increasing frequency, the Northcliffe press poured its vitriol over Britain's 'German' representative in the Netherlands, apparently with the connivance of some members of the diplomatic service. Lord Robert Cecil's defence of the beleaguered Oppenheimer as 'a public official who had served this country during the war with great efficiency and experience' ('The Times', 9 Nov 1917) helped to put an end to internal intrigues, but it could not silence the Northcliffe press. Lord Hardinge, the permanent under-secretary, evidently intimidated by the press campaign, used a minor dispute between Oppenheimer and the Dutch government as a pretext for his recall in September 1918. On his return to London he was told that in view of the growing prejudice against 'persons in the service with German names or German parentage' it had been decided to send him on extended leave (diary, 21 Oct 1918, Oppenheimer MSS, box 5). He was now only occasionally employed. A special mission to Vienna in 1919 to investigate the financial position of Austria provided a rare break from his involuntary indolence. Symptomatically, his recommendation of lenient financial terms to be imposed upon Austria was disregarded. The economic turmoil into which the Austrian republic was consequently thrown vindicated Oppenheimer. But by that time he had already decided to leave the diplomatic service. In his final interview with Lord Curzon he made no secret of the fact that 'in the service I had always been made to feel... an outsider' (memorandum, 15 Oct 1919, Oppenheimer MSS, box 6/2). In February 1920 Oppenheimer finally tendered his resignation, thus bringing to an end his short but notable diplomatic career. 
Oppenheimer spent the remainder of his life entirely devoted to artistic pursuits, although he was actively involved in helping German-Jewish refugees to resettle in England in the 1930s. He had been knighted in 1907, and in 1919 he was also created KCMG. On 2 September 1931 he married Jane Shillaber, second daughter of Colonel Cunliffe Martin of the Bengal lancers, and divorcee of Sir Ernest Burford Horlick, second baronet. She had three children from her previous marriage; there were no children from her marriage to Oppenheimer. The latter published his memoirs, 'Stranger Within', in 1960. He died at his London home, 20 Lowndes Square, on 25 June 1961. 


@@@@@


doc= 58939


Thompson, Josiah (c.1724-1806), Particular Baptist minister and historian, was born at Shrewsbury, the son of the Revd Josiah Thompson (1692-1780), Baptist minister. He was born in the same parish as the Revd Job Orton (1717-1783), with whom he later corresponded for many years. From October 1742 he was educated for the nonconformist ministry at John Eames's academy in Hoxton on the Coward Trust foundation. In June 1744, 'having lately had a considerable legacy left him' (Coward Trust minutes, 74), he refused any further financial help. In November 1744, after he had been called to the ministry by the church at Prescott Street, London, he was dismissed to be minister of the church at Unicorn Yard, Southwark. He was ordained on 23 February 1746. He resigned his charge in August 1761, according to Ivimey, the Baptist historian, because of ill health. Another source states his resignation was 'upon some change of sentiment', having originally been a strict Calvinist ('Monthly Repository', 282). Having inherited a considerable estate he was able to live in retirement as a gentleman for the rest of his life and preached only occasionally. Although his property 'gave him weight with his denomination', they did not hold him in very high regard (Wilson, 4.236). He 'does not appear to have done much good as a minister' (Ivimey, 3.427) was Ivimey's view, but Orton had a more favourable opinion. He heard Thompson give the charity sermon at Shrewsbury in June 1778 'with great acceptance', and when a larger collection 'than ever before' was made ('Letters to Dissenting Ministers', 1.199). Thompson's considerable property made him increasingly conservative following the French Revolution. Robert Aspland failed to obtain a grant from the Ward Trust in 1797 to study at the Bristol Baptist Academy because Thompson, the senior trustee, considered both Aspland and the institution too radical. Unusually for a dissenting minister, Thompson was said to be a devoted supporter of William Pitt, giving $100 to assist the prosecution of the war against France. 
In retirement Thompson undertook to collect materials for a history and account of the contemporary state of dissenting congregations in England and Wales. The work was prompted by the application made to parliament in 1772 for the relief of dissenting ministers and teachers. Through an extensive local correspondence Thompson acquired a mass of historical and contemporary information relating to about half the estimated 600 dissenting congregations in the country, which he arranged on a county basis and copied into a series of volumes. The collections, which he left in his will to Dr Williams's Library, are of considerable importance, not only for the statistics recording the number of congregations and ministers in 1772-3 but for the histories of many congregations 'taken from their Church Books, the Testimony & Report of old People, private Papers, & other authentic Records' (DWL, MS 38.7, preface), which are no longer available to the historian. Some of the accounts of individual congregations or of churches are of wider significance, notably the account of the rise of the Baptist New Connexion in Leicestershire. Thompson lived for many years in the house of Benjamin Stinton in Bury Street, London, and after Stinton's death with his widow. He moved with the family to Clapham, where he usually preached once a month, though he also assisted other ministers. He married late in life, but continued to live with his friend Mrs Stinton, to whose relations he was said to have left his substantial fortune, having no family of his own, and 'in whose vault at Bunhill-fields he desired to be buried' ('Monthly Repository', 283). He died on 4 June 1806 at Clapham. 


@@@@@


doc= 58943


Mary Augusta De Morgan (1850-1907), children's writer. The Burne-Jones, Morris, and De Morgan households were all now in west London, and there was much coming and going between them. Mary De Morgan, a small, abrupt but lovable figure, told fairy stories to the Morris and Burne-Jones children, which were then successfully published. Her first book of children's stories, 'On a Pincushion' (1877), was illustrated by her brother, who, typically, invented a special method for reproducing his drawings. Mary De Morgan died in Egypt in 1907. 


@@@@@


doc= 58947


Isherwood, Annie Cecilia Ramsbottom (1862-1906), Anglican nun and educationist, was born on 14 November 1862 at Hillingdon Lodge, Uxbridge, the youngest of six children of Captain Richard Ramsbottom-Isherwood (died 1874), an army officer, and his wife, Anna Clarendon Cox (died 1870) of Fairfield, New South Wales. She was always known as Cecile. Her mother died when she was eight and her father was killed in an accident when she was thirteen. She attended a boarding-school at Brighton, after which she lived with the family of one of her father's fellow officers and continued her education in lectures and classes. 
Entering by chance St Peter's Church, Eaton Square, in London, when she was sixteen, Cecile Isherwood heard a sermon by the vicar, G. H. Wilkinson (1833-1907), later primus of the Scottish Episcopal church, who was seeking missionaries. Deeply impressed by it, she was confirmed by him and devoted herself to social work in his parish. In 1883, on hearing the newly appointed bishop of Grahamstown, A. B. Webb (1839-1907), preach in the same church, she offered herself for service in his diocese, and was ordained deaconess. 
Grahamstown, in the eastern Cape, had been bitterly divided by a quarrel between the previous bishop and the dean. Bishop Webb wished to recruit women who would be rooted in the diocese and help him in a mission of reconciliation. Ultimately he hoped to form a sisterhood which would extend mission and educational work to people of all races. On the voyage out in 1883, from among the dozen women whom he had recruited, he singled out Cecile Isherwood to be their leader, although she was only twenty-one years old. In 1884 the Community of the Resurrection of Our Lord was established in Grahamstown with Sister Cecile as the first novice. In 1887 she professed and became mother superior, with Bishop Webb as warden. The community rapidly expanded and opened schools in Grahamstown, for both paying and poor girls, and a boarding-house for children of itinerant railway workers. In Port Elizabeth nursing staff were provided for the hospital and a school was established for coloured children; a school and industrial centre was also set up for African girls. Having been an orphan herself, Mother Cecile was horrified by the practice by which orphans were lodged in prisons and she lobbied in the hall of the Cape legislature until funds were provided for an orphanage. 
The most important work, however, was the establishment by the community of the Grahamstown Teaching College in 1894. Mother Cecile, unlike some of her more eager sisters, saw that it was even more important for the community to train teachers than to teach children themselves, and that this training in a local college, with a school attached, was likely to be much more effective than the preparation of girls as prospective teachers in Britain. Later she regarded the training of Dutch (Afrikaner) and British girls together as an important contribution to reconciliation after the South African War. 
Dr Muir, the Cape superintendent-general of education, a Scottish Presbyterian, was not predisposed to favour denominational education. Mother Cecile, however, won his support and that of the Grahamstown community by the appointment, despite the misgivings of some Anglicans, of nonconformist governors and by the admission of nonconformist ministers to instruct their co-religionists. She believed strongly in co-operation with the state authorities, but this required that government standards must be maintained. Thus she had to spend much of her time raising money for the purpose, and visiting Britain to do so, particularly when -- at Muir's request -- the training was extended from the primary to the secondary level. 
It was this unceasing effort, when her doctors had prescribed complete rest, which precipitated Mother Cecile's death at 14 Upper Hamilton Terrace, St John's Wood, London, after an operation for an internal growth, on 20 February 1906 at the age of forty-three. Her last message to her community, was 'Sparkle.... Don't let the fun go out of the place' ('Mother Cecile in South Africa', 92). She died so young that the two men who had inspired her spiritual pilgrimage, bishops Wilkinson and Webb, were present at her funeral in the church where it had started. She was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 24 February. She had been a remarkable institution builder, charming Joseph Chamberlain, the colonial secretary, and Dr L. S. Jameson, prime minister of the Cape, into financial support; but by her associates it was more for her spiritual leadership that she was remembered. She deliberately welcomed novices who would bring new kinds of gifts to the community, never trying to press them into a mould but allowing each personality to develop naturally. On the racial question she not only worked for reconciliation between British and Boers but also declared that the church could never do enough to make up for the great wrong which the white race had done to black people. 
Mother Cecile was tall and slender with brown eyes which her contemporaries remembered as both magnetic and twinkling. Revd E. J. Bodington, who succeeded Bishop Webb as warden, described her as having 'The finished manners of a woman of the world with just a touch of the kindness of a saint' ('Mother Cecile in South Africa', 143). She is commemorated in the calendar of the Anglican church in southern Africa. 


@@@@@


doc= 58948


Acton, Marion Jean Catherine Adams- (1846-1928), writer, was born Marion Hamilton on 21 June 1846, in Brodick, Isle of Arran, Scotland, the daughter of Edith Hamilton and an unidentified Scottish nobleman. Before the age of four she was adopted by George Edwards Hering (1805-1879), a landscape painter born in London of a German baronial family, and his wife, Catherine ('nee' Bromley), an artist. Her mother agreed to the adoption because it afforded her daughter better material and social circumstances. Henceforth known as Jeanie Hering, she moved to London and resided in St John's Wood, which was noted for its artistic community. She attended a day school in Finchley Road, London, from the age of six and finished her education with two years at school in Munster, Westphalia, Germany, between 1862 and 1864. 
Having modelled for many painters of the St John's Wood school and joined in the group's amateur performances, Hering initially wanted to become an actress, but her adoptive parents disapproved of the theatre as a career. She turned to writing, and four years after leaving school published 'Garry, a Holiday Story' (1868), a novel about a girl and her dog on holiday. A succession of other children's books followed, often drawing heavily on her own experiences: 'Golden Days' (1873) tells of life at a girls' boarding-school in Germany; 'Through the Mist' (1874) narrates the romances of twin young women from Brodick, where the Herings had a summer home; 'Elf' (1887) describes the early childhood of a Scottish girl. A clear moral or religious lesson distinguishes many of her stories, among them 'Truth will Out' (1873) and 'Honour is my Guide' (1886). She published over a dozen commercially successful novels between 1868 and 1894, many with George Routledge & Sons, a leading children's book publisher of the period, and she also wrote picture books, magazine stories, and plays. 
In 1874 Hering met John Adams-Acton (1830-1910), a prizewinning sculptor, and they married on 15 April 1875 at St Mark's Church, Hamilton Terrace, London. After visiting India for eight months, they settled in St John's Wood and spent summers at the family home in Brodick. They had four sons and three daughters. 
Through commissions and artistic friendships, Adams-Acton, as she became known, and her husband met many famous figures of the time, including William Gladstone, George Eliot, Robert Browning, and Cardinal Manning, and she became a noted hostess. Known also for her independent and sometimes impetuous personality, in 1887 she walked from London to Brodick -- a seven-week 500 mile journey -- with two nursemaids and her children, one of whom was pushed the entire way in a perambulator. A spirit of adventure, and perhaps a desire to gather raw material for her stories, inspired this journey to her birthplace. She had already written stories about the travels of perambulators, and she published her account of this journey as 'The Adventures of a Perambulator' in 1894. She was fascinated by spiritualism and the occult, and she often consulted astrologers, attended seances, and collected folk stories. In later life she began to write and dictate her reminiscences, though only sporadically. From these fragments A. M. W. Stirling created a posthumous memoir combining Adams-Acton's own words with third-person narrative, which was published as 'Victorian Sidelights' in 1954. Adams-Acton died on 10 October 1928 at her home, 99 Clifton Hill, St John's Wood, Middlesex, and was buried in Brodick. 


@@@@@


doc= 58958


Boston, Lucy Maria (1892-1990), writer, was born on 10 December 1892 at 8 Scarisbrick Street, Southport, Lancashire; she was the fifth of the six children of James Wood (died 1899), engineer and sometime mayor of Southport, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Garrett. She was educated at local schools in Southport and Arnside, and latterly at a private Quaker boarding-school in Sussex. In 1914 she entered Somerville College, Oxford, but she left after one year to undertake volunteer nursing during the First World War. After early experience at St Thomas's Hospital in London and Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, she worked at a military hospital at Houlgate, Normandy. On 21 September 1917 she married a distant cousin, (William) Harold Boston (1891-1969), with whom she had one son, Peter, born in 1918. They lived at Norton Lodge, Norton, Cheshire, near Harold Boston's work as a director of the family tannery. The marriage failed in 1935 and thereafter Lucy spent several years working as an artist in Italy and Austria until the threat of war forced her to return to England. In 1937 she rented a flat in Cambridge, and shortly afterwards she bought the twelfth-century manor at Hemingford Grey, near Huntingdon, a unique and extraordinary house to which she devoted the rest of her life and work. 
Lucy Boston found the manor in poor condition, with much of its original structure obscured by later Georgian additions, part of which had been destroyed by fire. Assisted by her son she spent several years in radical and painstaking restoration of the house, completing the work only after the outbreak of war. Over many years she remade the garden, which is distinguished for her topiary and collection of old roses. During the war she held regular concerts of classical music, played on her gramophone in the music room at the manor, to give respite and pleasure to RAF crews serving at nearby bases. 
Boston was already in her sixties when her first book, 'Yew Hall', a novel for adults, was published in 1954; as in almost all her later writing the manor is its setting and centrepiece. Later in 1954 her first children's book, 'The Children of Green Knowe', appeared and it proved to be the first of six books in which the manor is characterized as Green Knowe; collectively they form one of the outstanding achievements in modern children's literature. Most of the stories are time fantasies, in which the house's history is evoked and past and present occupants make contact with each other. An exception to this historical preoccupation is 'A Stranger at Green Knowe' (1961), widely regarded as her best book, which received the Library Association Carnegie medal for 1961. The tragic story of an escaped gorilla, based on Boston's indignation at the confinement of Guy the gorilla at London Zoo, it is an impassioned plea for freedom and respect for all wild, non-human creatures. The final book in the series, 'The Stones of Green Knowe' (1976), written after a gap of twelve years, is notably pessimistic in its verdict on contemporary environmental damage. Having started late in life she continued to write and publish well into her eighties. Her other books include stories for very young children, such as 'The Castle of Yew' (1965); two volumes of autobiography, 'Memory in a House' (1973) and 'Perverse and Foolish' (1979); and a volume of poems, 'Time is Undone' (1977). 
Lucy Boston was a woman of immense energy and creativity, which she retained into extreme old age. She had very striking dark eyes and large, strong, artisan's hands, which she used not only for vigorous gardening (she was scornful of those who could not use a spade properly) but for a series of delicate and exquisite patchworks, now carefully preserved. Outspoken, independent, and fearless, with fiercely held values and mordant wit, she was also generous and kind, and enjoyed showing complete strangers around the house and garden she loved. She died at the manor, following a stroke, on 25 May 1990; she was buried at the church of St Margaret of Antioch, Hemingford Abbots, on 1 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 58959


Briggs, Katharine Mary (1898-1980), writer and folklorist, was born on 8 November 1898 at 102 Fellows Road, Hampstead, eldest daughter of Ernest Edward Briggs (1866-1913) and his wife, Mary Cooper (1867-1956). Her father belonged to a wealthy Unitarian family in Yorkshire, engaged in mining, banking, and various industrial enterprises; he made an unconventional but happy marriage with a farmer's daughter. After a serious illness at sixteen he had given up a career in the family firm for the Slade School of Art, and become a distinguished landscape painter. When Katharine was twelve they moved from London to a beautiful house, Dalbeathie, built by Ernest above the River Tay near Dunkeld, Perthshire. It was filled with books and pictures, and a constant stream of guests, mostly artists and writers, came to stay. 
Katharine and her two sisters, Winifred and Elspeth, had an idyllic childhood, and she gained her love of folk-tales, local traditions, and storytelling from an early age, encouraged by her father. But he died when she was fourteen, and they were left somewhat isolated. Katharine went to school (Lansdowne House) in Edinburgh and then to Oxford to read English at Lady Margaret Hall, taking her degree in 1921. She returned to Dalbeathie to devote herself to her family, and the sisters worked at writing and art, Winifred producing some of their work on a small printing press. Katharine and Elspeth collected rare books on the seventeenth century, and wrote historical novels. They worked with Guides and Brownies, and Katharine became interested in story-telling, mimes, and plays for children, and invited Guide and Brownie leaders and others to the house for dramatic work. She developed a touring company called the Summer Players, rehearsing at Dalbeathie and giving performances in remote places far from theatres. Her own plays, along with ballads and folk-songs, were included in the repertory. In 1939 the family bought a house in the Cotswolds as a more accessible centre, but the outbreak of war changed everything. 
Evacuees came to Dalbeathie, which Winifred ran almost single-handed, while Elspeth trained as a draughtsman in London, and Katharine shocked her friends by joining the Women's Auxiliary Air Force in 1941 as an ordinary recruit. She worked as a nursing orderly, a great contrast to the privileged existence she had led hitherto, but she gained from contacts with a wider world, and made many friends. She attained the rank of lance air corporal, and as time went on she was able to organize plays and entertainments, write poems, and plan books. 
After the war she moved into the Barn House in Burford and set about making it habitable, while planning to do research in seventeenth-century literature at Oxford. She had become fascinated by the rich variety of fairy characters when working with Brownies, and had written a small book, 'The Personnel of Fairyland', published in 1953. Ethel Seaton, her sympathetic and inspiring supervisor, encouraged her to work on beliefs in the supernatural in seventeenth-century literature, and she achieved her doctorate in 1952. After her mother's death in 1956 Dalbeathie was sold, and Elspeth and Winifred moved to the Barn House. 
Once more they took up dramatic work, with memorable Shakespeare productions in their garden, and plays in Burford church; Katharine had now become a loyal member of the Church of England. She had support from Faith Spachman (later Sharp), a gifted musician; they tried to establish an arts centre, but had to be satisfied with the rebuilding of the parish hall. 
Katharine's work at Oxford resulted in two important books, 'The Anatomy of Puck: an Examination of Fairy Beliefs among Shakespeare's Contemporaries and Successors' (1959) and 'Pale Hecate's Team' (1961), on magic and witchcraft. She also published 'Hobberdy Dick' (1955), a delightful tale for children set in the Cotswolds in Tudor times with a household brownie as the main character, and 'Kate Crackernuts' (1963), a powerful and moving story of witchcraft based on a folk-tale, begun during the war. 'The Fairies in Tradition and Literature' (1967) dealt with recent fairy traditions, and included a list of fairy beings, as did the earlier 'Personnel of Fairyland'; out of these her enormously popular 'Dictionary of Fairies' (1976) developed. But for ten years she was working on a more ambitious project, a 'Dictionary of English Folktales', in four massive volumes; the manuscript was duly delivered to Routledge and Kegan Paul on the appointed day, and published in 1970-71. Katharine was elected to the council of the London Folklore Society in 1961, and was an extremely successful president from 1967 to 1970, doing much to rebuild the society at a crucial time in its history. 
Now, however, Katharine's life had become difficult. Two accidents left her seriously lame; Elspeth, to whom she was devoted, had died in 1961, and Winifred in 1966, and she could no longer manage alone. Then in 1975, when staying with a relative in Dover, she made a new friend in Katharine Law, and moved to St Margaret's Bay to live with her and Dr Carol Duff. She was nursed back to health and her remaining years were filled with happy activities. She made visits to America, where she was immensely popular, proved an excellent broadcaster, and published several popular books on folk-tales and fairy lore, while her work was translated into various languages including Japanese. Katharine was a woman of great charm, making friends everywhere and holding audiences enthralled by her story-telling. Her life was full and serene until her sudden death at her home, Southolme, Sea View Road, St Margaret's Bay, on 15 October 1980. Her ashes were buried at the church of St John the Baptist, Burford. Her portrait, painted by John Ward, was exhibited that year at the Royal Academy. The Folklore Society sponsors an annual Katharine Briggs lecture, while the Katharine Briggs Club, an interdisciplinary group, holds regular meetings and conferences. The Katharine Briggs Trust is now being set up to promote publication and research. 


@@@@@


doc= 58961


Brooke, (Leonard) Leslie (1862-1940), children's writer and illustrator, was born on 24 September 1862 in Birkenhead, near Liverpool, the second of the three children of Leonard Brooke (1825-1885), manufacturer, and his wife Rhoda (1829/30-1915), daughter of Henry Leslie Prentice of Caledon, co. Tyrone. His parents were both Irish. At Birkenhead School Leslie attracted the attention of the headmaster with his drawing. Severe typhoid contracted during a trip to Italy caused partial deafness that made Brooke decide to attend Birkenhead Art School (1880-82) instead of a university. He went on to study in London at St John's Wood Art School (1882-4) and the Royal Academy Art School (1884-8; Armitage medal 1888). Afterwards he began to illustrate books and book covers. When in 1891 he followed Walter Crane as illustrator of Mrs Molesworth's annual children's story-book (for Macmillan) his future blossomed. 
On 28 June 1894 Brooke married his cousin Sybil Diana (1870-1957), the daughter of the Revd Stopford Augustus Brooke. Leonard Stopford was born a year later. Brooke produced 'The Nursery Rhyme Book' for Warne, with an introduction and notes by Andrew Lang. It was released for Christmas 1897, 'illustrated by L. Leslie Brooke', the name he chose for publication. The illustrations are full of his trademarks, amusing details and visual puns, the puns often for adults as in 'This little piggy went to market' with humorous newspaper and book titles and a reference to Circe. Edward Lear's 'Nonsense Songs' followed. Published in two volumes, 'The Pelican Chorus' (1899) and 'The Jumblies' (1900), they were eventually combined in 1900. 
In September 1899 the family had moved to the village of Harwell near Oxford for Sybil's health. When Brooke decided to write and illustrate a picture-book, Sybil suggested Johnny Crow's garden, a game first begun by his father for his brother Henry and him and carried on by Brooke with his own son, Leonard: the book became a classic. In April 1903 a second son, Henry Brooke, was born, and 'Johnny Crow's Garden' (1903) was dedicated to Brooke's father and both boys. The book has humorous verses and details in each picture. Expressive faces and postures are augmented by subtle touches, again, with some designed to appeal to adults; on the Stork's 'Philosophic Talk' page, one of the books is 'Confuseus', while another is 'Ludovicus Carrollus de Jabberwockibus'. 
Brooke next turned to fairy-tales for Warne. 'The Story of the Three Little Pigs' and 'Tom Thumb' appeared separately, then together in 1904. In 1905 'The Golden Goose' and 'The Three Bears', with its puns ('Tom Bruin's school days', 'The bear truth'), followed; all four were published in one volume, 'Golden Goose Book' (1905), considered among his best. Meanwhile, 'Johnny Crow's Garden' gained in popularity, and using leftover original rhymes along with old favourites and new creations, Brooke produced a sequel, 'Johnny Crow's Party' (1907). Successful again, it assured his reputation. In 1908 the Brookes moved to a house in St John's Wood, London, where he continued to work. 
The First World War temporarily halted Brooke's output. His mother died in 1915, and on 25 September 1918 his son Leonard was killed in action. The family moved to Cumnor near Oxford in 1921, building a house. In 1920 another major Brooke work, illustrated nursery rhymes, was published as 'Ring o' Roses' (1922), containing his last illustrations of that decade. 

'A Roundabout Turn' by Robert H. Charles (1930) and 'Johnny Crow's New Party' (1935) were his last books. Brooke died on 1 May 1940 in the London home, 28 Hollycroft Avenue, Hampstead, to which he and Sybil Brooke had moved in 1933. 


@@@@@


doc= 58962


Broster, Dorothy Kathleen (1877-1950), novelist, was born at Grassendale Park, Garston, near Liverpool, on 2 September 1877, the eldest of the four children of Thomas Mawdsley Broster, shipowner, and his wife, Emily Kathleen, 'nee' Gething. She was educated privately until she was ten years old; she was then sent to a boarding-school near the coast in Lancashire. When her parents moved to Cheltenham she became, at the age of sixteen, a day girl at Cheltenham Ladies' College, where she was later followed by her two younger sisters, Phyllis and Barbara. She left school when she was nineteen with a scholarship to St Hilda's College, Oxford. She had a lively and intelligent mind and took second-class honours in modern history in 1900, but had to wait until 1920, when the first batch of Oxford women graduates at last were awarded their degrees; she then received her BA and MA simultaneously. At Cheltenham she made a number of friends, but she did not join very actively in the social life and was often seen as a somewhat aloof figure by her juniors. Later, at Oxford, she was known as a worrier, obsessed by the difficulties of daily living, the need to be ready for any and every emergency. Though she had a small circle of admiring friends, she was essentially a very private person and this trait continued throughout her life. 
After passing her final examinations, Broster spent the next thirteen years as secretary to the regius professor of modern history at Oxford. During this time she published some poems and her first short story but she seemed to find it difficult to do any sustained work; finally, with the help of one of her college friends, Miss G. W. Taylor, she completed a long historical novel, 'Chantemerle', about the rising in the Vendee after the French Revolution, and this was published in 1911. Two years later, in 1913, they published 'The Vision Splendid', which dealt with the Oxford Movement and the France of Louis Philippe. 
At the start of the First World War, Broster registered for war work and found herself, at the end of 1914, nursing wounded Belgian soldiers. She spoke French fairly fluently, so in April 1916 she went to France with the British Red Cross and was stationed in Yvetot, where she cared for wounded French soldiers in an Anglo-American hospital. At new year 1916 she was invalided home with an infection that affected her knee joints; she did not return to France, though she did some further nursing later, in England. 
The first novel Broster published as sole author was 'Sir Isumbras at the Ford'; this had been started before the war and was finally published in 1918, and reflects her interest in the sea. It was followed by what she thought of as her best book, 'The Yellow Poppy' (1920), and her favourite book, 'The Wounded Name' (1922). All her early books were set in France and fictionalized various periods of French history, illustrating her continued interest in her earlier academic studies. In 1923, however, she spent five weeks visiting Lochaber in the Scottish highlands and this inspired her to write the trilogy about the Jacobite rising of 1745, for which she is perhaps best remembered: 'The Flight of the Heron' (1925), 'The Gleam in the North' (1927), and 'The Dark Mile' (1929). Because she published as D. K. Broster, she was generally believed to be a man, and a Scotsman at that; she appeared to be somewhat flattered by this and never attempted to put the record straight. 
After the war Broster lived for many years in the south-east of England, sharing a house with a friend, Gertrude Schlich, daughter of Sir William Schlich. She continued to produce novels at regular intervals; her last, 'The Captain's Lady', was published in 1947. She died on 7 February 1950, of lung cancer, in Bexhill Hospital and was cremated on 13 February at Charing crematorium, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 58972


Giberne, Agnes (1845-1939), writer, was born on 19 November 1845 in Belgaum, India, the daughter of Major Charles Giberne (formerly de Giberne, of Huguenot descent) and Lydia Mary Wilson. After her father's retirement the family left India when she was an infant and lived in various European locations before settling in England. Educated at home, Giberne started writing stories as a young girl with her sisters. Her first known published work is a sentimental tale, 'A Visit to Aunt Agnes: for Very Little Children' (1864). Many of her earlier publications appeared under her initials 'A G', and are typical works of Victorian evangelical fiction emphasizing childish faults and the need for salvation. With 'The Curate's Home' (1869) Giberne started publishing under her own name. This was one of many historical and contemporary works for older girls, some of which were published by the Religious Tract Society; she also contributed two long serials to the 'Girl's Own Paper' (1882, 1899). 
Alongside her evangelistic and didactic fiction, and some devotional works, Giberne also wrote several highly regarded, often reprinted scientific textbooks for children on astronomy and geology. 'Sun, Moon and Stars' (1879) included a foreword by Charles Pritchard, Oxford professor of astronomy. Giberne's other main work was 'A Lady of England' (1895), a standard biography of Charlotte Maria Tucker, another Victorian children's writer. Most of Giberne's work appeared between 1870 and 1910, though she continued to publish new fiction into the late 1920s. 
Giberne remained unmarried, staying in her father's household until into her fifties, and in later life lived in Eastbourne. She was of independent means, and her writing arose from her religious, historical, and scientific interests rather than the necessity of earning a living. Giberne was a minor but prolific and versatile author whose variety of writing interests resulted in over a hundred books, and a sometimes surprising juxtaposition of titles. She died at 16 Motcombe Road, Eastbourne, on 20 August 1939. 


@@@@@


doc= 58973


Graham, Eleanor (1896-1984), publisher and children's writer, was born at 18 Grosvenor Park Road, Walthamstow, Essex, on 9 January 1896, the youngest child of Peter Anderson Graham (died 1925), a reporter for the 'Edinburgh Courant' and, after 1900, editor of 'Country Life', and his wife, Jane, 'nee' McLeod (died 1926?), who had been the librarian of a private lending library in Edinburgh. P. Anderson Graham was one of '[W. E.] Henley's young men' in the 1890s, the literary set that included Kenneth Grahame, whose biography Eleanor later wrote. When she was six her parents separated, which upset her deeply. She was very close to her Scottish grandmother, whose country ways she captured in her semi-autobiographical book, 'Head O'Mey' (1947). 
Eleanor Graham was educated at Chingford high school in Essex, at the North London Collegiate School for Girls, and at the London School of Medicine. She decided against a career in medicine, and left the school in 1916. She joined Lady Muriel Paget's mission to Czechoslovakia in the early 1920s, travelling widely to distribute aid in the countryside until she caught typhoid fever and had to return home. She settled in London, attending poetry readings at the Poetry Bookshop, where for a penny she heard Yeats read 'Innisfree'. Although she published her first children's book in this period, she never made her living by writing. In 1927 she was hired by the Bumpus Bookshop in Oxford Street to run its new children's room. She confided to her employer that she knew nothing of children's books and received the comforting reply that no one else did either. 
Very little critical or scholarly attention was paid to children's books before the 1930s, much rubbish was sold for children, and the good that came their way did so unheralded and often by chance. Graham was one of the first to see that a critical apparatus was needed for the evaluation of children's books and, as head of the respected Bumpus children's room, she was in an ideal position to make good the deficiency. During the late 1920s the first children's rooms in public libraries were established and Graham learned a great deal from watching children and librarians select books. She was convinced that children deserved books of the highest quality, and was ahead of her time in believing that any child was capable of responding to great writing, no matter how underprivileged his or her background. The period was a golden age for children's fiction but Graham felt the need for improvement in non-fiction for children, especially in science and history. She lamented that so little poetry was published for children, and raided the Bumpus stockroom for suitable collections. She was responsible for introducing Walter de la Mare, previously seen as an adult writer, to children. She worked at Bumpus until 1931 and took a proper pride in the influence she exercised through the job. She was not in awe of authors, and once advised Arthur Ransome that his new book 'Swallows and Amazons' would sell better if he gave it some illustrations. He took her advice. 
In the 1930s Graham worked as a children's book editor for William Heinemann and for Methuen, and briefly as the librarian for a private lending library that operated from a garage in Kensington, where she continued to observe children's reading habits. She reviewed children's books for the 'Sunday Times', the 'Bookman', and later for the new 'Junior Bookshelf'. In 1938 she published her best-known book, 'The Children who Lived in a Barn'. It was a worthy attempt to inject a little reality into the implausible holiday story genre spawned by Ransome's imitators, and as such is of interest more as a document than as a work of fiction. 
In 1940 Graham, who had taken a wartime job with the Board of Trade, was summoned by Allen Lane, publisher of the new Penguin Books, to his country house to discuss a new series for children. She arrived late and they spoke until two o'clock in the morning; Lane made her the editor of his new children's paperback series, Puffin Books, a position she held until her retirement in 1961. She was determined that the Puffin imprint should always signify quality and that it should not confine itself to well-established children's classics but should seek out modern classics. Despite the paper shortage and booksellers' doubt about the cheap new series, Puffin achieved a list of thirty-two titles by 1946, the first being Barbara Euphan Todd's 'Worzel Gummidge'. The series was a huge success and contributed greatly to children's literature, first by providing an affordable format for high-quality children's books, and secondly by the work it commissioned: Roger Lancelyn Green's 'King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table' (1953), for example, or Graham's own anthology, 'A Puffin Book of Verse' (1953). The latter, drawing heavily on Graham's favourite poet Robert Herrick, reflected her interest in putting into children's hands poetry originally written for adults. She addressed the lack of historical writing for children, starting the 'Story Biography' series for Methuen and contributing to it 'The Story of Charles Dickens' (1952). 
Eleanor Graham retired from Puffin in 1961. She had always worked from her London flat, and now she moved to Loughton, a country village, but she kept an approving eye on Kaye Webb, her young successor at Puffin. Children's literature entered a period of rapid change in the 1960s, and the book list Graham had built up was beginning to look a little fusty. The 1960s and 1970s put an end to the popularity of many of the titles Graham had selected, but they also saw the rise of young authors to whom she had given their first commissions, such as the artist Brian Wildsmith, who had illustrated Graham's 'The Story of Jesus' (1960). She continued to review children's books and remained a respected authority on them for the rest of her life. In 1973 she received the Children's Book Circle Eleanor Farjeon award for services to children's literature. She died at Hereford Lodge, Hereford Road, Westminster, London, on 8 March 1984. 
Eleanor Graham was a soft-spoken woman whose wide-apart shining eyes gave her a childlike appearance. There was nothing naive, however, about her critical faculties. She helped to elevate children's writing to a respected genre of English literature and assisted the numerous talented authors who emerged after about 1930 both as a publisher, by making their work available to the widest possible audience, and as a reviewer, by holding them accountable. Children, to her, were readers to be treated with the greatest respect, for them 'nothing but the best is good enough' (Clark, 91). 


@@@@@


doc= 58974


Green, Evelyn Ward Everett- (1856-1932), writer, was born on 17 November 1856 at 7 Upper Gower Street, London, the second of the three surviving daughters of George Pycock Green ('c'.1811-1893), portrait and landscape artist, and his wife, Mary Anne Everett Green, nee Wood (1818-1895), historian; she had also one older brother. She was baptized at Great Queen Street Wesleyan Methodist Chapel on 22 February 1857 as Eveline; later she adopted the spelling Evelyn and, like the rest of her family, the additional surname Everett. She was educated at home until the age of twelve, then for three years attended Mrs Bolton's Gower Street preparatory school. From her earliest childhood she invented stories to tell her sisters, and while at school wrote a historical tale about Lady Jane Grey. In 1872-3 she went to Bedford College, London, with a Reid scholarship, but found the curriculum undemanding, and, released from her mother's earlier restrictions on her reading, fell into the delights of fiction as supplied by Mudie's circulating library. She also had time to write her first novel, which failed to find a publisher. After her year at Bedford she studied at the London Academy of Music, and in addition to practising several hours a day, continued to write. At this time she hoped to go to India to keep house for her brother, an engineer, but his death in 1876 ended that scheme and she threw herself instead into 'good works' -- district visiting, Sunday and night school teaching, and eventually hospital nursing, possibly at St George's Hospital. 
In 1880 Everett-Green's first book, 'Tom Tempest's Victory', was published under the pseudonym H. F. E., and in the following two years four other books appeared. Finding time to write amid the pressures of home life was difficult, and London winters did not suit her health, but a friend, Catherine Mainwaring Sladen (1845-1943), whose family home had recently been broken up, suggested that she come to live with her in the country. From 1883 the two lived together, possibly initially in Somerset, and from the early 1890s in Surrey, at Albury near Guildford (first at Vale Cottage and later at Albury House). In 1911 they went abroad, eventually settling on Madeira, though during the First World War they lived at Battramsley House near Lymington, Hampshire. Everett-Green came to England every year, visiting her sister Gertrude, wife of James Gow, and doing business with her publishers. 
Everett-Green's works are more remarkable for their number -- about 350 -- and their variety than their content. At first she wrote principally for children and boys, dispensing the piety inculcated by her Methodist upbringing, but she soon turned to the books for slightly older girls for which she is now best remembered, typically taking a houseful of girls and reviewing their development from the schoolroom to adulthood. Careers are mentioned without disapproval, but marriage was the inevitable ending. Between 1890 and 1909 she produced some fifty historical tales, occasionally making use of her mother's work and ranging widely through medieval and modern history. After two early three-volume novels she left adult fiction alone for nearly twenty years, returning to it shortly before her move abroad; after that romantic fiction gradually became her sole genre. In 1909 she adopted the pseudonym Cecil Adair for some of her fiction, and these books, remarkable for their chaste sensationalism, enjoyed a certain success. She had earlier sometimes used the pseudonyms E. (or Evelyn) Ward, and Evelyn Dare, and occasionally collaborated with Louisa Bedford and Emma and Beatrice Marshall. 
Everett-Green died at her home, Quinta Pico de Sao Joao, Funchal, Madeira, on 23 April 1932. Although her books were sufficiently popular in their own day to bring her in an adequate income, they lack real distinction, and are now read, if at all, solely for the light they cast on their social background. That she wrote no series or sequels also told against her continuing popularity, and even before her death her girls' books had become the victims of changing times. 


@@@@@


doc= 58975


Fowler, Ellen Thorneycroft (1860-1929), novelist, was born at Summerfield, Racecourse, Chapel Ash, Wolverhampton, Staffordshire, on 9 April 1860, the elder daughter of Henry Hartley Fowler, first Viscount Wolverhampton (1830-1911), and his wife, Ellen (1830-1911), youngest daughter of George Benjamin Thorneycroft. Her sister, Edith Henrietta Hamilton ['see below'], was also a writer. Although the household was strictly Methodist, Ellen Fowler was a member of the Church of England from childhood. She was educated at home for the most part, but at the age of seventeen attended Laleham School, Middlesex, for about one year. Until her marriage on 16 April 1903 to Alfred Laurence Felkin (1856-1942), an inspector of schools, she lived at home with her parents at Woodthorne, Wolverhampton. 
Ellen Fowler's first publication, 'Songs and Sonnets' (1888), was followed by 'Verses, Grave and Gay' (1891), and 'Verses, Wise or Otherwise' (1895). In 1898 she won public commendation with her novel 'Concerning Isabel Carnaby'. This was autobiographical in origin, as it dealt with 'the contrast between Methodist domesticity and high London society' (Sutherland, 231). The novel was noticed by William Robertson Nicoll, who encouraged her to devote herself to novel writing. Her best-known books followed one another in quick succession: 'A Double Thread' (1899), 'The Farringdons' (1900), 'Fuel of Fire' (1902), 'Place and Power' (1903), and 'Kate of Kate Hall' (1904), the last-named a romance written in collaboration with her husband. 
Ellen Fowler was seen as a brilliant and witty conversationalist. As a novelist she was regarded as a faithful chronicler of simple society; her novels are best remembered for their lively dialogue. Her place in English fiction might have been higher had the construction of her novels been more vigorous, and their range less narrow. Although one review commented that she neglected to address important contemporary issues such as women's suffrage in her books ('the outlook of today, though hinted at, does not intrude'; 'TLS', 15 March 1923, 178), she earned something of a feminist reputation from two of her later novels. 'Miss Fallowfield's Fortune' (1908) deals with the lot of single women, and 'Her Ladyship's Conscience' (1913) with an unconventional relationship between an older man and younger woman. Her last novel was 'Signs and Wonders' (1926). She was a member of the Writers' Club and the Women's Athenaeum Club, and a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. 
After her marriage Ellen Fowler lived at Eltham, Kent, until 1916, when she moved to Bournemouth. During her later years failing health curtailed her writing. She died on 22 June 1929 at her home, Mershire Lodge, Marlborough Road, Bournemouth, survived only by her husband, as their marriage had been childless. 
Ellen Fowler's sister Edith Henrietta Hamilton (1865-1944), novelist, was born at Summerfield, Racecourse, Chapel Ash, Wolverhampton, on 16 February 1865. On 23 June 1903 she married William Robert Hamilton (1869-1954), a Church of England clergyman, at All Saints' Church, Knightsbridge, London. They had two sons: Gavin Robert Fowler Hamilton ('b'. 1905) and Henry Fowler New Hamilton ('b'. 1908). Edith's first publications were sharply amusing children's books, including 'The Young Pretenders' (1895), illustrated by Philip Burne-Jones, and 'The Professor's Children' (1897). Less well known than her sister, her adult novels also deal with the romantic problems of high-minded and politically active Christian members of the upper class. Her works in this vein include 'For Richer for Poorer' (1905) and 'Patricia' (1915). 'As in her sister's novels, the combination of snobbishness and spirituality is achieved with considerable polish' (Kemp and others, 138). She also wrote a biography of her father (1912). Edith Henrietta Hamilton died on 18 November 1944 and was survived by her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 58982


Knowles, Mabel Winifred (1875-1949), popular writer and church worker, was born at Ribblesdene, Leigham Court Road, Streatham, London, on 1 January 1875, the second daughter of William Knowles, a London merchant banker, and his wife, Emma Letitia Paxton. She was educated at home, and she remained single throughout her life. 
Knowles's first books were essentially religious and rather old-fashioned. 'Life's Object' (1899), a short volume evidently intended as a confirmation gift, recommended that girls exercise influence at home and avoid both athletics and the reading of 'foolish mawkish love stories'. 'In the Shadows' (1900) had consoling thoughts for mourners, and early children's books such as 'Mollie's Adventures' (1903) imitated the 'city arab' tales of the 1860s and 1870s. 
During the next decade, however, Knowles became skilled in two genres that proved widely popular with girls and women, eventually publishing more than 200 books as well as stories for 'Cassell's Family Magazine', 'Lady's Realm', 'Pall Mall Magazine', and other periodicals. Under the pen-name May Wynne she became known as a writer of safe but thrilling historical romances. Most of them featured young women on their own in some exciting era when they could become servants of an endangered queen. As in a 1917 title, 'A Spy for Napoleon', the heroine often encountered 'real' characters from history (especially Charles Stuart or Henri of Navarre). The story might eventually be resolved in orthodox Christian domesticity -- but not until after several hundred pages of intrigue and melodrama. 
May Wynne also produced more than a hundred children's books. The most interesting gave contemporary girls their own opportunities for peril and bravery. 'An English Girl in Serbia' (1916), among others, used the First World War as a setting. Dozens of school and guide adventures also emphasized courage. In 'Peggy's First Term' (1922), for example, a Canadian girl in an English school wins friends through an act of heroism, and in 'Lost in the Jungle' (1921) two shipwrecked daughters of an officer save themselves and a boy companion with the skills they have learned as girl guides. 
Between 1910 and 1913, before perfecting the formulas that made May Wynne popular, Knowles published under the name Lester Lurgan six science-fiction or detective novels, including 'Bohemian Blood' (1910) and 'A Message from Mars' (1912). In addition, some of her historical novels were made into films. 
For the last twenty-five years of her life, while continuing to write popular fiction, Mabel Knowles was in charge of the St Luke's Mission Church in London's Victoria Docks and lived nearby at Tyne House, 93 Maplin Road. She died of heart failure at 124 Butchers Road, Victoria Docks, London, on 29 November 1949 while preparing to lead a mission service for women. 


@@@@@


doc= 58983


Lancaster, William Joseph Cosens (1843-1922), children's writer, was born on 23 May 1843 at Concord Place, Weymouth, Dorset (most references except his birth certificate give his date of birth as 1851). He was the oldest son of Captain William Lancaster, a master mariner, and Anne, 'nee' Cosens. He was educated at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, where he won a number of prizes and joined the Royal Navy as a midshipman, aged fifteen. Defective eyesight meant that Lancaster had to abandon a career in the navy; instead, he qualified as a civil engineer. He specialized in sea and harbour work and hydrology. In this capacity he travelled widely and in the course of his work visited the Baltic and the Mediterranean, the East and West Indies, and the coasts of Africa. At one stage in his career he lived for eight years in Natal. In York, on 10 July 1878, he married Kezia Hannah Rice Oxley ('b'. 1850/51), the daughter of George Oxley, a provisions dealer. They reportedly had one son although little else is known of Lancaster's private life, and his death was registered by a nephew, Harold G. Smellie. 
Lancaster began to write his sea stories for boys in 1878 and continued to do so for the next forty years, publishing over fifty books for boys altogether. He always wrote under the pseudonym Harry Collingwood (the name chosen out of admiration for Vice-Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood, Nelson's second-in-command at Trafalgar). Lancaster's books were 'widely appreciated by many thousands of young readers' ('The Times', 17 June 1922). His travels as a civil engineer in sea and harbour work provided him with authentic background material for his stories. Although most of his boys' stories were about the sea, he also wrote several about flying. His first book was 'The Secret of the Sands' (1879), which was followed over the years by such titles as 'Voyage of the 'Aurora'' (1885), 'The Rover's Secret' (1888), 'The Pirate Slaver' (1895), 'An Ocean Chase' (1898), 'With Airship and Submarine' (1907), and 'A Middy of the Slave Squadron' (1910). 
Lancaster was a keen sportsman and enjoyed swimming, shooting, riding, and cycling. Like his more famous contemporary, G. A. Henty, he was also a keen yachtsman and racer as well as a yacht designer. His other hobbies included watercolour painting, photography, and music. He died at 40 Liverpool Road, Chester, on 10 June 1922 and was buried in the city on the 15th; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 58988


Montgomery, Lucy Maud (1874-1942), novelist and diarist, was born on 30 November 1874 in Clifton, Prince Edward Island, Canada, the only child of Hugh John Montgomery (1841-1900), shopkeeper and land agent, and Clara Woolner, 'nee' Macneill (1853-1876). After her mother's early death from tuberculosis, the child Maud was placed in the care of her maternal grandparents, while her father moved west, eventually remarrying, settling, and raising a second family in Alberta. Life in her grandparents' farmhouse at Cavendish, Prince Edward Island, was quiet, but Montgomery was part of an extended family with a tradition of story-telling. She learned and practised the craft during visits to her Montgomery grandparents and her aunt Annie Macneill Campbell's lively family. Montgomery was especially close to her youngest Campbell cousin, Frederica; Frede's death in 1919 ended Montgomery's closest relationship. 
Montgomery was educated in the local one-room school; when nine she began to write poetry and to keep a diary. Her first published poems and stories appeared in 1890-91, a year she spent in Alberta with her father's second family. After a teacher-training course in Charlottetown in 1892-3, she taught in a rural school, continuing to write and publish her stories. She studied for one year at Dalhousie University in 1895-6, but returned to teaching until needed upon her grandfather's death in 1898 to look after her grandmother. The young schoolteacher had rejected two possible partners, a Presbyterian minister who had been suitable and a farmer to whom she had been passionately attracted. Neither offered her the possibilities she longed for, but life with her grandmother was even narrower. The romantic fiction she was writing and selling to Canadian and American magazines was her major occupation: among her output were stories she liked enough to rework into later fiction. Increasingly confident in her talent and professionalism, and supported by her closeness to Frede and by the interest of another Presbyterian minister, Ewen Macdonald (1870-1943), she wrote her first novel, 'Anne of Green Gables'. Published in 1908, the book was a critical and commercial success, and was followed by a sequel as well as a continuing stream of stories and poems. On her grandmother's death in 1911 Montgomery married Macdonald, to whom she had been engaged for five years, and joined him in Leaskdale, Ontario, where he was minister. 
For more than thirty years Montgomery was both a successful and admired writer and a minister's wife. She wrote at the dining-room table in the mornings, and spent her afternoons and evenings in such activities as choir practice, congregational entertaining, and Red Cross war work. The couple had two sons, Chester in 1912 and Stuart in 1915. A stillbirth in 1914, the near-death of Frede in 1915, and the impact of the First World War distressed her, but she continued to write, bringing out more Anne books and a volume of poetry. 'The Alpine Path' (1917), an autobiographical essay, asserted her place as a highly disciplined and professional writer. Annual visits to her beloved Prince Edward Island maintained an essential link. Unhappily, a series of lawsuits with her first publisher over royalties and an unauthorized collection of stories began in 1918, and the dispute was not finished until 1928. More devastating were Frede's death and the first of her husband's series of mental breakdowns, the full extent of which she managed to conceal from his parishioners. Throughout the period between the wars Montgomery's life was a public success and a private struggle, the duality echoed in her two main writing projects, the fiction and the journal. The one was deft, amusing, and positive, though with a strong subversive streak and a sure knowledge of both the originality and the commonality of women's lives. The other was also crafted and edited, constructing and controlling the shadow side of her life, critical, despairing, painful. It was a side that shocked those who knew the public or literary woman when the first journal selections were published in 1985. She published her last novel in 1939, and worked on another collection of stories in 1940, but the now-fragmentary journals recorded her loss of hope for herself, her family, and for a world once again sunk in international war. Her physical and mental decline ended with her death in Toronto on 24 April 1942. She was buried in Cavendish, Prince Edward Island, on 29 April. 
Montgomery's fictions, both novelistic and autobiographical, have increasingly drawn serious critical attention, while continuing to be popular. Widely read, not only in Canada, her books have been turned into film and television, as well as into a tourist industry. Translated into a dozen languages, her novels are particularly popular in Poland and Japan. Their strong appeal derives in part from their celebration of the natural beauty of Prince Edward Island, but more especially from their celebration of women's lives, and the quiet challenge to the authority of the structures within which those lives are lived. 


@@@@@


doc= 58989


Sanders, Ruth Vernon Manning- (1888-1988), writer and folklorist, was born on 21 August 1888 in Swansea, the youngest of three daughters of John Edmondson Manning (1848-1910), Unitarian minister, and his wife. Brought up in a book-loving, play-acting household and moving to Sheffield, then to Manchester, Ruth won a Shakespeare scholarship to Manchester University, where she hoped to gain a degree in English literature and become an actress. A serious illness, however, ended her studies at the university, and a period of convalescence and travel then followed. 
Ruth met George Rawlings Sanders (1884/5-1952), then a painter, in Devon. The pair married in Totnes on 22 May 1911, joined their surnames with a hyphen, and took to the road together -- literally: in a horse-drawn caravan -- and spent two exciting, unorthodox, and thoroughly enjoyable years travelling with the well-known tenting circus known as Count Rosaire's, owned by Freddie Ross. A photograph shows Ruth in boots and breeches, whip in hand, seated on the knee of a crouching elephant -- which she apparently rode through the streets as part of the circus parade. With the birth of their daughter Joan in 1913 the circus period ended, and more conventional quarters were established in Bude, Cornwall. The caravanning influence must have persisted, however, because between 1914 and 1927 the Manning-Sanders household (augmented by a son, David, born in 1915) lived in Newlyn (Cornwall), Midhurst (Sussex), Catchal (Cornwall), Grasse (near Cannes), Catchal again, and Sennen Cove. 
In 1919 Ruth's first work was published: 'The Pedlar, and other Poems'. Two years later she submitted a narrative poem, 'Karn', to the Hogarth Press in hopes of publication. Virginia Woolf was enthusiastic: 'She sent a long poem, which seems to have a good deal of merit, and we are going to bring it out this Spring... its rather exciting and altogether most unexpected' ('Letters', 2.495). By early 1922 the publishing process was well under way: 'We are... busy printing a new long poem by a short fat poetess, who came to correct her proofs the other day... She was very nice, and very modest' (ibid., 2.502). To herself (in her diary, 6 February 1922) Woolf described the author: 'Mrs Manning-Sanders is a bob haired, wide mouthed woman, dressed in a velvet dressing gown, plump, sandy-haired with canine brown eyes far apart. We liked her' ('Diary', 2.160). 

'Karn' did not sell, nor did its successors 'Martha Wish-You-Ill' (1926) and 'The City' (1927) -- though the latter was awarded the Blindman international poetry prize. Ruth Manning-Sanders turned her hand to prose with the novel 'The Twelve Saints' (1925); this was followed by more fiction for adults and for children, a biography of Hans Andersen, a book about Devon and Cornwall, and 'The English Circus' (1952). This title and her children's books 'Circus Boy' and 'Luke's Circus' drew upon her earlier experience of life with Count Rosaire's travelling troupe -- and Ruth Manning-Sanders is credited in the 'Oxford English Dictionary' with the earliest use of the term 'strong woman', which is quoted from 'The English Circus'. 
George, confined to a wheelchair as the result of illness, abandoned painting for writing, and produced two or three novels of his own during the thirties. He died after a road accident in 1952, and it was in the aftermath of her bereavement that Ruth Manning-Sanders, in her late sixties, found her literary metier in the telling or retelling of folk-tales and legends for children. 'Peter and the Piskies: Cornish Folk and Fairy Tales', illustrated by Raymond Briggs, which happily united the author's lifelong interest in folklore and her abiding love for her adopted county, was published by Oxford University Press in 1958 and was an immense success. This was followed by the popular series of works entitled 'A Book of...', which was brought out by Methuen in twenty-two volumes between 1962 ('A Book of Giants') and 1984 ('A Book of Magic Horses'). The timeless quality of her subject matter meant that the fact that the author was now in her nineties did not detract from her appeal to the children of the 1980s; the uncluttered style of her vigorous narrative and her lack of sentimentality were as appropriate to that decade as they had been when she first became a best-seller in the early fifties. 
Manning-Sanders continued to work with the aid of her daughter Joan, who shared her house in Penzance, until 1988, when her last book, 'A Cauldron of Witches', was published six months before her 100th birthday. On 12 October 1988, two months after her birthday, this hard-working and professional writer died at Penzance, with more than ninety titles to her credit. 


@@@@@


doc= 58992


Meynell, Laurence Walter (1899-1989), author, was born at Grasmere, Oaks Crescent, Wolverhampton, Staffordshire, on 9 August 1899, the youngest son of Herbert Meynell, chairman of a brass-founding company, and his wife, Agnes Mary Sollom. The family was Roman Catholic, and Meynell was educated at St Edmund's College, Old Hall, Ware, Hertfordshire. During the First World War he served in the Honourable Artillery Company. Upon discharge he declined to enter the family business and was for a time an articled pupil in a land agency, an estate agent, and a schoolmaster, before settling on a career as a professional writer. He travelled a great deal throughout the 1920s, in Europe and on foot through Britain. While living in a garret in Paris he wrote his first novel, 'Mockbeggar' (1924). A satire on the 'bright young things' of the 1920s, it won the Harrap fiction prize. On 22 September 1932 he married a fellow writer, Shirley Ruth Darbyshire (1903-1955), daughter of Taylor Darbyshire, a journalist. They had one daughter. He served in the Royal Air Force during the Second World War and was mentioned in dispatches. 
Laurence Meynell was a prolific writer in a variety of genres. He wrote stories for girls, using the pseudonym Valerie Baxter, historical biographies which reflected his interest in engineering and craftsmanship, including one on Brunel, books on cricket, novels, career stories for children, and, most notably, mystery novels and books for boys. As A. Stephen Tring, he earned himself a modest place in literary history with his first children's book, 'The Old Gang' (1947), which broke free of the stilted language and archaic boarding-school setting typical of school stories of the time. With its brisk, colloquial dialogue and theme of rivalry between pupils at grammar and secondary modern schools, it set a new standard for school stories. Although not a great book (Meynell's social attitudes and contemporary schoolboy slang have dated it), it was both readable and firmly within the experience of the ordinary boy. The book was recognized by contemporary critics as a welcome innovation. One critic said of it, 'if the moribund boy's story is to recover its vitality a transfusion of Stephen Tring is our best hope' (Trease, 112). Meynell also wrote a series of books about a young boy named Barry Briggs, who at the beginning of the first story is about to sit the eleven-plus exam, which too was distinguished for its realistic characters and dialogue. 
Meynell had written a number of 'Ruritanian adventure stories' in his early days, but he developed as a serious mystery writer late in his career ('The Times'). His most memorable creation in this genre was the private eye Hooky Hefferman, the genial, clubbable 'man of the bars' (Pederson, 748). Meynell's characteristic style was good-natured and civilized, reflecting traits that friends recognized in the man himself. His writing, even in his hard-boiled detective novels, reflected his affection for civility and good manners. 
After the death of his first wife in 1955, Meynell married on 26 September 1956 the actress Joan Belfrage (1903/4-1986), whose previous marriage had been dissolved; she was the daughter of Francis Joseph Henley, a major in the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire light infantry. Between 1955 and 1957 Meynell edited the series 'Men of the Counties' for the Bodley Head and from 1958 to 1960 was literary editor of 'Time and Tide' in the difficult period following the death of Lady Rhondda. He was a devotee of the works of Samuel Johnson and served for a time as president of the Johnson Society. In his 'Who's Who' entry he listed his recreations as 'walking [and] trying to write a play'. His publications included one play among over 150 other books. Meynell died at 14 New Church Road, Hove, Sussex, on 14 April 1989. 
The traits that made Meynell's books for children accessible in the 1940s and 1950s -- their colloquial language and topical situations -- have caused them to date. But he will be remembered as one of the first, if not the greatest, exponents of the lively, realistic, and topical children's story that came to dominate the literature of the late twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 58995


Power, Rhoda Dolores Le Poer (1890-1957), broadcaster and children's writer, was born on 29 May 1890 at Parkdale, Dunham Massey, Altrincham, Cheshire, the second of the three daughters of Philip Ernest Le Poer Power ('b'. 1860), stockbroker, of Altrincham, Cheshire, and his wife, Mabel Grindlay Clegg (1866-1903). She was the sister of the historian Eileen Power (1889-1940) and of Beryl Power (1891-1974). The family came originally from Waterford, Ireland, but there is no evidence that it was connected to the Le Poer family of Waterford. In 1891 her father was sent to prison for five years for forgery, and was declared bankrupt, and was imprisoned again in 1905 for another five years. Rhoda did not see her father again after 1891. The family moved to London, and then Bournemouth, and in 1899 went to Switzerland, where her mother was treated for tuberculosis. After their mother's death, Rhoda and her sisters moved to Oxford with their maternal grandfather, and were educated at Oxford High School for Girls. She studied languages and political economy at St Andrews University from 1911 to 1913, and won a distinction in economic history. After leaving university, she taught for a year in the United States, and in 1916 went to Russia as governess to the daughter of a businessman in Rostov-on-Don. In 'Under Cossack and Bolshevik' (1919) she described her experiences there during the Russian Revolution, when Rostov, a Cossack town, was attacked by Bolshevik forces. After the war she worked as a freelance journalist, lived in Palestine for a time, and wrote travel guides. 
In the mid-1920s Rhoda and Eileen Power started a series of history books for children. The first of these, 'Boys and Girls in History' (1926), was an attempt to illustrate life in England through the lives of children, based on contemporary accounts. Other books written together included 'Twenty Centuries of Travel' (1926) and 'Cities and their Stories' (1927). In the 1930s she continued to write children's histories on her own, including 'Great People of the Past' (1932) and 'The Kingsway Histories for Juniors' (1937). 
Rhoda Power's career with the BBC began in 1927, at the time of the BBC inquiry into the value of broadcast lessons for schools, when she was asked by Mary Somerville to give six talks, 'Boys and girls of other days'. She worked on a freelance basis until July 1937, when she was appointed as a part-time assistant and scriptwriter in the school broadcasting department. Her contribution to developing school history broadcasting was the idea of the illustrated history lesson, augmenting the talk with sound effects, music of the period, and dialogue, and introducing the dramatic interlude. While Eileen checked the programmes for historical accuracy, Rhoda did a great deal of research herself, especially for the interludes: as she pointed out, it was a struggle to keep up to date as her 'special subject' was 4000 BC to the present day. She preferred to do the reading first, and then get her ideas for the broadcasts, and her sources included contemporary accounts wherever possible. She wanted to make history come to life, determined that it should no longer be regarded as the 'dry bones of the past', and she wanted to show children that history was the story of human life, and not just facts and events. She shared with Eileen a belief in the importance of teaching world history, and her 'World History' series, started in 1932, was one of her most successful. She became a passionate advocate of school broadcasting, travelling round the country talking at teacher training colleges, visiting schools, talking to teachers and children. She regarded school broadcasting as a co-operative venture, working with teachers, making suggestions for how to use her lessons, wanting to relate her programmes to the work done in the classroom, to complement the work of the teacher, and not to replace it. 
Rhoda Power became a full-time member of the school broadcasting department with the outbreak of war in 1939, and moved to Bristol with the department in 1940. As well as writing scripts for the 'British History' and 'World History' series, she developed 'How Things Began' and 'If You were Chinese': this latter was prepared in close consultation with the Chinese community in England. She also published 'Ten Minute Tales' (1943) and 'The American Twins of the Revolution' (1943) in the twins series started by Lucy Fitch Perkins. By the end of the war she was exhausted -- she estimated that she had written 340 scripts between 1939 and 1946 -- and she was also frustrated at the lack of time to browse and try out new ideas, feeling her technique had become stereotyped. After a year off from 1946 to 1947, travelling in South and North America, she arranged to have three months' unpaid leave every year. 
Highly regarded by historians and educationists such as H. A. L. Fisher and R. H. Tawney for her contribution to the teaching of history, Rhoda Power was appointed MBE in 1950. Although she suffered from chronic deafness, which got worse after an unsuccessful operation in America in 1947, she continued to write scripts and develop new series, while publishing books based on her broadcasts, including 'We Were There' (1955), stories told by imaginary eye-witnesses. She also contributed to children's television programmes. 
Rhoda Power died very suddenly on 9 March 1957 at 72 Westbourne Park Road, Paddington, London. She was unmarried. She left her collection of books to the BBC's school broadcasting department, which created a Rhoda Power Library at Portland Place. 


@@@@@


doc= 58997


Roberts, Sir Charles George Douglas (1860-1943), poet and writer, was born on 10 January 1860, in Douglas, near Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada, the elder son of the Revd George Goodridge Roberts LLD and his wife, Emma Wetmore Bliss. His brother was Theodore Goodridge Roberts (1877-1953), also a writer. Emma Roberts's father was of United Empire loyalist stock; her ancestor the Revd Daniel Bliss (1715-1764) was the great-grandfather of Ralph Waldo Emerson. From 1861 Roberts lived in Westcock, New Brunswick, by the remote Tantramar marshes on the upper bay of Fundy, where he was tutored by his father. During 1873-6 he was educated at the Collegiate School in Fredericton, where his cousin (William) Bliss Carman (1861-1929) was a pupil. He attended the University of New Brunswick from 1876, graduating with a BA in 1879 (MA, 1881). He was headmaster of Chatham high school in 1879-82, and of York Street School, Fredericton, in 1882-3. Roberts married Mary (May) Fenety (died 1930) on 29 December 1880. In 1883 he was invited by Goldwin Smith to edit 'The Week', a cultural magazine published weekly in Toronto. As editor, Roberts published works by Bliss Carman and Archibald Lampman, and encouraged other rising poets. He disagreed, however, with Smith's views on the debate over Canada's potential annexation to the United States, and so resigned after three months. 
Roberts's reputation became firmly established during his ten fruitful years as professor of English at King's College, Windsor, Nova Scotia, from 1885 to 1895, where he wrote reviews, lectured widely, and produced his best poems. At the height of his poetic career he left to become a freelance writer. Living at first in Fredericton, he soon became restless and moved to New York in 1897 to work briefly as assistant editor of the 'Illustrated American' and to be at the heart of literary life. From New York he travelled to Europe and London at various times between 1899 and 1907, and resided mainly in London during 1912-25. There he met such celebrities as the prime minister, Ramsay MacDonald, the prince of Wales, Oscar Wilde, and Algernon Charles Swinburne; he also became a friend of Richard le Gallienne. In 1914 he joined the Legion of Frontiersmen as a private, rising eventually to major in 1917; in 1916 he went to the western front as special press officer to the Canadian corps, and in 1918 was recalled to the war records office in London. He finally returned to Canada in 1925 and settled in Toronto. 
Roberts became known as the father of Canadian poetry. He had grown up in the 1870s, when the spirit of national idealism following confederation and the debate about independence, imperial federation, or annexation with America, were very much alive. The young nation needed a distinct literature of its own and writers were much in demand. Roberts, Archibald Lampman, Bliss Carman, and Duncan Campbell Scott, emerged as the most prominent poets of that generation, and later became known as the confederation poets. The two most important influences of Roberts's formative years were his father, who had aroused his interest in English and classical literature, and George R. Parkin, his charismatic headmaster in Fredericton, who had fired his passion for Tennyson, Browning, Arnold, Swinburne, Rossetti, and the English Romantic poets. The unusual beauty of the maritime surroundings of his childhood, the farming and fishing communities, and the wild forests of New Brunswick, inspired him throughout his life. 
Roberts's first collection, ''Orion' and other Poems' (1880), largely drawn from Greek legend and the works of Keats, Shelley, and Tennyson, became a literary landmark in Canada, and an inspiration to other poets, particularly Archibald Lampman. 'In Divers Tones' (1886) turns to the landscapes of his youth and contains the elegiac 'Tantramar Revisited', possibly his best poem, as well as sonnets, love poems, and three patriotic poems ('Canada', 'Collect for Dominion Day', and 'An Ode for the Canadian Confederacy'). In his best poems the pioneering ethos of the settler and man's confrontation with wild nature are fundamental to his themes and imagery. Roberts found his true voice in 'Songs of the Common Day' (1893), containing a sonnet sequence following the seasonal work of farmers in New Brunswick, and 'Ave! an Ode for the Shelley Centenary'. In poems such as 'The Potato Harvest', he presents the primal activities of farming and husbandry in mythologically archetypal forms. 'The Book of the Native' (1896), containing several unsuccessful mystical poems, marked a decline. 'New York Nocturnes' (1898), with its urban themes and nostalgic love lyrics, and other collections published after he had left Canada, such as 'The Book of the Rose' (1903) and 'New Poems' (1910), added little to his reputation. 'Collected Poems' appeared in 1901 (revised 1919). His technical facility ranged over a variety of forms, including sonnets, the Petrarchan sonnet, ballad variants, and topographical odes. His effective use of rhyme and rhythm, together with his characteristically lyrical-elegiac tone, was well suited to the content of his verse. 
During nearly thirty years of self-exile Roberts wrote little poetry of merit. When he returned to Canada in 1925, however, he was welcomed as a hero. A poetic revival followed with 'The Vagrant of Time' (1927), in which he began experimenting with new metres, and ''The Iceberg' and other Poems' (1931), which contains a haunting free-verse poem about the 'Titanic' narrated by the iceberg. 'Selected Poems' (1936) was followed by 'Canada Speaks for Britain' (1941), containing his war poems. A younger generation of poets, including A. M. Klein and A. J. M. Smith, had emerged during the 1930s. Influenced by modernism and contemporary movements outside Canada, they rejected the Victorian-Romantic modes practised by Roberts and his generation. In several reappraisals since the 1980s, scholars have acknowledged his important contribution to the course of Canadian literature. Roberts left only a few memorable poems, but above all he gave Canada an indigenous poetic voice. His 'Complete Poems', edited by Desmond Pacey and Graham C. Adams, appeared in 1985, and 'The Collected Letters of Sir Charles G. D. Roberts', edited by Laurel Boone, in 1989. 
Roberts is also remembered as the originator of the realistic animal story, a title he shared with Ernest Thompson Seton, whose best-selling 'Wild Animals I have Known' (1898) did much to popularize the genre. Beginning with 'Earth's Enigmas' (1896), Roberts published over a dozen collections, including 'The Kindred of the Wild' (1902), 'The Watchers of the Trails' (1904), 'Red Fox' (1905), 'The Haunters of the Silences' (1907), and 'They that Walk the Wild' (1924). He described the animal story as 'a psychological romance constructed on a foundation of natural science'. When accused by President Theodore Roosevelt of being a 'nature-fakir' ('Everybody's Magazine', June 1907), Roberts argued that animals were motivated not just by instinct but by 'something akin to reason'. 
As with his poetry, Roberts recreated in his prose a maritime environment deeply rooted in the past. The French-English struggle for Acadia (now Nova Scotia) is the background for several historical romances, including 'The Forge in the Forest' (1896) and 'A Sister to Evangeline' (1896). Others were set in New Brunswick, such as 'The Heart of the Ancient Wood' (1900), about a girl brought up in the wilderness; 'The Heart that Knows' (1906), set in Westcock; 'The Backwoodsmen' (1909); and 'Eyes of the Wilderness' (1933). 'Barbara Ladd' (1902) is a novel set in New England during the American War of Independence. 'In the Morning of Time' (1919) concerns the evolution of prehistoric man. In a long and versatile career Roberts also produced collections of boys' stories, travel guides, and historical works, including a translation of Philippe Aubert de Gaspe's 'Les anciens canadiens' ('The Canadians of Old: an Historical Romance', 1890) and 'A History of Canada' (1897). 
Roberts was elected to the Royal Society of Canada in 1890; became a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1893; received the Royal Society of Canada's gold medal for literature in 1926; became national president of the Canadian Authors' Association in 1927; and was knighted in 1935. 
Charles and May Roberts had three sons and a daughter but from 1896 they ceased to live together for any length of time; May died in 1930. For much of his adult life he was plagued by debt but with the help of Lorne Pierce, the publisher and scholar, he received an annual government pension in 1935. His distinguished appearance -- medium height, rugged features, athletic build, and cheerful disposition, endeared him to his colleagues and to several women with whom he became romantically involved. 
As co-editor of 'A Standard Dictionary of Canadian Biography: the Canadian Who Was Who' (2 vols., 1934-8), he employed the assistance of Joan Montgomery. They were married on 18 October 1943, he aged eighty-three and she thirty-three. Roberts died shortly afterwards, in Toronto, on 26 November 1943. 


@@@@@


doc= 58999


Saville, (Leonard) Malcolm (1901-1982), children's author, was born at 18 Alpine Road, Hastings, Sussex, on 21 February 1901, the son of Ernest Vivian Saville (1874-1924), bookseller, and his wife, Fanny Ethel, 'nee' Hayes (1873-1937). His grandparents had been Congregationalist missionaries: the initials LMS were a tribute to the London Missionary Society. After boarding at Richmond Hill School, at Richmond, Surrey, which he enjoyed, he went on to work in book sales for Oxford University Press (1917-20), Cassells (1920-22), Amalgamated Press (1922-36), and George Newnes (1936-41), which gave him a broad knowledge of children's fiction. 
Known as Len at home and Malcolm to his readers, Saville lived in north London before the Second World War. He married Dorothy May McCoy (1898-1987), daughter of James McCoy, a schoolmaster, at the parish church, Stroud Green, on 2 June 1926. After this Saville became and remained a high church Anglican. They had four children between 1928 and 1935: Robin Prosper, Rosemary, Susan Jennifer, and Jeremy David. In 1932 the family moved to Harpenden, a small commuter town outside London, where they remained until 1950. 
Saville's first book was 'Amateur Acting and Producing for Beginners' (1937) using the pseudonym D. J. Desmond, a name that he occasionally reused in the 1940s. Two different original dust jackets were produced, for different series. His first children's story came out in 1943, when his family evacuated to Cwm Head House near Marshbrook, Shropshire, and he remained in London on war duties. This book, 'Mystery at Witchend', dedicated to 'TWO Rs and TWO J's' (the initials of his children) was set in a nearby house at the edge of the Long Mynd near a lone pine tree: the Lone Pine Club began here with core characters David, Petronella ('Peter'), twins Mary and Dickie, Tom and Jenny; Penny and Jon from Rye were added in book 3. The 'Lone Pine series' of twenty books (plus a short story) ended in 1978 with 'Home to Witchend'. Although Shropshire was a common Lone Pine setting, other books in the series were set elsewhere, several in Sussex but also Dartmoor, Southwold, Yorkshire, London, and elsewhere. 
A series written by Saville for younger children, featuring Mary and Michael, started with a public information film in 1945, 'Trouble at Townsend', in which Mary was played by Petula Clark; there were five later books and two short stories. Townsend Farm in the film was Saville's family home, Westend Farm, Wheathampstead, Harpenden, the address recorded in the book's foreword. Cornwall, Dorset, Sussex, and the Grand Union Canal were settings for later stories in the series. 
After four Lone Pine books the Jillies, featuring Mandy, Prue, and Tim, were introduced in three books written at speed by Saville in 1947-8 with locations in Blakeney, London, and Shap in Westmorland (three more were added later, featuring Ely, Austria, and the home counties). Stories of the Buckingham family (Juliet and Simon with their friend Charles Renislau, son of a Polish pianist and composer), began in 1950 with three books. Three more were added later up to 1974: locations were Ludlow, Whitby, Brighton, London, Italy, Amsterdam, and Surrey. 
While writing children's books Saville worked as an editor after the Second World War with 'My Garden' magazine (1946-51) and 'Sunny Stories' magazine (1954-8), and as a general editor for George Newnes and C. Arthur Pearson (1957-66). In 1950 the family moved to Guildford. 
Four Nettleford stories were set a few miles from Saville's Guildford home: these were gentle tales of children in their community, enjoying craft fairs and snowball fights. The final story was a holiday adventure in Swaledale. Eight Susan and Bill stories for younger readers started in the 1950s, combining housing estate life with seaside holidays on the south coast. Further house moves by Saville, to Barcombe and Lewes for example, brought new locations, the latter introducing the Brown family stories. 
From 1963 Saville produced a new series for older teenagers, the Marston Baines series (seven books), which took its inspiration from the first James Bond film in 1962 and featured the fight against global evil but without the sexual impropriety of Bond. Baines was a master spy whose university student friends get into some serious difficulties with terrorists, antisemites, drug dealers, black magic, and the Mafia. The locations were Tuscany, Provence, Venice, Mallorca, Brittany, the Dolomites, and Luxembourg, all inspired by family holidays. Saville declared in his letters that this was the series he wished to be remembered by; but ironically it was the only series to receive no reprint or paperback run, and reviews were mixed. Two books never resulted in series: 'Treasure at the Mill' (1957) became a film; 'The Thin Grey Man' (1966) became a school text. 
Saville also wrote non-fiction, generally on country themes. 'Country Scrapbook' (1944), 'Open-Air Scrapbook' (1945), and 'Seaside Scrapbook' (1946) were conceived in wartime, teaching readers of the preciousness of England. He encouraged post-war outdoor pursuits and holidays, the early stories being vicarious outdoor adventures so children could learn 'woodcraft' safely (Thompson Seton, the naturalist and promoter of the Boy Scout movement in North America, was an important influence). Later in life Saville returned to countryside books, including a partnership with the illustrator Elsie Wrigley. He wrote two religious books, 'King of Kings' (1958, a life of Jesus) and 'Strange Story' (1967, the crucifixion seen through the eyes of a soldier involved). He introduced children to gardening in a number of books. Most of his books for adults were written in his last decade, of which 'Portrait of Rye' (1976) and 'The Silent Hills of Shropshire' (1998, completed by Mark O'Hanlon) stand out. 
In total Saville published ninety known books (eighty-five for children, with Newnes, Lutterworth, Evans, Hodder and Stoughton, John Murray, Nelson, Heinemann, Collins, and Armada paperbacks as his major publishers) and various articles and short stories, one later published in book form. His stories typically were realistic holiday adventures featuring both boys and girls. His most popular books were republished in various editions, both hardback and paperback. His stories were set in real places and he encouraged his child readers to visit these. Some stories were translated into European languages (Dutch, French, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Norwegian, and Finnish are known) and some circulated in Australia, the USA, and Canada. 
A key motivation for Saville to write in the early years was financial, to pay school fees, since each of his children went to a fee-paying school. Nevertheless he found his rapidly growing competence and reputation as a writer intrinsically rewarding. He promoted his own writing, first through 'Children's Hour' (his early books were serialized), through serializations in the 'Mickey Mouse Weekly' and 'Children's Newspaper', two children's films ('Trouble at Townsend', 1946, and 'Treasure at the Mill', 1957), and serialization for early commercial television ('The Ambermere Treasure', 1955-6). He encouraged readers to contact him, always answering their letters and enclosing marketing material, setting up a formal Lone Pine Club with a badge and ephemera. Nevertheless he wrote in 1973 for the magazine 'Books for Your Children': 'Writing can be a very lonely way of trying to earn a living.' 
Saville's books are optimistic, with good triumphing and values of loyalty and friendship dominant. Relationships reflect the complexity of adolescent feelings without being too sentimental, though of course youthful feelings are idealized, interpreted by a middle-aged author. In stories for older children, 'special friends' and romance are unreally depicted as enduring, culminating in engagement and marriage: the development of relationships is depicted as complex but non-sexual as was customary in books for children before the 1970s. All Saville's work was pedagogic, its main themes being teaching about good and evil, the environment, and personal relationships. 
Saville died in St Helen's Hospital, Hastings, Sussex, on 30 June 1982. He was survived by his wife, Dorothy, and his two sons and two daughters. His ashes were buried in the garden of remembrance at St Thomas's Church, Winchelsea. 
Saville turned to writing in his forties and quickly established a reputation for children's recreational reading that brought him contracts with many major publishing houses. Though following a successful formula involving adventure stories in holiday time, he stood out for both his concern for positive relationships and his vivid use of real locations. The Lone Pine books have been republished since his death, in some cases twice, but for adult enthusiasts rather than for children, in contrast to his contemporary Enid Blyton. 


@@@@@


doc= 59003


Tourtel, Mary (1874-1948), illustrator and author, was born on 28 January 1874 at 52 Palace Street, Canterbury, Kent, the youngest child of Samuel Austen Caldwell, a stained-glass designer and stonemason, and his wife, Sarah, formerly Scott. Mary's father, and later his son Samuel, restored stained glass for Canterbury Cathedral. Her elder brother Edmund was a talented animal painter and book illustrator who exhibited at the Royal Academy. In this artistic environment, it is not surprising that Mary showed an early talent for drawing, and she was educated at the prestigious local Sidney Cooper School of Art, where she won the coveted Prince of Wales scholarship. Her forte was animal drawing, and her illustrations for children's books were first published in 1897. A handsome, strong-featured woman, she married, at Stoke Poges on 26 September 1900, the journalist Herbert Bird Tourtel (1874-1931), son of Peter Tourtel, journalist, of St Peter Port, Guernsey. 
Mary and Herbert Tourtel remained childless, and travelled extensively together in Italy, Egypt, and India. Later they were to develop a shared passion for flying, and Mary Tourtel was then able to sketch from the air unusual angles and aspects of landscape which were to enrich many of her picture-strips. 
It is as the creator of Rupert Bear that she attained distinction. Despite her talents and successful early career, Mary Tourtel's anthropomorphic animal drawings had considerably less panache than those of several gifted contemporaries (notably the Teddy Tail originator, Charles Folkard, and H. S. Foxwell, the most brilliant of the Amalgamated Press's Tiger Tim illustrators). Nevertheless she created Britain's longest-running newspaper-strip hero. Now frequently dubbed 'Britain's answer to Mickey Mouse', Rupert owed his existence to the Fleet Street circulation battles. The 'Daily Mail' launched Folkard's sale-boosting mouse, Teddy Tail, in 1915 and the 'Daily Mirror' followed suit with A. B. Payne's extremely successful penguin and dog twosome, Pip and Squeak, who were soon joined by Wilfred, their rabbit foster child. The 'Daily Express''s proprietor Lord Beaverbrook instructed his editor, R. D. Blumenfeld, to find and develop an animal character to eclipse those of the 'Daily Mail' and 'Daily Mirror'. One or two experimental strips were tried and rejected, and Herbert Tourtel, then a sub-editor on the paper, suggested that Mary could produce what was required. 
Mary Tourtel's first Rupert serial, 'The Little Lost Bear', began as a single-frame picture with verse narrative on 8 November 1920: Rupert's neat appearance (his scarf, sweater, checked trousers, and upright stance) was immediately established. He was pictured with his parents, and thus tenuously linked with magical elements of 'The Three Bears' fairy-tale, but a cosy, domestic atmosphere was also conveyed. All this, plus the fact that Rupert, despite his furry head and hands, was always in essence a small boy (in fact a juvenile version of Everyman) ensured his success. Adult readers as well as children empathized with his wonderfully wide-ranging adventures in which he was frequently the innocent abroad, beset by but always triumphing over evil in the shape of Tourtel's colourful ogres, giants, and monsters. Her balladic style and rustic but Gothic-spiced settings launched not only Rupert but his assorted animal chums, and arguably her most intriguing character, the Merlin-esque Wise Old Goat. 
Mary Tourtel drew, and contributed most of the slightly lumpy verse to, the daily Rupert strip until 1935, giving it up then because of failing eyesight. Her husband had died from a heart condition in 1931, and on her retirement Mary returned to Canterbury. She developed a brain tumour, and died in Kent and Canterbury Hospital on 15 March 1948; she was buried in St Martin's churchyard, Canterbury. 
In the hands of subsequent artists Rupert has continued in the 'Daily Express', in books, and on television, giving rise to a whole line of merchandise. There has been some slight updating in deference to new social attitudes, and, despite occasional accusations of anti-feminism, racism, and class prejudice, Rupert has survived, holding an appeal for a varied readership. 


@@@@@


doc= 59004


Vaizey, Jessie (1856-1917), writer, was born on 3 October 1856 at 47 Myrtle Street South, Mount Pleasant, in Liverpool, the second of the seven children of David Bell ('b'. 'c'.1814), shipping agent and insurance broker, and his wife, Elizabeth Morrish, 'nee' Barton ('b'. 'c'.1821); both parents were Scottish. Jessie depicted their happy family life in her semi-autobiographical novel 'Salt of Life' (1915). She and her elder sister were educated at home by a governess and then by a tutor, who encouraged her youthful writing. She had from childhood told stories to her siblings and in her middle teens won a newspaper short-story competition. She apparently continued to write for pleasure but published nothing until after her first husband's death. 
On 19 July 1883, at the parish church of Llangollen, Denbighshire, Wales, Jessie married Henry Mansergh (1852-1894), a cotton broker, and continued living in the more affluent suburbs of Liverpool. A daughter was born in 1886, but the marriage was troubled, possibly by Henry Mansergh's addiction to alcohol or drugs. After his death of kidney disease on 28 May 1894, probably to supplement her income, 'Mrs Henry Mansergh' appears in print as the author of short stories and magazine serials, some of which were later published in volume form. Her first book, 'A Girl in Springtime' (1897), had been serialized in the 'Girls' Own Paper' as early as August 1894. 
Another short-story competition (won with an entry sent in surreptitiously by her young daughter) brought the prize of a cruise to the eastern Mediterranean and Egypt, where Jessie met George de Horne Vaizey (1857-1927), an insurance broker of Essex stock but with a proud strain of Dutch ancestry. They married in Liverpool on 19 March 1898, the circumstances of their meeting giving rise to a family joke that 'granny won grandfather in a competition'. 
As Mrs George de Horne Vaizey, Jessie continued to write prolifically. She and her husband settled first at Broxbourne, Hertfordshire, where their son George (who also became a novelist) was born in 1900. Two years later Jessie contracted typhoid, and was left with a crippling form of arthritis which confined her to a wheelchair and caused her more or less constant pain. Yet she managed to remain cheerful, witty, and well-dressed, and even to go on with her hobby of embroidering needlework pictures. 
Jessie Vaizey wrote principally for and about women, but it was the handful of her books for girls which brought her lasting popularity. Her first success in this field was 'About Peggy Savile' (1900), but her resounding triumph was 'Pixie O'Shaughnessy' (1902). This heroine was not the first wild Irish girl in school-story fiction, but her naivety, charm, and thoughtfulness made her particularly bewitching, and the book was to be reprinted as late as 1940. 'Pixie''s Irish background was derived from a brief holiday visit, just as Egypt had supplied the setting for 'A Rose-Coloured Thread' (1898), Liverpool for several books, Hertfordshire for 'A Houseful of Girls' (1901), and London flats for others. 
In 1910 the Vaizeys moved to The Pryors, a large block of flats overlooking Hampstead Heath, where the outlook gave Jessie much pleasure. Jessie Vaizey died on 23 January 1917, following an operation for an appendix abscess, having been sustained in all the troubles of her life by her strong Presbyterian faith. She had been much distressed by the outbreak of the First World War, although she did not allow it to shadow her writing. Jessie Vaizey preferred to give her stories happy endings, but they were not always conventional ones and she was well aware of the sadder side of life. Her most interesting books lay bare two of the dilemmas then facing middle-class young women: the lack of meaningful occupation for the well-to-do (for instance in 'Grizel Married', 1915) and the scarcity of gainful employment for the poverty-stricken (as in 'The Daughters of a Genius', 1903, and particularly 'The Independence of Claire', 1915). This perception, and her careful delineations of middle-class society, memorably distinguish her work from the mass of merely romantic contemporary fiction. 


@@@@@


doc= 59006


Walton, Amy Catherine (1849-1939), children's writer, daughter of the Revd John Deck (1815-1882), vicar of St Stephen's, Hull, and Mary Ann Sanderson Gibson (1813-1903), hymn writer, was born on 7 August 1849 at 5 Belgrave Terrace, Hull. She has been confused in the British Library catalogue, the Bodleian catalogue, and elsewhere with Mrs Catherine Augusta Walton (died 1906), wife of Oriel Farnell Walton (1846-1886), a barrister, and eldest daughter of Lord Cecil James Gordon-Moore (1806-1878) and his wife, Emily Moore (died 1902). 
The Deck family's Anglican evangelical credentials were proved by the father's fiercely anti-Puseyite publications, the collaborative hymn writing of mother and daughter, and the middle names of Amy's younger brother, Henry Legh Richmond ('b'. 1853). Her best-known work, 'Christie's Old Organ, or, 'Home Sweet Home'' (1874), was written to illustrate her mother's hymn 'There is a city bright', to which Amy had contributed the first verse. One of her first works for children, 'My Mates and I' (1873), had been sold under her father's name to the Religious Tract Society for $24. The Religious Tract Society's payments were low (she received $15 for 'Christie's Old Organ' with a bonus of more than $6), yet by 1919 she had received a further $492 from their profits on her early works. Another of her piously sentimental best-sellers for children, 'Little Dot' (1873), had also been written before her marriage, on 16 February 1875, at St Stephen's, Hull, to the Revd Octavius Frank Walton (1844-1933), who had served as her father's curate for the previous three years. Her work had been published anonymously before her marriage; post-1875 works and reprints were printed under her married name. 
Immediately after their marriage Octavius Walton took up the ecclesiastically contentious post of incumbent of Christ Church, Mount Zion, Jerusalem, but returned in 1876 to a chaplaincy established for English textile workers in the Scottish borders at Cally, Kirkcudbright. Here they stayed until 1883. Subsequent moves took Octavius Walton to the tradesmen's church of St Thomas, York (1883-93); St Jude's, Wolverhampton, Staffordshire (1893-1906), where Amy's widowed mother joined them; and Leigh, Tonbridge, Kent (1906-17). After a period of retirement in Shamley Green, near Guildford, Surrey, the couple returned to live at Great Barnetts, Leigh. 
By the time Octavius became vicar of Leigh, Amy had immersed herself in parish work, such as the Sunday school, the mothers' union, and sewing classes for teenage girls, leaving little time for her writing: only two of her thirty titles appeared after this move. A photograph of this period shows a woman of kindly if slightly masculine appearance, her hair scraped back and presenting a strange contrast with the rather fussily feminine clothes she is wearing. 
Although Walton's tales sometimes espoused topical philanthropic causes, such as the outcry against the moral and physical risks suffered by child actors in cheap theatres and travelling fairs, featured in 'A Peep Behind the Scenes' (1877), or the campaign for safer seafaring conditions, alluded to in 'Saved at Sea' (1879) and 'Launch the Lifeboat' (1886), their chief purpose was always the evangelical work of conversion. The effect of their sentimental piety was unmarred by sectarian prejudice: the labours of devout parochial clergymen were rated no more highly than those of mission chapels or scripture readers, or the timely words of a Christian neighbour, in achieving the great work of salvation. Despite asserting that earthly pilgrimage is but a prelude to reward or punishment in the afterlife, her tales rarely refrained from offering shorter-term proof of the fates awaiting the redeemed and the unredeemed. Both structurally and morally her stories leaned heavily upon a fairy-tale inheritance that made them palatable to children, and their sanitized pictures of virtuous orphaned waifs, whose innate cleanliness and gentility was often confirmed by the satisfying revelation of a genetic entitlement to middle-class status, made them safe presents for children of every class. Tales that had initially appeared in cheap tract format were often republished as more sumptuous illustrated gift-books. She and her publishers were to approve a film version of 'A Peep Behind the Scenes', shown by the Studio of Portsmouth Road, Thames Ditton, Surrey, on 11 December 1918. 
Walton also wrote simple retellings of biblical stories, such as 'The King's Cup-Bearer: the Story of Nehemiah' (1891), and 'Dr Forester' (1906), a romantic Christian mystery tale aimed at an adolescent readership. Walton died on 5 July 1939 at Dry Bank House, Dry Hill, Park Road, Tonbridge, Kent. The cause of death was heart failure following a fall in her home. 


@@@@@


doc= 59007


Sprigg, Christopher St John (1907-1937), writer, was born on 20 October 1907 at 53 Montserrat Road, Putney, south-west London, the third child of Stanhope William Sprigg (died 1932), then literary editor of the 'Daily Express', and Jessie Mary Caudwell (1872/1873-1916), a professional artist. 
Stanhope Sprigg, an Irish protestant, had converted to his wife's Catholicism upon their marriage, and their three children were brought up as devout members of the Roman communion. Paula, the eldest ('b'. 1899), became a nun. Christopher's childhood was mainly spent at East Hendred in Berkshire. His mother died when he was eight, and he was sent away to the Benedictines' Ealing Priory School. His close schoolfriend Paul Beard, who with his wife, Elizabeth, became Sprigg's closest literary confidant and who edited the posthumous 'Poems', described Sprigg as greatly interested in both poetry and science even as a schoolboy. 
Before he had reached fifteen Christopher Sprigg abruptly left school (family financial difficulties were rumoured, Stanhope Sprigg having lost his job at the 'Express'), and moved with his father to Bradford, where Sprigg senior became literary editor of the 'Yorkshire Observer', and his son worked on that paper as a cub reporter. In 1925 Sprigg returned south to live with his elder brother, Theodore, and his wife, Vida, at Claygate, Surrey. He went through intensely religious phases -- though he lost his faith 'some time before 1932'. His religious turmoils are a main subject of his poems, which he went on writing in spurts all his life. He never married. 
Theodore Sprigg was the editor of 'Airways', the first British aeronautical monthly. Christopher threw himself into the burgeoning world of air-minded journalism, reviewing books and films for 'Airways', editing 'Airways and Airports', and writing short air stories for 'Popular Flying'. He also found time to edit 'British Malaya'. He wrote under a large roster of names -- including St John Lewis and Arthur Cave. Arthur Cave's stories in 'Popular Flying' were, said Captain W. E. Johns, author of the famous Biggles air-novels, 'some of the best short air stories that have ever been written'. 
The Sprigg brothers were busy entrepreneurs, founding Airways Publications Ltd, running an air press agency, starting up 'Aeromarine Advertising', editing the short-lived 'Work and Opportunities: the National Advertiser of British Training and Service'. Very keen, too, on motor cars, Sprigg patented in 1930 a variable-speed gear that attracted praise from the motor industry. But his main source of income in the early 1930s -- the many Sprigg commercial enterprises having collapsed by then -- was writing. He became, essentially, a full-time freelance. He had learned to fly at Brooklands Aero Club, and he produced popular flying handbooks -- 'Fly with Me' (1932), 'Let's Learn to Fly' (1937) -- and pot-boiling celebrations of air achievements: 'The Airship' (1931), 'British Airways' (1934), 'Great Flights' (1935). He wrote non-stop, not least a sequence of trashy and patently money-spinning thrillers (some of them, he claimed, knocked off in a fortnight or so each): 'Crime in Kensington' (1933), 'Fatality in Fleet Street' (1933), 'The Perfect Alibi' (1934), 'Death of an Airman' (1934), 'Death of a Queen' (1935). 'The Six Queer Things: Uncanny Stories', edited by Sprigg, came out posthumously in 1937. But by 1935 this autodidactic hack writer, a relentless wide-reader (he was a keen member of the London Library), endlessly curious about the new sciences, especially psychology, psychiatry, anthropology, modern biology, and quantum physics, was turning to political science and educating himself in socialist texts. All on his own he became a Marxist. 
In mid-1935, in Porthleven, Cornwall, this embryonic Marxist started a book to be called 'Verse and Mathematics' ('a study in the Foundation of Poetry'). In November of that year Sprigg left his brother's house in Surrey to live in Poplar, in the East End of London, telling Theodore this was to seek local colour for his fiction, but actually intending to share in the proletarian life his new politics were driving him to value. He joined the Poplar branch of the Communist Party. He started learning Russian with an eye to visiting the Soviet Union. He stopped writing every day at 5 p.m. to go out on party work, flyposting, speaking on street corners, selling the 'Daily Worker'. His (mainly dock worker) comrades soon lost their suspicions of this loquacious, bourgeois, horse-riding writer ally. He became their delegate on the Poplar Peace Pledge Union council. He was completely unknown to party headquarters in King Street, Covent Garden. He attended some lectures by party intellectuals -- Douglas Garman and Alick West -- but steered clear of their 'verbosity and dogmatism'. 
But in addition to his journalism and the rest, by which he 'scratched a living', Sprigg was engaged on the serious work which distinguished him as perhaps British communism's sharpest intellectual of his time. He wrote plays and sub-Kafkaesque short stories, polishing and splitting up 'Verse and Mathematics' into what became 'Illusion and Reality' and 'The Crisis in Physics'. 'Illusion and Reality' was the first extended British attempt at a Marxist analysis of art, self, and literary history. It was conceptually rough-edged, but impressively ambitious and always suggestive, for all its adherence to Moscow's line on socialist realism and the abhorrence of modernism and popular culture. 'The Crisis in Physics' boldly linked epistemological problems in science with the perceived threat to bourgeois economics. He also composed the wonderfully alert essays on aesthetics, bourgeois biology, modern thinkers, and cultic heroes (including the especially fine pieces on George Bernard Shaw, D. H. Lawrence, and T. E. Lawrence, comparable in many ways with the essays of the great German Marxist Walter Benjamin) which became 'Studies in a Dying Culture' and 'Further Studies in a Dying Culture'. In February 1936 the novel 'This my Hand' appeared, as by Christopher Caudwell, becoming the only book so to appear in Sprigg's lifetime. It attempted, somewhat weakly, to add social engagement to his crime mode (the usual extreme violences are afforced by some religious and political background analyses, earnest psychologizings, and sentiments against capital punishment). It shows little promise for any future career that Caudwell might have had as a writer of Marxized genre fiction. 
Meanwhile practical politics were commanding the attention of Spriggy, as his comrades knew him. In March 1936 he was made branch secretary. He visited Paris to see the new popular front government at first hand. In London he was arrested and beaten up by police while scuffling with Mosley's fascists in Victoria Park, Hackney. When the Spanish Civil War broke out in July 1936 he was, in common with all 1930s leftists, quite magnetized by its significance. In December that year he answered the party's call for all able-bodied men to go and fight for the Spanish republican cause. He drove to Spain the vehicle Poplar people had purchased as an ambulance (usefully this bourgeois communist possessed a passport). Once in Spain he joined up with the International Brigades, trained as a machine-gunner at Albacete, became a machine-gun instructor and group political delegate, and edited a wall-newspaper. Early in February 1937 he and his battalion moved up to the Jarama River in the defence of Madrid. On the afternoon of the chaotic first day of the Jarama battle, 12 February 1937, Sprigg died covering a retreat by his company in the face of overwhelming fascist force. His body was never recovered. The faithful Theodore had tried to have the party in London recall his brother from dangerous action as a valuable intellectual, and did eventually succeed in that by showing General-Secretary Harry Pollitt the proofs of 'Illusion and Reality'. The telegram summoning Sprigg home arrived just too late. 
Paul Beard's selection from the many poems Sprigg wrote appeared in 1939. By then the name Christopher Caudwell had begun to be known -- through 'Illusion and Reality' (1937), 'Studies in a Dying Culture' (1938), and 'The Crisis in Physics' (1939). Caudwell's 'Further Studies in a Dying Culture' was published in 1948. He was Britain's foremost pioneer of Marxist literary theory, and gradually his renown as an inspiring, if never not chaotic cultural analyst, spread across the world. A 'Collected Poems' came out in 1986, edited by Alan Young, as did a collection of previously unpublished manuscripts, 'Scenes and Actions', edited by Jean Duport and David Margolies. 


@@@@@


doc= 59008


Mallory family (per. c.1100-1300), gentry, of medieval Leicestershire, was first represented by Richard [i] Mallory (d. c.1160), a follower of Robert, earl of Leicester, in the 1130s and 1140s. The Mallory name must have come to Leicestershire rather earlier, however, for it appears as the name of a family of substantial knights in the county of Meulan, in the French Vexin. It would therefore seem most likely that a Mallory arrived in the county at the time when Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan, was earl there, that is between 1107 and 1118. The name Mallory is a nickname and could variously be interpreted as 'unlucky' or 'foul-mouthed'. Richard [i] had at least two probable sons, Richard [ii] and Anschetil, who seem to have taken the English and Norman fees of the family respectively on his death about 1160. It is from these two that the many and various branches of the family derive, although only the elder branch, settled at Kirkby Mallory, Leicestershire, will be followed here. However, Anschetil Mallory (d. c.1190), seneschal of Robert de Breteuil, earl of Leicester, has to be noticed as a prominent character in the reign of Henry II, and a leading rebel of the wars of 1173-4, who defended Leicester Castle against the royalists. Anschetil survived this political mistake and acquired English lands at Tachbrook Mallory, Warwickshire, where his family flourished into the fourteenth century. 

Richard [ii] Mallory (d. before 1175) of Kirkby Mallory, although less important politically than his younger brother and not attached to Earl Robert, had more considerable landed interests. A good marriage to Agnes, coheir of William (II) de Neufmarche, brought Richard estates at Welton and Thrupp, Northamptonshire, held at fee-farm of 40's'. from Leicester Abbey, and (from later evidence) land at Broughton Astley, Leicestershire, and the service of Billesley, Warwickshire (see below). Richard died at some time before 1175, and was survived for several years by his wife. He left as his heir William, but left also at least three other sons who obtained subtenancies in the Mallory lands, one of whom, Simon (died 'c'.1208), founded a long-lasting cadet branch of the family at Welton, which survived into the fourteenth century. William Mallory (d. c.1202) was his father's eldest son, and took responsibility for granting the Welton estate as a subtenancy to his younger brother, Simon. This would seem to have been an internal family arrangement which thus allowed more than one son to succeed while still preserving the integrity of the family's lands. He married a certain Alice, but nothing more of her is known. William had only one known son, Richard [iii] Mallory (d. 1217), who seems to have been active in Leicestershire as early as 1201. He made a rather large number of known grants: the church of Kirkby, first to Philip of Kington and then to Thelsford Priory, Warwickshire; several parcels of land in the same place to the hospitals of St John and the Holy Trinity, Northampton; small estates in Kirkby to his uncle, Luke Mallory, and to one Alexander of Whitby; and the advowson of the chapel of Peckleton to William Motun. He was at one point attached to the retinue of Saer de Quincy, earl of Winchester, in whose service he died at Mountsorrel Castle in 1217. He married Cecilia, sister of Stephen of Seagrave, the justiciar, and through her obtained three carrucates at Burgh, Leicestershire. Her suits for dower between 1220 and 1222 make it possible to assess Richard [iii]'s interests as being at his death the manors of Kirkby, Welton, and Thrupp, four and a half virgates subinfeudated at Broughton Astley, and several subinfeudated estates within Kirkby. For this he answered for a half fee to the Montfort half of the earldom of Leicester, a small assessment for such a large estate. 
Richard [iii] left four known sons, one of the younger of whom, Anschetil, founded yet another cadet branch of what was by now becoming a widespread family, at Octon in the East Riding of Yorkshire. The eldest son, Thomas [i] Mallory (b. 1201x5, d. in or after 1240), succeeded to Kirkby as a minor; he was in wardship to Henry of Seagrave in 1222 and had come of age by 1226, when he presented to the rectory of Kirkby. In 1234 he was involved in a plea concerning the service owed for the old Neufmarche estate of Billesley, Warwickshire, to which he apparently had some claim through his great-grandmother Agnes. Thomas was at that same time associated with the household of Simon de Montfort, but more closely with that of his uncle, Stephen of Seagrave. He was alive in 1240 but thereafter disappears; all that is known is that he was survived by his widow, Christina, and left a son and heir, Henry Mallory (d. in or before 1277). Little is known of Henry, other than that he instituted a chantry for his father's soul at the hospital chapel of Holy Trinity, Northampton, and that he attested a charter of Earl Simon de Montfort before 1265. Henry was succeeded by one Sir Thomas [ii] Mallory (d. in or after 1299) by 1277, who was probably (but not certainly) his brother. Thomas [ii] was the first of the Kirkby branch of the family known to have been knighted. By contrast, the Mallorys of Tachbrook and Welton were consistently knighted throughout the thirteenth century. Thomas [ii] was a household knight of Edmund, earl of Lancaster, in the early 1290s and is last found in 1299, making purchases of land in Kirkby. 
The Mallory family is a singularly well-documented example of the way that a gentry family could multiply and spread in several branches over two centuries, on what was initially a small endowment in land. By 1300 six distinct and related Mallory lineages can be distinguished, settled mostly in the midlands, four of them having produced knights of the county court. The Mallorys of Kirkby, the eldest branch, are an object lesson in how this was achieved on small means: by windfall marriages, magnate patronage, and subinfeudation. It is clear that by 1300 the Mallorys of Kirkby farmed directly comparatively little land, but existed on the services and maintenance owed them. It is also instructive how the Mallorys of several generations varied their magnate allegiance from generation to generation after the mid-twelfth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 59009


Mallory family (per. c.1100-1300), gentry, of medieval Leicestershire, was first represented by Richard [i] Mallory (d. c.1160), a follower of Robert, earl of Leicester, in the 1130s and 1140s. The Mallory name must have come to Leicestershire rather earlier, however, for it appears as the name of a family of substantial knights in the county of Meulan, in the French Vexin. It would therefore seem most likely that a Mallory arrived in the county at the time when Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan, was earl there, that is between 1107 and 1118. The name Mallory is a nickname and could variously be interpreted as 'unlucky' or 'foul-mouthed'. Richard [i] had at least two probable sons, Richard [ii] and Anschetil, who seem to have taken the English and Norman fees of the family respectively on his death about 1160. It is from these two that the many and various branches of the family derive, although only the elder branch, settled at Kirkby Mallory, Leicestershire, will be followed here. However, Anschetil Mallory (d. c.1190), seneschal of Robert de Breteuil, earl of Leicester, has to be noticed as a prominent character in the reign of Henry II, and a leading rebel of the wars of 1173-4, who defended Leicester Castle against the royalists. Anschetil survived this political mistake and acquired English lands at Tachbrook Mallory, Warwickshire, where his family flourished into the fourteenth century. 

Richard [ii] Mallory (d. before 1175) of Kirkby Mallory, although less important politically than his younger brother and not attached to Earl Robert, had more considerable landed interests. A good marriage to Agnes, coheir of William (II) de Neufmarche, brought Richard estates at Welton and Thrupp, Northamptonshire, held at fee-farm of 40's'. from Leicester Abbey, and (from later evidence) land at Broughton Astley, Leicestershire, and the service of Billesley, Warwickshire (see below). Richard died at some time before 1175, and was survived for several years by his wife. He left as his heir William, but left also at least three other sons who obtained subtenancies in the Mallory lands, one of whom, Simon (died 'c'.1208), founded a long-lasting cadet branch of the family at Welton, which survived into the fourteenth century. William Mallory (d. c.1202) was his father's eldest son, and took responsibility for granting the Welton estate as a subtenancy to his younger brother, Simon. This would seem to have been an internal family arrangement which thus allowed more than one son to succeed while still preserving the integrity of the family's lands. He married a certain Alice, but nothing more of her is known. William had only one known son, Richard [iii] Mallory (d. 1217), who seems to have been active in Leicestershire as early as 1201. He made a rather large number of known grants: the church of Kirkby, first to Philip of Kington and then to Thelsford Priory, Warwickshire; several parcels of land in the same place to the hospitals of St John and the Holy Trinity, Northampton; small estates in Kirkby to his uncle, Luke Mallory, and to one Alexander of Whitby; and the advowson of the chapel of Peckleton to William Motun. He was at one point attached to the retinue of Saer de Quincy, earl of Winchester, in whose service he died at Mountsorrel Castle in 1217. He married Cecilia, sister of Stephen of Seagrave, the justiciar, and through her obtained three carrucates at Burgh, Leicestershire. Her suits for dower between 1220 and 1222 make it possible to assess Richard [iii]'s interests as being at his death the manors of Kirkby, Welton, and Thrupp, four and a half virgates subinfeudated at Broughton Astley, and several subinfeudated estates within Kirkby. For this he answered for a half fee to the Montfort half of the earldom of Leicester, a small assessment for such a large estate. 
Richard [iii] left four known sons, one of the younger of whom, Anschetil, founded yet another cadet branch of what was by now becoming a widespread family, at Octon in the East Riding of Yorkshire. The eldest son, Thomas [i] Mallory (b. 1201x5, d. in or after 1240), succeeded to Kirkby as a minor; he was in wardship to Henry of Seagrave in 1222 and had come of age by 1226, when he presented to the rectory of Kirkby. In 1234 he was involved in a plea concerning the service owed for the old Neufmarche estate of Billesley, Warwickshire, to which he apparently had some claim through his great-grandmother Agnes. Thomas was at that same time associated with the household of Simon de Montfort, but more closely with that of his uncle, Stephen of Seagrave. He was alive in 1240 but thereafter disappears; all that is known is that he was survived by his widow, Christina, and left a son and heir, Henry Mallory (d. in or before 1277). Little is known of Henry, other than that he instituted a chantry for his father's soul at the hospital chapel of Holy Trinity, Northampton, and that he attested a charter of Earl Simon de Montfort before 1265. Henry was succeeded by one Sir Thomas [ii] Mallory (d. in or after 1299) by 1277, who was probably (but not certainly) his brother. Thomas [ii] was the first of the Kirkby branch of the family known to have been knighted. By contrast, the Mallorys of Tachbrook and Welton were consistently knighted throughout the thirteenth century. Thomas [ii] was a household knight of Edmund, earl of Lancaster, in the early 1290s and is last found in 1299, making purchases of land in Kirkby. 
The Mallory family is a singularly well-documented example of the way that a gentry family could multiply and spread in several branches over two centuries, on what was initially a small endowment in land. By 1300 six distinct and related Mallory lineages can be distinguished, settled mostly in the midlands, four of them having produced knights of the county court. The Mallorys of Kirkby, the eldest branch, are an object lesson in how this was achieved on small means: by windfall marriages, magnate patronage, and subinfeudation. It is clear that by 1300 the Mallorys of Kirkby farmed directly comparatively little land, but existed on the services and maintenance owed them. It is also instructive how the Mallorys of several generations varied their magnate allegiance from generation to generation after the mid-twelfth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 59010


Mallory family (per. c.1100-1300), gentry, of medieval Leicestershire, was first represented by Richard [i] Mallory (d. c.1160), a follower of Robert, earl of Leicester, in the 1130s and 1140s. The Mallory name must have come to Leicestershire rather earlier, however, for it appears as the name of a family of substantial knights in the county of Meulan, in the French Vexin. It would therefore seem most likely that a Mallory arrived in the county at the time when Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan, was earl there, that is between 1107 and 1118. The name Mallory is a nickname and could variously be interpreted as 'unlucky' or 'foul-mouthed'. Richard [i] had at least two probable sons, Richard [ii] and Anschetil, who seem to have taken the English and Norman fees of the family respectively on his death about 1160. It is from these two that the many and various branches of the family derive, although only the elder branch, settled at Kirkby Mallory, Leicestershire, will be followed here. However, Anschetil Mallory (d. c.1190), seneschal of Robert de Breteuil, earl of Leicester, has to be noticed as a prominent character in the reign of Henry II, and a leading rebel of the wars of 1173-4, who defended Leicester Castle against the royalists. Anschetil survived this political mistake and acquired English lands at Tachbrook Mallory, Warwickshire, where his family flourished into the fourteenth century. 

Richard [ii] Mallory (d. before 1175) of Kirkby Mallory, although less important politically than his younger brother and not attached to Earl Robert, had more considerable landed interests. A good marriage to Agnes, coheir of William (II) de Neufmarche, brought Richard estates at Welton and Thrupp, Northamptonshire, held at fee-farm of 40's'. from Leicester Abbey, and (from later evidence) land at Broughton Astley, Leicestershire, and the service of Billesley, Warwickshire (see below). Richard died at some time before 1175, and was survived for several years by his wife. He left as his heir William, but left also at least three other sons who obtained subtenancies in the Mallory lands, one of whom, Simon (died 'c'.1208), founded a long-lasting cadet branch of the family at Welton, which survived into the fourteenth century. William Mallory (d. c.1202) was his father's eldest son, and took responsibility for granting the Welton estate as a subtenancy to his younger brother, Simon. This would seem to have been an internal family arrangement which thus allowed more than one son to succeed while still preserving the integrity of the family's lands. He married a certain Alice, but nothing more of her is known. William had only one known son, Richard [iii] Mallory (d. 1217), who seems to have been active in Leicestershire as early as 1201. He made a rather large number of known grants: the church of Kirkby, first to Philip of Kington and then to Thelsford Priory, Warwickshire; several parcels of land in the same place to the hospitals of St John and the Holy Trinity, Northampton; small estates in Kirkby to his uncle, Luke Mallory, and to one Alexander of Whitby; and the advowson of the chapel of Peckleton to William Motun. He was at one point attached to the retinue of Saer de Quincy, earl of Winchester, in whose service he died at Mountsorrel Castle in 1217. He married Cecilia, sister of Stephen of Seagrave, the justiciar, and through her obtained three carrucates at Burgh, Leicestershire. Her suits for dower between 1220 and 1222 make it possible to assess Richard [iii]'s interests as being at his death the manors of Kirkby, Welton, and Thrupp, four and a half virgates subinfeudated at Broughton Astley, and several subinfeudated estates within Kirkby. For this he answered for a half fee to the Montfort half of the earldom of Leicester, a small assessment for such a large estate. 
Richard [iii] left four known sons, one of the younger of whom, Anschetil, founded yet another cadet branch of what was by now becoming a widespread family, at Octon in the East Riding of Yorkshire. The eldest son, Thomas [i] Mallory (b. 1201x5, d. in or after 1240), succeeded to Kirkby as a minor; he was in wardship to Henry of Seagrave in 1222 and had come of age by 1226, when he presented to the rectory of Kirkby. In 1234 he was involved in a plea concerning the service owed for the old Neufmarche estate of Billesley, Warwickshire, to which he apparently had some claim through his great-grandmother Agnes. Thomas was at that same time associated with the household of Simon de Montfort, but more closely with that of his uncle, Stephen of Seagrave. He was alive in 1240 but thereafter disappears; all that is known is that he was survived by his widow, Christina, and left a son and heir, Henry Mallory (d. in or before 1277). Little is known of Henry, other than that he instituted a chantry for his father's soul at the hospital chapel of Holy Trinity, Northampton, and that he attested a charter of Earl Simon de Montfort before 1265. Henry was succeeded by one Sir Thomas [ii] Mallory (d. in or after 1299) by 1277, who was probably (but not certainly) his brother. Thomas [ii] was the first of the Kirkby branch of the family known to have been knighted. By contrast, the Mallorys of Tachbrook and Welton were consistently knighted throughout the thirteenth century. Thomas [ii] was a household knight of Edmund, earl of Lancaster, in the early 1290s and is last found in 1299, making purchases of land in Kirkby. 
The Mallory family is a singularly well-documented example of the way that a gentry family could multiply and spread in several branches over two centuries, on what was initially a small endowment in land. By 1300 six distinct and related Mallory lineages can be distinguished, settled mostly in the midlands, four of them having produced knights of the county court. The Mallorys of Kirkby, the eldest branch, are an object lesson in how this was achieved on small means: by windfall marriages, magnate patronage, and subinfeudation. It is clear that by 1300 the Mallorys of Kirkby farmed directly comparatively little land, but existed on the services and maintenance owed them. It is also instructive how the Mallorys of several generations varied their magnate allegiance from generation to generation after the mid-twelfth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 59011


Waterston, Jane Elizabeth (1843-1932), missionary and doctor in South Africa, was born on 18 January 1843 in Inverness, a middle child of four girls and two boys of the first cousins Agnes Webster and Charles Waterston (died 1897), the manager of the Caledonian Bank in Inverness. 
Jane Waterston was educated privately and at Inverness Royal Academy. Although her father remained a member of the Church of Scotland after the great disruption of 1843, Jane Waterston decided to become a missionary in the Free Church of Scotland, which was then more active in African mission work. When James Stewart of Glasgow, previously a member of David Livingstone's 1862-3 Zambezi expedition, was appointed as principal of Lovedale School in the Ciskei region of Cape Colony in 1866, she accompanied him to South Africa. As principal of the Girls' Institution at Lovedale, formally opened on 23 August 1868, her goal was to turn out women who would be able to establish Christian homes in Africa. 
Through Waterston's enthusiastic and energetic leadership, the school produced some of the most notable young black women of the late nineteenth century in Cape Colony, including Letty Ncheni, wife of John Knox Bokwe. But Waterston's heart was not in schoolteaching. Throughout this period she followed the efforts of Elizabeth Garrett Anderson and Sophia Jex Blake to train as doctors. On 11 October 1874, the year of Livingstone's burial in Westminster Abbey, she registered as one of the first students at the London School of Medicine for Women. Her object was to join the Free Church mission to be founded on Lake Nyasa in the wake of Livingstone's death. 
After completing her medical training in London and in Ireland, where she obtained the licentiate of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland, Waterston set out in 1879 for Nyasaland to join the Livingstonia Mission run by Robert Laws. Jane Waterston found Livingstonia an unsympathetic environment. The male missionaries were awkward in the presence of a highly educated woman and dismissive of her abilities, confining her to teaching the youngest pupils. She in turn was appalled at their treatment of Africans. After only six months she left, deeply disillusioned with mission work, and returned to Lovedale, where she opened a clinic. 
By this time Jane Waterston's family had been left penniless after the failure of the Caledonian Bank in 1878; her brothers were unemployed and her mother and sisters unfitted to provide for themselves. She became the main breadwinner for her family. In 1883 she moved to Cape Town, where she remained for the rest of her life, living at 53 Grave Street. Although she was the only woman doctor in a country not noted for its enlightened attitude to women, she was accepted by the local medical profession. This was partly because of her tact and strength of character, and partly because she chose to practise among women, the poor of Cape Town, and the Xhosa dock labourers, whose language she spoke. 
While she rejected emerging evolutionary theories and referred to Darwin as the 'ape-faced man', Waterston embraced modern developments in medicine wholeheartedly. In 1887 she returned to Britain to further her medical training. In 1888 she obtained the licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, and the degree of MD from Brussels University in June of that year. In July she was awarded the certificate in psychological medicine from the Medico Psychological Association of Great Britain, the first women to achieve this qualification. It is possible that mental difficulties in her own family prompted this interest, which she furthered in South Africa as a member of the boards of the mental asylums on Robben Island and at Valkenburg, the latter noted for its modern approach to mental illness. On her return to Cape Town she became an active member of the medical profession, acting as the president of the Cape of Good Hope (western) branch of the British Medical Association in 1905-6. In her later years honours were showered upon her. In 1925 she was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland, the second woman to achieve this honour, and in 1929 she was made an honorary doctor of laws by the University of Cape Town. 
This recognition was due partly to Waterston's political activity. Although she never openly supported women's suffrage, she lived opposite the Cape houses of parliament and regularly attended sessions there. She lobbied vigorously for the protection of black education and increasingly, from the 1880s, the promotion of the British empire. This interest quickened through her close friendship with Edmund Garrett, editor of the 'Cape Times', who introduced her to Sir Alfred Milner when he arrived as governor of Cape Colony in 1898. During the South African War she organized relief for the Uitlander women and children who were deported to the coast from the Boer republics. The high regard in which Milner held her probably also explains why she was appointed to the Ladies Commission led by Millicent Garrett Fawcett, which had been established in 1901 to investigate the mortality of Boer women and children in the concentration camps set up by the British army as a result of the scorched earth policy. She has been regarded with opprobrium by Afrikaners for her contempt for the Boers, a consequence of their treatment of Africans, but she did her work well. 
In her later years Waterston had a standing in Cape Town among people of all colours and when she died there on 7 November 1932 her funeral procession was one of the largest ever seen in the city. 


@@@@@


doc= 59012


Martha Howell Bennett Combe (1806-1893)], one of five daughters of John Edwards, an ironmonger with premises in the High Street. Combe married her on 3 September 1840, Newman officiating at the ceremony. They had no children. Throughout their married life they were strong supporters of the Tractarian movement. 


@@@@@


doc= 59013


Selina Hall (1781/2-1853), who continued the business, seemingly without a pause, until her death. Many maps of this period simply signed S. Hall are undoubtedly her work, or work done under her direction, although it was her husband's name that continued to appear on the title-pages of atlases as well as in contemporary directories. Her work is highly competent and may be characterized as slightly looser and more open in appearance than that of Sidney Hall. 


@@@@@


doc= 59015


Macpherson, Gerardine (1830/31-1878), biographer and book illustrator, was born probably in London, the elder child of Henry Bate, a Leicester artist, and his wife, Louisa, 'nee' Murphy, the sister of Anna Brownell Jameson (1794-1860), a well-known writer on art and literature. After Bate went bankrupt in 1839, the childless Mrs Jameson undertook to pay for and superintend his daughter's education. In December 1840 she wrote apprehensively to her friend Ottilie von Goethe that her niece was 'growing a great tall, wild girl, and requires good discipline' ('Letters of Anna Jameson', 130), but by February 1842 Gerardine (known as Geddie) seems to have been living with her. 
In 1846-7 aunt and niece visited France and Italy, mainly to finish Gerardine Bate's education; they travelled with the newly married Robert and Elizabeth Barrett Browning. The romantic atmosphere must have affected the impressionable Gerardine: in Rome she met and fell in love with Robert Macpherson (1814-1872), a flamboyant Scottish artist who had recently been converted to Roman Catholicism. Stoutly protestant and probably distressed at the prospect of losing her adopted daughter, Jameson strongly disapproved of the attachment. The marriage was delayed by the 1848 revolution in Rome, which further depleted Macpherson's already precarious finances (in 1851, he turned to photography to earn his living); Gerardine Bate appears to have returned to her parents, who did not oppose the match, and in April 1849 Jameson wrote grumpily: 'Gerardine does not go on to my satisfaction' ('Letters of Anna Jameson', 165). The couple were married on 4 September 1849 in Ealing; in the following year, Mrs Macpherson converted to Catholicism. 
Jameson was eventually reconciled to her niece's marriage: in 1855 and 1857, she visited the Macphersons in Rome, attending mass at St Peter's on one occasion to please Gerardine. In 1846-7 Gerardine had designed the engravings for Jameson's 'Sacred and Legendary Art' (1848); Jameson now engaged her to provide etchings for the second edition of her 'Legends of the Madonna' (1857). Such employment was no doubt welcome: never more than comfortably off, the Macphersons had a growing family and Robert was almost continually in poor health. Gerardine Macpherson was a working wife and mother: she illustrated her husband's 'Vatican Sculptures' (1863) and assisted him with his photographic business. Robert Macpherson also dealt in antiquities: responsible for the discovery of Michelangelo's 'The Entombment of Christ' in 1846, he hoarded it as a financial security, describing it as 'Gerardine's fortune' and eventually selling it to the National Gallery in 1868 for $2000. 
After 1865 Robert Macpherson's health and business both declined, and he died in November 1872, leaving his wife and four surviving children in financial distress. Gerardine Macpherson supported her family by giving lessons in English, acting as an amanuensis, and serving as a newspaper correspondent in Rome during the hot season when the regular correspondents departed. More significantly, she prepared her 'Memoirs of the Life of Anna Jameson' (1878), which necessitated a three-month visit to England; the first biography of her aunt, it was published after her death with an introductory preface by a family friend, the novelist Margaret Oliphant. It remained the most important account of Jameson's life and work until it was superseded by Clara Thomas's 1967 biography. Worn out by her many employments, suffering from rheumatism and heart disease, Gerardine Macpherson died in Rome on 24 May 1878; she was buried next to her husband in the cemetery of San Lorenzo. 
When first embarking on her niece's education in 1842, Jameson had declared that she would try to 'give her the means of independence [so that] she will not be obliged to marry for money, like so many women of her condition' ('Letters of Anna Jameson', 135): ironically, as for her aunt, neither education nor marriage ensured financial security (whatever their other benefits) for Gerardine Macpherson. Her plight is indicative of the financial perils of the mid-Victorian middle-class woman; her achievements were the essentially complementary and concealed ones characteristic of the home-educated and amateur woman artist and writer of the 1850s and 1860s. 


@@@@@


doc= 59016


Merrifield, Mary Philadelphia (1804-1889), writer on art and algologist, was born on 15 April 1804 in Brompton, London, the daughter of a conveyancing barrister, Sir Charles Watkins. In 1827 she married John Merrifield of Tavistock (1788/9-1877), who was called to the bar in Middle Temple in 1828 and practised for many years in Brighton, where the family lived. Her earliest work appears to be her translation, entitled 'Treatise of Painting' (1844), of Cennino Cennici's early fifteenth-century work, which had been recently discovered and published in 1821 by the Italian antiquary Giuseppe Tambroni. This led to her employment by the royal commission on the fine arts, investigating the history of painters' materials and techniques, which resulted in the publication of her 'The Art of Fresco Painting' (1846). Reflecting the royal commission's deep concern about the absence of a British school of history painting, it was at once a collection of historical texts on the techniques of twelfth- to eighteenth-century fresco painters and a manual for the practising artist; it long remained a useful work and was reprinted in 1952. Her two sons, Charles Watkins Merrifield (1827-1884), later a marine engineer and mathematician, and Frederick Merrifield, assisted her researches. Mrs Merrifield followed this important work with 'Original Treatises on the Arts of Painting' (1849), a collection of early technical information which remained of value for many years and was reprinted in 1967. 
In 1851 Mary Merrifield published 'Practical Directions for Portrait-Painting in Watercolours', which was followed in 1854 by 'Dress as a Fine Art', a reprint of essays which had first appeared in the 'Art Journal' and the 'London Magazine'; both works seem to be intended for a readership of young middle-class women. In 'Dress' Mrs Merrifield declared herself in favour of practical, modest, and elegant fashions, and displayed a considerable sympathy for the dress reforms of Amelia Bloomer. Her 'Handbook of Light and Shade with Reference to Model Drawing' (1855) was possibly written at the request of her son Charles, who was then an examiner in the education office. 
On 2 May 1857 Mary Merrifield was granted a civil-list pension of $100 in recognition of her services to literature and art. Ironically her literary career now took a new direction: in the same year she published 'Brighton Past and Present', a lively guidebook featuring a good many Regency anecdotes, which was followed by 'A Sketch of the Natural History of Brighton' (1864). This reflected her new interest in botany: over the next twenty years, taking advantage of her seaside residency, she became an accepted authority on seaweeds, publishing articles on marine algae in the 'Journal of the Linnean Society', the 'Journal of Botany', and the 'Annals of Botany'. From 1875 until her death she also contributed frequently to the important scientific journal 'Nature', exhibiting a keen sensitivity to both the beauty and the antiquity of her subject matter. She assisted in the arrangement and display of natural history exhibits at the Brighton Museum, and in her later years learned Danish and Swedish to read scientific literature in these languages. A species of marine algae was named after her, and her herbarium is held at the natural history department of the British Museum. 
After the death of her husband in 1877 Mary Merrifield went to live with her daughter, who had married a clergyman, at Stapleford vicarage, near Cambridge; she died there on 4 January 1889. Her contributions to both art history and science show how a linguistically accomplished middle-class woman could establish herself in Victorian cultural and scholarly circles: C. R. Sherman has emphasized how translations -- rather than original writings -- could serve as 'passports for women's publications in the arts' (Sherman, 13), while the essentially taxonomic and descriptive project of late Victorian botany offered Merrifield an opportunity to establish a niche in one of the few sciences considered suitable for her sex. 


@@@@@


doc= 59019


Stapleton, Mary Helen Alicia (1837-1918), local historian, was born on 14 August 1837 at Eaton Bishop, Herefordshire, the only daughter of John Thomas Dolman (died 1868), a physician in York, and his wife, Ann Helen Cox; both her parents belonged to long-established Roman Catholic families. She attended the Bar Convent School, York. In the mid-1840s the Dolmans moved to Souldern Manor in Oxfordshire, which belonged to Mrs Dolman's father. On 24 June 1857 Mary Dolman married Bryan John Stapleton (1831-1903), sixth son of Thomas Stapleton (1788-1839), of Carlton House, Yorkshire, and half-brother of the eighth Lord Beaumont; the couple lived initially at The Grove, Richmond, Yorkshire, where their first three children were born. They were to have seven sons and seven daughters; three of the children died in infancy. The marriage was a happy one, despite the contrasting temperaments of husband and wife: while Bryan John was full of 'fiery impetuosity', Mary was described by her daughter Winifred as 'quiet and undemonstrative' and 'English to the core' (Stapleton, 67). 
In 1868, after Mary's father died, the Stapletons moved to Souldern Manor. The household was happy and carefree, though the children received a strict religious education of the traditional English Catholic variety, which produced devout but reticent 'Garden of the Soul Catholics' (Stapleton, 28). Although a devoted and busy mother, Mary Stapleton found time to play Lady Bountiful in the local village and to form a friendship with Bishop Ullathorne of Birmingham. In the late 1870s the Stapletons lost some property in Yorkshire and one daughter died of diphtheria; their straitened finances and concerns about the unhealthiness of Souldern caused them to move to Grove House, Kidlington. They later lived at different addresses in Oxford, including The Cedars, Summertown, and became more involved in city life and local Conservative politics. 
Both Mary Stapleton and her husband developed an interest in local history: a member of the North Oxfordshire Archaeological Society (later the Oxfordshire Archaeological Society) from 1881, Bryan John Stapleton was a committee member and treasurer from 'c'.1897 until his death, after which Mrs Stapleton became a life member. She probably turned more fully to 'her favourite occupation, the writing of local history' (Stapleton, 65) after the birth of her last child in 1884, although she had been collecting information while still at Kidlington. Her researches in Oxfordshire libraries, local houses, and churchyards were initially for 'pleasure and private use' (Stapleton, 65), but an Oxford don persuaded her to let Oxford University Press publish her work. Her first publication was 'Three Oxfordshire Parishes: a History of Kidlington, Yarnton, and Begbroke' (1893). A more substantial work -- reflecting her religious affiliation -- followed in 1906: 'A history of the Post-Reformation Catholic missions in Oxfordshire, with an account of the families connected to them' contained more relating to the second half of its title than its first, and her own annotated copy, now in the Bodleian Library, contains interpolated hand-drawn family trees. The book was based on exhaustive research in a wide range of printed sources and manuscripts in Oxford colleges and the Bodleian. Winifred Stapleton recalled that her father was 'very proud of mother's wonderful talents and delighted to call her the 'walking encyclopaedia'' (Stapleton, 65-6). Despite this promising (if dull) beginning, Mrs Stapleton contributed little more to the early twentieth-century resurgence in Catholic history; however, she did supply historical notes to several Oxfordshire Catholic registers in the 1911 and 1915 volumes published by the Catholic Record Society. 
Bryan John Stapleton died in March 1903; Mary Stapleton was doubly bereaved, as two of their sons had lately been killed in the South African War. Later that year Mary and her youngest daughter went on the tour of northern Italy, and to Rome for an audience with the pope. She then moved to 78 Parkwood Road, Boscombe, Hampshire, where she lived for the rest of her life. She died there, surrounded by candles representing her fourteen children, on 10 April 1918, and was buried on 15 April in Boscombe cemetery. Although an obituarist opined that 'she will be chiefly remembered as one of the early band of lady historians' ('Oxfordshire Archaeological Society Report', 2), she was one of many amateur women historians who for decades had turned to the materials closest to hand, thus becoming contributors to the development of minor historical disciplines such as family and local history. 


@@@@@


doc= 59020


Harcourt family (per. c.1050-1330), gentry, a family of major importance in the central midlands, was first to be found in Normandy before 1066 where sources deriving from the abbey of Bec-Hellouin identify one Anschetil as lord of Harcourt (Eure) and as a close cousin of the magnate family known as the Beaumonts, lords of Beaumont-le-Roger and Pont-Audemer. His son Robert fitz Anschetil (d. in or before 1118) held a large barony from the Beaumonts. The creation of the earldom of Warwick for Henry de Beaumont in 1088 brought Robert an estate of seven fees in Leicestershire and Warwickshire formerly held in chief by Robert de Vescy but subordinated to the earldom. The Harcourts secured a number of other estates in the same counties when Henry I created the earldom of Leicester for Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan (died 1118), in 1107, including Market Bosworth, Leicestershire, which became the Harcourt centre in England in the twelfth century. Robert fitz Anschetil had died by 1118 to be succeeded by numerous sons, at least four of whom took shares of his cross-channel estates. The son who founded the chief English branch of the family was Ivo de Harcourt (d. in or after 1166) who acquired most of the Harcourt lands in England perhaps in succession (at least in the earldom of Warwick) to his elder, childless brother, Anschetil fitz Robert, who died soon after 1130. Ivo was a major follower of Robert (II), earl of Leicester. He is found frequently in the Leicester household, and accompanied his lord to Normandy in 1154. Perhaps to simplify the problems posed by the split allegiance, Roger, earl of Warwick, transferred to Earl Robert three and a half Harcourt fees in exchange for an equal number of Leicester fees in Warwickshire, in a singular arrangement transacted before 1153. Ivo was still alive in 1166, but probably died not long afterwards. 
Ivo was succeeded by his son Robert de Harcourt (d. c.1205). Robert attested a late charter of Robert (II) of Leicester, and although he acted as a pledge for Earl Robert (III) in a debt to Aaron the Jew before 1179, he seems largely to have separated himself from the Leicester family after 1168. He was an independent figure in the midlands, his concerns centred on estate improvement and enlargement. He promoted the status of his house at Market Bosworth by the building of a substantial private chapel, which involved him in litigation with Bertram de Verdon, patron of the parish church of the place. In the reign of Henry II, before 1184, he made a profitable marriage to Isabel, daughter of Richard (I) de Camville, obtaining in 1192 the substantial marriage portion of Stanton Harcourt, Oxfordshire, and Norton and Stratton in the soke of Rothley, valued at $56 rent p.a. Between 1198 and 1202 he was sheriff of Leicestershire and Warwickshire, and left a debt of $127 3's'. 0died which was still outstanding on his death 'c'.1205. 
Robert left several sons, but the bulk of his estates came to his eldest, Sir William [i] de Harcourt (d. c.1223), who was active in King Richard's wars in France, doing service for his father for the fee of Stanton Harcourt in 1197. He was also active on King John's behalf in the campaigns of 1215 and campaigned in 1220-21 for the regents of Henry III against the count of Aumale's rebellion and John's former sheriffs. The exchequer memoranda have him alive in the year Easter 1222-3 but there is reference to the executors of his testament in a fine of April 1223. His son answered for his considerable debts (over $400) in 1224. As with his father, William seems not to have had any magnate links, but rather to have formed a connection with the king direct and entered the group of minor curial magnates: the scale of his debts indicates that his finances may not have equalled his aspirations. 
William was succeeded by his son Sir Richard [i] de Harcourt (d. 1258). Richard made a third substantial acquisition for his family in the Staffordshire manor of Ellenhall, which came to him through marriage to Orabilia, daughter of Thomas Noel. He made careful arrangements for the succession to his lands, enfeoffing his younger son, Saher, with two Leicestershire manors, Kibworth and Newton Harcourt, in his own lifetime. He died early in 1258 leaving his brother, William, rector of Aylestone, as his executor, as appears from a later fine. His eldest son, Sir William [ii] de Harcourt (d. 1270), succeeded to the bulk of his estate, doing homage to the king for his manor of Stanton in April 1258. William [ii] made two marriages, the first (before 1253) to Alice, sister of Alan de la Zouche, which brought him the manor of Tong, Shropshire, and Braunstone, Leicestershire, from his father. The second marriage was to a certain Hilaria. This William became involved with the Montfortian cause in 1264-5, although there is little evidence to link him with the Montfort affinity in the midlands before then. His brother Sir Saher was, however, a long-term associate of Earl Simon, and was ruined by his involvement with the baronial cause. William [ii] was burdened with fines of 500 marks, but in 1267 found a group of neighbours and relatives able to guarantee and clear 400 marks, which the king had granted to Sir Philip Basset, and in 1269 negotiated the clearing of a further 100 marks owed to William de Valence. William died in 1270, leaving his only son, Sir Richard [ii] de Harcourt (1256-1293), a minor, as heir. Richard had proof of age in 1277, when his date of birth was agreed as having been 9 December 1256 in Oxfordshire (presumably at Stanton), which would have made him the son of William's first marriage. Richard was already married at that time to Margery Bek of Eresby. Sir Richard died early in 1293 leaving as heir his son Sir John Harcourt (1274-1330). 
The successive heads of the Harcourt family after the 1160s were men of national significance, and although they clearly found their minor magnate status a financial burden, did not enter into any alliance with the greater magnates. The Harcourts successfully maintained and augmented their already substantial demesne interests in three midland counties throughout the thirteenth century, largely by advantageous marriages, which must be a tribute to their court connections and lineage. Their arms were two bars (seal of Richard [i], 'c'.1223) and later or, two bars gules (William [ii], 'c'.1285, St George's roll). 


@@@@@


doc= 59021


Harcourt family (per. c.1050-1330), gentry, a family of major importance in the central midlands, was first to be found in Normandy before 1066 where sources deriving from the abbey of Bec-Hellouin identify one Anschetil as lord of Harcourt (Eure) and as a close cousin of the magnate family known as the Beaumonts, lords of Beaumont-le-Roger and Pont-Audemer. His son Robert fitz Anschetil (d. in or before 1118) held a large barony from the Beaumonts. The creation of the earldom of Warwick for Henry de Beaumont in 1088 brought Robert an estate of seven fees in Leicestershire and Warwickshire formerly held in chief by Robert de Vescy but subordinated to the earldom. The Harcourts secured a number of other estates in the same counties when Henry I created the earldom of Leicester for Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan (died 1118), in 1107, including Market Bosworth, Leicestershire, which became the Harcourt centre in England in the twelfth century. Robert fitz Anschetil had died by 1118 to be succeeded by numerous sons, at least four of whom took shares of his cross-channel estates. The son who founded the chief English branch of the family was Ivo de Harcourt (d. in or after 1166) who acquired most of the Harcourt lands in England perhaps in succession (at least in the earldom of Warwick) to his elder, childless brother, Anschetil fitz Robert, who died soon after 1130. Ivo was a major follower of Robert (II), earl of Leicester. He is found frequently in the Leicester household, and accompanied his lord to Normandy in 1154. Perhaps to simplify the problems posed by the split allegiance, Roger, earl of Warwick, transferred to Earl Robert three and a half Harcourt fees in exchange for an equal number of Leicester fees in Warwickshire, in a singular arrangement transacted before 1153. Ivo was still alive in 1166, but probably died not long afterwards. 
Ivo was succeeded by his son Robert de Harcourt (d. c.1205). Robert attested a late charter of Robert (II) of Leicester, and although he acted as a pledge for Earl Robert (III) in a debt to Aaron the Jew before 1179, he seems largely to have separated himself from the Leicester family after 1168. He was an independent figure in the midlands, his concerns centred on estate improvement and enlargement. He promoted the status of his house at Market Bosworth by the building of a substantial private chapel, which involved him in litigation with Bertram de Verdon, patron of the parish church of the place. In the reign of Henry II, before 1184, he made a profitable marriage to Isabel, daughter of Richard (I) de Camville, obtaining in 1192 the substantial marriage portion of Stanton Harcourt, Oxfordshire, and Norton and Stratton in the soke of Rothley, valued at $56 rent p.a. Between 1198 and 1202 he was sheriff of Leicestershire and Warwickshire, and left a debt of $127 3's'. 0died which was still outstanding on his death 'c'.1205. 
Robert left several sons, but the bulk of his estates came to his eldest, Sir William [i] de Harcourt (d. c.1223), who was active in King Richard's wars in France, doing service for his father for the fee of Stanton Harcourt in 1197. He was also active on King John's behalf in the campaigns of 1215 and campaigned in 1220-21 for the regents of Henry III against the count of Aumale's rebellion and John's former sheriffs. The exchequer memoranda have him alive in the year Easter 1222-3 but there is reference to the executors of his testament in a fine of April 1223. His son answered for his considerable debts (over $400) in 1224. As with his father, William seems not to have had any magnate links, but rather to have formed a connection with the king direct and entered the group of minor curial magnates: the scale of his debts indicates that his finances may not have equalled his aspirations. 
William was succeeded by his son Sir Richard [i] de Harcourt (d. 1258). Richard made a third substantial acquisition for his family in the Staffordshire manor of Ellenhall, which came to him through marriage to Orabilia, daughter of Thomas Noel. He made careful arrangements for the succession to his lands, enfeoffing his younger son, Saher, with two Leicestershire manors, Kibworth and Newton Harcourt, in his own lifetime. He died early in 1258 leaving his brother, William, rector of Aylestone, as his executor, as appears from a later fine. His eldest son, Sir William [ii] de Harcourt (d. 1270), succeeded to the bulk of his estate, doing homage to the king for his manor of Stanton in April 1258. William [ii] made two marriages, the first (before 1253) to Alice, sister of Alan de la Zouche, which brought him the manor of Tong, Shropshire, and Braunstone, Leicestershire, from his father. The second marriage was to a certain Hilaria. This William became involved with the Montfortian cause in 1264-5, although there is little evidence to link him with the Montfort affinity in the midlands before then. His brother Sir Saher was, however, a long-term associate of Earl Simon, and was ruined by his involvement with the baronial cause. William [ii] was burdened with fines of 500 marks, but in 1267 found a group of neighbours and relatives able to guarantee and clear 400 marks, which the king had granted to Sir Philip Basset, and in 1269 negotiated the clearing of a further 100 marks owed to William de Valence. William died in 1270, leaving his only son, Sir Richard [ii] de Harcourt (1256-1293), a minor, as heir. Richard had proof of age in 1277, when his date of birth was agreed as having been 9 December 1256 in Oxfordshire (presumably at Stanton), which would have made him the son of William's first marriage. Richard was already married at that time to Margery Bek of Eresby. Sir Richard died early in 1293 leaving as heir his son Sir John Harcourt (1274-1330). 
The successive heads of the Harcourt family after the 1160s were men of national significance, and although they clearly found their minor magnate status a financial burden, did not enter into any alliance with the greater magnates. The Harcourts successfully maintained and augmented their already substantial demesne interests in three midland counties throughout the thirteenth century, largely by advantageous marriages, which must be a tribute to their court connections and lineage. Their arms were two bars (seal of Richard [i], 'c'.1223) and later or, two bars gules (William [ii], 'c'.1285, St George's roll). 


@@@@@


doc= 59022


Harcourt family (per. c.1050-1330), gentry, a family of major importance in the central midlands, was first to be found in Normandy before 1066 where sources deriving from the abbey of Bec-Hellouin identify one Anschetil as lord of Harcourt (Eure) and as a close cousin of the magnate family known as the Beaumonts, lords of Beaumont-le-Roger and Pont-Audemer. His son Robert fitz Anschetil (d. in or before 1118) held a large barony from the Beaumonts. The creation of the earldom of Warwick for Henry de Beaumont in 1088 brought Robert an estate of seven fees in Leicestershire and Warwickshire formerly held in chief by Robert de Vescy but subordinated to the earldom. The Harcourts secured a number of other estates in the same counties when Henry I created the earldom of Leicester for Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan (died 1118), in 1107, including Market Bosworth, Leicestershire, which became the Harcourt centre in England in the twelfth century. Robert fitz Anschetil had died by 1118 to be succeeded by numerous sons, at least four of whom took shares of his cross-channel estates. The son who founded the chief English branch of the family was Ivo de Harcourt (d. in or after 1166) who acquired most of the Harcourt lands in England perhaps in succession (at least in the earldom of Warwick) to his elder, childless brother, Anschetil fitz Robert, who died soon after 1130. Ivo was a major follower of Robert (II), earl of Leicester. He is found frequently in the Leicester household, and accompanied his lord to Normandy in 1154. Perhaps to simplify the problems posed by the split allegiance, Roger, earl of Warwick, transferred to Earl Robert three and a half Harcourt fees in exchange for an equal number of Leicester fees in Warwickshire, in a singular arrangement transacted before 1153. Ivo was still alive in 1166, but probably died not long afterwards. 
Ivo was succeeded by his son Robert de Harcourt (d. c.1205). Robert attested a late charter of Robert (II) of Leicester, and although he acted as a pledge for Earl Robert (III) in a debt to Aaron the Jew before 1179, he seems largely to have separated himself from the Leicester family after 1168. He was an independent figure in the midlands, his concerns centred on estate improvement and enlargement. He promoted the status of his house at Market Bosworth by the building of a substantial private chapel, which involved him in litigation with Bertram de Verdon, patron of the parish church of the place. In the reign of Henry II, before 1184, he made a profitable marriage to Isabel, daughter of Richard (I) de Camville, obtaining in 1192 the substantial marriage portion of Stanton Harcourt, Oxfordshire, and Norton and Stratton in the soke of Rothley, valued at $56 rent p.a. Between 1198 and 1202 he was sheriff of Leicestershire and Warwickshire, and left a debt of $127 3's'. 0died which was still outstanding on his death 'c'.1205. 
Robert left several sons, but the bulk of his estates came to his eldest, Sir William [i] de Harcourt (d. c.1223), who was active in King Richard's wars in France, doing service for his father for the fee of Stanton Harcourt in 1197. He was also active on King John's behalf in the campaigns of 1215 and campaigned in 1220-21 for the regents of Henry III against the count of Aumale's rebellion and John's former sheriffs. The exchequer memoranda have him alive in the year Easter 1222-3 but there is reference to the executors of his testament in a fine of April 1223. His son answered for his considerable debts (over $400) in 1224. As with his father, William seems not to have had any magnate links, but rather to have formed a connection with the king direct and entered the group of minor curial magnates: the scale of his debts indicates that his finances may not have equalled his aspirations. 
William was succeeded by his son Sir Richard [i] de Harcourt (d. 1258). Richard made a third substantial acquisition for his family in the Staffordshire manor of Ellenhall, which came to him through marriage to Orabilia, daughter of Thomas Noel. He made careful arrangements for the succession to his lands, enfeoffing his younger son, Saher, with two Leicestershire manors, Kibworth and Newton Harcourt, in his own lifetime. He died early in 1258 leaving his brother, William, rector of Aylestone, as his executor, as appears from a later fine. His eldest son, Sir William [ii] de Harcourt (d. 1270), succeeded to the bulk of his estate, doing homage to the king for his manor of Stanton in April 1258. William [ii] made two marriages, the first (before 1253) to Alice, sister of Alan de la Zouche, which brought him the manor of Tong, Shropshire, and Braunstone, Leicestershire, from his father. The second marriage was to a certain Hilaria. This William became involved with the Montfortian cause in 1264-5, although there is little evidence to link him with the Montfort affinity in the midlands before then. His brother Sir Saher was, however, a long-term associate of Earl Simon, and was ruined by his involvement with the baronial cause. William [ii] was burdened with fines of 500 marks, but in 1267 found a group of neighbours and relatives able to guarantee and clear 400 marks, which the king had granted to Sir Philip Basset, and in 1269 negotiated the clearing of a further 100 marks owed to William de Valence. William died in 1270, leaving his only son, Sir Richard [ii] de Harcourt (1256-1293), a minor, as heir. Richard had proof of age in 1277, when his date of birth was agreed as having been 9 December 1256 in Oxfordshire (presumably at Stanton), which would have made him the son of William's first marriage. Richard was already married at that time to Margery Bek of Eresby. Sir Richard died early in 1293 leaving as heir his son Sir John Harcourt (1274-1330). 
The successive heads of the Harcourt family after the 1160s were men of national significance, and although they clearly found their minor magnate status a financial burden, did not enter into any alliance with the greater magnates. The Harcourts successfully maintained and augmented their already substantial demesne interests in three midland counties throughout the thirteenth century, largely by advantageous marriages, which must be a tribute to their court connections and lineage. Their arms were two bars (seal of Richard [i], 'c'.1223) and later or, two bars gules (William [ii], 'c'.1285, St George's roll). 


@@@@@


doc= 59023


Harcourt family (per. c.1050-1330), gentry, a family of major importance in the central midlands, was first to be found in Normandy before 1066 where sources deriving from the abbey of Bec-Hellouin identify one Anschetil as lord of Harcourt (Eure) and as a close cousin of the magnate family known as the Beaumonts, lords of Beaumont-le-Roger and Pont-Audemer. His son Robert fitz Anschetil (d. in or before 1118) held a large barony from the Beaumonts. The creation of the earldom of Warwick for Henry de Beaumont in 1088 brought Robert an estate of seven fees in Leicestershire and Warwickshire formerly held in chief by Robert de Vescy but subordinated to the earldom. The Harcourts secured a number of other estates in the same counties when Henry I created the earldom of Leicester for Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan (died 1118), in 1107, including Market Bosworth, Leicestershire, which became the Harcourt centre in England in the twelfth century. Robert fitz Anschetil had died by 1118 to be succeeded by numerous sons, at least four of whom took shares of his cross-channel estates. The son who founded the chief English branch of the family was Ivo de Harcourt (d. in or after 1166) who acquired most of the Harcourt lands in England perhaps in succession (at least in the earldom of Warwick) to his elder, childless brother, Anschetil fitz Robert, who died soon after 1130. Ivo was a major follower of Robert (II), earl of Leicester. He is found frequently in the Leicester household, and accompanied his lord to Normandy in 1154. Perhaps to simplify the problems posed by the split allegiance, Roger, earl of Warwick, transferred to Earl Robert three and a half Harcourt fees in exchange for an equal number of Leicester fees in Warwickshire, in a singular arrangement transacted before 1153. Ivo was still alive in 1166, but probably died not long afterwards. 
Ivo was succeeded by his son Robert de Harcourt (d. c.1205). Robert attested a late charter of Robert (II) of Leicester, and although he acted as a pledge for Earl Robert (III) in a debt to Aaron the Jew before 1179, he seems largely to have separated himself from the Leicester family after 1168. He was an independent figure in the midlands, his concerns centred on estate improvement and enlargement. He promoted the status of his house at Market Bosworth by the building of a substantial private chapel, which involved him in litigation with Bertram de Verdon, patron of the parish church of the place. In the reign of Henry II, before 1184, he made a profitable marriage to Isabel, daughter of Richard (I) de Camville, obtaining in 1192 the substantial marriage portion of Stanton Harcourt, Oxfordshire, and Norton and Stratton in the soke of Rothley, valued at $56 rent p.a. Between 1198 and 1202 he was sheriff of Leicestershire and Warwickshire, and left a debt of $127 3's'. 0died which was still outstanding on his death 'c'.1205. 
Robert left several sons, but the bulk of his estates came to his eldest, Sir William [i] de Harcourt (d. c.1223), who was active in King Richard's wars in France, doing service for his father for the fee of Stanton Harcourt in 1197. He was also active on King John's behalf in the campaigns of 1215 and campaigned in 1220-21 for the regents of Henry III against the count of Aumale's rebellion and John's former sheriffs. The exchequer memoranda have him alive in the year Easter 1222-3 but there is reference to the executors of his testament in a fine of April 1223. His son answered for his considerable debts (over $400) in 1224. As with his father, William seems not to have had any magnate links, but rather to have formed a connection with the king direct and entered the group of minor curial magnates: the scale of his debts indicates that his finances may not have equalled his aspirations. 
William was succeeded by his son Sir Richard [i] de Harcourt (d. 1258). Richard made a third substantial acquisition for his family in the Staffordshire manor of Ellenhall, which came to him through marriage to Orabilia, daughter of Thomas Noel. He made careful arrangements for the succession to his lands, enfeoffing his younger son, Saher, with two Leicestershire manors, Kibworth and Newton Harcourt, in his own lifetime. He died early in 1258 leaving his brother, William, rector of Aylestone, as his executor, as appears from a later fine. His eldest son, Sir William [ii] de Harcourt (d. 1270), succeeded to the bulk of his estate, doing homage to the king for his manor of Stanton in April 1258. William [ii] made two marriages, the first (before 1253) to Alice, sister of Alan de la Zouche, which brought him the manor of Tong, Shropshire, and Braunstone, Leicestershire, from his father. The second marriage was to a certain Hilaria. This William became involved with the Montfortian cause in 1264-5, although there is little evidence to link him with the Montfort affinity in the midlands before then. His brother Sir Saher was, however, a long-term associate of Earl Simon, and was ruined by his involvement with the baronial cause. William [ii] was burdened with fines of 500 marks, but in 1267 found a group of neighbours and relatives able to guarantee and clear 400 marks, which the king had granted to Sir Philip Basset, and in 1269 negotiated the clearing of a further 100 marks owed to William de Valence. William died in 1270, leaving his only son, Sir Richard [ii] de Harcourt (1256-1293), a minor, as heir. Richard had proof of age in 1277, when his date of birth was agreed as having been 9 December 1256 in Oxfordshire (presumably at Stanton), which would have made him the son of William's first marriage. Richard was already married at that time to Margery Bek of Eresby. Sir Richard died early in 1293 leaving as heir his son Sir John Harcourt (1274-1330). 
The successive heads of the Harcourt family after the 1160s were men of national significance, and although they clearly found their minor magnate status a financial burden, did not enter into any alliance with the greater magnates. The Harcourts successfully maintained and augmented their already substantial demesne interests in three midland counties throughout the thirteenth century, largely by advantageous marriages, which must be a tribute to their court connections and lineage. Their arms were two bars (seal of Richard [i], 'c'.1223) and later or, two bars gules (William [ii], 'c'.1285, St George's roll). 


@@@@@


doc= 59024


Harcourt family (per. c.1050-1330), gentry, a family of major importance in the central midlands, was first to be found in Normandy before 1066 where sources deriving from the abbey of Bec-Hellouin identify one Anschetil as lord of Harcourt (Eure) and as a close cousin of the magnate family known as the Beaumonts, lords of Beaumont-le-Roger and Pont-Audemer. His son Robert fitz Anschetil (d. in or before 1118) held a large barony from the Beaumonts. The creation of the earldom of Warwick for Henry de Beaumont in 1088 brought Robert an estate of seven fees in Leicestershire and Warwickshire formerly held in chief by Robert de Vescy but subordinated to the earldom. The Harcourts secured a number of other estates in the same counties when Henry I created the earldom of Leicester for Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan (died 1118), in 1107, including Market Bosworth, Leicestershire, which became the Harcourt centre in England in the twelfth century. Robert fitz Anschetil had died by 1118 to be succeeded by numerous sons, at least four of whom took shares of his cross-channel estates. The son who founded the chief English branch of the family was Ivo de Harcourt (d. in or after 1166) who acquired most of the Harcourt lands in England perhaps in succession (at least in the earldom of Warwick) to his elder, childless brother, Anschetil fitz Robert, who died soon after 1130. Ivo was a major follower of Robert (II), earl of Leicester. He is found frequently in the Leicester household, and accompanied his lord to Normandy in 1154. Perhaps to simplify the problems posed by the split allegiance, Roger, earl of Warwick, transferred to Earl Robert three and a half Harcourt fees in exchange for an equal number of Leicester fees in Warwickshire, in a singular arrangement transacted before 1153. Ivo was still alive in 1166, but probably died not long afterwards. 
Ivo was succeeded by his son Robert de Harcourt (d. c.1205). Robert attested a late charter of Robert (II) of Leicester, and although he acted as a pledge for Earl Robert (III) in a debt to Aaron the Jew before 1179, he seems largely to have separated himself from the Leicester family after 1168. He was an independent figure in the midlands, his concerns centred on estate improvement and enlargement. He promoted the status of his house at Market Bosworth by the building of a substantial private chapel, which involved him in litigation with Bertram de Verdon, patron of the parish church of the place. In the reign of Henry II, before 1184, he made a profitable marriage to Isabel, daughter of Richard (I) de Camville, obtaining in 1192 the substantial marriage portion of Stanton Harcourt, Oxfordshire, and Norton and Stratton in the soke of Rothley, valued at $56 rent p.a. Between 1198 and 1202 he was sheriff of Leicestershire and Warwickshire, and left a debt of $127 3's'. 0died which was still outstanding on his death 'c'.1205. 
Robert left several sons, but the bulk of his estates came to his eldest, Sir William [i] de Harcourt (d. c.1223), who was active in King Richard's wars in France, doing service for his father for the fee of Stanton Harcourt in 1197. He was also active on King John's behalf in the campaigns of 1215 and campaigned in 1220-21 for the regents of Henry III against the count of Aumale's rebellion and John's former sheriffs. The exchequer memoranda have him alive in the year Easter 1222-3 but there is reference to the executors of his testament in a fine of April 1223. His son answered for his considerable debts (over $400) in 1224. As with his father, William seems not to have had any magnate links, but rather to have formed a connection with the king direct and entered the group of minor curial magnates: the scale of his debts indicates that his finances may not have equalled his aspirations. 
William was succeeded by his son Sir Richard [i] de Harcourt (d. 1258). Richard made a third substantial acquisition for his family in the Staffordshire manor of Ellenhall, which came to him through marriage to Orabilia, daughter of Thomas Noel. He made careful arrangements for the succession to his lands, enfeoffing his younger son, Saher, with two Leicestershire manors, Kibworth and Newton Harcourt, in his own lifetime. He died early in 1258 leaving his brother, William, rector of Aylestone, as his executor, as appears from a later fine. His eldest son, Sir William [ii] de Harcourt (d. 1270), succeeded to the bulk of his estate, doing homage to the king for his manor of Stanton in April 1258. William [ii] made two marriages, the first (before 1253) to Alice, sister of Alan de la Zouche, which brought him the manor of Tong, Shropshire, and Braunstone, Leicestershire, from his father. The second marriage was to a certain Hilaria. This William became involved with the Montfortian cause in 1264-5, although there is little evidence to link him with the Montfort affinity in the midlands before then. His brother Sir Saher was, however, a long-term associate of Earl Simon, and was ruined by his involvement with the baronial cause. William [ii] was burdened with fines of 500 marks, but in 1267 found a group of neighbours and relatives able to guarantee and clear 400 marks, which the king had granted to Sir Philip Basset, and in 1269 negotiated the clearing of a further 100 marks owed to William de Valence. William died in 1270, leaving his only son, Sir Richard [ii] de Harcourt (1256-1293), a minor, as heir. Richard had proof of age in 1277, when his date of birth was agreed as having been 9 December 1256 in Oxfordshire (presumably at Stanton), which would have made him the son of William's first marriage. Richard was already married at that time to Margery Bek of Eresby. Sir Richard died early in 1293 leaving as heir his son Sir John Harcourt (1274-1330). 
The successive heads of the Harcourt family after the 1160s were men of national significance, and although they clearly found their minor magnate status a financial burden, did not enter into any alliance with the greater magnates. The Harcourts successfully maintained and augmented their already substantial demesne interests in three midland counties throughout the thirteenth century, largely by advantageous marriages, which must be a tribute to their court connections and lineage. Their arms were two bars (seal of Richard [i], 'c'.1223) and later or, two bars gules (William [ii], 'c'.1285, St George's roll). 


@@@@@


doc= 59025


Harcourt family (per. c.1050-1330), gentry, a family of major importance in the central midlands, was first to be found in Normandy before 1066 where sources deriving from the abbey of Bec-Hellouin identify one Anschetil as lord of Harcourt (Eure) and as a close cousin of the magnate family known as the Beaumonts, lords of Beaumont-le-Roger and Pont-Audemer. His son Robert fitz Anschetil (d. in or before 1118) held a large barony from the Beaumonts. The creation of the earldom of Warwick for Henry de Beaumont in 1088 brought Robert an estate of seven fees in Leicestershire and Warwickshire formerly held in chief by Robert de Vescy but subordinated to the earldom. The Harcourts secured a number of other estates in the same counties when Henry I created the earldom of Leicester for Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan (died 1118), in 1107, including Market Bosworth, Leicestershire, which became the Harcourt centre in England in the twelfth century. Robert fitz Anschetil had died by 1118 to be succeeded by numerous sons, at least four of whom took shares of his cross-channel estates. The son who founded the chief English branch of the family was Ivo de Harcourt (d. in or after 1166) who acquired most of the Harcourt lands in England perhaps in succession (at least in the earldom of Warwick) to his elder, childless brother, Anschetil fitz Robert, who died soon after 1130. Ivo was a major follower of Robert (II), earl of Leicester. He is found frequently in the Leicester household, and accompanied his lord to Normandy in 1154. Perhaps to simplify the problems posed by the split allegiance, Roger, earl of Warwick, transferred to Earl Robert three and a half Harcourt fees in exchange for an equal number of Leicester fees in Warwickshire, in a singular arrangement transacted before 1153. Ivo was still alive in 1166, but probably died not long afterwards. 
Ivo was succeeded by his son Robert de Harcourt (d. c.1205). Robert attested a late charter of Robert (II) of Leicester, and although he acted as a pledge for Earl Robert (III) in a debt to Aaron the Jew before 1179, he seems largely to have separated himself from the Leicester family after 1168. He was an independent figure in the midlands, his concerns centred on estate improvement and enlargement. He promoted the status of his house at Market Bosworth by the building of a substantial private chapel, which involved him in litigation with Bertram de Verdon, patron of the parish church of the place. In the reign of Henry II, before 1184, he made a profitable marriage to Isabel, daughter of Richard (I) de Camville, obtaining in 1192 the substantial marriage portion of Stanton Harcourt, Oxfordshire, and Norton and Stratton in the soke of Rothley, valued at $56 rent p.a. Between 1198 and 1202 he was sheriff of Leicestershire and Warwickshire, and left a debt of $127 3's'. 0died which was still outstanding on his death 'c'.1205. 
Robert left several sons, but the bulk of his estates came to his eldest, Sir William [i] de Harcourt (d. c.1223), who was active in King Richard's wars in France, doing service for his father for the fee of Stanton Harcourt in 1197. He was also active on King John's behalf in the campaigns of 1215 and campaigned in 1220-21 for the regents of Henry III against the count of Aumale's rebellion and John's former sheriffs. The exchequer memoranda have him alive in the year Easter 1222-3 but there is reference to the executors of his testament in a fine of April 1223. His son answered for his considerable debts (over $400) in 1224. As with his father, William seems not to have had any magnate links, but rather to have formed a connection with the king direct and entered the group of minor curial magnates: the scale of his debts indicates that his finances may not have equalled his aspirations. 
William was succeeded by his son Sir Richard [i] de Harcourt (d. 1258). Richard made a third substantial acquisition for his family in the Staffordshire manor of Ellenhall, which came to him through marriage to Orabilia, daughter of Thomas Noel. He made careful arrangements for the succession to his lands, enfeoffing his younger son, Saher, with two Leicestershire manors, Kibworth and Newton Harcourt, in his own lifetime. He died early in 1258 leaving his brother, William, rector of Aylestone, as his executor, as appears from a later fine. His eldest son, Sir William [ii] de Harcourt (d. 1270), succeeded to the bulk of his estate, doing homage to the king for his manor of Stanton in April 1258. William [ii] made two marriages, the first (before 1253) to Alice, sister of Alan de la Zouche, which brought him the manor of Tong, Shropshire, and Braunstone, Leicestershire, from his father. The second marriage was to a certain Hilaria. This William became involved with the Montfortian cause in 1264-5, although there is little evidence to link him with the Montfort affinity in the midlands before then. His brother Sir Saher was, however, a long-term associate of Earl Simon, and was ruined by his involvement with the baronial cause. William [ii] was burdened with fines of 500 marks, but in 1267 found a group of neighbours and relatives able to guarantee and clear 400 marks, which the king had granted to Sir Philip Basset, and in 1269 negotiated the clearing of a further 100 marks owed to William de Valence. William died in 1270, leaving his only son, Sir Richard [ii] de Harcourt (1256-1293), a minor, as heir. Richard had proof of age in 1277, when his date of birth was agreed as having been 9 December 1256 in Oxfordshire (presumably at Stanton), which would have made him the son of William's first marriage. Richard was already married at that time to Margery Bek of Eresby. Sir Richard died early in 1293 leaving as heir his son Sir John Harcourt (1274-1330). 
The successive heads of the Harcourt family after the 1160s were men of national significance, and although they clearly found their minor magnate status a financial burden, did not enter into any alliance with the greater magnates. The Harcourts successfully maintained and augmented their already substantial demesne interests in three midland counties throughout the thirteenth century, largely by advantageous marriages, which must be a tribute to their court connections and lineage. Their arms were two bars (seal of Richard [i], 'c'.1223) and later or, two bars gules (William [ii], 'c'.1285, St George's roll). 


@@@@@


doc= 59026


Harcourt family (per. c.1050-1330), gentry, a family of major importance in the central midlands, was first to be found in Normandy before 1066 where sources deriving from the abbey of Bec-Hellouin identify one Anschetil as lord of Harcourt (Eure) and as a close cousin of the magnate family known as the Beaumonts, lords of Beaumont-le-Roger and Pont-Audemer. His son Robert fitz Anschetil (d. in or before 1118) held a large barony from the Beaumonts. The creation of the earldom of Warwick for Henry de Beaumont in 1088 brought Robert an estate of seven fees in Leicestershire and Warwickshire formerly held in chief by Robert de Vescy but subordinated to the earldom. The Harcourts secured a number of other estates in the same counties when Henry I created the earldom of Leicester for Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan (died 1118), in 1107, including Market Bosworth, Leicestershire, which became the Harcourt centre in England in the twelfth century. Robert fitz Anschetil had died by 1118 to be succeeded by numerous sons, at least four of whom took shares of his cross-channel estates. The son who founded the chief English branch of the family was Ivo de Harcourt (d. in or after 1166) who acquired most of the Harcourt lands in England perhaps in succession (at least in the earldom of Warwick) to his elder, childless brother, Anschetil fitz Robert, who died soon after 1130. Ivo was a major follower of Robert (II), earl of Leicester. He is found frequently in the Leicester household, and accompanied his lord to Normandy in 1154. Perhaps to simplify the problems posed by the split allegiance, Roger, earl of Warwick, transferred to Earl Robert three and a half Harcourt fees in exchange for an equal number of Leicester fees in Warwickshire, in a singular arrangement transacted before 1153. Ivo was still alive in 1166, but probably died not long afterwards. 
Ivo was succeeded by his son Robert de Harcourt (d. c.1205). Robert attested a late charter of Robert (II) of Leicester, and although he acted as a pledge for Earl Robert (III) in a debt to Aaron the Jew before 1179, he seems largely to have separated himself from the Leicester family after 1168. He was an independent figure in the midlands, his concerns centred on estate improvement and enlargement. He promoted the status of his house at Market Bosworth by the building of a substantial private chapel, which involved him in litigation with Bertram de Verdon, patron of the parish church of the place. In the reign of Henry II, before 1184, he made a profitable marriage to Isabel, daughter of Richard (I) de Camville, obtaining in 1192 the substantial marriage portion of Stanton Harcourt, Oxfordshire, and Norton and Stratton in the soke of Rothley, valued at $56 rent p.a. Between 1198 and 1202 he was sheriff of Leicestershire and Warwickshire, and left a debt of $127 3's'. 0died which was still outstanding on his death 'c'.1205. 
Robert left several sons, but the bulk of his estates came to his eldest, Sir William [i] de Harcourt (d. c.1223), who was active in King Richard's wars in France, doing service for his father for the fee of Stanton Harcourt in 1197. He was also active on King John's behalf in the campaigns of 1215 and campaigned in 1220-21 for the regents of Henry III against the count of Aumale's rebellion and John's former sheriffs. The exchequer memoranda have him alive in the year Easter 1222-3 but there is reference to the executors of his testament in a fine of April 1223. His son answered for his considerable debts (over $400) in 1224. As with his father, William seems not to have had any magnate links, but rather to have formed a connection with the king direct and entered the group of minor curial magnates: the scale of his debts indicates that his finances may not have equalled his aspirations. 
William was succeeded by his son Sir Richard [i] de Harcourt (d. 1258). Richard made a third substantial acquisition for his family in the Staffordshire manor of Ellenhall, which came to him through marriage to Orabilia, daughter of Thomas Noel. He made careful arrangements for the succession to his lands, enfeoffing his younger son, Saher, with two Leicestershire manors, Kibworth and Newton Harcourt, in his own lifetime. He died early in 1258 leaving his brother, William, rector of Aylestone, as his executor, as appears from a later fine. His eldest son, Sir William [ii] de Harcourt (d. 1270), succeeded to the bulk of his estate, doing homage to the king for his manor of Stanton in April 1258. William [ii] made two marriages, the first (before 1253) to Alice, sister of Alan de la Zouche, which brought him the manor of Tong, Shropshire, and Braunstone, Leicestershire, from his father. The second marriage was to a certain Hilaria. This William became involved with the Montfortian cause in 1264-5, although there is little evidence to link him with the Montfort affinity in the midlands before then. His brother Sir Saher was, however, a long-term associate of Earl Simon, and was ruined by his involvement with the baronial cause. William [ii] was burdened with fines of 500 marks, but in 1267 found a group of neighbours and relatives able to guarantee and clear 400 marks, which the king had granted to Sir Philip Basset, and in 1269 negotiated the clearing of a further 100 marks owed to William de Valence. William died in 1270, leaving his only son, Sir Richard [ii] de Harcourt (1256-1293), a minor, as heir. Richard had proof of age in 1277, when his date of birth was agreed as having been 9 December 1256 in Oxfordshire (presumably at Stanton), which would have made him the son of William's first marriage. Richard was already married at that time to Margery Bek of Eresby. Sir Richard died early in 1293 leaving as heir his son Sir John Harcourt (1274-1330). 
The successive heads of the Harcourt family after the 1160s were men of national significance, and although they clearly found their minor magnate status a financial burden, did not enter into any alliance with the greater magnates. The Harcourts successfully maintained and augmented their already substantial demesne interests in three midland counties throughout the thirteenth century, largely by advantageous marriages, which must be a tribute to their court connections and lineage. Their arms were two bars (seal of Richard [i], 'c'.1223) and later or, two bars gules (William [ii], 'c'.1285, St George's roll). 


@@@@@


doc= 59027


Harcourt family (per. c.1050-1330), gentry, a family of major importance in the central midlands, was first to be found in Normandy before 1066 where sources deriving from the abbey of Bec-Hellouin identify one Anschetil as lord of Harcourt (Eure) and as a close cousin of the magnate family known as the Beaumonts, lords of Beaumont-le-Roger and Pont-Audemer. His son Robert fitz Anschetil (d. in or before 1118) held a large barony from the Beaumonts. The creation of the earldom of Warwick for Henry de Beaumont in 1088 brought Robert an estate of seven fees in Leicestershire and Warwickshire formerly held in chief by Robert de Vescy but subordinated to the earldom. The Harcourts secured a number of other estates in the same counties when Henry I created the earldom of Leicester for Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan (died 1118), in 1107, including Market Bosworth, Leicestershire, which became the Harcourt centre in England in the twelfth century. Robert fitz Anschetil had died by 1118 to be succeeded by numerous sons, at least four of whom took shares of his cross-channel estates. The son who founded the chief English branch of the family was Ivo de Harcourt (d. in or after 1166) who acquired most of the Harcourt lands in England perhaps in succession (at least in the earldom of Warwick) to his elder, childless brother, Anschetil fitz Robert, who died soon after 1130. Ivo was a major follower of Robert (II), earl of Leicester. He is found frequently in the Leicester household, and accompanied his lord to Normandy in 1154. Perhaps to simplify the problems posed by the split allegiance, Roger, earl of Warwick, transferred to Earl Robert three and a half Harcourt fees in exchange for an equal number of Leicester fees in Warwickshire, in a singular arrangement transacted before 1153. Ivo was still alive in 1166, but probably died not long afterwards. 
Ivo was succeeded by his son Robert de Harcourt (d. c.1205). Robert attested a late charter of Robert (II) of Leicester, and although he acted as a pledge for Earl Robert (III) in a debt to Aaron the Jew before 1179, he seems largely to have separated himself from the Leicester family after 1168. He was an independent figure in the midlands, his concerns centred on estate improvement and enlargement. He promoted the status of his house at Market Bosworth by the building of a substantial private chapel, which involved him in litigation with Bertram de Verdon, patron of the parish church of the place. In the reign of Henry II, before 1184, he made a profitable marriage to Isabel, daughter of Richard (I) de Camville, obtaining in 1192 the substantial marriage portion of Stanton Harcourt, Oxfordshire, and Norton and Stratton in the soke of Rothley, valued at $56 rent p.a. Between 1198 and 1202 he was sheriff of Leicestershire and Warwickshire, and left a debt of $127 3's'. 0died which was still outstanding on his death 'c'.1205. 
Robert left several sons, but the bulk of his estates came to his eldest, Sir William [i] de Harcourt (d. c.1223), who was active in King Richard's wars in France, doing service for his father for the fee of Stanton Harcourt in 1197. He was also active on King John's behalf in the campaigns of 1215 and campaigned in 1220-21 for the regents of Henry III against the count of Aumale's rebellion and John's former sheriffs. The exchequer memoranda have him alive in the year Easter 1222-3 but there is reference to the executors of his testament in a fine of April 1223. His son answered for his considerable debts (over $400) in 1224. As with his father, William seems not to have had any magnate links, but rather to have formed a connection with the king direct and entered the group of minor curial magnates: the scale of his debts indicates that his finances may not have equalled his aspirations. 
William was succeeded by his son Sir Richard [i] de Harcourt (d. 1258). Richard made a third substantial acquisition for his family in the Staffordshire manor of Ellenhall, which came to him through marriage to Orabilia, daughter of Thomas Noel. He made careful arrangements for the succession to his lands, enfeoffing his younger son, Saher, with two Leicestershire manors, Kibworth and Newton Harcourt, in his own lifetime. He died early in 1258 leaving his brother, William, rector of Aylestone, as his executor, as appears from a later fine. His eldest son, Sir William [ii] de Harcourt (d. 1270), succeeded to the bulk of his estate, doing homage to the king for his manor of Stanton in April 1258. William [ii] made two marriages, the first (before 1253) to Alice, sister of Alan de la Zouche, which brought him the manor of Tong, Shropshire, and Braunstone, Leicestershire, from his father. The second marriage was to a certain Hilaria. This William became involved with the Montfortian cause in 1264-5, although there is little evidence to link him with the Montfort affinity in the midlands before then. His brother Sir Saher was, however, a long-term associate of Earl Simon, and was ruined by his involvement with the baronial cause. William [ii] was burdened with fines of 500 marks, but in 1267 found a group of neighbours and relatives able to guarantee and clear 400 marks, which the king had granted to Sir Philip Basset, and in 1269 negotiated the clearing of a further 100 marks owed to William de Valence. William died in 1270, leaving his only son, Sir Richard [ii] de Harcourt (1256-1293), a minor, as heir. Richard had proof of age in 1277, when his date of birth was agreed as having been 9 December 1256 in Oxfordshire (presumably at Stanton), which would have made him the son of William's first marriage. Richard was already married at that time to Margery Bek of Eresby. Sir Richard died early in 1293 leaving as heir his son Sir John Harcourt (1274-1330). 
The successive heads of the Harcourt family after the 1160s were men of national significance, and although they clearly found their minor magnate status a financial burden, did not enter into any alliance with the greater magnates. The Harcourts successfully maintained and augmented their already substantial demesne interests in three midland counties throughout the thirteenth century, largely by advantageous marriages, which must be a tribute to their court connections and lineage. Their arms were two bars (seal of Richard [i], 'c'.1223) and later or, two bars gules (William [ii], 'c'.1285, St George's roll). 


@@@@@


doc= 59028


Mallory family (per. c.1100-1300), gentry, of medieval Leicestershire, was first represented by Richard [i] Mallory (d. c.1160), a follower of Robert, earl of Leicester, in the 1130s and 1140s. The Mallory name must have come to Leicestershire rather earlier, however, for it appears as the name of a family of substantial knights in the county of Meulan, in the French Vexin. It would therefore seem most likely that a Mallory arrived in the county at the time when Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan, was earl there, that is between 1107 and 1118. The name Mallory is a nickname and could variously be interpreted as 'unlucky' or 'foul-mouthed'. Richard [i] had at least two probable sons, Richard [ii] and Anschetil, who seem to have taken the English and Norman fees of the family respectively on his death about 1160. It is from these two that the many and various branches of the family derive, although only the elder branch, settled at Kirkby Mallory, Leicestershire, will be followed here. However, Anschetil Mallory (d. c.1190), seneschal of Robert de Breteuil, earl of Leicester, has to be noticed as a prominent character in the reign of Henry II, and a leading rebel of the wars of 1173-4, who defended Leicester Castle against the royalists. Anschetil survived this political mistake and acquired English lands at Tachbrook Mallory, Warwickshire, where his family flourished into the fourteenth century. 

Richard [ii] Mallory (d. before 1175) of Kirkby Mallory, although less important politically than his younger brother and not attached to Earl Robert, had more considerable landed interests. A good marriage to Agnes, coheir of William (II) de Neufmarche, brought Richard estates at Welton and Thrupp, Northamptonshire, held at fee-farm of 40's'. from Leicester Abbey, and (from later evidence) land at Broughton Astley, Leicestershire, and the service of Billesley, Warwickshire (see below). Richard died at some time before 1175, and was survived for several years by his wife. He left as his heir William, but left also at least three other sons who obtained subtenancies in the Mallory lands, one of whom, Simon (died 'c'.1208), founded a long-lasting cadet branch of the family at Welton, which survived into the fourteenth century. William Mallory (d. c.1202) was his father's eldest son, and took responsibility for granting the Welton estate as a subtenancy to his younger brother, Simon. This would seem to have been an internal family arrangement which thus allowed more than one son to succeed while still preserving the integrity of the family's lands. He married a certain Alice, but nothing more of her is known. William had only one known son, Richard [iii] Mallory (d. 1217), who seems to have been active in Leicestershire as early as 1201. He made a rather large number of known grants: the church of Kirkby, first to Philip of Kington and then to Thelsford Priory, Warwickshire; several parcels of land in the same place to the hospitals of St John and the Holy Trinity, Northampton; small estates in Kirkby to his uncle, Luke Mallory, and to one Alexander of Whitby; and the advowson of the chapel of Peckleton to William Motun. He was at one point attached to the retinue of Saer de Quincy, earl of Winchester, in whose service he died at Mountsorrel Castle in 1217. He married Cecilia, sister of Stephen of Seagrave, the justiciar, and through her obtained three carrucates at Burgh, Leicestershire. Her suits for dower between 1220 and 1222 make it possible to assess Richard [iii]'s interests as being at his death the manors of Kirkby, Welton, and Thrupp, four and a half virgates subinfeudated at Broughton Astley, and several subinfeudated estates within Kirkby. For this he answered for a half fee to the Montfort half of the earldom of Leicester, a small assessment for such a large estate. 
Richard [iii] left four known sons, one of the younger of whom, Anschetil, founded yet another cadet branch of what was by now becoming a widespread family, at Octon in the East Riding of Yorkshire. The eldest son, Thomas [i] Mallory (b. 1201x5, d. in or after 1240), succeeded to Kirkby as a minor; he was in wardship to Henry of Seagrave in 1222 and had come of age by 1226, when he presented to the rectory of Kirkby. In 1234 he was involved in a plea concerning the service owed for the old Neufmarche estate of Billesley, Warwickshire, to which he apparently had some claim through his great-grandmother Agnes. Thomas was at that same time associated with the household of Simon de Montfort, but more closely with that of his uncle, Stephen of Seagrave. He was alive in 1240 but thereafter disappears; all that is known is that he was survived by his widow, Christina, and left a son and heir, Henry Mallory (d. in or before 1277). Little is known of Henry, other than that he instituted a chantry for his father's soul at the hospital chapel of Holy Trinity, Northampton, and that he attested a charter of Earl Simon de Montfort before 1265. Henry was succeeded by one Sir Thomas [ii] Mallory (d. in or after 1299) by 1277, who was probably (but not certainly) his brother. Thomas [ii] was the first of the Kirkby branch of the family known to have been knighted. By contrast, the Mallorys of Tachbrook and Welton were consistently knighted throughout the thirteenth century. Thomas [ii] was a household knight of Edmund, earl of Lancaster, in the early 1290s and is last found in 1299, making purchases of land in Kirkby. 
The Mallory family is a singularly well-documented example of the way that a gentry family could multiply and spread in several branches over two centuries, on what was initially a small endowment in land. By 1300 six distinct and related Mallory lineages can be distinguished, settled mostly in the midlands, four of them having produced knights of the county court. The Mallorys of Kirkby, the eldest branch, are an object lesson in how this was achieved on small means: by windfall marriages, magnate patronage, and subinfeudation. It is clear that by 1300 the Mallorys of Kirkby farmed directly comparatively little land, but existed on the services and maintenance owed them. It is also instructive how the Mallorys of several generations varied their magnate allegiance from generation to generation after the mid-twelfth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 59029


Mallory family (per. c.1100-1300), gentry, of medieval Leicestershire, was first represented by Richard [i] Mallory (d. c.1160), a follower of Robert, earl of Leicester, in the 1130s and 1140s. The Mallory name must have come to Leicestershire rather earlier, however, for it appears as the name of a family of substantial knights in the county of Meulan, in the French Vexin. It would therefore seem most likely that a Mallory arrived in the county at the time when Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan, was earl there, that is between 1107 and 1118. The name Mallory is a nickname and could variously be interpreted as 'unlucky' or 'foul-mouthed'. Richard [i] had at least two probable sons, Richard [ii] and Anschetil, who seem to have taken the English and Norman fees of the family respectively on his death about 1160. It is from these two that the many and various branches of the family derive, although only the elder branch, settled at Kirkby Mallory, Leicestershire, will be followed here. However, Anschetil Mallory (d. c.1190), seneschal of Robert de Breteuil, earl of Leicester, has to be noticed as a prominent character in the reign of Henry II, and a leading rebel of the wars of 1173-4, who defended Leicester Castle against the royalists. Anschetil survived this political mistake and acquired English lands at Tachbrook Mallory, Warwickshire, where his family flourished into the fourteenth century. 

Richard [ii] Mallory (d. before 1175) of Kirkby Mallory, although less important politically than his younger brother and not attached to Earl Robert, had more considerable landed interests. A good marriage to Agnes, coheir of William (II) de Neufmarche, brought Richard estates at Welton and Thrupp, Northamptonshire, held at fee-farm of 40's'. from Leicester Abbey, and (from later evidence) land at Broughton Astley, Leicestershire, and the service of Billesley, Warwickshire (see below). Richard died at some time before 1175, and was survived for several years by his wife. He left as his heir William, but left also at least three other sons who obtained subtenancies in the Mallory lands, one of whom, Simon (died 'c'.1208), founded a long-lasting cadet branch of the family at Welton, which survived into the fourteenth century. William Mallory (d. c.1202) was his father's eldest son, and took responsibility for granting the Welton estate as a subtenancy to his younger brother, Simon. This would seem to have been an internal family arrangement which thus allowed more than one son to succeed while still preserving the integrity of the family's lands. He married a certain Alice, but nothing more of her is known. William had only one known son, Richard [iii] Mallory (d. 1217), who seems to have been active in Leicestershire as early as 1201. He made a rather large number of known grants: the church of Kirkby, first to Philip of Kington and then to Thelsford Priory, Warwickshire; several parcels of land in the same place to the hospitals of St John and the Holy Trinity, Northampton; small estates in Kirkby to his uncle, Luke Mallory, and to one Alexander of Whitby; and the advowson of the chapel of Peckleton to William Motun. He was at one point attached to the retinue of Saer de Quincy, earl of Winchester, in whose service he died at Mountsorrel Castle in 1217. He married Cecilia, sister of Stephen of Seagrave, the justiciar, and through her obtained three carrucates at Burgh, Leicestershire. Her suits for dower between 1220 and 1222 make it possible to assess Richard [iii]'s interests as being at his death the manors of Kirkby, Welton, and Thrupp, four and a half virgates subinfeudated at Broughton Astley, and several subinfeudated estates within Kirkby. For this he answered for a half fee to the Montfort half of the earldom of Leicester, a small assessment for such a large estate. 
Richard [iii] left four known sons, one of the younger of whom, Anschetil, founded yet another cadet branch of what was by now becoming a widespread family, at Octon in the East Riding of Yorkshire. The eldest son, Thomas [i] Mallory (b. 1201x5, d. in or after 1240), succeeded to Kirkby as a minor; he was in wardship to Henry of Seagrave in 1222 and had come of age by 1226, when he presented to the rectory of Kirkby. In 1234 he was involved in a plea concerning the service owed for the old Neufmarche estate of Billesley, Warwickshire, to which he apparently had some claim through his great-grandmother Agnes. Thomas was at that same time associated with the household of Simon de Montfort, but more closely with that of his uncle, Stephen of Seagrave. He was alive in 1240 but thereafter disappears; all that is known is that he was survived by his widow, Christina, and left a son and heir, Henry Mallory (d. in or before 1277). Little is known of Henry, other than that he instituted a chantry for his father's soul at the hospital chapel of Holy Trinity, Northampton, and that he attested a charter of Earl Simon de Montfort before 1265. Henry was succeeded by one Sir Thomas [ii] Mallory (d. in or after 1299) by 1277, who was probably (but not certainly) his brother. Thomas [ii] was the first of the Kirkby branch of the family known to have been knighted. By contrast, the Mallorys of Tachbrook and Welton were consistently knighted throughout the thirteenth century. Thomas [ii] was a household knight of Edmund, earl of Lancaster, in the early 1290s and is last found in 1299, making purchases of land in Kirkby. 
The Mallory family is a singularly well-documented example of the way that a gentry family could multiply and spread in several branches over two centuries, on what was initially a small endowment in land. By 1300 six distinct and related Mallory lineages can be distinguished, settled mostly in the midlands, four of them having produced knights of the county court. The Mallorys of Kirkby, the eldest branch, are an object lesson in how this was achieved on small means: by windfall marriages, magnate patronage, and subinfeudation. It is clear that by 1300 the Mallorys of Kirkby farmed directly comparatively little land, but existed on the services and maintenance owed them. It is also instructive how the Mallorys of several generations varied their magnate allegiance from generation to generation after the mid-twelfth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 59030


Mallory family (per. c.1100-1300), gentry, of medieval Leicestershire, was first represented by Richard [i] Mallory (d. c.1160), a follower of Robert, earl of Leicester, in the 1130s and 1140s. The Mallory name must have come to Leicestershire rather earlier, however, for it appears as the name of a family of substantial knights in the county of Meulan, in the French Vexin. It would therefore seem most likely that a Mallory arrived in the county at the time when Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan, was earl there, that is between 1107 and 1118. The name Mallory is a nickname and could variously be interpreted as 'unlucky' or 'foul-mouthed'. Richard [i] had at least two probable sons, Richard [ii] and Anschetil, who seem to have taken the English and Norman fees of the family respectively on his death about 1160. It is from these two that the many and various branches of the family derive, although only the elder branch, settled at Kirkby Mallory, Leicestershire, will be followed here. However, Anschetil Mallory (d. c.1190), seneschal of Robert de Breteuil, earl of Leicester, has to be noticed as a prominent character in the reign of Henry II, and a leading rebel of the wars of 1173-4, who defended Leicester Castle against the royalists. Anschetil survived this political mistake and acquired English lands at Tachbrook Mallory, Warwickshire, where his family flourished into the fourteenth century. 

Richard [ii] Mallory (d. before 1175) of Kirkby Mallory, although less important politically than his younger brother and not attached to Earl Robert, had more considerable landed interests. A good marriage to Agnes, coheir of William (II) de Neufmarche, brought Richard estates at Welton and Thrupp, Northamptonshire, held at fee-farm of 40's'. from Leicester Abbey, and (from later evidence) land at Broughton Astley, Leicestershire, and the service of Billesley, Warwickshire (see below). Richard died at some time before 1175, and was survived for several years by his wife. He left as his heir William, but left also at least three other sons who obtained subtenancies in the Mallory lands, one of whom, Simon (died 'c'.1208), founded a long-lasting cadet branch of the family at Welton, which survived into the fourteenth century. William Mallory (d. c.1202) was his father's eldest son, and took responsibility for granting the Welton estate as a subtenancy to his younger brother, Simon. This would seem to have been an internal family arrangement which thus allowed more than one son to succeed while still preserving the integrity of the family's lands. He married a certain Alice, but nothing more of her is known. William had only one known son, Richard [iii] Mallory (d. 1217), who seems to have been active in Leicestershire as early as 1201. He made a rather large number of known grants: the church of Kirkby, first to Philip of Kington and then to Thelsford Priory, Warwickshire; several parcels of land in the same place to the hospitals of St John and the Holy Trinity, Northampton; small estates in Kirkby to his uncle, Luke Mallory, and to one Alexander of Whitby; and the advowson of the chapel of Peckleton to William Motun. He was at one point attached to the retinue of Saer de Quincy, earl of Winchester, in whose service he died at Mountsorrel Castle in 1217. He married Cecilia, sister of Stephen of Seagrave, the justiciar, and through her obtained three carrucates at Burgh, Leicestershire. Her suits for dower between 1220 and 1222 make it possible to assess Richard [iii]'s interests as being at his death the manors of Kirkby, Welton, and Thrupp, four and a half virgates subinfeudated at Broughton Astley, and several subinfeudated estates within Kirkby. For this he answered for a half fee to the Montfort half of the earldom of Leicester, a small assessment for such a large estate. 
Richard [iii] left four known sons, one of the younger of whom, Anschetil, founded yet another cadet branch of what was by now becoming a widespread family, at Octon in the East Riding of Yorkshire. The eldest son, Thomas [i] Mallory (b. 1201x5, d. in or after 1240), succeeded to Kirkby as a minor; he was in wardship to Henry of Seagrave in 1222 and had come of age by 1226, when he presented to the rectory of Kirkby. In 1234 he was involved in a plea concerning the service owed for the old Neufmarche estate of Billesley, Warwickshire, to which he apparently had some claim through his great-grandmother Agnes. Thomas was at that same time associated with the household of Simon de Montfort, but more closely with that of his uncle, Stephen of Seagrave. He was alive in 1240 but thereafter disappears; all that is known is that he was survived by his widow, Christina, and left a son and heir, Henry Mallory (d. in or before 1277). Little is known of Henry, other than that he instituted a chantry for his father's soul at the hospital chapel of Holy Trinity, Northampton, and that he attested a charter of Earl Simon de Montfort before 1265. Henry was succeeded by one Sir Thomas [ii] Mallory (d. in or after 1299) by 1277, who was probably (but not certainly) his brother. Thomas [ii] was the first of the Kirkby branch of the family known to have been knighted. By contrast, the Mallorys of Tachbrook and Welton were consistently knighted throughout the thirteenth century. Thomas [ii] was a household knight of Edmund, earl of Lancaster, in the early 1290s and is last found in 1299, making purchases of land in Kirkby. 
The Mallory family is a singularly well-documented example of the way that a gentry family could multiply and spread in several branches over two centuries, on what was initially a small endowment in land. By 1300 six distinct and related Mallory lineages can be distinguished, settled mostly in the midlands, four of them having produced knights of the county court. The Mallorys of Kirkby, the eldest branch, are an object lesson in how this was achieved on small means: by windfall marriages, magnate patronage, and subinfeudation. It is clear that by 1300 the Mallorys of Kirkby farmed directly comparatively little land, but existed on the services and maintenance owed them. It is also instructive how the Mallorys of several generations varied their magnate allegiance from generation to generation after the mid-twelfth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 59031


Mallory family (per. c.1100-1300), gentry, of medieval Leicestershire, was first represented by Richard [i] Mallory (d. c.1160), a follower of Robert, earl of Leicester, in the 1130s and 1140s. The Mallory name must have come to Leicestershire rather earlier, however, for it appears as the name of a family of substantial knights in the county of Meulan, in the French Vexin. It would therefore seem most likely that a Mallory arrived in the county at the time when Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan, was earl there, that is between 1107 and 1118. The name Mallory is a nickname and could variously be interpreted as 'unlucky' or 'foul-mouthed'. Richard [i] had at least two probable sons, Richard [ii] and Anschetil, who seem to have taken the English and Norman fees of the family respectively on his death about 1160. It is from these two that the many and various branches of the family derive, although only the elder branch, settled at Kirkby Mallory, Leicestershire, will be followed here. However, Anschetil Mallory (d. c.1190), seneschal of Robert de Breteuil, earl of Leicester, has to be noticed as a prominent character in the reign of Henry II, and a leading rebel of the wars of 1173-4, who defended Leicester Castle against the royalists. Anschetil survived this political mistake and acquired English lands at Tachbrook Mallory, Warwickshire, where his family flourished into the fourteenth century. 

Richard [ii] Mallory (d. before 1175) of Kirkby Mallory, although less important politically than his younger brother and not attached to Earl Robert, had more considerable landed interests. A good marriage to Agnes, coheir of William (II) de Neufmarche, brought Richard estates at Welton and Thrupp, Northamptonshire, held at fee-farm of 40's'. from Leicester Abbey, and (from later evidence) land at Broughton Astley, Leicestershire, and the service of Billesley, Warwickshire (see below). Richard died at some time before 1175, and was survived for several years by his wife. He left as his heir William, but left also at least three other sons who obtained subtenancies in the Mallory lands, one of whom, Simon (died 'c'.1208), founded a long-lasting cadet branch of the family at Welton, which survived into the fourteenth century. William Mallory (d. c.1202) was his father's eldest son, and took responsibility for granting the Welton estate as a subtenancy to his younger brother, Simon. This would seem to have been an internal family arrangement which thus allowed more than one son to succeed while still preserving the integrity of the family's lands. He married a certain Alice, but nothing more of her is known. William had only one known son, Richard [iii] Mallory (d. 1217), who seems to have been active in Leicestershire as early as 1201. He made a rather large number of known grants: the church of Kirkby, first to Philip of Kington and then to Thelsford Priory, Warwickshire; several parcels of land in the same place to the hospitals of St John and the Holy Trinity, Northampton; small estates in Kirkby to his uncle, Luke Mallory, and to one Alexander of Whitby; and the advowson of the chapel of Peckleton to William Motun. He was at one point attached to the retinue of Saer de Quincy, earl of Winchester, in whose service he died at Mountsorrel Castle in 1217. He married Cecilia, sister of Stephen of Seagrave, the justiciar, and through her obtained three carrucates at Burgh, Leicestershire. Her suits for dower between 1220 and 1222 make it possible to assess Richard [iii]'s interests as being at his death the manors of Kirkby, Welton, and Thrupp, four and a half virgates subinfeudated at Broughton Astley, and several subinfeudated estates within Kirkby. For this he answered for a half fee to the Montfort half of the earldom of Leicester, a small assessment for such a large estate. 
Richard [iii] left four known sons, one of the younger of whom, Anschetil, founded yet another cadet branch of what was by now becoming a widespread family, at Octon in the East Riding of Yorkshire. The eldest son, Thomas [i] Mallory (b. 1201x5, d. in or after 1240), succeeded to Kirkby as a minor; he was in wardship to Henry of Seagrave in 1222 and had come of age by 1226, when he presented to the rectory of Kirkby. In 1234 he was involved in a plea concerning the service owed for the old Neufmarche estate of Billesley, Warwickshire, to which he apparently had some claim through his great-grandmother Agnes. Thomas was at that same time associated with the household of Simon de Montfort, but more closely with that of his uncle, Stephen of Seagrave. He was alive in 1240 but thereafter disappears; all that is known is that he was survived by his widow, Christina, and left a son and heir, Henry Mallory (d. in or before 1277). Little is known of Henry, other than that he instituted a chantry for his father's soul at the hospital chapel of Holy Trinity, Northampton, and that he attested a charter of Earl Simon de Montfort before 1265. Henry was succeeded by one Sir Thomas [ii] Mallory (d. in or after 1299) by 1277, who was probably (but not certainly) his brother. Thomas [ii] was the first of the Kirkby branch of the family known to have been knighted. By contrast, the Mallorys of Tachbrook and Welton were consistently knighted throughout the thirteenth century. Thomas [ii] was a household knight of Edmund, earl of Lancaster, in the early 1290s and is last found in 1299, making purchases of land in Kirkby. 
The Mallory family is a singularly well-documented example of the way that a gentry family could multiply and spread in several branches over two centuries, on what was initially a small endowment in land. By 1300 six distinct and related Mallory lineages can be distinguished, settled mostly in the midlands, four of them having produced knights of the county court. The Mallorys of Kirkby, the eldest branch, are an object lesson in how this was achieved on small means: by windfall marriages, magnate patronage, and subinfeudation. It is clear that by 1300 the Mallorys of Kirkby farmed directly comparatively little land, but existed on the services and maintenance owed them. It is also instructive how the Mallorys of several generations varied their magnate allegiance from generation to generation after the mid-twelfth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 59032


Mallory family (per. c.1100-1300), gentry, of medieval Leicestershire, was first represented by Richard [i] Mallory (d. c.1160), a follower of Robert, earl of Leicester, in the 1130s and 1140s. The Mallory name must have come to Leicestershire rather earlier, however, for it appears as the name of a family of substantial knights in the county of Meulan, in the French Vexin. It would therefore seem most likely that a Mallory arrived in the county at the time when Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan, was earl there, that is between 1107 and 1118. The name Mallory is a nickname and could variously be interpreted as 'unlucky' or 'foul-mouthed'. Richard [i] had at least two probable sons, Richard [ii] and Anschetil, who seem to have taken the English and Norman fees of the family respectively on his death about 1160. It is from these two that the many and various branches of the family derive, although only the elder branch, settled at Kirkby Mallory, Leicestershire, will be followed here. However, Anschetil Mallory (d. c.1190), seneschal of Robert de Breteuil, earl of Leicester, has to be noticed as a prominent character in the reign of Henry II, and a leading rebel of the wars of 1173-4, who defended Leicester Castle against the royalists. Anschetil survived this political mistake and acquired English lands at Tachbrook Mallory, Warwickshire, where his family flourished into the fourteenth century. 

Richard [ii] Mallory (d. before 1175) of Kirkby Mallory, although less important politically than his younger brother and not attached to Earl Robert, had more considerable landed interests. A good marriage to Agnes, coheir of William (II) de Neufmarche, brought Richard estates at Welton and Thrupp, Northamptonshire, held at fee-farm of 40's'. from Leicester Abbey, and (from later evidence) land at Broughton Astley, Leicestershire, and the service of Billesley, Warwickshire (see below). Richard died at some time before 1175, and was survived for several years by his wife. He left as his heir William, but left also at least three other sons who obtained subtenancies in the Mallory lands, one of whom, Simon (died 'c'.1208), founded a long-lasting cadet branch of the family at Welton, which survived into the fourteenth century. William Mallory (d. c.1202) was his father's eldest son, and took responsibility for granting the Welton estate as a subtenancy to his younger brother, Simon. This would seem to have been an internal family arrangement which thus allowed more than one son to succeed while still preserving the integrity of the family's lands. He married a certain Alice, but nothing more of her is known. William had only one known son, Richard [iii] Mallory (d. 1217), who seems to have been active in Leicestershire as early as 1201. He made a rather large number of known grants: the church of Kirkby, first to Philip of Kington and then to Thelsford Priory, Warwickshire; several parcels of land in the same place to the hospitals of St John and the Holy Trinity, Northampton; small estates in Kirkby to his uncle, Luke Mallory, and to one Alexander of Whitby; and the advowson of the chapel of Peckleton to William Motun. He was at one point attached to the retinue of Saer de Quincy, earl of Winchester, in whose service he died at Mountsorrel Castle in 1217. He married Cecilia, sister of Stephen of Seagrave, the justiciar, and through her obtained three carrucates at Burgh, Leicestershire. Her suits for dower between 1220 and 1222 make it possible to assess Richard [iii]'s interests as being at his death the manors of Kirkby, Welton, and Thrupp, four and a half virgates subinfeudated at Broughton Astley, and several subinfeudated estates within Kirkby. For this he answered for a half fee to the Montfort half of the earldom of Leicester, a small assessment for such a large estate. 
Richard [iii] left four known sons, one of the younger of whom, Anschetil, founded yet another cadet branch of what was by now becoming a widespread family, at Octon in the East Riding of Yorkshire. The eldest son, Thomas [i] Mallory (b. 1201x5, d. in or after 1240), succeeded to Kirkby as a minor; he was in wardship to Henry of Seagrave in 1222 and had come of age by 1226, when he presented to the rectory of Kirkby. In 1234 he was involved in a plea concerning the service owed for the old Neufmarche estate of Billesley, Warwickshire, to which he apparently had some claim through his great-grandmother Agnes. Thomas was at that same time associated with the household of Simon de Montfort, but more closely with that of his uncle, Stephen of Seagrave. He was alive in 1240 but thereafter disappears; all that is known is that he was survived by his widow, Christina, and left a son and heir, Henry Mallory (d. in or before 1277). Little is known of Henry, other than that he instituted a chantry for his father's soul at the hospital chapel of Holy Trinity, Northampton, and that he attested a charter of Earl Simon de Montfort before 1265. Henry was succeeded by one Sir Thomas [ii] Mallory (d. in or after 1299) by 1277, who was probably (but not certainly) his brother. Thomas [ii] was the first of the Kirkby branch of the family known to have been knighted. By contrast, the Mallorys of Tachbrook and Welton were consistently knighted throughout the thirteenth century. Thomas [ii] was a household knight of Edmund, earl of Lancaster, in the early 1290s and is last found in 1299, making purchases of land in Kirkby. 
The Mallory family is a singularly well-documented example of the way that a gentry family could multiply and spread in several branches over two centuries, on what was initially a small endowment in land. By 1300 six distinct and related Mallory lineages can be distinguished, settled mostly in the midlands, four of them having produced knights of the county court. The Mallorys of Kirkby, the eldest branch, are an object lesson in how this was achieved on small means: by windfall marriages, magnate patronage, and subinfeudation. It is clear that by 1300 the Mallorys of Kirkby farmed directly comparatively little land, but existed on the services and maintenance owed them. It is also instructive how the Mallorys of several generations varied their magnate allegiance from generation to generation after the mid-twelfth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 59033


Jackson, Georgina Frederica (1823/4-1895), writer on dialect, was born in Everton, Liverpool, daughter of William Jackson, a Liverpool wine merchant; her only other relative known by name was a married sister, mentioned in her will. Of Shropshire parentage, she lived in rural mid-Shropshire in childhood from the age of nine or ten. Evidently well educated, by 1871 she was running a school for young ladies at 13 White Friars, Chester, offering a 'sound English education' to boarders and day pupils. A photograph of her, probably taken in the 1870s, shows regular, strongly formed features, no less attractive for a slight severity of expression. 
Casual reading in 1870 led Georgina Jackson to compile a list of Shropshire words remembered from childhood. Then a friend encouraged her to undertake a substantial work on the county dialect; the achievement for which she is remembered occupied a decade of her life, during which her vocation was teaching, literary work occupied her leisure hours, and holidays were devoted to dialecting tours. In three years she collected 3000 words, verifying them all herself. In 1873 she was advised by the philologist W. W. Skeat to record the locality from which each word came and to use the glossic symbols of A. J. Ellis (whom she also consulted). Applying their counsel thoroughly, she spent four years recasting her first three years' work. 
In 1877 illness prevented Georgina Jackson's last planned tour, that of south-east Shropshire. She was awarded $100 from the Royal Literary Fund in 1878, and her 'Shropshire Word-Book' was issued in three parts from 1879 to 1881. It included a grammar and was one of the very best of its kind, but by the time it was published its author was an invalid. Granted a civil-list pension of $40 about 1880, she gave up her school and moved to a smaller house nearby. She passed materials for her projected book on Shropshire folklore to her friend Charlotte Burne, who brought it out in 1883, duly acknowledging Georgina Jackson's work. 
In later years, though confined to one room, often bedridden and in much pain, Georgina Jackson remained cheerful and courageous, living on very small means but keeping up her interest in dialect and etymology as correspondent and voluntary reader for the 'English Dialect Dictionary'. She died aged seventy-one of chronic heart disease at her home, 11 Black Friars, Chester, on 16 October 1895. She was buried in Chester cemetery on 19 October; the dean and archdeacon of Chester officiated, both having been her parish priest. 


@@@@@


doc= 59037


Greenwood, Alice Drayton (1862-1935), historian, was born on 18 November 1862 at 15 Lime Grove, Chorlton, Lancashire, the eldest child of Dr Joseph Gouge Greenwood (1821-1894) and his first wife, Elizabeth (Eliza) Taylor, daughter of the Revd John Taylor, a well-known Unitarian minister. Her mother died after the birth of a second daughter, and her father remarried in 1871. The family lived thereafter in Fallowfield, Manchester, where Dr Greenwood was first tutor, then professor of classics and history, and finally principal at Owens College (1857-89). From 1880 to 1886 he was vice-chancellor of Victoria University of Manchester. Brought up in an academic environment, Alice Greenwood was educated at Cheltenham Ladies' College (1875?-82), and on returning home attended lectures and classes at Victoria University, taking advantage of the fact that, although women were not admitted to the building, the teaching was conducted in separate premises in Brunswick Street. The friendship and encouragement of teachers at the college, notably Adolphus William Ward, then professor of English language and history, and later master of Peterhouse, Cambridge, of Augustus Samuel Wilkins, professor of classics, and Dr Herman Hager, a specialist in German literature, gave direction to her interests, while her father can be credited with a general, rather than a particular, influence. She developed a fine taste in reading, exact standards of scholarly accuracy, a strong sense of public duty, and an unobtrusive but strong attachment to the Church of England. 
Alice Greenwood entered Somerville Hall, Oxford, in 1886, and obtained a first-class honours degree in 1888 along with one other woman, Gertrude Bell of Lady Margaret Hall, and nine men, though the two women's names did not appear in the published list. She was remembered at Oxford for her vivacity and leadership in debate, and won a money prize for a historical essay offered by Mary (Mrs Humphry) Ward to the Association for Promoting the Education of Women in Oxford. In 1888 she was appointed assistant mistress at Clifton High School for Girls, Manchester, greatly enjoying the teaching but expressing even then a dislike for the idea of becoming a headmistress, wholly engaged in administration. When a colleague at the school was appointed headmistress of the North Manchester High School for Girls in 1892, she moved there with her. Meanwhile Adolphus Ward succeeded her father as principal of Owens College, and under his auspices the independent Withington Girls School was founded in 1891. Alice Greenwood became its second headmistress in 1896, when the first moved to a larger school. She was a vigorous and successful holder of the post until 1900, when she resigned. Her first book, 'Europe and Papacy in the Middle Ages', for schools, had been published in 1892 (2nd edn, 1896), and the steady flow after 1900 of deeply researched work on literature and history, some of which served, or responded to, requests from Adolphus Ward, probably explains her decision at thirty-eight years of age to leave teaching for writing. 
Under Sir Adolphus Ward's editorship of the 'Cambridge Modern History' (1901-12) and co-editorship of the 'Cambridge History of English Literature' (1907-16) Alice Greenwood wrote three chapters in volume 2 of the latter on the later middle ages, showing fastidious care in the study of variant texts and sensitivity in appraising literary style, language, and early grammar. Both for the 'Cambridge History of English Literature' and for the 'Cambridge Modern History' she did innumerable grinding chores, compiling genealogies, chronological tables, and indexes. Her two most notable, independently written, books dealt with eighteenth-century England. One was a two-volume study, 'Lives of the Hanoverian Queens of England' (1909, 1911), demonstrating her thorough reading of manifold documents. She resisted the temptation, when evidence about the women was thin, to write more freely about the men, but following the conventions of her age cultivated a certain reserve which is tantalizing to the modern reader; her style is in contrast with the 'brazen candour' of her sources. But some constraints were self-imposed, inasmuch as she deemed biography different from history, and strove to see circumstances 'as they probably appeared to the actors themselves' (A. Greenwood, 'Hanoverian Queens', 1911, 2.x). Her study 'Horace Walpole's World: a Sketch of Whig Society under George III' (1913) better displayed her skill in depicting an age in succinct, arresting phrases. Other works included school textbooks on English and European history, tales from Richard Hakluyt, and a selection from the Paston letters. She always matched her style to her readership: her school textbooks were written in a friendly, informal way, yet summarized in sharply discerning sentences the most significant long-term trends. Her original scholarly research investigated fresh sources and private letters with impressive thoroughness. Above all she was concerned to place people at the centre of the stage and to achieve a sense of actuality that made the past live before her readers' eyes. She probed character and personality in order to arrive at portraits that went beyond the mere public image. Her judgements were shrewd and often memorable, especially in her opening sentences. She cared nothing for fame, but wished to 'hand on the torch of honest study and true patriotism'. A pupil described her as 'a splendid and powerful woman' (Wilson, 9). 
Alice Greenwood moved to Oxford some time before 1910 and was associated with St Hugh's College, becoming a member of council (1910-16) and honorary secretary (1914-16). In 1916 she moved with a former colleague, Helen M. Turing, to Wandsworth Common, London, and then to Somerset, first to an old house and then to a new one in Williton, looking towards the Quantock hills. There she much enjoyed country walks, her large garden, and birds. She did not give up writing until 1934 and died at Shercroft, Catwell, Williton, on 27 April 1935. Her grave is in Wolvercote cemetery, Oxford, next to her sister who died in 1912. 


@@@@@


doc= 59038


Thompson, Robert (1876-1955), woodcarver, was born on 7 May 1876 at Kilburn Hall, Kilburn, in the North Riding of Yorkshire, the sixth son and seventh of the eight children of John Thompson ('c'.1832-1895), village joiner, and his wife, Dinah ('c'.1838-1898), daughter of Benjamin Cornforth. Robert attended the village school in Kilburn and was particularly competent in drawing. His elder brothers were engaged in joinery, farming, and stone masonry. 
At the age of fourteen Thompson began a five-year apprenticeship in engineering with Garnett Wire Ltd in Cleckheaton. Being accustomed to a rural life he did not enjoy the industrial West Riding and travelled home when he could. During the journey he had to wait an hour in Ripon, where he spent his time in the cathedral sketching the medieval woodcarvings attributed to William Bromflet. He studied Tudor woodcarving tools, acquired -- or made -- his own tools, and started to practise carving with the help of one of his father's men. Thompson saw that the rippled surface produced by an adze on the surface of the oak -- a characteristic of his later work -- allowed the wood's colour, grain, and medullary rays to be displayed to their full beauty, thereby being in sympathy with the current arts and crafts movement. 
On the completion of Thompson's apprenticeship his father agreed to take him on as his assistant. However, John Thompson died nine months later, leaving Robert to run the business. While running the joinery business with the help of his brothers he also managed to set time aside to study more deeply the carving of wood, particularly English oak ('quercus robur'). On 17 October 1905 he married Ada Jane (1867/8-1943), daughter of James Newby, butcher, at Shipton Thorpe in the East Riding of Yorkshire; their only child, Elsie, was born a year later. 
The conclusion of the South African War in 1902 brought an increased demand for memorial church furniture, which Thompson was now able to supply. Possibly his first order was for a pulpit for Yearsley church in the North Riding of Yorkshire in 1909. Orders for lychgates required that he work in two materials, and so, with the help of his brother, Thompson carved in stone and oak. In 1919 he was asked to create a large crucifix for the Roman Catholic church at Ampleforth, where he met Paul Neville. The two men were of similar age and formed a lasting friendship, meeting regularly to talk and to share food and a pipe. Neville later became headmaster of Ampleforth College and placed many further orders for the abbey and school, which now hold the largest collection of Thompson's work. Thompson was asked to create chairs for the monks and, knowing that the abbey's patron saint, St Lawrence, had been martyred on a hot gridiron, chose this emblem for the side and back panels of his 'monk's chair'. The design was later modified to be less severe and became the lattice panel that is still used on many chairs. 
Aware that the making of high-quality carved furniture required air-seasoned oak, Thompson slowly built up a large stock at his workshop at Kilburn. From about 1920 he began to incorporate a carving of a mouse on each of his pieces. The idea for the mouse -- which became his trademark, and led to him being known as the Mouseman of Kilburn and Mousey Thompson -- either followed his observation of a mouse quietly at work in a local church or was his response to another craftsman's claim that they were as poor as church mice. The latter explanation was offered by Thompson in a letter to a client (J. Thompson, 20), though the mouse trademark also fits with his adopted motto: 'Industry in quiet places'. From about 1920 a carving of a mouse usually appeared on work by Thompson's company. In this period his skills as local joiner led to his appointment as the area factor for the ecclesiastical commission which, from the dissolution of Byland Abbey until the 1950s, owned most of the properties and lands in the area surrounding Kilburn. Thompson's duties involved the regular inspection of properties and the organization of their maintenance. About the time that he introduced the mouse to his work Thompson was also active, with other local people, in restoring the Kilburn White Horse, a mid-nineteenth-century chalk figure on Roulston Scar. He was also prominent in the committee that raised funds for the figure's regular 'grooming'. 
The demand for ecclesiastical memorial pieces increased further during the inter-war period and the Kilburn workshop expanded from ten craftsmen in 1928 to thirty by the middle of the following decade. Many of Thompson's several hundred ecclesiastical commissions were for church interiors in Yorkshire and examples of his stalls, memorial screens, and doors, fonts, pulpits, altars, rails, lecterns, and chairs can be seen, for instance, at St Mary the Virgin, Bridlington, St Mary's, Beverley, St Michael's, Coxwold, and All Saints, Ilkley, as well as at York Minster, where some of his finest work was undertaken under the supervision of the architects Sir Charles Peers and Sir Albert Richardson. Other notable examples of church interiors include work at St Mary the Virgin, Berkeley, Gloucester, the Benedictine priory at Workington, Cumberland, St John the Baptist, Spalding, Lincolnshire, and St Edward's Roman Catholic Church on the Hebridean island of Canna. Though a self-styled 'ecclesiastical contractor', Thompson also undertook commissions for domestic interiors. One of his earliest pieces was an oak staircase at Upsall Castle, north of Kilburn, and one of his largest was a table for Ampleforth College library, for which he later designed carrels, bookcases, and chairs between the mid-1920s and 1950s. Thompson's domestic work also brought him to the attention of an overseas market: the first order from North America was placed in the 1920s, and subsequent requests indicated the growing popularity of both his work and trademark: one successfully delivered letter was addressed simply to 'The Mouseman, England'. 
During the Second World War many of Thompson's craftsmen were called up to fight; in 1944 he wrote that 'Orders are pouring in and I've only one man and six boys left out of thirty-three; I have work to do in seventeen churches' (family archives). In the early days most of the work had been done by hand, but Thompson saw the advantages of machine tools, as well as their faults. He allowed machines to take the hard grind out of the work, but insisted that his craftsmen impart the care, time, and skill to bring out the very best qualities of the wood. In keeping with this appreciation of his craft -- a feature throughout his working life -- Thompson collected examples of carvings and used them as a resource for himself and his apprentices. He also collected humorous and pithy sayings and mottoes for use on furniture, along with heraldic devices which feature in his work and about which he was deeply knowledgeable. 
In 1924 Thompson's daughter, Elsie, married Percy Gregory Cartwright, one of Robert's craftsmen in Kilburn. Their sons, Robert Thompson Cartwright and John Cartwright, joined the family business and served an apprenticeship under their grandfather. Robert's great-grandsons continued in the family tradition, and in the early twenty-first century were responsible for running Robert Thompson Craftsmen's Ltd, still based at Kilburn. Robert Thompson died of cancer on 8 December 1955 at the Purey Cust Nursing Home, York, and was buried on 11 December at St Mary's, Kilburn. A quiet, hard working, well-read, humorous man, he passed on his skills and enthusiasm to numerous apprentices and directed his expanding firm for sixty years. Thompson's 'mouse furniture' is now enjoyed worldwide. 


@@@@@


doc= 59039


Thompson, Robert Michael (1911-1988), comedian, was born on 18 November 1911 at 4 The Staiths, Penshaw, near Sunderland, co. Durham, the youngest child of John Thompson, colliery overman, and his wife, Mary Cain. He had three brothers and three sisters. Having lost both parents before reaching the age of eight, Bobby was brought up by married sisters and moved through a number of schools in the Fatfield and Penshaw area of the county. From the age of fourteen he worked at North Biddick colliery, remaining there until the pit closed in 1931. For ten years he moved between unemployment and casual labouring jobs while entertaining in his spare time as a singer and harmonica player. He was called up for war service in February 1941 and acted as company runner in the Border regiment based at Carlisle, Cumberland. He served until July 1944, returning to the north-east after two years of civilian life in Cumberland. 
After a further five years in and out of work Thompson was persuaded to audition for a new regional radio series entitled 'Wot Cheor, Geordie'. Success encouraged him to give up a post he had just acquired at the Royal Ordnance Factory, Birtley, to become a professional entertainer. The radio series reached a wide audience in the north-east and brought him work in theatres throughout the region. By Christmas 1958 he was top of the bill in the prestigious Theatre Royal pantomime in Newcastle upon Tyne; this was followed shortly by a television series, 'The Bobby Thompson Show', produced by the newly formed Tyne-Tees company. The series was not a long-term success, perhaps because his material was not extensive enough, or because his act was more suited to the intimacy of a working-men's club or small theatre. As a result, his career began to founder. It was resurrected in the mid-1960s under new management and extensive bookings in working-men's clubs led to a long-playing record of his act in 1978. The record sold out in the region and occasioned his appearance on 'Wogan', a major national television chat show. 
Thompson was as popular in the working-men's clubs as he had been in the theatres. This was his secret. Described as a born comedian by his radio producer, Richard Kelly, he performed in a style rooted deep in nineteenth-century north-eastern humour. He worked at times in Yorkshire, but mostly in the area bounded by the Tweed and the Tees, and his ultimate success was limited to his native region. National exposure tended to leave audiences mildly amused, yet baffled by the little man's humour and the impenetrability of his accent. His two acts as the Little Waster and Soldier Bobby -- 'You didn't laugh at me when I was fighting for yer!' -- relied heavily on experiences shared with his audiences: outside toilets, home-made rugs, clothes bought through catalogues, and the intricacies of betting on the horses -- these were the very stuff of his act. Small and slight, he brought laughter the minute he appeared on stage as the Little Waster, 'a one-off emaciated figure crowned by a flat cap... the little man fighting back', as comedian Ken Dodd described him (Nicolson, 8). 
Despite a simple act, Bobby Thompson's was a complex character. A lifelong Roman Catholic, he gave much support to charity. He was also famed, in later life in particular, for his unreliability and tendency to double booking. He gambled -- in early life on the dogs and later in casinos. Financial problems took him to court on more than one occasion and led to a bankruptcy inquiry in 1986. He was a heavy smoker and drinker. Off-stage he was smart, dapper, and besuited and enjoyed the services of a personal chauffeur at the height of his career. He was married three times: first on 11 April 1936 to Anna Marjoram; they had one daughter and the marriage was dissolved in 1945. In the same year, on 4 October, he married Phyllis Coates (1910-1967); they had two sons. On 31 December 1982 he married Eleanor Cicely (Cissie) Palmer (died 1995). Between the second and third marriage he was very close to his housekeeper, Lottie Tate. His biography hints at an illegitimate child born elsewhere in the 1950s (Nicolson, 60). In later life he lived at Whitley Bay on the Northumberland coast and continued to perform in the clubs into the 1980s. He died of myocardial infarction and emphysema at Preston Hospital, North Shields, on 16 April 1988. A requiem mass in Cullercoats was followed by cremation at the Whitley Bay crematorium on 20 April 1988. Earlier that year he had featured in a Channel 4 television documentary, and he was considered worthy of a 'Times' obituary, therein described as a cult figure and folk hero who lost two fortunes. 


@@@@@


doc= 59040


Bloet family (per. c.1080-c.1300), gentry, in the south-west and Welsh march, was first represented by Ralph [i] Bloet (fl. 1086-c.1112), chief tenant of the honour of Striguil at the time of the Domesday survey. He held lands totalling forty-three hides in Hampshire, Somerset, Wiltshire, and Gloucestershire in 1086. He granted the manor of Ruddle, Gloucestershire, to Gloucester Abbey before 1100, and confirmed the manor of Bulley, Gloucestershire, to the same abbey before 1112, grants that indicate that he had also obtained the 'Domesday' lands of Walter Balistarius after the survey, but before the death of William II. The Ralph [ii] Bloet (d. in or before 1157) who appears as a prominent follower of Gilbert de Clare, earl of Pembroke (died 1148), and his son Earl Richard de Clare (died 1176) -- successive lords of Striguil -- may have been son or grandson of the first Ralph. Nothing much of Ralph [ii] is known, other than that he had died by 1157 and fathered a number of sons, some of whom founded cadet lines. One of these younger sons, Walter Bloet (who had died by 1199), founded a branch of the family at Raglan, Monmouthshire, which he had by grant of Earl Richard de Clare, and participated in the earl's conquest of Leinster. Another younger son, Sir Robert Bloet ('fl'. 1207), took a share of the Bloet lands at Daglingworth, Gloucestershire, and picked up Wiltshire estates based at Salthrop. Both the Raglan and Daglingworth branches survived and prospered into the fourteenth century. 

Sir Ralph [iii] Bloet (d. 1199) inherited the bulk of the family lands, and also his father's leading position in the honour of Striguil. He accompanied his lord, Earl Richard de Clare, on the conquest of Leinster and is named by the 'Song of Dermot and the Earl' as one of the earl's council at Waterford in 1171. But neither he nor his brothers acquired any sizeable estates in Leinster as a result. On the earl's death Ralph and his younger brother William were granted wardship of the honour of Striguil and Chepstow Castle, which they jointly held until 1185, and Ralph alone thereafter until Michaelmas 1188. Ralph can be proved to have held all the lands that had been in the hands of Ralph [i] in 1086, and his considerable holdings within the honour are sufficient to explain his local prominence. After William (I) Marshal acquired the honour of Striguil by marriage to Countess Isabel de Clare (daughter of Earl Richard) the connection persisted, for Ralph [iii] witnessed the Marshal's charters in 1189. Ralph died early in 1199. His wife, Nest Bloet (d. 1224/5), was a member of the Welsh royal dynasty of Caerleon, and had been a mistress of Henry II during the early 1170s. Ralph [iii] brought up her illegitimate son by the king, Morgan Bloet, later provost of Beverley and bishop-elect of Durham (1213). She seems to have been responsible for the close connections between their many sons and the royal curia in the time of King John. Nest Bloet survived Ralph by many years and enjoyed a substantial dower settlement. 
Their eldest son, Sir Ralph [iv] Bloet (d. 1241/2), continued the family's connection with the household of the lords of Striguil. He attested acts of William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke (died 1219), and fought on his side during the wars of 1215-17. The connection was long-lasting; Ralph [iv] was suspected of supporting the rebellion of his lord, Richard Marshal, earl of Pembroke (died 1234), against Henry III and had his English lands confiscated in 1233 as a result, although they were soon restored. He appears as a knight active across the several counties where he held land. He died at some time late in 1241 or early in 1242 leaving his sons minors. The result was a wardship agreement between Walter Marshal, earl of Pembroke, and Earl Simon de Montfort, by which Ralph [iv]'s lands, sons, and their marriages were granted to Montfort. The eldest, Sir William Bloet (d. 1287x1300), took the bulk of the lands but has no known later connection with the earl; however, William's younger brother, Ralph [v] Bloet of Hinton Blewitt, fought and died for Montfort at Evesham in 1265. William was of age in 1251 and had respites of knighthood, a status he was still avoiding in 1256, but to which he had succumbed by 1264, securing a lifetime exemption for juries in 1268. He was active in public affairs, investigating (as a knight of Hampshire) the abuses of Adam of Stratton on the Isle of Wight, and being summoned to a great council at Gloucester in 1287. He had died by 1300, when the family's lands had come to one John Bloet, who may well have been his son, although this is not certain. 
The family of Bloet was a remarkable instance of continuity both of a magnate connection and prosperity over several generations. Four, or perhaps five, successive heads of the family were leading retainers of the lords of Striguil, a period spanning over 150 years. The continuity of the link may have had a lot to do with the size of the Bloet holding (some six large manors) within the honour, which was a significant proportion of the tenured lands, and which was referred to -- exceptionally -- as a 'baronia' within it (rather like the 'baroniae' of the honours of Glamorgan and Chester) in 1284. There is also the significance of the fact that the family had from the Clares (probably since the twelfth century) another large manor in Langstone, Monmouthshire, which tied them to the march and marcher interests. The family largely retained its original endowment: interests at Daglingworth and Hinton Blewitt were subinfeudated to cadet branches, and not alienated. Other cadets were endowed with acquisitions, some acquired through their own initiative (like Raglan) and others by marriage, like Liswerry and Salisbury, Monmouthshire, which came to William Bloet, son of Ralph [iii], from the marriage settlement of Nest, Ralph's wife. The family made some endowments of religious houses. Ralph [i] patronized Gloucester Abbey, and Ralph [iii] Godstow Abbey, where his sister became a nun. The use of Gloucestershire lands in both cases indicates that the family regarded its English centre as elsewhere: certainly Silchester, Hampshire, was its chief seat by the thirteenth century. The family's arms appear on William Bloet's seal ('c'.1250) and in St George's roll ('c'.1285) as or, two wings conjoined in fess gules. 


@@@@@


doc= 59041


Bloet family (per. c.1080-c.1300), gentry, in the south-west and Welsh march, was first represented by Ralph [i] Bloet (fl. 1086-c.1112), chief tenant of the honour of Striguil at the time of the Domesday survey. He held lands totalling forty-three hides in Hampshire, Somerset, Wiltshire, and Gloucestershire in 1086. He granted the manor of Ruddle, Gloucestershire, to Gloucester Abbey before 1100, and confirmed the manor of Bulley, Gloucestershire, to the same abbey before 1112, grants that indicate that he had also obtained the 'Domesday' lands of Walter Balistarius after the survey, but before the death of William II. The Ralph [ii] Bloet (d. in or before 1157) who appears as a prominent follower of Gilbert de Clare, earl of Pembroke (died 1148), and his son Earl Richard de Clare (died 1176) -- successive lords of Striguil -- may have been son or grandson of the first Ralph. Nothing much of Ralph [ii] is known, other than that he had died by 1157 and fathered a number of sons, some of whom founded cadet lines. One of these younger sons, Walter Bloet (who had died by 1199), founded a branch of the family at Raglan, Monmouthshire, which he had by grant of Earl Richard de Clare, and participated in the earl's conquest of Leinster. Another younger son, Sir Robert Bloet ('fl'. 1207), took a share of the Bloet lands at Daglingworth, Gloucestershire, and picked up Wiltshire estates based at Salthrop. Both the Raglan and Daglingworth branches survived and prospered into the fourteenth century. 

Sir Ralph [iii] Bloet (d. 1199) inherited the bulk of the family lands, and also his father's leading position in the honour of Striguil. He accompanied his lord, Earl Richard de Clare, on the conquest of Leinster and is named by the 'Song of Dermot and the Earl' as one of the earl's council at Waterford in 1171. But neither he nor his brothers acquired any sizeable estates in Leinster as a result. On the earl's death Ralph and his younger brother William were granted wardship of the honour of Striguil and Chepstow Castle, which they jointly held until 1185, and Ralph alone thereafter until Michaelmas 1188. Ralph can be proved to have held all the lands that had been in the hands of Ralph [i] in 1086, and his considerable holdings within the honour are sufficient to explain his local prominence. After William (I) Marshal acquired the honour of Striguil by marriage to Countess Isabel de Clare (daughter of Earl Richard) the connection persisted, for Ralph [iii] witnessed the Marshal's charters in 1189. Ralph died early in 1199. His wife, Nest Bloet (d. 1224/5), was a member of the Welsh royal dynasty of Caerleon, and had been a mistress of Henry II during the early 1170s. Ralph [iii] brought up her illegitimate son by the king, Morgan Bloet, later provost of Beverley and bishop-elect of Durham (1213). She seems to have been responsible for the close connections between their many sons and the royal curia in the time of King John. Nest Bloet survived Ralph by many years and enjoyed a substantial dower settlement. 
Their eldest son, Sir Ralph [iv] Bloet (d. 1241/2), continued the family's connection with the household of the lords of Striguil. He attested acts of William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke (died 1219), and fought on his side during the wars of 1215-17. The connection was long-lasting; Ralph [iv] was suspected of supporting the rebellion of his lord, Richard Marshal, earl of Pembroke (died 1234), against Henry III and had his English lands confiscated in 1233 as a result, although they were soon restored. He appears as a knight active across the several counties where he held land. He died at some time late in 1241 or early in 1242 leaving his sons minors. The result was a wardship agreement between Walter Marshal, earl of Pembroke, and Earl Simon de Montfort, by which Ralph [iv]'s lands, sons, and their marriages were granted to Montfort. The eldest, Sir William Bloet (d. 1287x1300), took the bulk of the lands but has no known later connection with the earl; however, William's younger brother, Ralph [v] Bloet of Hinton Blewitt, fought and died for Montfort at Evesham in 1265. William was of age in 1251 and had respites of knighthood, a status he was still avoiding in 1256, but to which he had succumbed by 1264, securing a lifetime exemption for juries in 1268. He was active in public affairs, investigating (as a knight of Hampshire) the abuses of Adam of Stratton on the Isle of Wight, and being summoned to a great council at Gloucester in 1287. He had died by 1300, when the family's lands had come to one John Bloet, who may well have been his son, although this is not certain. 
The family of Bloet was a remarkable instance of continuity both of a magnate connection and prosperity over several generations. Four, or perhaps five, successive heads of the family were leading retainers of the lords of Striguil, a period spanning over 150 years. The continuity of the link may have had a lot to do with the size of the Bloet holding (some six large manors) within the honour, which was a significant proportion of the tenured lands, and which was referred to -- exceptionally -- as a 'baronia' within it (rather like the 'baroniae' of the honours of Glamorgan and Chester) in 1284. There is also the significance of the fact that the family had from the Clares (probably since the twelfth century) another large manor in Langstone, Monmouthshire, which tied them to the march and marcher interests. The family largely retained its original endowment: interests at Daglingworth and Hinton Blewitt were subinfeudated to cadet branches, and not alienated. Other cadets were endowed with acquisitions, some acquired through their own initiative (like Raglan) and others by marriage, like Liswerry and Salisbury, Monmouthshire, which came to William Bloet, son of Ralph [iii], from the marriage settlement of Nest, Ralph's wife. The family made some endowments of religious houses. Ralph [i] patronized Gloucester Abbey, and Ralph [iii] Godstow Abbey, where his sister became a nun. The use of Gloucestershire lands in both cases indicates that the family regarded its English centre as elsewhere: certainly Silchester, Hampshire, was its chief seat by the thirteenth century. The family's arms appear on William Bloet's seal ('c'.1250) and in St George's roll ('c'.1285) as or, two wings conjoined in fess gules. 


@@@@@


doc= 59042


Bloet family (per. c.1080-c.1300), gentry, in the south-west and Welsh march, was first represented by Ralph [i] Bloet (fl. 1086-c.1112), chief tenant of the honour of Striguil at the time of the Domesday survey. He held lands totalling forty-three hides in Hampshire, Somerset, Wiltshire, and Gloucestershire in 1086. He granted the manor of Ruddle, Gloucestershire, to Gloucester Abbey before 1100, and confirmed the manor of Bulley, Gloucestershire, to the same abbey before 1112, grants that indicate that he had also obtained the 'Domesday' lands of Walter Balistarius after the survey, but before the death of William II. The Ralph [ii] Bloet (d. in or before 1157) who appears as a prominent follower of Gilbert de Clare, earl of Pembroke (died 1148), and his son Earl Richard de Clare (died 1176) -- successive lords of Striguil -- may have been son or grandson of the first Ralph. Nothing much of Ralph [ii] is known, other than that he had died by 1157 and fathered a number of sons, some of whom founded cadet lines. One of these younger sons, Walter Bloet (who had died by 1199), founded a branch of the family at Raglan, Monmouthshire, which he had by grant of Earl Richard de Clare, and participated in the earl's conquest of Leinster. Another younger son, Sir Robert Bloet ('fl'. 1207), took a share of the Bloet lands at Daglingworth, Gloucestershire, and picked up Wiltshire estates based at Salthrop. Both the Raglan and Daglingworth branches survived and prospered into the fourteenth century. 

Sir Ralph [iii] Bloet (d. 1199) inherited the bulk of the family lands, and also his father's leading position in the honour of Striguil. He accompanied his lord, Earl Richard de Clare, on the conquest of Leinster and is named by the 'Song of Dermot and the Earl' as one of the earl's council at Waterford in 1171. But neither he nor his brothers acquired any sizeable estates in Leinster as a result. On the earl's death Ralph and his younger brother William were granted wardship of the honour of Striguil and Chepstow Castle, which they jointly held until 1185, and Ralph alone thereafter until Michaelmas 1188. Ralph can be proved to have held all the lands that had been in the hands of Ralph [i] in 1086, and his considerable holdings within the honour are sufficient to explain his local prominence. After William (I) Marshal acquired the honour of Striguil by marriage to Countess Isabel de Clare (daughter of Earl Richard) the connection persisted, for Ralph [iii] witnessed the Marshal's charters in 1189. Ralph died early in 1199. His wife, Nest Bloet (d. 1224/5), was a member of the Welsh royal dynasty of Caerleon, and had been a mistress of Henry II during the early 1170s. Ralph [iii] brought up her illegitimate son by the king, Morgan Bloet, later provost of Beverley and bishop-elect of Durham (1213). She seems to have been responsible for the close connections between their many sons and the royal curia in the time of King John. Nest Bloet survived Ralph by many years and enjoyed a substantial dower settlement. 
Their eldest son, Sir Ralph [iv] Bloet (d. 1241/2), continued the family's connection with the household of the lords of Striguil. He attested acts of William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke (died 1219), and fought on his side during the wars of 1215-17. The connection was long-lasting; Ralph [iv] was suspected of supporting the rebellion of his lord, Richard Marshal, earl of Pembroke (died 1234), against Henry III and had his English lands confiscated in 1233 as a result, although they were soon restored. He appears as a knight active across the several counties where he held land. He died at some time late in 1241 or early in 1242 leaving his sons minors. The result was a wardship agreement between Walter Marshal, earl of Pembroke, and Earl Simon de Montfort, by which Ralph [iv]'s lands, sons, and their marriages were granted to Montfort. The eldest, Sir William Bloet (d. 1287x1300), took the bulk of the lands but has no known later connection with the earl; however, William's younger brother, Ralph [v] Bloet of Hinton Blewitt, fought and died for Montfort at Evesham in 1265. William was of age in 1251 and had respites of knighthood, a status he was still avoiding in 1256, but to which he had succumbed by 1264, securing a lifetime exemption for juries in 1268. He was active in public affairs, investigating (as a knight of Hampshire) the abuses of Adam of Stratton on the Isle of Wight, and being summoned to a great council at Gloucester in 1287. He had died by 1300, when the family's lands had come to one John Bloet, who may well have been his son, although this is not certain. 
The family of Bloet was a remarkable instance of continuity both of a magnate connection and prosperity over several generations. Four, or perhaps five, successive heads of the family were leading retainers of the lords of Striguil, a period spanning over 150 years. The continuity of the link may have had a lot to do with the size of the Bloet holding (some six large manors) within the honour, which was a significant proportion of the tenured lands, and which was referred to -- exceptionally -- as a 'baronia' within it (rather like the 'baroniae' of the honours of Glamorgan and Chester) in 1284. There is also the significance of the fact that the family had from the Clares (probably since the twelfth century) another large manor in Langstone, Monmouthshire, which tied them to the march and marcher interests. The family largely retained its original endowment: interests at Daglingworth and Hinton Blewitt were subinfeudated to cadet branches, and not alienated. Other cadets were endowed with acquisitions, some acquired through their own initiative (like Raglan) and others by marriage, like Liswerry and Salisbury, Monmouthshire, which came to William Bloet, son of Ralph [iii], from the marriage settlement of Nest, Ralph's wife. The family made some endowments of religious houses. Ralph [i] patronized Gloucester Abbey, and Ralph [iii] Godstow Abbey, where his sister became a nun. The use of Gloucestershire lands in both cases indicates that the family regarded its English centre as elsewhere: certainly Silchester, Hampshire, was its chief seat by the thirteenth century. The family's arms appear on William Bloet's seal ('c'.1250) and in St George's roll ('c'.1285) as or, two wings conjoined in fess gules. 


@@@@@


doc= 59043


Bloet family (per. c.1080-c.1300), gentry, in the south-west and Welsh march, was first represented by Ralph [i] Bloet (fl. 1086-c.1112), chief tenant of the honour of Striguil at the time of the Domesday survey. He held lands totalling forty-three hides in Hampshire, Somerset, Wiltshire, and Gloucestershire in 1086. He granted the manor of Ruddle, Gloucestershire, to Gloucester Abbey before 1100, and confirmed the manor of Bulley, Gloucestershire, to the same abbey before 1112, grants that indicate that he had also obtained the 'Domesday' lands of Walter Balistarius after the survey, but before the death of William II. The Ralph [ii] Bloet (d. in or before 1157) who appears as a prominent follower of Gilbert de Clare, earl of Pembroke (died 1148), and his son Earl Richard de Clare (died 1176) -- successive lords of Striguil -- may have been son or grandson of the first Ralph. Nothing much of Ralph [ii] is known, other than that he had died by 1157 and fathered a number of sons, some of whom founded cadet lines. One of these younger sons, Walter Bloet (who had died by 1199), founded a branch of the family at Raglan, Monmouthshire, which he had by grant of Earl Richard de Clare, and participated in the earl's conquest of Leinster. Another younger son, Sir Robert Bloet ('fl'. 1207), took a share of the Bloet lands at Daglingworth, Gloucestershire, and picked up Wiltshire estates based at Salthrop. Both the Raglan and Daglingworth branches survived and prospered into the fourteenth century. 

Sir Ralph [iii] Bloet (d. 1199) inherited the bulk of the family lands, and also his father's leading position in the honour of Striguil. He accompanied his lord, Earl Richard de Clare, on the conquest of Leinster and is named by the 'Song of Dermot and the Earl' as one of the earl's council at Waterford in 1171. But neither he nor his brothers acquired any sizeable estates in Leinster as a result. On the earl's death Ralph and his younger brother William were granted wardship of the honour of Striguil and Chepstow Castle, which they jointly held until 1185, and Ralph alone thereafter until Michaelmas 1188. Ralph can be proved to have held all the lands that had been in the hands of Ralph [i] in 1086, and his considerable holdings within the honour are sufficient to explain his local prominence. After William (I) Marshal acquired the honour of Striguil by marriage to Countess Isabel de Clare (daughter of Earl Richard) the connection persisted, for Ralph [iii] witnessed the Marshal's charters in 1189. Ralph died early in 1199. His wife, Nest Bloet (d. 1224/5), was a member of the Welsh royal dynasty of Caerleon, and had been a mistress of Henry II during the early 1170s. Ralph [iii] brought up her illegitimate son by the king, Morgan Bloet, later provost of Beverley and bishop-elect of Durham (1213). She seems to have been responsible for the close connections between their many sons and the royal curia in the time of King John. Nest Bloet survived Ralph by many years and enjoyed a substantial dower settlement. 
Their eldest son, Sir Ralph [iv] Bloet (d. 1241/2), continued the family's connection with the household of the lords of Striguil. He attested acts of William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke (died 1219), and fought on his side during the wars of 1215-17. The connection was long-lasting; Ralph [iv] was suspected of supporting the rebellion of his lord, Richard Marshal, earl of Pembroke (died 1234), against Henry III and had his English lands confiscated in 1233 as a result, although they were soon restored. He appears as a knight active across the several counties where he held land. He died at some time late in 1241 or early in 1242 leaving his sons minors. The result was a wardship agreement between Walter Marshal, earl of Pembroke, and Earl Simon de Montfort, by which Ralph [iv]'s lands, sons, and their marriages were granted to Montfort. The eldest, Sir William Bloet (d. 1287x1300), took the bulk of the lands but has no known later connection with the earl; however, William's younger brother, Ralph [v] Bloet of Hinton Blewitt, fought and died for Montfort at Evesham in 1265. William was of age in 1251 and had respites of knighthood, a status he was still avoiding in 1256, but to which he had succumbed by 1264, securing a lifetime exemption for juries in 1268. He was active in public affairs, investigating (as a knight of Hampshire) the abuses of Adam of Stratton on the Isle of Wight, and being summoned to a great council at Gloucester in 1287. He had died by 1300, when the family's lands had come to one John Bloet, who may well have been his son, although this is not certain. 
The family of Bloet was a remarkable instance of continuity both of a magnate connection and prosperity over several generations. Four, or perhaps five, successive heads of the family were leading retainers of the lords of Striguil, a period spanning over 150 years. The continuity of the link may have had a lot to do with the size of the Bloet holding (some six large manors) within the honour, which was a significant proportion of the tenured lands, and which was referred to -- exceptionally -- as a 'baronia' within it (rather like the 'baroniae' of the honours of Glamorgan and Chester) in 1284. There is also the significance of the fact that the family had from the Clares (probably since the twelfth century) another large manor in Langstone, Monmouthshire, which tied them to the march and marcher interests. The family largely retained its original endowment: interests at Daglingworth and Hinton Blewitt were subinfeudated to cadet branches, and not alienated. Other cadets were endowed with acquisitions, some acquired through their own initiative (like Raglan) and others by marriage, like Liswerry and Salisbury, Monmouthshire, which came to William Bloet, son of Ralph [iii], from the marriage settlement of Nest, Ralph's wife. The family made some endowments of religious houses. Ralph [i] patronized Gloucester Abbey, and Ralph [iii] Godstow Abbey, where his sister became a nun. The use of Gloucestershire lands in both cases indicates that the family regarded its English centre as elsewhere: certainly Silchester, Hampshire, was its chief seat by the thirteenth century. The family's arms appear on William Bloet's seal ('c'.1250) and in St George's roll ('c'.1285) as or, two wings conjoined in fess gules. 


@@@@@


doc= 59044


Bloet family (per. c.1080-c.1300), gentry, in the south-west and Welsh march, was first represented by Ralph [i] Bloet (fl. 1086-c.1112), chief tenant of the honour of Striguil at the time of the Domesday survey. He held lands totalling forty-three hides in Hampshire, Somerset, Wiltshire, and Gloucestershire in 1086. He granted the manor of Ruddle, Gloucestershire, to Gloucester Abbey before 1100, and confirmed the manor of Bulley, Gloucestershire, to the same abbey before 1112, grants that indicate that he had also obtained the 'Domesday' lands of Walter Balistarius after the survey, but before the death of William II. The Ralph [ii] Bloet (d. in or before 1157) who appears as a prominent follower of Gilbert de Clare, earl of Pembroke (died 1148), and his son Earl Richard de Clare (died 1176) -- successive lords of Striguil -- may have been son or grandson of the first Ralph. Nothing much of Ralph [ii] is known, other than that he had died by 1157 and fathered a number of sons, some of whom founded cadet lines. One of these younger sons, Walter Bloet (who had died by 1199), founded a branch of the family at Raglan, Monmouthshire, which he had by grant of Earl Richard de Clare, and participated in the earl's conquest of Leinster. Another younger son, Sir Robert Bloet ('fl'. 1207), took a share of the Bloet lands at Daglingworth, Gloucestershire, and picked up Wiltshire estates based at Salthrop. Both the Raglan and Daglingworth branches survived and prospered into the fourteenth century. 

Sir Ralph [iii] Bloet (d. 1199) inherited the bulk of the family lands, and also his father's leading position in the honour of Striguil. He accompanied his lord, Earl Richard de Clare, on the conquest of Leinster and is named by the 'Song of Dermot and the Earl' as one of the earl's council at Waterford in 1171. But neither he nor his brothers acquired any sizeable estates in Leinster as a result. On the earl's death Ralph and his younger brother William were granted wardship of the honour of Striguil and Chepstow Castle, which they jointly held until 1185, and Ralph alone thereafter until Michaelmas 1188. Ralph can be proved to have held all the lands that had been in the hands of Ralph [i] in 1086, and his considerable holdings within the honour are sufficient to explain his local prominence. After William (I) Marshal acquired the honour of Striguil by marriage to Countess Isabel de Clare (daughter of Earl Richard) the connection persisted, for Ralph [iii] witnessed the Marshal's charters in 1189. Ralph died early in 1199. His wife, Nest Bloet (d. 1224/5), was a member of the Welsh royal dynasty of Caerleon, and had been a mistress of Henry II during the early 1170s. Ralph [iii] brought up her illegitimate son by the king, Morgan Bloet, later provost of Beverley and bishop-elect of Durham (1213). She seems to have been responsible for the close connections between their many sons and the royal curia in the time of King John. Nest Bloet survived Ralph by many years and enjoyed a substantial dower settlement. 
Their eldest son, Sir Ralph [iv] Bloet (d. 1241/2), continued the family's connection with the household of the lords of Striguil. He attested acts of William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke (died 1219), and fought on his side during the wars of 1215-17. The connection was long-lasting; Ralph [iv] was suspected of supporting the rebellion of his lord, Richard Marshal, earl of Pembroke (died 1234), against Henry III and had his English lands confiscated in 1233 as a result, although they were soon restored. He appears as a knight active across the several counties where he held land. He died at some time late in 1241 or early in 1242 leaving his sons minors. The result was a wardship agreement between Walter Marshal, earl of Pembroke, and Earl Simon de Montfort, by which Ralph [iv]'s lands, sons, and their marriages were granted to Montfort. The eldest, Sir William Bloet (d. 1287x1300), took the bulk of the lands but has no known later connection with the earl; however, William's younger brother, Ralph [v] Bloet of Hinton Blewitt, fought and died for Montfort at Evesham in 1265. William was of age in 1251 and had respites of knighthood, a status he was still avoiding in 1256, but to which he had succumbed by 1264, securing a lifetime exemption for juries in 1268. He was active in public affairs, investigating (as a knight of Hampshire) the abuses of Adam of Stratton on the Isle of Wight, and being summoned to a great council at Gloucester in 1287. He had died by 1300, when the family's lands had come to one John Bloet, who may well have been his son, although this is not certain. 
The family of Bloet was a remarkable instance of continuity both of a magnate connection and prosperity over several generations. Four, or perhaps five, successive heads of the family were leading retainers of the lords of Striguil, a period spanning over 150 years. The continuity of the link may have had a lot to do with the size of the Bloet holding (some six large manors) within the honour, which was a significant proportion of the tenured lands, and which was referred to -- exceptionally -- as a 'baronia' within it (rather like the 'baroniae' of the honours of Glamorgan and Chester) in 1284. There is also the significance of the fact that the family had from the Clares (probably since the twelfth century) another large manor in Langstone, Monmouthshire, which tied them to the march and marcher interests. The family largely retained its original endowment: interests at Daglingworth and Hinton Blewitt were subinfeudated to cadet branches, and not alienated. Other cadets were endowed with acquisitions, some acquired through their own initiative (like Raglan) and others by marriage, like Liswerry and Salisbury, Monmouthshire, which came to William Bloet, son of Ralph [iii], from the marriage settlement of Nest, Ralph's wife. The family made some endowments of religious houses. Ralph [i] patronized Gloucester Abbey, and Ralph [iii] Godstow Abbey, where his sister became a nun. The use of Gloucestershire lands in both cases indicates that the family regarded its English centre as elsewhere: certainly Silchester, Hampshire, was its chief seat by the thirteenth century. The family's arms appear on William Bloet's seal ('c'.1250) and in St George's roll ('c'.1285) as or, two wings conjoined in fess gules. 


@@@@@


doc= 59045


Bois, du, family (per. c.1071-1313), barons, were important tenants and retainers of the earls of Leicester. For seven generations each head of the family bore the name Arnold, which became a component of the place names of their principal residences. Substantial earthworks next to the church at Thorpe Arnold are all that remains of the du Bois manor house there. There is also mention of a residence at Bois-Ernault in Normandy. 

Arnold (I) du Bois (fl. 1071-1094) was a leading tenant of the honour of Breteuil in Normandy, with lands in ten surrounding settlements. He also held Pullay of the duke of Normandy. He was one of ten knights taken prisoner during a baronial conflict at Ivry in Normandy in 1094 and subsequently gaoled. Arnold (II) du Bois (fl. 1100-1125) was the castellan of Lyre in Normandy when it was attacked by Henry I in 1119. Arnold, like the majority of the tenants of Breteuil, had revolted after the imposition upon the honour of a royal nominee, the Breton baron Ralph de Gael. In 1121 the honour passed by marriage to Robert (II), earl of Leicester (died 1168), whose lordship Arnold accepted and in return received a substantial grant of lands in Leicestershire. 

Arnold (III) du Bois (fl. 1130-1160) acquired further estates in Gloucestershire and Warwickshire through marriage to Isabel de Waterville, heir of another Leicester tenant. He served the earl throughout the troubled reign of Stephen, as constable and 'de facto' deputy in Normandy in 1138-9 and as steward and constant attendant in England from 1140 onwards. He appears as a witness to charters of Stephen and of Henry Plantagenet, as duke of Normandy and subsequently as king of England, on most occasions in the company of his lord the earl, who supported Stephen and Henry in turn. In 1147 Arnold founded the Cistercian monastery at Biddlesden in Buckinghamshire, a daughter house of Garendon, Leicestershire, on land to which he had dubious title. He also made substantial grants to Leicester Abbey; and like his father and grandfather he was a patron of Lyre Abbey in Normandy. 
The relationship between Arnold (IV) du Bois (d. 1205) and Robert (III) de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1190), was perhaps not as close as that which had existed between their respective fathers, although Arnold appears to have supported the earl in his revolt against Henry II in 1173 and afterwards served as his steward. Arnold accompanied Robert (IV) de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1204), on the third crusade, and was one of the party led by the earl that successfully routed a band of Turks outside Ramlah in late 1191. On his return from the Holy Land he was impleaded for debt by the moneylender Elias fitz Aaron of Lincoln. He married Emma, daughter and coheir of Payn of Houghton, Northamptonshire, acquiring through her lands in Northamptonshire and Lincolnshire. His brother Robert du Bois ('fl'. 1154-1190) was rector of Claybrooke, Leicestershire, and a household clerk of the earls of Leicester. Arnold (V) du Bois (1186?-1222) was a minor at his father's death in 1205, and was placed in the wardship of Roger of Basingham. He reached his majority in 1207 but his inheritance was much reduced, both in extent and prestige. The loss of Normandy to the Capetians in 1204 had irrevocably deprived the family of its ancestral lands, and the division of the earldom of Leicester after 1204 extinguished the du Bois stewardship. The division also left Arnold with two overlords for the lands formerly held of the earldom, Saer (IV) de Quincy (died 1219) and Simon de Montfort (died 1218). In the civil war of 1216 Arnold fought against the king, and he was briefly deprived of his lands as a result. He married Alice, heir of Henry of Tubney, steward of the earl of Warwick and lord of Tubney, Berkshire. 

Arnold (VI) du Bois (d. 1255) was one of the knights who mustered at Portsmouth in late 1229 for an abortive royal expedition to Brittany. He was custodian of Nottingham Castle and acting sheriff of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire for part of 1239, and in 1253 he was appointed justice of the forests south of the Trent. He was an adherent of Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester (died 1265), and his sister Joan du Bois married Montfort's steward Thomas Astley. His brother William du Bois ('fl'. 1235-1260) was a household knight of Roger de Quincy, constable of Scotland. Arnold married Joan Beauchamp, coheir of John Beauchamp of Ashington, Suffolk. Matthew Paris gave his arms as argent, two bars and a canton gules. The heraldic seal of one of Arnold's charters shows two bars, on a canton or quarter a lion passant. He died on 6 February 1255 and was buried in Biddlesden Abbey. Arnold (VII) du Bois (d. 1277) was obliged to mortgage his manor of Ashington to the bishop of Norwich in order to raise money in 1259. He also supported Montfort, but a fortuitous illness precluded his participation in the baronial wars of 1264-5, and he did not suffer for his earlier allegiance. His eldest son, Arnold, died in his lifetime and, on his death on 1 April 1277, he was succeeded by his second son, John du Bois, Lord du Bois (1253-1290), who was born on 29 June 1253. John had a summons to the Shrewsbury parliament of 1283. He married, but there were no children of the union, and on his death before 6 February 1290 his heir was his younger brother Master William du Bois, a cleric. After William's death, before 6 March 1313, the bulk of the du Bois lands passed to his niece Maud Lovell and her husband, William de la Zouche, first Lord Zouche ['see under 'Zouche family]. 


@@@@@


doc= 59046


Bois, du, family (per. c.1071-1313), barons, were important tenants and retainers of the earls of Leicester. For seven generations each head of the family bore the name Arnold, which became a component of the place names of their principal residences. Substantial earthworks next to the church at Thorpe Arnold are all that remains of the du Bois manor house there. There is also mention of a residence at Bois-Ernault in Normandy. 

Arnold (I) du Bois (fl. 1071-1094) was a leading tenant of the honour of Breteuil in Normandy, with lands in ten surrounding settlements. He also held Pullay of the duke of Normandy. He was one of ten knights taken prisoner during a baronial conflict at Ivry in Normandy in 1094 and subsequently gaoled. Arnold (II) du Bois (fl. 1100-1125) was the castellan of Lyre in Normandy when it was attacked by Henry I in 1119. Arnold, like the majority of the tenants of Breteuil, had revolted after the imposition upon the honour of a royal nominee, the Breton baron Ralph de Gael. In 1121 the honour passed by marriage to Robert (II), earl of Leicester (died 1168), whose lordship Arnold accepted and in return received a substantial grant of lands in Leicestershire. 

Arnold (III) du Bois (fl. 1130-1160) acquired further estates in Gloucestershire and Warwickshire through marriage to Isabel de Waterville, heir of another Leicester tenant. He served the earl throughout the troubled reign of Stephen, as constable and 'de facto' deputy in Normandy in 1138-9 and as steward and constant attendant in England from 1140 onwards. He appears as a witness to charters of Stephen and of Henry Plantagenet, as duke of Normandy and subsequently as king of England, on most occasions in the company of his lord the earl, who supported Stephen and Henry in turn. In 1147 Arnold founded the Cistercian monastery at Biddlesden in Buckinghamshire, a daughter house of Garendon, Leicestershire, on land to which he had dubious title. He also made substantial grants to Leicester Abbey; and like his father and grandfather he was a patron of Lyre Abbey in Normandy. 
The relationship between Arnold (IV) du Bois (d. 1205) and Robert (III) de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1190), was perhaps not as close as that which had existed between their respective fathers, although Arnold appears to have supported the earl in his revolt against Henry II in 1173 and afterwards served as his steward. Arnold accompanied Robert (IV) de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1204), on the third crusade, and was one of the party led by the earl that successfully routed a band of Turks outside Ramlah in late 1191. On his return from the Holy Land he was impleaded for debt by the moneylender Elias fitz Aaron of Lincoln. He married Emma, daughter and coheir of Payn of Houghton, Northamptonshire, acquiring through her lands in Northamptonshire and Lincolnshire. His brother Robert du Bois ('fl'. 1154-1190) was rector of Claybrooke, Leicestershire, and a household clerk of the earls of Leicester. Arnold (V) du Bois (1186?-1222) was a minor at his father's death in 1205, and was placed in the wardship of Roger of Basingham. He reached his majority in 1207 but his inheritance was much reduced, both in extent and prestige. The loss of Normandy to the Capetians in 1204 had irrevocably deprived the family of its ancestral lands, and the division of the earldom of Leicester after 1204 extinguished the du Bois stewardship. The division also left Arnold with two overlords for the lands formerly held of the earldom, Saer (IV) de Quincy (died 1219) and Simon de Montfort (died 1218). In the civil war of 1216 Arnold fought against the king, and he was briefly deprived of his lands as a result. He married Alice, heir of Henry of Tubney, steward of the earl of Warwick and lord of Tubney, Berkshire. 

Arnold (VI) du Bois (d. 1255) was one of the knights who mustered at Portsmouth in late 1229 for an abortive royal expedition to Brittany. He was custodian of Nottingham Castle and acting sheriff of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire for part of 1239, and in 1253 he was appointed justice of the forests south of the Trent. He was an adherent of Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester (died 1265), and his sister Joan du Bois married Montfort's steward Thomas Astley. His brother William du Bois ('fl'. 1235-1260) was a household knight of Roger de Quincy, constable of Scotland. Arnold married Joan Beauchamp, coheir of John Beauchamp of Ashington, Suffolk. Matthew Paris gave his arms as argent, two bars and a canton gules. The heraldic seal of one of Arnold's charters shows two bars, on a canton or quarter a lion passant. He died on 6 February 1255 and was buried in Biddlesden Abbey. Arnold (VII) du Bois (d. 1277) was obliged to mortgage his manor of Ashington to the bishop of Norwich in order to raise money in 1259. He also supported Montfort, but a fortuitous illness precluded his participation in the baronial wars of 1264-5, and he did not suffer for his earlier allegiance. His eldest son, Arnold, died in his lifetime and, on his death on 1 April 1277, he was succeeded by his second son, John du Bois, Lord du Bois (1253-1290), who was born on 29 June 1253. John had a summons to the Shrewsbury parliament of 1283. He married, but there were no children of the union, and on his death before 6 February 1290 his heir was his younger brother Master William du Bois, a cleric. After William's death, before 6 March 1313, the bulk of the du Bois lands passed to his niece Maud Lovell and her husband, William de la Zouche, first Lord Zouche ['see under 'Zouche family]. 


@@@@@


doc= 59047


Bois, du, family (per. c.1071-1313), barons, were important tenants and retainers of the earls of Leicester. For seven generations each head of the family bore the name Arnold, which became a component of the place names of their principal residences. Substantial earthworks next to the church at Thorpe Arnold are all that remains of the du Bois manor house there. There is also mention of a residence at Bois-Ernault in Normandy. 

Arnold (I) du Bois (fl. 1071-1094) was a leading tenant of the honour of Breteuil in Normandy, with lands in ten surrounding settlements. He also held Pullay of the duke of Normandy. He was one of ten knights taken prisoner during a baronial conflict at Ivry in Normandy in 1094 and subsequently gaoled. Arnold (II) du Bois (fl. 1100-1125) was the castellan of Lyre in Normandy when it was attacked by Henry I in 1119. Arnold, like the majority of the tenants of Breteuil, had revolted after the imposition upon the honour of a royal nominee, the Breton baron Ralph de Gael. In 1121 the honour passed by marriage to Robert (II), earl of Leicester (died 1168), whose lordship Arnold accepted and in return received a substantial grant of lands in Leicestershire. 

Arnold (III) du Bois (fl. 1130-1160) acquired further estates in Gloucestershire and Warwickshire through marriage to Isabel de Waterville, heir of another Leicester tenant. He served the earl throughout the troubled reign of Stephen, as constable and 'de facto' deputy in Normandy in 1138-9 and as steward and constant attendant in England from 1140 onwards. He appears as a witness to charters of Stephen and of Henry Plantagenet, as duke of Normandy and subsequently as king of England, on most occasions in the company of his lord the earl, who supported Stephen and Henry in turn. In 1147 Arnold founded the Cistercian monastery at Biddlesden in Buckinghamshire, a daughter house of Garendon, Leicestershire, on land to which he had dubious title. He also made substantial grants to Leicester Abbey; and like his father and grandfather he was a patron of Lyre Abbey in Normandy. 
The relationship between Arnold (IV) du Bois (d. 1205) and Robert (III) de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1190), was perhaps not as close as that which had existed between their respective fathers, although Arnold appears to have supported the earl in his revolt against Henry II in 1173 and afterwards served as his steward. Arnold accompanied Robert (IV) de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1204), on the third crusade, and was one of the party led by the earl that successfully routed a band of Turks outside Ramlah in late 1191. On his return from the Holy Land he was impleaded for debt by the moneylender Elias fitz Aaron of Lincoln. He married Emma, daughter and coheir of Payn of Houghton, Northamptonshire, acquiring through her lands in Northamptonshire and Lincolnshire. His brother Robert du Bois ('fl'. 1154-1190) was rector of Claybrooke, Leicestershire, and a household clerk of the earls of Leicester. Arnold (V) du Bois (1186?-1222) was a minor at his father's death in 1205, and was placed in the wardship of Roger of Basingham. He reached his majority in 1207 but his inheritance was much reduced, both in extent and prestige. The loss of Normandy to the Capetians in 1204 had irrevocably deprived the family of its ancestral lands, and the division of the earldom of Leicester after 1204 extinguished the du Bois stewardship. The division also left Arnold with two overlords for the lands formerly held of the earldom, Saer (IV) de Quincy (died 1219) and Simon de Montfort (died 1218). In the civil war of 1216 Arnold fought against the king, and he was briefly deprived of his lands as a result. He married Alice, heir of Henry of Tubney, steward of the earl of Warwick and lord of Tubney, Berkshire. 

Arnold (VI) du Bois (d. 1255) was one of the knights who mustered at Portsmouth in late 1229 for an abortive royal expedition to Brittany. He was custodian of Nottingham Castle and acting sheriff of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire for part of 1239, and in 1253 he was appointed justice of the forests south of the Trent. He was an adherent of Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester (died 1265), and his sister Joan du Bois married Montfort's steward Thomas Astley. His brother William du Bois ('fl'. 1235-1260) was a household knight of Roger de Quincy, constable of Scotland. Arnold married Joan Beauchamp, coheir of John Beauchamp of Ashington, Suffolk. Matthew Paris gave his arms as argent, two bars and a canton gules. The heraldic seal of one of Arnold's charters shows two bars, on a canton or quarter a lion passant. He died on 6 February 1255 and was buried in Biddlesden Abbey. Arnold (VII) du Bois (d. 1277) was obliged to mortgage his manor of Ashington to the bishop of Norwich in order to raise money in 1259. He also supported Montfort, but a fortuitous illness precluded his participation in the baronial wars of 1264-5, and he did not suffer for his earlier allegiance. His eldest son, Arnold, died in his lifetime and, on his death on 1 April 1277, he was succeeded by his second son, John du Bois, Lord du Bois (1253-1290), who was born on 29 June 1253. John had a summons to the Shrewsbury parliament of 1283. He married, but there were no children of the union, and on his death before 6 February 1290 his heir was his younger brother Master William du Bois, a cleric. After William's death, before 6 March 1313, the bulk of the du Bois lands passed to his niece Maud Lovell and her husband, William de la Zouche, first Lord Zouche ['see under 'Zouche family]. 


@@@@@


doc= 59048


Bois, du, family (per. c.1071-1313), barons, were important tenants and retainers of the earls of Leicester. For seven generations each head of the family bore the name Arnold, which became a component of the place names of their principal residences. Substantial earthworks next to the church at Thorpe Arnold are all that remains of the du Bois manor house there. There is also mention of a residence at Bois-Ernault in Normandy. 

Arnold (I) du Bois (fl. 1071-1094) was a leading tenant of the honour of Breteuil in Normandy, with lands in ten surrounding settlements. He also held Pullay of the duke of Normandy. He was one of ten knights taken prisoner during a baronial conflict at Ivry in Normandy in 1094 and subsequently gaoled. Arnold (II) du Bois (fl. 1100-1125) was the castellan of Lyre in Normandy when it was attacked by Henry I in 1119. Arnold, like the majority of the tenants of Breteuil, had revolted after the imposition upon the honour of a royal nominee, the Breton baron Ralph de Gael. In 1121 the honour passed by marriage to Robert (II), earl of Leicester (died 1168), whose lordship Arnold accepted and in return received a substantial grant of lands in Leicestershire. 

Arnold (III) du Bois (fl. 1130-1160) acquired further estates in Gloucestershire and Warwickshire through marriage to Isabel de Waterville, heir of another Leicester tenant. He served the earl throughout the troubled reign of Stephen, as constable and 'de facto' deputy in Normandy in 1138-9 and as steward and constant attendant in England from 1140 onwards. He appears as a witness to charters of Stephen and of Henry Plantagenet, as duke of Normandy and subsequently as king of England, on most occasions in the company of his lord the earl, who supported Stephen and Henry in turn. In 1147 Arnold founded the Cistercian monastery at Biddlesden in Buckinghamshire, a daughter house of Garendon, Leicestershire, on land to which he had dubious title. He also made substantial grants to Leicester Abbey; and like his father and grandfather he was a patron of Lyre Abbey in Normandy. 
The relationship between Arnold (IV) du Bois (d. 1205) and Robert (III) de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1190), was perhaps not as close as that which had existed between their respective fathers, although Arnold appears to have supported the earl in his revolt against Henry II in 1173 and afterwards served as his steward. Arnold accompanied Robert (IV) de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1204), on the third crusade, and was one of the party led by the earl that successfully routed a band of Turks outside Ramlah in late 1191. On his return from the Holy Land he was impleaded for debt by the moneylender Elias fitz Aaron of Lincoln. He married Emma, daughter and coheir of Payn of Houghton, Northamptonshire, acquiring through her lands in Northamptonshire and Lincolnshire. His brother Robert du Bois ('fl'. 1154-1190) was rector of Claybrooke, Leicestershire, and a household clerk of the earls of Leicester. Arnold (V) du Bois (1186?-1222) was a minor at his father's death in 1205, and was placed in the wardship of Roger of Basingham. He reached his majority in 1207 but his inheritance was much reduced, both in extent and prestige. The loss of Normandy to the Capetians in 1204 had irrevocably deprived the family of its ancestral lands, and the division of the earldom of Leicester after 1204 extinguished the du Bois stewardship. The division also left Arnold with two overlords for the lands formerly held of the earldom, Saer (IV) de Quincy (died 1219) and Simon de Montfort (died 1218). In the civil war of 1216 Arnold fought against the king, and he was briefly deprived of his lands as a result. He married Alice, heir of Henry of Tubney, steward of the earl of Warwick and lord of Tubney, Berkshire. 

Arnold (VI) du Bois (d. 1255) was one of the knights who mustered at Portsmouth in late 1229 for an abortive royal expedition to Brittany. He was custodian of Nottingham Castle and acting sheriff of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire for part of 1239, and in 1253 he was appointed justice of the forests south of the Trent. He was an adherent of Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester (died 1265), and his sister Joan du Bois married Montfort's steward Thomas Astley. His brother William du Bois ('fl'. 1235-1260) was a household knight of Roger de Quincy, constable of Scotland. Arnold married Joan Beauchamp, coheir of John Beauchamp of Ashington, Suffolk. Matthew Paris gave his arms as argent, two bars and a canton gules. The heraldic seal of one of Arnold's charters shows two bars, on a canton or quarter a lion passant. He died on 6 February 1255 and was buried in Biddlesden Abbey. Arnold (VII) du Bois (d. 1277) was obliged to mortgage his manor of Ashington to the bishop of Norwich in order to raise money in 1259. He also supported Montfort, but a fortuitous illness precluded his participation in the baronial wars of 1264-5, and he did not suffer for his earlier allegiance. His eldest son, Arnold, died in his lifetime and, on his death on 1 April 1277, he was succeeded by his second son, John du Bois, Lord du Bois (1253-1290), who was born on 29 June 1253. John had a summons to the Shrewsbury parliament of 1283. He married, but there were no children of the union, and on his death before 6 February 1290 his heir was his younger brother Master William du Bois, a cleric. After William's death, before 6 March 1313, the bulk of the du Bois lands passed to his niece Maud Lovell and her husband, William de la Zouche, first Lord Zouche ['see under 'Zouche family]. 


@@@@@


doc= 59049


Bois, du, family (per. c.1071-1313), barons, were important tenants and retainers of the earls of Leicester. For seven generations each head of the family bore the name Arnold, which became a component of the place names of their principal residences. Substantial earthworks next to the church at Thorpe Arnold are all that remains of the du Bois manor house there. There is also mention of a residence at Bois-Ernault in Normandy. 

Arnold (I) du Bois (fl. 1071-1094) was a leading tenant of the honour of Breteuil in Normandy, with lands in ten surrounding settlements. He also held Pullay of the duke of Normandy. He was one of ten knights taken prisoner during a baronial conflict at Ivry in Normandy in 1094 and subsequently gaoled. Arnold (II) du Bois (fl. 1100-1125) was the castellan of Lyre in Normandy when it was attacked by Henry I in 1119. Arnold, like the majority of the tenants of Breteuil, had revolted after the imposition upon the honour of a royal nominee, the Breton baron Ralph de Gael. In 1121 the honour passed by marriage to Robert (II), earl of Leicester (died 1168), whose lordship Arnold accepted and in return received a substantial grant of lands in Leicestershire. 

Arnold (III) du Bois (fl. 1130-1160) acquired further estates in Gloucestershire and Warwickshire through marriage to Isabel de Waterville, heir of another Leicester tenant. He served the earl throughout the troubled reign of Stephen, as constable and 'de facto' deputy in Normandy in 1138-9 and as steward and constant attendant in England from 1140 onwards. He appears as a witness to charters of Stephen and of Henry Plantagenet, as duke of Normandy and subsequently as king of England, on most occasions in the company of his lord the earl, who supported Stephen and Henry in turn. In 1147 Arnold founded the Cistercian monastery at Biddlesden in Buckinghamshire, a daughter house of Garendon, Leicestershire, on land to which he had dubious title. He also made substantial grants to Leicester Abbey; and like his father and grandfather he was a patron of Lyre Abbey in Normandy. 
The relationship between Arnold (IV) du Bois (d. 1205) and Robert (III) de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1190), was perhaps not as close as that which had existed between their respective fathers, although Arnold appears to have supported the earl in his revolt against Henry II in 1173 and afterwards served as his steward. Arnold accompanied Robert (IV) de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1204), on the third crusade, and was one of the party led by the earl that successfully routed a band of Turks outside Ramlah in late 1191. On his return from the Holy Land he was impleaded for debt by the moneylender Elias fitz Aaron of Lincoln. He married Emma, daughter and coheir of Payn of Houghton, Northamptonshire, acquiring through her lands in Northamptonshire and Lincolnshire. His brother Robert du Bois ('fl'. 1154-1190) was rector of Claybrooke, Leicestershire, and a household clerk of the earls of Leicester. Arnold (V) du Bois (1186?-1222) was a minor at his father's death in 1205, and was placed in the wardship of Roger of Basingham. He reached his majority in 1207 but his inheritance was much reduced, both in extent and prestige. The loss of Normandy to the Capetians in 1204 had irrevocably deprived the family of its ancestral lands, and the division of the earldom of Leicester after 1204 extinguished the du Bois stewardship. The division also left Arnold with two overlords for the lands formerly held of the earldom, Saer (IV) de Quincy (died 1219) and Simon de Montfort (died 1218). In the civil war of 1216 Arnold fought against the king, and he was briefly deprived of his lands as a result. He married Alice, heir of Henry of Tubney, steward of the earl of Warwick and lord of Tubney, Berkshire. 

Arnold (VI) du Bois (d. 1255) was one of the knights who mustered at Portsmouth in late 1229 for an abortive royal expedition to Brittany. He was custodian of Nottingham Castle and acting sheriff of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire for part of 1239, and in 1253 he was appointed justice of the forests south of the Trent. He was an adherent of Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester (died 1265), and his sister Joan du Bois married Montfort's steward Thomas Astley. His brother William du Bois ('fl'. 1235-1260) was a household knight of Roger de Quincy, constable of Scotland. Arnold married Joan Beauchamp, coheir of John Beauchamp of Ashington, Suffolk. Matthew Paris gave his arms as argent, two bars and a canton gules. The heraldic seal of one of Arnold's charters shows two bars, on a canton or quarter a lion passant. He died on 6 February 1255 and was buried in Biddlesden Abbey. Arnold (VII) du Bois (d. 1277) was obliged to mortgage his manor of Ashington to the bishop of Norwich in order to raise money in 1259. He also supported Montfort, but a fortuitous illness precluded his participation in the baronial wars of 1264-5, and he did not suffer for his earlier allegiance. His eldest son, Arnold, died in his lifetime and, on his death on 1 April 1277, he was succeeded by his second son, John du Bois, Lord du Bois (1253-1290), who was born on 29 June 1253. John had a summons to the Shrewsbury parliament of 1283. He married, but there were no children of the union, and on his death before 6 February 1290 his heir was his younger brother Master William du Bois, a cleric. After William's death, before 6 March 1313, the bulk of the du Bois lands passed to his niece Maud Lovell and her husband, William de la Zouche, first Lord Zouche ['see under 'Zouche family]. 


@@@@@


doc= 59050


Bois, du, family (per. c.1071-1313), barons, were important tenants and retainers of the earls of Leicester. For seven generations each head of the family bore the name Arnold, which became a component of the place names of their principal residences. Substantial earthworks next to the church at Thorpe Arnold are all that remains of the du Bois manor house there. There is also mention of a residence at Bois-Ernault in Normandy. 

Arnold (I) du Bois (fl. 1071-1094) was a leading tenant of the honour of Breteuil in Normandy, with lands in ten surrounding settlements. He also held Pullay of the duke of Normandy. He was one of ten knights taken prisoner during a baronial conflict at Ivry in Normandy in 1094 and subsequently gaoled. Arnold (II) du Bois (fl. 1100-1125) was the castellan of Lyre in Normandy when it was attacked by Henry I in 1119. Arnold, like the majority of the tenants of Breteuil, had revolted after the imposition upon the honour of a royal nominee, the Breton baron Ralph de Gael. In 1121 the honour passed by marriage to Robert (II), earl of Leicester (died 1168), whose lordship Arnold accepted and in return received a substantial grant of lands in Leicestershire. 

Arnold (III) du Bois (fl. 1130-1160) acquired further estates in Gloucestershire and Warwickshire through marriage to Isabel de Waterville, heir of another Leicester tenant. He served the earl throughout the troubled reign of Stephen, as constable and 'de facto' deputy in Normandy in 1138-9 and as steward and constant attendant in England from 1140 onwards. He appears as a witness to charters of Stephen and of Henry Plantagenet, as duke of Normandy and subsequently as king of England, on most occasions in the company of his lord the earl, who supported Stephen and Henry in turn. In 1147 Arnold founded the Cistercian monastery at Biddlesden in Buckinghamshire, a daughter house of Garendon, Leicestershire, on land to which he had dubious title. He also made substantial grants to Leicester Abbey; and like his father and grandfather he was a patron of Lyre Abbey in Normandy. 
The relationship between Arnold (IV) du Bois (d. 1205) and Robert (III) de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1190), was perhaps not as close as that which had existed between their respective fathers, although Arnold appears to have supported the earl in his revolt against Henry II in 1173 and afterwards served as his steward. Arnold accompanied Robert (IV) de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1204), on the third crusade, and was one of the party led by the earl that successfully routed a band of Turks outside Ramlah in late 1191. On his return from the Holy Land he was impleaded for debt by the moneylender Elias fitz Aaron of Lincoln. He married Emma, daughter and coheir of Payn of Houghton, Northamptonshire, acquiring through her lands in Northamptonshire and Lincolnshire. His brother Robert du Bois ('fl'. 1154-1190) was rector of Claybrooke, Leicestershire, and a household clerk of the earls of Leicester. Arnold (V) du Bois (1186?-1222) was a minor at his father's death in 1205, and was placed in the wardship of Roger of Basingham. He reached his majority in 1207 but his inheritance was much reduced, both in extent and prestige. The loss of Normandy to the Capetians in 1204 had irrevocably deprived the family of its ancestral lands, and the division of the earldom of Leicester after 1204 extinguished the du Bois stewardship. The division also left Arnold with two overlords for the lands formerly held of the earldom, Saer (IV) de Quincy (died 1219) and Simon de Montfort (died 1218). In the civil war of 1216 Arnold fought against the king, and he was briefly deprived of his lands as a result. He married Alice, heir of Henry of Tubney, steward of the earl of Warwick and lord of Tubney, Berkshire. 

Arnold (VI) du Bois (d. 1255) was one of the knights who mustered at Portsmouth in late 1229 for an abortive royal expedition to Brittany. He was custodian of Nottingham Castle and acting sheriff of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire for part of 1239, and in 1253 he was appointed justice of the forests south of the Trent. He was an adherent of Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester (died 1265), and his sister Joan du Bois married Montfort's steward Thomas Astley. His brother William du Bois ('fl'. 1235-1260) was a household knight of Roger de Quincy, constable of Scotland. Arnold married Joan Beauchamp, coheir of John Beauchamp of Ashington, Suffolk. Matthew Paris gave his arms as argent, two bars and a canton gules. The heraldic seal of one of Arnold's charters shows two bars, on a canton or quarter a lion passant. He died on 6 February 1255 and was buried in Biddlesden Abbey. Arnold (VII) du Bois (d. 1277) was obliged to mortgage his manor of Ashington to the bishop of Norwich in order to raise money in 1259. He also supported Montfort, but a fortuitous illness precluded his participation in the baronial wars of 1264-5, and he did not suffer for his earlier allegiance. His eldest son, Arnold, died in his lifetime and, on his death on 1 April 1277, he was succeeded by his second son, John du Bois, Lord du Bois (1253-1290), who was born on 29 June 1253. John had a summons to the Shrewsbury parliament of 1283. He married, but there were no children of the union, and on his death before 6 February 1290 his heir was his younger brother Master William du Bois, a cleric. After William's death, before 6 March 1313, the bulk of the du Bois lands passed to his niece Maud Lovell and her husband, William de la Zouche, first Lord Zouche ['see under 'Zouche family]. 


@@@@@


doc= 59051


Bois, du, family (per. c.1071-1313), barons, were important tenants and retainers of the earls of Leicester. For seven generations each head of the family bore the name Arnold, which became a component of the place names of their principal residences. Substantial earthworks next to the church at Thorpe Arnold are all that remains of the du Bois manor house there. There is also mention of a residence at Bois-Ernault in Normandy. 

Arnold (I) du Bois (fl. 1071-1094) was a leading tenant of the honour of Breteuil in Normandy, with lands in ten surrounding settlements. He also held Pullay of the duke of Normandy. He was one of ten knights taken prisoner during a baronial conflict at Ivry in Normandy in 1094 and subsequently gaoled. Arnold (II) du Bois (fl. 1100-1125) was the castellan of Lyre in Normandy when it was attacked by Henry I in 1119. Arnold, like the majority of the tenants of Breteuil, had revolted after the imposition upon the honour of a royal nominee, the Breton baron Ralph de Gael. In 1121 the honour passed by marriage to Robert (II), earl of Leicester (died 1168), whose lordship Arnold accepted and in return received a substantial grant of lands in Leicestershire. 

Arnold (III) du Bois (fl. 1130-1160) acquired further estates in Gloucestershire and Warwickshire through marriage to Isabel de Waterville, heir of another Leicester tenant. He served the earl throughout the troubled reign of Stephen, as constable and 'de facto' deputy in Normandy in 1138-9 and as steward and constant attendant in England from 1140 onwards. He appears as a witness to charters of Stephen and of Henry Plantagenet, as duke of Normandy and subsequently as king of England, on most occasions in the company of his lord the earl, who supported Stephen and Henry in turn. In 1147 Arnold founded the Cistercian monastery at Biddlesden in Buckinghamshire, a daughter house of Garendon, Leicestershire, on land to which he had dubious title. He also made substantial grants to Leicester Abbey; and like his father and grandfather he was a patron of Lyre Abbey in Normandy. 
The relationship between Arnold (IV) du Bois (d. 1205) and Robert (III) de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1190), was perhaps not as close as that which had existed between their respective fathers, although Arnold appears to have supported the earl in his revolt against Henry II in 1173 and afterwards served as his steward. Arnold accompanied Robert (IV) de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1204), on the third crusade, and was one of the party led by the earl that successfully routed a band of Turks outside Ramlah in late 1191. On his return from the Holy Land he was impleaded for debt by the moneylender Elias fitz Aaron of Lincoln. He married Emma, daughter and coheir of Payn of Houghton, Northamptonshire, acquiring through her lands in Northamptonshire and Lincolnshire. His brother Robert du Bois ('fl'. 1154-1190) was rector of Claybrooke, Leicestershire, and a household clerk of the earls of Leicester. Arnold (V) du Bois (1186?-1222) was a minor at his father's death in 1205, and was placed in the wardship of Roger of Basingham. He reached his majority in 1207 but his inheritance was much reduced, both in extent and prestige. The loss of Normandy to the Capetians in 1204 had irrevocably deprived the family of its ancestral lands, and the division of the earldom of Leicester after 1204 extinguished the du Bois stewardship. The division also left Arnold with two overlords for the lands formerly held of the earldom, Saer (IV) de Quincy (died 1219) and Simon de Montfort (died 1218). In the civil war of 1216 Arnold fought against the king, and he was briefly deprived of his lands as a result. He married Alice, heir of Henry of Tubney, steward of the earl of Warwick and lord of Tubney, Berkshire. 

Arnold (VI) du Bois (d. 1255) was one of the knights who mustered at Portsmouth in late 1229 for an abortive royal expedition to Brittany. He was custodian of Nottingham Castle and acting sheriff of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire for part of 1239, and in 1253 he was appointed justice of the forests south of the Trent. He was an adherent of Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester (died 1265), and his sister Joan du Bois married Montfort's steward Thomas Astley. His brother William du Bois ('fl'. 1235-1260) was a household knight of Roger de Quincy, constable of Scotland. Arnold married Joan Beauchamp, coheir of John Beauchamp of Ashington, Suffolk. Matthew Paris gave his arms as argent, two bars and a canton gules. The heraldic seal of one of Arnold's charters shows two bars, on a canton or quarter a lion passant. He died on 6 February 1255 and was buried in Biddlesden Abbey. Arnold (VII) du Bois (d. 1277) was obliged to mortgage his manor of Ashington to the bishop of Norwich in order to raise money in 1259. He also supported Montfort, but a fortuitous illness precluded his participation in the baronial wars of 1264-5, and he did not suffer for his earlier allegiance. His eldest son, Arnold, died in his lifetime and, on his death on 1 April 1277, he was succeeded by his second son, John du Bois, Lord du Bois (1253-1290), who was born on 29 June 1253. John had a summons to the Shrewsbury parliament of 1283. He married, but there were no children of the union, and on his death before 6 February 1290 his heir was his younger brother Master William du Bois, a cleric. After William's death, before 6 March 1313, the bulk of the du Bois lands passed to his niece Maud Lovell and her husband, William de la Zouche, first Lord Zouche ['see under 'Zouche family]. 


@@@@@


doc= 59052


Bois, du, family (per. c.1071-1313), barons, were important tenants and retainers of the earls of Leicester. For seven generations each head of the family bore the name Arnold, which became a component of the place names of their principal residences. Substantial earthworks next to the church at Thorpe Arnold are all that remains of the du Bois manor house there. There is also mention of a residence at Bois-Ernault in Normandy. 

Arnold (I) du Bois (fl. 1071-1094) was a leading tenant of the honour of Breteuil in Normandy, with lands in ten surrounding settlements. He also held Pullay of the duke of Normandy. He was one of ten knights taken prisoner during a baronial conflict at Ivry in Normandy in 1094 and subsequently gaoled. Arnold (II) du Bois (fl. 1100-1125) was the castellan of Lyre in Normandy when it was attacked by Henry I in 1119. Arnold, like the majority of the tenants of Breteuil, had revolted after the imposition upon the honour of a royal nominee, the Breton baron Ralph de Gael. In 1121 the honour passed by marriage to Robert (II), earl of Leicester (died 1168), whose lordship Arnold accepted and in return received a substantial grant of lands in Leicestershire. 

Arnold (III) du Bois (fl. 1130-1160) acquired further estates in Gloucestershire and Warwickshire through marriage to Isabel de Waterville, heir of another Leicester tenant. He served the earl throughout the troubled reign of Stephen, as constable and 'de facto' deputy in Normandy in 1138-9 and as steward and constant attendant in England from 1140 onwards. He appears as a witness to charters of Stephen and of Henry Plantagenet, as duke of Normandy and subsequently as king of England, on most occasions in the company of his lord the earl, who supported Stephen and Henry in turn. In 1147 Arnold founded the Cistercian monastery at Biddlesden in Buckinghamshire, a daughter house of Garendon, Leicestershire, on land to which he had dubious title. He also made substantial grants to Leicester Abbey; and like his father and grandfather he was a patron of Lyre Abbey in Normandy. 
The relationship between Arnold (IV) du Bois (d. 1205) and Robert (III) de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1190), was perhaps not as close as that which had existed between their respective fathers, although Arnold appears to have supported the earl in his revolt against Henry II in 1173 and afterwards served as his steward. Arnold accompanied Robert (IV) de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1204), on the third crusade, and was one of the party led by the earl that successfully routed a band of Turks outside Ramlah in late 1191. On his return from the Holy Land he was impleaded for debt by the moneylender Elias fitz Aaron of Lincoln. He married Emma, daughter and coheir of Payn of Houghton, Northamptonshire, acquiring through her lands in Northamptonshire and Lincolnshire. His brother Robert du Bois ('fl'. 1154-1190) was rector of Claybrooke, Leicestershire, and a household clerk of the earls of Leicester. Arnold (V) du Bois (1186?-1222) was a minor at his father's death in 1205, and was placed in the wardship of Roger of Basingham. He reached his majority in 1207 but his inheritance was much reduced, both in extent and prestige. The loss of Normandy to the Capetians in 1204 had irrevocably deprived the family of its ancestral lands, and the division of the earldom of Leicester after 1204 extinguished the du Bois stewardship. The division also left Arnold with two overlords for the lands formerly held of the earldom, Saer (IV) de Quincy (died 1219) and Simon de Montfort (died 1218). In the civil war of 1216 Arnold fought against the king, and he was briefly deprived of his lands as a result. He married Alice, heir of Henry of Tubney, steward of the earl of Warwick and lord of Tubney, Berkshire. 

Arnold (VI) du Bois (d. 1255) was one of the knights who mustered at Portsmouth in late 1229 for an abortive royal expedition to Brittany. He was custodian of Nottingham Castle and acting sheriff of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire for part of 1239, and in 1253 he was appointed justice of the forests south of the Trent. He was an adherent of Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester (died 1265), and his sister Joan du Bois married Montfort's steward Thomas Astley. His brother William du Bois ('fl'. 1235-1260) was a household knight of Roger de Quincy, constable of Scotland. Arnold married Joan Beauchamp, coheir of John Beauchamp of Ashington, Suffolk. Matthew Paris gave his arms as argent, two bars and a canton gules. The heraldic seal of one of Arnold's charters shows two bars, on a canton or quarter a lion passant. He died on 6 February 1255 and was buried in Biddlesden Abbey. Arnold (VII) du Bois (d. 1277) was obliged to mortgage his manor of Ashington to the bishop of Norwich in order to raise money in 1259. He also supported Montfort, but a fortuitous illness precluded his participation in the baronial wars of 1264-5, and he did not suffer for his earlier allegiance. His eldest son, Arnold, died in his lifetime and, on his death on 1 April 1277, he was succeeded by his second son, John du Bois, Lord du Bois (1253-1290), who was born on 29 June 1253. John had a summons to the Shrewsbury parliament of 1283. He married, but there were no children of the union, and on his death before 6 February 1290 his heir was his younger brother Master William du Bois, a cleric. After William's death, before 6 March 1313, the bulk of the du Bois lands passed to his niece Maud Lovell and her husband, William de la Zouche, first Lord Zouche ['see under 'Zouche family]. 


@@@@@


doc= 59053


Darcy family (per. c.1284-1488), gentry, produced several notable royal servants in the fourteenth century. At the death of Roger Darcy of Oldcotes and Styrrup ('c'.1284) ['see 'Darcy family (per. 1086-1333)] Sir John Darcy 'le cosyn' (d. 1347) headed the family. He had a distinguished career initially in the service of Aymer de Valence, earl of Pembroke (died 1324), then achieved prominence in the political and military service of Edward II and, particularly, of Edward III. Royal patronage founded the fortunes of his successors with the receipt of considerable gifts of land and office. John's service as justiciar of Ireland provided an enduring connection with the political community there and, although it was with his first wife, Emmeline, heir of Walter Heron of Silkstone, that he had a son and heir, his second wife, Joan (died 1359), daughter of Richard de Burgh, second earl of Ulster, and widow of Thomas Fitzjohn, earl of Kildare, provided Irish lands and founded through their eldest son, William Darcy of Plattyn, co. Meath ('b'. 1330, died before 1362), a noteworthy junior Irish branch of the family. 

John Darcy, second Lord Darcy (1317-1356), 'le fitz', was the eldest son of Sir John Darcy 'le cosyn' (d. 1347); he accompanied his father to Ireland as early as 1324 and followed him into royal service. Under Edward III he commanded a company with Walter Mauny in the opening phase of the Hundred Years' War and was rewarded in 1341 by a grant to him and his heirs of $40 a year for his long service. On 15 July 1346, when with the king at La Hogue, he was granted a further $200 a year for life to maintain himself as a banneret and went on to fight at Crecy and Calais. In 1347 he received his father's land and the office of keeper of the Tower of London for life. Outside the military sphere in 1344 he was appointed escheator of Holderness for life. He served on numerous judicial commissions, particularly in Yorkshire, and on the diplomatic commission to negotiate peace with France in September 1347. Although he never held high office in Edward III's household, he was personally summoned to parliaments from 20 November 1348 until his death. John Darcy 'le fitz' married Alianore, daughter of Robert Holland, Lord Holland (d. 1328), of West Derby, Lancashire, before 1332, and then in 1344 Elizabeth (1331-1368), heir of Nicholas, Lord Meynell. The latter marriage required a papal dispensation, granted in 1344, and was licensed by the king to help John finance his royal service. He died at Notton, Yorkshire, on 5 March 1356 and was buried at Guisborough Priory, of which he had held half the advowson. In his lifetime he had given the advowson of the church of Knaith to the impoverished prioress and convent of Heynings, Lincolnshire, perhaps to support a relative, Margery, who was confined there. He left a substantial fortune to his son, John, born on 24 June 1350. During his minority the family estates were taken into royal hands, the bulk being granted for the support of Queen Philippa, and the remainder to Isabella, the king's eldest daughter. The depredations committed by Queen Philippa's tenants of the estate were so severe that a damning inquisition was held in 1360. 
On the death of the young John Darcy on 26 August 1362 the estates passed to his younger brother Philip Darcy, third Baron Darcy (1352-1399), who received his estate in autumn 1373. Philip successfully adopted his father's mantle. He served with John of Gaunt in Picardy and Caux between July and November 1369 and was active in the royal household, being described as 'de familia regis' in 1372. He served with the earl of Buckingham in the raid on Brittany of July 1380 to April 1381. He was on the commission to take the homage of the count of Flanders on 20 June 1383, served in Scotland under the duke of Lancaster in April 1384, and under the king in August 1385. He was an active admiral of the Thames and northwards (1385-9) and in February 1389 was being retained for the king's intended expedition in Scotland. In the same year he is first recorded as one of the king's knights in the royal household, probably an uncontroversial appointment. Philip was a justice of the peace in Lindsey, Lincolnshire, between 1377 and 1385, and occasionally served in the West Riding of Yorkshire and Northumberland. He was also frequently appointed to judicial commissions and to array men. Philip was summoned to all the parliaments of Richard II's reign until his death, but by the mid-1390s no longer seems to have been active in the royal or local administration. In September 1397 he gave an oath to maintain the statutes of the preceding parliament, but appears to have retired from public life. Philip had married Elizabeth (died 1412), second daughter of Sir Thomas Grey of Heaton, Northumberland. He died on 24 April 1399 and was buried next to his father in Guisborough Priory. 
Philip's son John Darcy, fourth Baron Darcy (1377-1411), received livery of his father's estates on 12 June 1399. He seems to have been able to make an easy transition to support for Henry IV. He was summoned to all parliaments from August 1399 until his death. In May 1402 he was appointed to suppress sedition and then was with the prince of Wales in 1407. However, he never seems to have aspired to, nor achieved, the prominence of his father or grandfather in matters of war or affairs of state. In part this may reflect the declining financial fortunes of the family exacerbated by the longevity of family widows. At John Darcy's death on 9 December 1411 his estate was valued at barely over $100 a year, although this appears to allow for dowers to his mother and his widow, Margaret, daughter of Sir Henry Grey of Wilton, and was suspected to be a substantial undervaluation. 
The Darcy family fortunes were not to revive for the next fifty years: John Darcy was succeeded by his son Philip, born 'c'.1398, who never achieved his majority, dying on 2 August 1418. In June 1412 John's widow, Margaret Darcy, Lady Darcy (d. 1454), was granted $40 per year from the estate to support herself, her second son, and four daughters. Worse, in 1433 Margaret had to present herself at parliament to prove she still lived and that her Irish estates should not be seized. Philip had married Alianore (died 1469), daughter of Sir Henry Fitzhugh, his guardian. She received a third of his estate in dower in 1421 and the remainder, not entailed in the male line, was left to two infant daughters: Elizabeth ('b'. 'c'.1417, died after 1458), who married Sir James Strangways (d. 1480), and Margery (1418-1469), who married Sir John Conyers of Hornby, Yorkshire (died 1490) ['see under 'Conyers family (per. c.1375-c.1525)]. The tomb in Selby Abbey, usually attributed to his father, is more likely to be that of Philip. Intriguingly, in 1427 a commission was sent to the abbey to investigate the documents in a chest supposedly relating to the inheritance of some of the family lands. Those estates entailed in the male line, including the valuable manors of Temple Newsam and Temple Hirst, Yorkshire, passed to John Darcy (b. before 1412, d. 1458), brother of Philip Darcy. He married Joan, daughter of Lord Greystoke, without licence and only received a pardon in October 1427 on payment of 200 marks. He achieved little prominence and was succeeded by his grandson Sir William Darcy (c.1454-1488), who married Euphemia, daughter of Sir Thomas Langton. The couple are most notable as the parents of Thomas Darcy (d. 1537). 


@@@@@


doc= 59054


Darcy family (per. c.1284-1488), gentry, produced several notable royal servants in the fourteenth century. At the death of Roger Darcy of Oldcotes and Styrrup ('c'.1284) ['see 'Darcy family (per. 1086-1333)] Sir John Darcy 'le cosyn' (d. 1347) headed the family. He had a distinguished career initially in the service of Aymer de Valence, earl of Pembroke (died 1324), then achieved prominence in the political and military service of Edward II and, particularly, of Edward III. Royal patronage founded the fortunes of his successors with the receipt of considerable gifts of land and office. John's service as justiciar of Ireland provided an enduring connection with the political community there and, although it was with his first wife, Emmeline, heir of Walter Heron of Silkstone, that he had a son and heir, his second wife, Joan (died 1359), daughter of Richard de Burgh, second earl of Ulster, and widow of Thomas Fitzjohn, earl of Kildare, provided Irish lands and founded through their eldest son, William Darcy of Plattyn, co. Meath ('b'. 1330, died before 1362), a noteworthy junior Irish branch of the family. 

John Darcy, second Lord Darcy (1317-1356), 'le fitz', was the eldest son of Sir John Darcy 'le cosyn' (d. 1347); he accompanied his father to Ireland as early as 1324 and followed him into royal service. Under Edward III he commanded a company with Walter Mauny in the opening phase of the Hundred Years' War and was rewarded in 1341 by a grant to him and his heirs of $40 a year for his long service. On 15 July 1346, when with the king at La Hogue, he was granted a further $200 a year for life to maintain himself as a banneret and went on to fight at Crecy and Calais. In 1347 he received his father's land and the office of keeper of the Tower of London for life. Outside the military sphere in 1344 he was appointed escheator of Holderness for life. He served on numerous judicial commissions, particularly in Yorkshire, and on the diplomatic commission to negotiate peace with France in September 1347. Although he never held high office in Edward III's household, he was personally summoned to parliaments from 20 November 1348 until his death. John Darcy 'le fitz' married Alianore, daughter of Robert Holland, Lord Holland (d. 1328), of West Derby, Lancashire, before 1332, and then in 1344 Elizabeth (1331-1368), heir of Nicholas, Lord Meynell. The latter marriage required a papal dispensation, granted in 1344, and was licensed by the king to help John finance his royal service. He died at Notton, Yorkshire, on 5 March 1356 and was buried at Guisborough Priory, of which he had held half the advowson. In his lifetime he had given the advowson of the church of Knaith to the impoverished prioress and convent of Heynings, Lincolnshire, perhaps to support a relative, Margery, who was confined there. He left a substantial fortune to his son, John, born on 24 June 1350. During his minority the family estates were taken into royal hands, the bulk being granted for the support of Queen Philippa, and the remainder to Isabella, the king's eldest daughter. The depredations committed by Queen Philippa's tenants of the estate were so severe that a damning inquisition was held in 1360. 
On the death of the young John Darcy on 26 August 1362 the estates passed to his younger brother Philip Darcy, third Baron Darcy (1352-1399), who received his estate in autumn 1373. Philip successfully adopted his father's mantle. He served with John of Gaunt in Picardy and Caux between July and November 1369 and was active in the royal household, being described as 'de familia regis' in 1372. He served with the earl of Buckingham in the raid on Brittany of July 1380 to April 1381. He was on the commission to take the homage of the count of Flanders on 20 June 1383, served in Scotland under the duke of Lancaster in April 1384, and under the king in August 1385. He was an active admiral of the Thames and northwards (1385-9) and in February 1389 was being retained for the king's intended expedition in Scotland. In the same year he is first recorded as one of the king's knights in the royal household, probably an uncontroversial appointment. Philip was a justice of the peace in Lindsey, Lincolnshire, between 1377 and 1385, and occasionally served in the West Riding of Yorkshire and Northumberland. He was also frequently appointed to judicial commissions and to array men. Philip was summoned to all the parliaments of Richard II's reign until his death, but by the mid-1390s no longer seems to have been active in the royal or local administration. In September 1397 he gave an oath to maintain the statutes of the preceding parliament, but appears to have retired from public life. Philip had married Elizabeth (died 1412), second daughter of Sir Thomas Grey of Heaton, Northumberland. He died on 24 April 1399 and was buried next to his father in Guisborough Priory. 
Philip's son John Darcy, fourth Baron Darcy (1377-1411), received livery of his father's estates on 12 June 1399. He seems to have been able to make an easy transition to support for Henry IV. He was summoned to all parliaments from August 1399 until his death. In May 1402 he was appointed to suppress sedition and then was with the prince of Wales in 1407. However, he never seems to have aspired to, nor achieved, the prominence of his father or grandfather in matters of war or affairs of state. In part this may reflect the declining financial fortunes of the family exacerbated by the longevity of family widows. At John Darcy's death on 9 December 1411 his estate was valued at barely over $100 a year, although this appears to allow for dowers to his mother and his widow, Margaret, daughter of Sir Henry Grey of Wilton, and was suspected to be a substantial undervaluation. 
The Darcy family fortunes were not to revive for the next fifty years: John Darcy was succeeded by his son Philip, born 'c'.1398, who never achieved his majority, dying on 2 August 1418. In June 1412 John's widow, Margaret Darcy, Lady Darcy (d. 1454), was granted $40 per year from the estate to support herself, her second son, and four daughters. Worse, in 1433 Margaret had to present herself at parliament to prove she still lived and that her Irish estates should not be seized. Philip had married Alianore (died 1469), daughter of Sir Henry Fitzhugh, his guardian. She received a third of his estate in dower in 1421 and the remainder, not entailed in the male line, was left to two infant daughters: Elizabeth ('b'. 'c'.1417, died after 1458), who married Sir James Strangways (d. 1480), and Margery (1418-1469), who married Sir John Conyers of Hornby, Yorkshire (died 1490) ['see under 'Conyers family (per. c.1375-c.1525)]. The tomb in Selby Abbey, usually attributed to his father, is more likely to be that of Philip. Intriguingly, in 1427 a commission was sent to the abbey to investigate the documents in a chest supposedly relating to the inheritance of some of the family lands. Those estates entailed in the male line, including the valuable manors of Temple Newsam and Temple Hirst, Yorkshire, passed to John Darcy (b. before 1412, d. 1458), brother of Philip Darcy. He married Joan, daughter of Lord Greystoke, without licence and only received a pardon in October 1427 on payment of 200 marks. He achieved little prominence and was succeeded by his grandson Sir William Darcy (c.1454-1488), who married Euphemia, daughter of Sir Thomas Langton. The couple are most notable as the parents of Thomas Darcy (d. 1537). 


@@@@@


doc= 59055


Darcy family (per. c.1284-1488), gentry, produced several notable royal servants in the fourteenth century. At the death of Roger Darcy of Oldcotes and Styrrup ('c'.1284) ['see 'Darcy family (per. 1086-1333)] Sir John Darcy 'le cosyn' (d. 1347) headed the family. He had a distinguished career initially in the service of Aymer de Valence, earl of Pembroke (died 1324), then achieved prominence in the political and military service of Edward II and, particularly, of Edward III. Royal patronage founded the fortunes of his successors with the receipt of considerable gifts of land and office. John's service as justiciar of Ireland provided an enduring connection with the political community there and, although it was with his first wife, Emmeline, heir of Walter Heron of Silkstone, that he had a son and heir, his second wife, Joan (died 1359), daughter of Richard de Burgh, second earl of Ulster, and widow of Thomas Fitzjohn, earl of Kildare, provided Irish lands and founded through their eldest son, William Darcy of Plattyn, co. Meath ('b'. 1330, died before 1362), a noteworthy junior Irish branch of the family. 

John Darcy, second Lord Darcy (1317-1356), 'le fitz', was the eldest son of Sir John Darcy 'le cosyn' (d. 1347); he accompanied his father to Ireland as early as 1324 and followed him into royal service. Under Edward III he commanded a company with Walter Mauny in the opening phase of the Hundred Years' War and was rewarded in 1341 by a grant to him and his heirs of $40 a year for his long service. On 15 July 1346, when with the king at La Hogue, he was granted a further $200 a year for life to maintain himself as a banneret and went on to fight at Crecy and Calais. In 1347 he received his father's land and the office of keeper of the Tower of London for life. Outside the military sphere in 1344 he was appointed escheator of Holderness for life. He served on numerous judicial commissions, particularly in Yorkshire, and on the diplomatic commission to negotiate peace with France in September 1347. Although he never held high office in Edward III's household, he was personally summoned to parliaments from 20 November 1348 until his death. John Darcy 'le fitz' married Alianore, daughter of Robert Holland, Lord Holland (d. 1328), of West Derby, Lancashire, before 1332, and then in 1344 Elizabeth (1331-1368), heir of Nicholas, Lord Meynell. The latter marriage required a papal dispensation, granted in 1344, and was licensed by the king to help John finance his royal service. He died at Notton, Yorkshire, on 5 March 1356 and was buried at Guisborough Priory, of which he had held half the advowson. In his lifetime he had given the advowson of the church of Knaith to the impoverished prioress and convent of Heynings, Lincolnshire, perhaps to support a relative, Margery, who was confined there. He left a substantial fortune to his son, John, born on 24 June 1350. During his minority the family estates were taken into royal hands, the bulk being granted for the support of Queen Philippa, and the remainder to Isabella, the king's eldest daughter. The depredations committed by Queen Philippa's tenants of the estate were so severe that a damning inquisition was held in 1360. 
On the death of the young John Darcy on 26 August 1362 the estates passed to his younger brother Philip Darcy, third Baron Darcy (1352-1399), who received his estate in autumn 1373. Philip successfully adopted his father's mantle. He served with John of Gaunt in Picardy and Caux between July and November 1369 and was active in the royal household, being described as 'de familia regis' in 1372. He served with the earl of Buckingham in the raid on Brittany of July 1380 to April 1381. He was on the commission to take the homage of the count of Flanders on 20 June 1383, served in Scotland under the duke of Lancaster in April 1384, and under the king in August 1385. He was an active admiral of the Thames and northwards (1385-9) and in February 1389 was being retained for the king's intended expedition in Scotland. In the same year he is first recorded as one of the king's knights in the royal household, probably an uncontroversial appointment. Philip was a justice of the peace in Lindsey, Lincolnshire, between 1377 and 1385, and occasionally served in the West Riding of Yorkshire and Northumberland. He was also frequently appointed to judicial commissions and to array men. Philip was summoned to all the parliaments of Richard II's reign until his death, but by the mid-1390s no longer seems to have been active in the royal or local administration. In September 1397 he gave an oath to maintain the statutes of the preceding parliament, but appears to have retired from public life. Philip had married Elizabeth (died 1412), second daughter of Sir Thomas Grey of Heaton, Northumberland. He died on 24 April 1399 and was buried next to his father in Guisborough Priory. 
Philip's son John Darcy, fourth Baron Darcy (1377-1411), received livery of his father's estates on 12 June 1399. He seems to have been able to make an easy transition to support for Henry IV. He was summoned to all parliaments from August 1399 until his death. In May 1402 he was appointed to suppress sedition and then was with the prince of Wales in 1407. However, he never seems to have aspired to, nor achieved, the prominence of his father or grandfather in matters of war or affairs of state. In part this may reflect the declining financial fortunes of the family exacerbated by the longevity of family widows. At John Darcy's death on 9 December 1411 his estate was valued at barely over $100 a year, although this appears to allow for dowers to his mother and his widow, Margaret, daughter of Sir Henry Grey of Wilton, and was suspected to be a substantial undervaluation. 
The Darcy family fortunes were not to revive for the next fifty years: John Darcy was succeeded by his son Philip, born 'c'.1398, who never achieved his majority, dying on 2 August 1418. In June 1412 John's widow, Margaret Darcy, Lady Darcy (d. 1454), was granted $40 per year from the estate to support herself, her second son, and four daughters. Worse, in 1433 Margaret had to present herself at parliament to prove she still lived and that her Irish estates should not be seized. Philip had married Alianore (died 1469), daughter of Sir Henry Fitzhugh, his guardian. She received a third of his estate in dower in 1421 and the remainder, not entailed in the male line, was left to two infant daughters: Elizabeth ('b'. 'c'.1417, died after 1458), who married Sir James Strangways (d. 1480), and Margery (1418-1469), who married Sir John Conyers of Hornby, Yorkshire (died 1490) ['see under 'Conyers family (per. c.1375-c.1525)]. The tomb in Selby Abbey, usually attributed to his father, is more likely to be that of Philip. Intriguingly, in 1427 a commission was sent to the abbey to investigate the documents in a chest supposedly relating to the inheritance of some of the family lands. Those estates entailed in the male line, including the valuable manors of Temple Newsam and Temple Hirst, Yorkshire, passed to John Darcy (b. before 1412, d. 1458), brother of Philip Darcy. He married Joan, daughter of Lord Greystoke, without licence and only received a pardon in October 1427 on payment of 200 marks. He achieved little prominence and was succeeded by his grandson Sir William Darcy (c.1454-1488), who married Euphemia, daughter of Sir Thomas Langton. The couple are most notable as the parents of Thomas Darcy (d. 1537). 


@@@@@


doc= 59056


Darcy family (per. c.1284-1488), gentry, produced several notable royal servants in the fourteenth century. At the death of Roger Darcy of Oldcotes and Styrrup ('c'.1284) ['see 'Darcy family (per. 1086-1333)] Sir John Darcy 'le cosyn' (d. 1347) headed the family. He had a distinguished career initially in the service of Aymer de Valence, earl of Pembroke (died 1324), then achieved prominence in the political and military service of Edward II and, particularly, of Edward III. Royal patronage founded the fortunes of his successors with the receipt of considerable gifts of land and office. John's service as justiciar of Ireland provided an enduring connection with the political community there and, although it was with his first wife, Emmeline, heir of Walter Heron of Silkstone, that he had a son and heir, his second wife, Joan (died 1359), daughter of Richard de Burgh, second earl of Ulster, and widow of Thomas Fitzjohn, earl of Kildare, provided Irish lands and founded through their eldest son, William Darcy of Plattyn, co. Meath ('b'. 1330, died before 1362), a noteworthy junior Irish branch of the family. 

John Darcy, second Lord Darcy (1317-1356), 'le fitz', was the eldest son of Sir John Darcy 'le cosyn' (d. 1347); he accompanied his father to Ireland as early as 1324 and followed him into royal service. Under Edward III he commanded a company with Walter Mauny in the opening phase of the Hundred Years' War and was rewarded in 1341 by a grant to him and his heirs of $40 a year for his long service. On 15 July 1346, when with the king at La Hogue, he was granted a further $200 a year for life to maintain himself as a banneret and went on to fight at Crecy and Calais. In 1347 he received his father's land and the office of keeper of the Tower of London for life. Outside the military sphere in 1344 he was appointed escheator of Holderness for life. He served on numerous judicial commissions, particularly in Yorkshire, and on the diplomatic commission to negotiate peace with France in September 1347. Although he never held high office in Edward III's household, he was personally summoned to parliaments from 20 November 1348 until his death. John Darcy 'le fitz' married Alianore, daughter of Robert Holland, Lord Holland (d. 1328), of West Derby, Lancashire, before 1332, and then in 1344 Elizabeth (1331-1368), heir of Nicholas, Lord Meynell. The latter marriage required a papal dispensation, granted in 1344, and was licensed by the king to help John finance his royal service. He died at Notton, Yorkshire, on 5 March 1356 and was buried at Guisborough Priory, of which he had held half the advowson. In his lifetime he had given the advowson of the church of Knaith to the impoverished prioress and convent of Heynings, Lincolnshire, perhaps to support a relative, Margery, who was confined there. He left a substantial fortune to his son, John, born on 24 June 1350. During his minority the family estates were taken into royal hands, the bulk being granted for the support of Queen Philippa, and the remainder to Isabella, the king's eldest daughter. The depredations committed by Queen Philippa's tenants of the estate were so severe that a damning inquisition was held in 1360. 
On the death of the young John Darcy on 26 August 1362 the estates passed to his younger brother Philip Darcy, third Baron Darcy (1352-1399), who received his estate in autumn 1373. Philip successfully adopted his father's mantle. He served with John of Gaunt in Picardy and Caux between July and November 1369 and was active in the royal household, being described as 'de familia regis' in 1372. He served with the earl of Buckingham in the raid on Brittany of July 1380 to April 1381. He was on the commission to take the homage of the count of Flanders on 20 June 1383, served in Scotland under the duke of Lancaster in April 1384, and under the king in August 1385. He was an active admiral of the Thames and northwards (1385-9) and in February 1389 was being retained for the king's intended expedition in Scotland. In the same year he is first recorded as one of the king's knights in the royal household, probably an uncontroversial appointment. Philip was a justice of the peace in Lindsey, Lincolnshire, between 1377 and 1385, and occasionally served in the West Riding of Yorkshire and Northumberland. He was also frequently appointed to judicial commissions and to array men. Philip was summoned to all the parliaments of Richard II's reign until his death, but by the mid-1390s no longer seems to have been active in the royal or local administration. In September 1397 he gave an oath to maintain the statutes of the preceding parliament, but appears to have retired from public life. Philip had married Elizabeth (died 1412), second daughter of Sir Thomas Grey of Heaton, Northumberland. He died on 24 April 1399 and was buried next to his father in Guisborough Priory. 
Philip's son John Darcy, fourth Baron Darcy (1377-1411), received livery of his father's estates on 12 June 1399. He seems to have been able to make an easy transition to support for Henry IV. He was summoned to all parliaments from August 1399 until his death. In May 1402 he was appointed to suppress sedition and then was with the prince of Wales in 1407. However, he never seems to have aspired to, nor achieved, the prominence of his father or grandfather in matters of war or affairs of state. In part this may reflect the declining financial fortunes of the family exacerbated by the longevity of family widows. At John Darcy's death on 9 December 1411 his estate was valued at barely over $100 a year, although this appears to allow for dowers to his mother and his widow, Margaret, daughter of Sir Henry Grey of Wilton, and was suspected to be a substantial undervaluation. 
The Darcy family fortunes were not to revive for the next fifty years: John Darcy was succeeded by his son Philip, born 'c'.1398, who never achieved his majority, dying on 2 August 1418. In June 1412 John's widow, Margaret Darcy, Lady Darcy (d. 1454), was granted $40 per year from the estate to support herself, her second son, and four daughters. Worse, in 1433 Margaret had to present herself at parliament to prove she still lived and that her Irish estates should not be seized. Philip had married Alianore (died 1469), daughter of Sir Henry Fitzhugh, his guardian. She received a third of his estate in dower in 1421 and the remainder, not entailed in the male line, was left to two infant daughters: Elizabeth ('b'. 'c'.1417, died after 1458), who married Sir James Strangways (d. 1480), and Margery (1418-1469), who married Sir John Conyers of Hornby, Yorkshire (died 1490) ['see under 'Conyers family (per. c.1375-c.1525)]. The tomb in Selby Abbey, usually attributed to his father, is more likely to be that of Philip. Intriguingly, in 1427 a commission was sent to the abbey to investigate the documents in a chest supposedly relating to the inheritance of some of the family lands. Those estates entailed in the male line, including the valuable manors of Temple Newsam and Temple Hirst, Yorkshire, passed to John Darcy (b. before 1412, d. 1458), brother of Philip Darcy. He married Joan, daughter of Lord Greystoke, without licence and only received a pardon in October 1427 on payment of 200 marks. He achieved little prominence and was succeeded by his grandson Sir William Darcy (c.1454-1488), who married Euphemia, daughter of Sir Thomas Langton. The couple are most notable as the parents of Thomas Darcy (d. 1537). 


@@@@@


doc= 59057


Darcy family (per. c.1284-1488), gentry, produced several notable royal servants in the fourteenth century. At the death of Roger Darcy of Oldcotes and Styrrup ('c'.1284) ['see 'Darcy family (per. 1086-1333)] Sir John Darcy 'le cosyn' (d. 1347) headed the family. He had a distinguished career initially in the service of Aymer de Valence, earl of Pembroke (died 1324), then achieved prominence in the political and military service of Edward II and, particularly, of Edward III. Royal patronage founded the fortunes of his successors with the receipt of considerable gifts of land and office. John's service as justiciar of Ireland provided an enduring connection with the political community there and, although it was with his first wife, Emmeline, heir of Walter Heron of Silkstone, that he had a son and heir, his second wife, Joan (died 1359), daughter of Richard de Burgh, second earl of Ulster, and widow of Thomas Fitzjohn, earl of Kildare, provided Irish lands and founded through their eldest son, William Darcy of Plattyn, co. Meath ('b'. 1330, died before 1362), a noteworthy junior Irish branch of the family. 

John Darcy, second Lord Darcy (1317-1356), 'le fitz', was the eldest son of Sir John Darcy 'le cosyn' (d. 1347); he accompanied his father to Ireland as early as 1324 and followed him into royal service. Under Edward III he commanded a company with Walter Mauny in the opening phase of the Hundred Years' War and was rewarded in 1341 by a grant to him and his heirs of $40 a year for his long service. On 15 July 1346, when with the king at La Hogue, he was granted a further $200 a year for life to maintain himself as a banneret and went on to fight at Crecy and Calais. In 1347 he received his father's land and the office of keeper of the Tower of London for life. Outside the military sphere in 1344 he was appointed escheator of Holderness for life. He served on numerous judicial commissions, particularly in Yorkshire, and on the diplomatic commission to negotiate peace with France in September 1347. Although he never held high office in Edward III's household, he was personally summoned to parliaments from 20 November 1348 until his death. John Darcy 'le fitz' married Alianore, daughter of Robert Holland, Lord Holland (d. 1328), of West Derby, Lancashire, before 1332, and then in 1344 Elizabeth (1331-1368), heir of Nicholas, Lord Meynell. The latter marriage required a papal dispensation, granted in 1344, and was licensed by the king to help John finance his royal service. He died at Notton, Yorkshire, on 5 March 1356 and was buried at Guisborough Priory, of which he had held half the advowson. In his lifetime he had given the advowson of the church of Knaith to the impoverished prioress and convent of Heynings, Lincolnshire, perhaps to support a relative, Margery, who was confined there. He left a substantial fortune to his son, John, born on 24 June 1350. During his minority the family estates were taken into royal hands, the bulk being granted for the support of Queen Philippa, and the remainder to Isabella, the king's eldest daughter. The depredations committed by Queen Philippa's tenants of the estate were so severe that a damning inquisition was held in 1360. 
On the death of the young John Darcy on 26 August 1362 the estates passed to his younger brother Philip Darcy, third Baron Darcy (1352-1399), who received his estate in autumn 1373. Philip successfully adopted his father's mantle. He served with John of Gaunt in Picardy and Caux between July and November 1369 and was active in the royal household, being described as 'de familia regis' in 1372. He served with the earl of Buckingham in the raid on Brittany of July 1380 to April 1381. He was on the commission to take the homage of the count of Flanders on 20 June 1383, served in Scotland under the duke of Lancaster in April 1384, and under the king in August 1385. He was an active admiral of the Thames and northwards (1385-9) and in February 1389 was being retained for the king's intended expedition in Scotland. In the same year he is first recorded as one of the king's knights in the royal household, probably an uncontroversial appointment. Philip was a justice of the peace in Lindsey, Lincolnshire, between 1377 and 1385, and occasionally served in the West Riding of Yorkshire and Northumberland. He was also frequently appointed to judicial commissions and to array men. Philip was summoned to all the parliaments of Richard II's reign until his death, but by the mid-1390s no longer seems to have been active in the royal or local administration. In September 1397 he gave an oath to maintain the statutes of the preceding parliament, but appears to have retired from public life. Philip had married Elizabeth (died 1412), second daughter of Sir Thomas Grey of Heaton, Northumberland. He died on 24 April 1399 and was buried next to his father in Guisborough Priory. 
Philip's son John Darcy, fourth Baron Darcy (1377-1411), received livery of his father's estates on 12 June 1399. He seems to have been able to make an easy transition to support for Henry IV. He was summoned to all parliaments from August 1399 until his death. In May 1402 he was appointed to suppress sedition and then was with the prince of Wales in 1407. However, he never seems to have aspired to, nor achieved, the prominence of his father or grandfather in matters of war or affairs of state. In part this may reflect the declining financial fortunes of the family exacerbated by the longevity of family widows. At John Darcy's death on 9 December 1411 his estate was valued at barely over $100 a year, although this appears to allow for dowers to his mother and his widow, Margaret, daughter of Sir Henry Grey of Wilton, and was suspected to be a substantial undervaluation. 
The Darcy family fortunes were not to revive for the next fifty years: John Darcy was succeeded by his son Philip, born 'c'.1398, who never achieved his majority, dying on 2 August 1418. In June 1412 John's widow, Margaret Darcy, Lady Darcy (d. 1454), was granted $40 per year from the estate to support herself, her second son, and four daughters. Worse, in 1433 Margaret had to present herself at parliament to prove she still lived and that her Irish estates should not be seized. Philip had married Alianore (died 1469), daughter of Sir Henry Fitzhugh, his guardian. She received a third of his estate in dower in 1421 and the remainder, not entailed in the male line, was left to two infant daughters: Elizabeth ('b'. 'c'.1417, died after 1458), who married Sir James Strangways (d. 1480), and Margery (1418-1469), who married Sir John Conyers of Hornby, Yorkshire (died 1490) ['see under 'Conyers family (per. c.1375-c.1525)]. The tomb in Selby Abbey, usually attributed to his father, is more likely to be that of Philip. Intriguingly, in 1427 a commission was sent to the abbey to investigate the documents in a chest supposedly relating to the inheritance of some of the family lands. Those estates entailed in the male line, including the valuable manors of Temple Newsam and Temple Hirst, Yorkshire, passed to John Darcy (b. before 1412, d. 1458), brother of Philip Darcy. He married Joan, daughter of Lord Greystoke, without licence and only received a pardon in October 1427 on payment of 200 marks. He achieved little prominence and was succeeded by his grandson Sir William Darcy (c.1454-1488), who married Euphemia, daughter of Sir Thomas Langton. The couple are most notable as the parents of Thomas Darcy (d. 1537). 


@@@@@


doc= 59058


Darcy family (per. c.1284-1488), gentry, produced several notable royal servants in the fourteenth century. At the death of Roger Darcy of Oldcotes and Styrrup ('c'.1284) ['see 'Darcy family (per. 1086-1333)] Sir John Darcy 'le cosyn' (d. 1347) headed the family. He had a distinguished career initially in the service of Aymer de Valence, earl of Pembroke (died 1324), then achieved prominence in the political and military service of Edward II and, particularly, of Edward III. Royal patronage founded the fortunes of his successors with the receipt of considerable gifts of land and office. John's service as justiciar of Ireland provided an enduring connection with the political community there and, although it was with his first wife, Emmeline, heir of Walter Heron of Silkstone, that he had a son and heir, his second wife, Joan (died 1359), daughter of Richard de Burgh, second earl of Ulster, and widow of Thomas Fitzjohn, earl of Kildare, provided Irish lands and founded through their eldest son, William Darcy of Plattyn, co. Meath ('b'. 1330, died before 1362), a noteworthy junior Irish branch of the family. 

John Darcy, second Lord Darcy (1317-1356), 'le fitz', was the eldest son of Sir John Darcy 'le cosyn' (d. 1347); he accompanied his father to Ireland as early as 1324 and followed him into royal service. Under Edward III he commanded a company with Walter Mauny in the opening phase of the Hundred Years' War and was rewarded in 1341 by a grant to him and his heirs of $40 a year for his long service. On 15 July 1346, when with the king at La Hogue, he was granted a further $200 a year for life to maintain himself as a banneret and went on to fight at Crecy and Calais. In 1347 he received his father's land and the office of keeper of the Tower of London for life. Outside the military sphere in 1344 he was appointed escheator of Holderness for life. He served on numerous judicial commissions, particularly in Yorkshire, and on the diplomatic commission to negotiate peace with France in September 1347. Although he never held high office in Edward III's household, he was personally summoned to parliaments from 20 November 1348 until his death. John Darcy 'le fitz' married Alianore, daughter of Robert Holland, Lord Holland (d. 1328), of West Derby, Lancashire, before 1332, and then in 1344 Elizabeth (1331-1368), heir of Nicholas, Lord Meynell. The latter marriage required a papal dispensation, granted in 1344, and was licensed by the king to help John finance his royal service. He died at Notton, Yorkshire, on 5 March 1356 and was buried at Guisborough Priory, of which he had held half the advowson. In his lifetime he had given the advowson of the church of Knaith to the impoverished prioress and convent of Heynings, Lincolnshire, perhaps to support a relative, Margery, who was confined there. He left a substantial fortune to his son, John, born on 24 June 1350. During his minority the family estates were taken into royal hands, the bulk being granted for the support of Queen Philippa, and the remainder to Isabella, the king's eldest daughter. The depredations committed by Queen Philippa's tenants of the estate were so severe that a damning inquisition was held in 1360. 
On the death of the young John Darcy on 26 August 1362 the estates passed to his younger brother Philip Darcy, third Baron Darcy (1352-1399), who received his estate in autumn 1373. Philip successfully adopted his father's mantle. He served with John of Gaunt in Picardy and Caux between July and November 1369 and was active in the royal household, being described as 'de familia regis' in 1372. He served with the earl of Buckingham in the raid on Brittany of July 1380 to April 1381. He was on the commission to take the homage of the count of Flanders on 20 June 1383, served in Scotland under the duke of Lancaster in April 1384, and under the king in August 1385. He was an active admiral of the Thames and northwards (1385-9) and in February 1389 was being retained for the king's intended expedition in Scotland. In the same year he is first recorded as one of the king's knights in the royal household, probably an uncontroversial appointment. Philip was a justice of the peace in Lindsey, Lincolnshire, between 1377 and 1385, and occasionally served in the West Riding of Yorkshire and Northumberland. He was also frequently appointed to judicial commissions and to array men. Philip was summoned to all the parliaments of Richard II's reign until his death, but by the mid-1390s no longer seems to have been active in the royal or local administration. In September 1397 he gave an oath to maintain the statutes of the preceding parliament, but appears to have retired from public life. Philip had married Elizabeth (died 1412), second daughter of Sir Thomas Grey of Heaton, Northumberland. He died on 24 April 1399 and was buried next to his father in Guisborough Priory. 
Philip's son John Darcy, fourth Baron Darcy (1377-1411), received livery of his father's estates on 12 June 1399. He seems to have been able to make an easy transition to support for Henry IV. He was summoned to all parliaments from August 1399 until his death. In May 1402 he was appointed to suppress sedition and then was with the prince of Wales in 1407. However, he never seems to have aspired to, nor achieved, the prominence of his father or grandfather in matters of war or affairs of state. In part this may reflect the declining financial fortunes of the family exacerbated by the longevity of family widows. At John Darcy's death on 9 December 1411 his estate was valued at barely over $100 a year, although this appears to allow for dowers to his mother and his widow, Margaret, daughter of Sir Henry Grey of Wilton, and was suspected to be a substantial undervaluation. 
The Darcy family fortunes were not to revive for the next fifty years: John Darcy was succeeded by his son Philip, born 'c'.1398, who never achieved his majority, dying on 2 August 1418. In June 1412 John's widow, Margaret Darcy, Lady Darcy (d. 1454), was granted $40 per year from the estate to support herself, her second son, and four daughters. Worse, in 1433 Margaret had to present herself at parliament to prove she still lived and that her Irish estates should not be seized. Philip had married Alianore (died 1469), daughter of Sir Henry Fitzhugh, his guardian. She received a third of his estate in dower in 1421 and the remainder, not entailed in the male line, was left to two infant daughters: Elizabeth ('b'. 'c'.1417, died after 1458), who married Sir James Strangways (d. 1480), and Margery (1418-1469), who married Sir John Conyers of Hornby, Yorkshire (died 1490) ['see under 'Conyers family (per. c.1375-c.1525)]. The tomb in Selby Abbey, usually attributed to his father, is more likely to be that of Philip. Intriguingly, in 1427 a commission was sent to the abbey to investigate the documents in a chest supposedly relating to the inheritance of some of the family lands. Those estates entailed in the male line, including the valuable manors of Temple Newsam and Temple Hirst, Yorkshire, passed to John Darcy (b. before 1412, d. 1458), brother of Philip Darcy. He married Joan, daughter of Lord Greystoke, without licence and only received a pardon in October 1427 on payment of 200 marks. He achieved little prominence and was succeeded by his grandson Sir William Darcy (c.1454-1488), who married Euphemia, daughter of Sir Thomas Langton. The couple are most notable as the parents of Thomas Darcy (d. 1537). 


@@@@@


doc= 59059


Plumpton family (per. c.1165-c.1550), gentry, of Plumpton near Knaresborough in the West Riding of Yorkshire, receive their first historical notice in the mid-1160s when Sir Nigel of Plumpton (fl. c.1165) is mentioned as holder of a knight's fee of the Percy barony of Spofforth. Peter of Plumpton (fl. 1215), and heir, backed the baronial opposition to King John in the early thirteenth century and, as a result, was deprived of his estates: only following the king's death, when he swore fealty to Henry III, was his inheritance restored. Thereafter little is heard of the family until, in 1331, Sir William [i] Plumpton (d. 1361) represented Yorkshire in parliament. Sir Robert [i] Plumpton (1341-1407), Sir William's son and heir, campaigned in both France and Scotland in the later fourteenth century, and certainly made a prestigious match when he secured the hand of Isabel, daughter of Henry Scrope, first Baron Scrope of Masham, and sister of Richard Scrope who became archbishop of York in 1398. In the short term, however, this marriage proved a distinctly mixed blessing for the family. Sir Robert's eldest son, Sir William [ii] Plumpton (d. 1405), albeit after providing generously for the succession by producing at least nine children with his wife, Alice (died 1423), daughter of John Gisburn, a citizen, merchant, and three times mayor of York, became embroiled, partly as a consequence of the Scrope connection, in a major rebellion against the first Lancastrian king, Henry IV, in 1405. Not only was his uncle Richard Scrope a prime mover in the insurrection but so was Plumpton's probable patron Henry Percy, first earl of Northumberland, and, when the rebellion failed, both the archbishop and Sir William were executed at York in June 1405. Plumpton's head was placed on the city's Micklegate as a dire warning against future acts of treason. Fortunately for the family, however, this proved the limit of Henry IV's vengeance. The king allowed Sir William's widow to retain the Plumpton manors of Grassington and Studley Roger, as well as goods to the value of $40 out of her late husband's estate for the maintenance of her children, and the family was spared the disastrous political, social, and financial consequences of attainder: indeed, both Sir William's father and his eldest son rapidly obtained royal pardons. By the time Sir Robert [i] Plumpton died on 19 April 1407 his son's treason had already become no more than an uncomfortable memory. 

Sir Robert [ii] Plumpton (1383-1421), eldest son and heir of Sir William [ii], secured a notably advantageous marriage (by November 1401) to Alice Foljambe, a wealthy heiress who brought with her substantial estates in Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, and Staffordshire: as a result, the Plumpton sphere of influence, hitherto largely confined to the West Riding, came also to embrace a great swathe of territory in the north midlands. A firm supporter of the Lancastrian regime and a retainer of Henry Percy, second earl of Northumberland (died 1455), who was restored to royal favour by Henry V between 1414 and 1416, he established a tradition of loyal service that his son and grandson were to maintain for most of the rest of the century. Percy patronage probably helps to explain his appearance on several government commissions and, more importantly from his family's point of view, his appointment in April 1414 as steward of the royal honour of Knaresborough and constable of Knaresborough Castle, posts that carried not only a generous salary but also the potential for greatly enhancing his prestige and power in the local community. Sir Robert's eminence in his home county is reflected in his return to parliament by the electors of Yorkshire in 1411 and 1416, while his new status as a prominent midlands landowner is underlined by his representation of Nottinghamshire in the Leicester parliament of 1414. Like so many knights he also joined Henry V's French campaigns. Retained for life at a fee of 20 marks per annum in October 1415 to serve the king's brother John, duke of Bedford, in peace and war, he left Southampton in April 1418 in a force commanded by Henry, Lord Fitzhugh, to take part in Henry V's conquest of Normandy; moreover, although he returned to England in 1419, he once more set sail for France in October 1420 with a retinue of eight archers, and died on 8 December 1421, probably at the siege of Meaux. 
Sir Robert [ii] Plumpton's eldest son and heir, Sir William Plumpton (1404-1480), similarly served the crown in both France and England: indeed, his loyalty to the house of Lancaster, no doubt reflecting the political affiliations of his Percy patrons, caused him great trouble once Edward IV had secured the throne in 1461. Like his father he grasped every opportunity to enhance his family's social status and local influence, not least by a ruthless exploitation of the marriage market. Just as he himself had been married at an early age, to Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Brian Stapleton (died 1464), in order to establish a beneficial alliance between the Plumptons and their prosperous near neighbours the Stapletons of Carlton, so he treated his own children in a fashion cavalier even by fifteenth-century standards. From his first marriage he had two sons, Robert [iii] and William [iii], both of whom predeceased him and who married, successively, Elizabeth, the daughter of Thomas Clifford, eighth Baron Clifford of Westmorland (d. 1455). The daughters of this first, Stapleton, marriage were married into prominent local families, including the Roos of Ingmanthorpe, the Middletons of Kirkby Overblow, the Beckwiths of Clint, the Goldsboroughs, the Hamertons, and the Darells of Sessay. His only surviving son, from his second marriage, to Joan Wintringham of Knaresborough, married into the Gascoignes of Gawthorpe. 
Despite the catastrophic results of these devious manoeuvrings in the marital stakes, which led to years of litigation and substantial losses of land, this surviving son, Sir Robert Plumpton (1453-1525) ['see under 'Plumpton, Sir William (1404-1480)], entertained similar ambitions respecting his own children. Perhaps, too, such family priorities help to explain why no later medieval Plumptons became monks or nuns, or joined the ranks of the friars, and only two enjoyed careers as secular clerics. Sir Robert [ii]'s brother George became rector of Grasmere, Westmorland, in 1439 and of Bingham, Nottinghamshire, in 1447, and retired to Bolton Abbey, Yorkshire, 'c'.1451, where he was still living in 1459; and Richard Plumpton, nephew of Sir William (died 1480), became a chaplain and was probably still alive in 1519. Religious bequests, including the foundation of chantries at Ripon (in 1345) and Spofforth (in 1450), suggest that spiritual considerations were by no means absent from their minds, but it was only in the sixteenth century, when the family estates had been much depleted as a result of the failure of Sir Robert Plumpton (died 1525) and his son William [iv] Plumpton (1485-1547) to resist rival claims to their inheritance, that religion came to the fore: in the 1530s William's son, Robert [iv] Plumpton (1516-1546), became a convert to protestantism, and in Elizabeth I's reign, ironically, the Plumptons became renowned in northern England for their unswerving loyalty to Roman Catholicism. By then, however, the family's political, economic, and social position had long since passed its fifteenth-century heyday. 
Thanks to the survival of the Plumpton correspondence, a collection of about 250 family letters ranging in date from 1461 to 1552, and the coucher book, a cartulary of almost a thousand charters, deeds, and miscellaneous records (the earliest dating from the twelfth century), the Plumptons are the best-documented of all later medieval Yorkshire gentry families. Both letters and papers probably owe their survival, in the first instance, to the prolonged and acrimonious wrangles between the heirs of Sir William Plumpton (1404-1480) for possession of his inheritance and, thereafter, to their transcription in the early seventeenth century ['see also 'Babthorpe family (per. c.1501-1635)]. By the time that Thomas Stapleton (1805-1849) began work on the archive in the early nineteenth century, the originals had vanished. Nevertheless Stapleton, using the seventeenth-century transcripts, was able to publish a scholarly edition of the letters for the Camden Society in 1839 and, in a long introduction, to include many items from the coucher book as well. A new edition was published by the Camden Society in 1996. 
The letters and papers make possible unusually full portrayals of Sir William Plumpton (died 1480) and his son, Sir Robert Plumpton (died 1525), and reveal the dynamics of gentry relationships at the time, especially evident in the litigiousness provoked by Sir William's eccentric marriage policy. Several of his legal advisers figure in the correspondence: during the 1460s Brian Roucliffe (died 1494), baron of the exchequer, served Sir William in this capacity, and in the 1460s and 1470s also Godfrey Green, who was notably active in conducting legal suits and reporting on their progress. Edward Plumpton (a trained lawyer and possibly a nephew of Sir William), John Pullan, and George Emerson frequently acted in a similar vein for Sir Robert. 


@@@@@


doc= 59060


Plumpton family (per. c.1165-c.1550), gentry, of Plumpton near Knaresborough in the West Riding of Yorkshire, receive their first historical notice in the mid-1160s when Sir Nigel of Plumpton (fl. c.1165) is mentioned as holder of a knight's fee of the Percy barony of Spofforth. Peter of Plumpton (fl. 1215), and heir, backed the baronial opposition to King John in the early thirteenth century and, as a result, was deprived of his estates: only following the king's death, when he swore fealty to Henry III, was his inheritance restored. Thereafter little is heard of the family until, in 1331, Sir William [i] Plumpton (d. 1361) represented Yorkshire in parliament. Sir Robert [i] Plumpton (1341-1407), Sir William's son and heir, campaigned in both France and Scotland in the later fourteenth century, and certainly made a prestigious match when he secured the hand of Isabel, daughter of Henry Scrope, first Baron Scrope of Masham, and sister of Richard Scrope who became archbishop of York in 1398. In the short term, however, this marriage proved a distinctly mixed blessing for the family. Sir Robert's eldest son, Sir William [ii] Plumpton (d. 1405), albeit after providing generously for the succession by producing at least nine children with his wife, Alice (died 1423), daughter of John Gisburn, a citizen, merchant, and three times mayor of York, became embroiled, partly as a consequence of the Scrope connection, in a major rebellion against the first Lancastrian king, Henry IV, in 1405. Not only was his uncle Richard Scrope a prime mover in the insurrection but so was Plumpton's probable patron Henry Percy, first earl of Northumberland, and, when the rebellion failed, both the archbishop and Sir William were executed at York in June 1405. Plumpton's head was placed on the city's Micklegate as a dire warning against future acts of treason. Fortunately for the family, however, this proved the limit of Henry IV's vengeance. The king allowed Sir William's widow to retain the Plumpton manors of Grassington and Studley Roger, as well as goods to the value of $40 out of her late husband's estate for the maintenance of her children, and the family was spared the disastrous political, social, and financial consequences of attainder: indeed, both Sir William's father and his eldest son rapidly obtained royal pardons. By the time Sir Robert [i] Plumpton died on 19 April 1407 his son's treason had already become no more than an uncomfortable memory. 

Sir Robert [ii] Plumpton (1383-1421), eldest son and heir of Sir William [ii], secured a notably advantageous marriage (by November 1401) to Alice Foljambe, a wealthy heiress who brought with her substantial estates in Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, and Staffordshire: as a result, the Plumpton sphere of influence, hitherto largely confined to the West Riding, came also to embrace a great swathe of territory in the north midlands. A firm supporter of the Lancastrian regime and a retainer of Henry Percy, second earl of Northumberland (died 1455), who was restored to royal favour by Henry V between 1414 and 1416, he established a tradition of loyal service that his son and grandson were to maintain for most of the rest of the century. Percy patronage probably helps to explain his appearance on several government commissions and, more importantly from his family's point of view, his appointment in April 1414 as steward of the royal honour of Knaresborough and constable of Knaresborough Castle, posts that carried not only a generous salary but also the potential for greatly enhancing his prestige and power in the local community. Sir Robert's eminence in his home county is reflected in his return to parliament by the electors of Yorkshire in 1411 and 1416, while his new status as a prominent midlands landowner is underlined by his representation of Nottinghamshire in the Leicester parliament of 1414. Like so many knights he also joined Henry V's French campaigns. Retained for life at a fee of 20 marks per annum in October 1415 to serve the king's brother John, duke of Bedford, in peace and war, he left Southampton in April 1418 in a force commanded by Henry, Lord Fitzhugh, to take part in Henry V's conquest of Normandy; moreover, although he returned to England in 1419, he once more set sail for France in October 1420 with a retinue of eight archers, and died on 8 December 1421, probably at the siege of Meaux. 
Sir Robert [ii] Plumpton's eldest son and heir, Sir William Plumpton (1404-1480), similarly served the crown in both France and England: indeed, his loyalty to the house of Lancaster, no doubt reflecting the political affiliations of his Percy patrons, caused him great trouble once Edward IV had secured the throne in 1461. Like his father he grasped every opportunity to enhance his family's social status and local influence, not least by a ruthless exploitation of the marriage market. Just as he himself had been married at an early age, to Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Brian Stapleton (died 1464), in order to establish a beneficial alliance between the Plumptons and their prosperous near neighbours the Stapletons of Carlton, so he treated his own children in a fashion cavalier even by fifteenth-century standards. From his first marriage he had two sons, Robert [iii] and William [iii], both of whom predeceased him and who married, successively, Elizabeth, the daughter of Thomas Clifford, eighth Baron Clifford of Westmorland (d. 1455). The daughters of this first, Stapleton, marriage were married into prominent local families, including the Roos of Ingmanthorpe, the Middletons of Kirkby Overblow, the Beckwiths of Clint, the Goldsboroughs, the Hamertons, and the Darells of Sessay. His only surviving son, from his second marriage, to Joan Wintringham of Knaresborough, married into the Gascoignes of Gawthorpe. 
Despite the catastrophic results of these devious manoeuvrings in the marital stakes, which led to years of litigation and substantial losses of land, this surviving son, Sir Robert Plumpton (1453-1525) ['see under 'Plumpton, Sir William (1404-1480)], entertained similar ambitions respecting his own children. Perhaps, too, such family priorities help to explain why no later medieval Plumptons became monks or nuns, or joined the ranks of the friars, and only two enjoyed careers as secular clerics. Sir Robert [ii]'s brother George became rector of Grasmere, Westmorland, in 1439 and of Bingham, Nottinghamshire, in 1447, and retired to Bolton Abbey, Yorkshire, 'c'.1451, where he was still living in 1459; and Richard Plumpton, nephew of Sir William (died 1480), became a chaplain and was probably still alive in 1519. Religious bequests, including the foundation of chantries at Ripon (in 1345) and Spofforth (in 1450), suggest that spiritual considerations were by no means absent from their minds, but it was only in the sixteenth century, when the family estates had been much depleted as a result of the failure of Sir Robert Plumpton (died 1525) and his son William [iv] Plumpton (1485-1547) to resist rival claims to their inheritance, that religion came to the fore: in the 1530s William's son, Robert [iv] Plumpton (1516-1546), became a convert to protestantism, and in Elizabeth I's reign, ironically, the Plumptons became renowned in northern England for their unswerving loyalty to Roman Catholicism. By then, however, the family's political, economic, and social position had long since passed its fifteenth-century heyday. 
Thanks to the survival of the Plumpton correspondence, a collection of about 250 family letters ranging in date from 1461 to 1552, and the coucher book, a cartulary of almost a thousand charters, deeds, and miscellaneous records (the earliest dating from the twelfth century), the Plumptons are the best-documented of all later medieval Yorkshire gentry families. Both letters and papers probably owe their survival, in the first instance, to the prolonged and acrimonious wrangles between the heirs of Sir William Plumpton (1404-1480) for possession of his inheritance and, thereafter, to their transcription in the early seventeenth century ['see also 'Babthorpe family (per. c.1501-1635)]. By the time that Thomas Stapleton (1805-1849) began work on the archive in the early nineteenth century, the originals had vanished. Nevertheless Stapleton, using the seventeenth-century transcripts, was able to publish a scholarly edition of the letters for the Camden Society in 1839 and, in a long introduction, to include many items from the coucher book as well. A new edition was published by the Camden Society in 1996. 
The letters and papers make possible unusually full portrayals of Sir William Plumpton (died 1480) and his son, Sir Robert Plumpton (died 1525), and reveal the dynamics of gentry relationships at the time, especially evident in the litigiousness provoked by Sir William's eccentric marriage policy. Several of his legal advisers figure in the correspondence: during the 1460s Brian Roucliffe (died 1494), baron of the exchequer, served Sir William in this capacity, and in the 1460s and 1470s also Godfrey Green, who was notably active in conducting legal suits and reporting on their progress. Edward Plumpton (a trained lawyer and possibly a nephew of Sir William), John Pullan, and George Emerson frequently acted in a similar vein for Sir Robert. 


@@@@@


doc= 59061


Plumpton family (per. c.1165-c.1550), gentry, of Plumpton near Knaresborough in the West Riding of Yorkshire, receive their first historical notice in the mid-1160s when Sir Nigel of Plumpton (fl. c.1165) is mentioned as holder of a knight's fee of the Percy barony of Spofforth. Peter of Plumpton (fl. 1215), and heir, backed the baronial opposition to King John in the early thirteenth century and, as a result, was deprived of his estates: only following the king's death, when he swore fealty to Henry III, was his inheritance restored. Thereafter little is heard of the family until, in 1331, Sir William [i] Plumpton (d. 1361) represented Yorkshire in parliament. Sir Robert [i] Plumpton (1341-1407), Sir William's son and heir, campaigned in both France and Scotland in the later fourteenth century, and certainly made a prestigious match when he secured the hand of Isabel, daughter of Henry Scrope, first Baron Scrope of Masham, and sister of Richard Scrope who became archbishop of York in 1398. In the short term, however, this marriage proved a distinctly mixed blessing for the family. Sir Robert's eldest son, Sir William [ii] Plumpton (d. 1405), albeit after providing generously for the succession by producing at least nine children with his wife, Alice (died 1423), daughter of John Gisburn, a citizen, merchant, and three times mayor of York, became embroiled, partly as a consequence of the Scrope connection, in a major rebellion against the first Lancastrian king, Henry IV, in 1405. Not only was his uncle Richard Scrope a prime mover in the insurrection but so was Plumpton's probable patron Henry Percy, first earl of Northumberland, and, when the rebellion failed, both the archbishop and Sir William were executed at York in June 1405. Plumpton's head was placed on the city's Micklegate as a dire warning against future acts of treason. Fortunately for the family, however, this proved the limit of Henry IV's vengeance. The king allowed Sir William's widow to retain the Plumpton manors of Grassington and Studley Roger, as well as goods to the value of $40 out of her late husband's estate for the maintenance of her children, and the family was spared the disastrous political, social, and financial consequences of attainder: indeed, both Sir William's father and his eldest son rapidly obtained royal pardons. By the time Sir Robert [i] Plumpton died on 19 April 1407 his son's treason had already become no more than an uncomfortable memory. 

Sir Robert [ii] Plumpton (1383-1421), eldest son and heir of Sir William [ii], secured a notably advantageous marriage (by November 1401) to Alice Foljambe, a wealthy heiress who brought with her substantial estates in Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, and Staffordshire: as a result, the Plumpton sphere of influence, hitherto largely confined to the West Riding, came also to embrace a great swathe of territory in the north midlands. A firm supporter of the Lancastrian regime and a retainer of Henry Percy, second earl of Northumberland (died 1455), who was restored to royal favour by Henry V between 1414 and 1416, he established a tradition of loyal service that his son and grandson were to maintain for most of the rest of the century. Percy patronage probably helps to explain his appearance on several government commissions and, more importantly from his family's point of view, his appointment in April 1414 as steward of the royal honour of Knaresborough and constable of Knaresborough Castle, posts that carried not only a generous salary but also the potential for greatly enhancing his prestige and power in the local community. Sir Robert's eminence in his home county is reflected in his return to parliament by the electors of Yorkshire in 1411 and 1416, while his new status as a prominent midlands landowner is underlined by his representation of Nottinghamshire in the Leicester parliament of 1414. Like so many knights he also joined Henry V's French campaigns. Retained for life at a fee of 20 marks per annum in October 1415 to serve the king's brother John, duke of Bedford, in peace and war, he left Southampton in April 1418 in a force commanded by Henry, Lord Fitzhugh, to take part in Henry V's conquest of Normandy; moreover, although he returned to England in 1419, he once more set sail for France in October 1420 with a retinue of eight archers, and died on 8 December 1421, probably at the siege of Meaux. 
Sir Robert [ii] Plumpton's eldest son and heir, Sir William Plumpton (1404-1480), similarly served the crown in both France and England: indeed, his loyalty to the house of Lancaster, no doubt reflecting the political affiliations of his Percy patrons, caused him great trouble once Edward IV had secured the throne in 1461. Like his father he grasped every opportunity to enhance his family's social status and local influence, not least by a ruthless exploitation of the marriage market. Just as he himself had been married at an early age, to Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Brian Stapleton (died 1464), in order to establish a beneficial alliance between the Plumptons and their prosperous near neighbours the Stapletons of Carlton, so he treated his own children in a fashion cavalier even by fifteenth-century standards. From his first marriage he had two sons, Robert [iii] and William [iii], both of whom predeceased him and who married, successively, Elizabeth, the daughter of Thomas Clifford, eighth Baron Clifford of Westmorland (d. 1455). The daughters of this first, Stapleton, marriage were married into prominent local families, including the Roos of Ingmanthorpe, the Middletons of Kirkby Overblow, the Beckwiths of Clint, the Goldsboroughs, the Hamertons, and the Darells of Sessay. His only surviving son, from his second marriage, to Joan Wintringham of Knaresborough, married into the Gascoignes of Gawthorpe. 
Despite the catastrophic results of these devious manoeuvrings in the marital stakes, which led to years of litigation and substantial losses of land, this surviving son, Sir Robert Plumpton (1453-1525) ['see under 'Plumpton, Sir William (1404-1480)], entertained similar ambitions respecting his own children. Perhaps, too, such family priorities help to explain why no later medieval Plumptons became monks or nuns, or joined the ranks of the friars, and only two enjoyed careers as secular clerics. Sir Robert [ii]'s brother George became rector of Grasmere, Westmorland, in 1439 and of Bingham, Nottinghamshire, in 1447, and retired to Bolton Abbey, Yorkshire, 'c'.1451, where he was still living in 1459; and Richard Plumpton, nephew of Sir William (died 1480), became a chaplain and was probably still alive in 1519. Religious bequests, including the foundation of chantries at Ripon (in 1345) and Spofforth (in 1450), suggest that spiritual considerations were by no means absent from their minds, but it was only in the sixteenth century, when the family estates had been much depleted as a result of the failure of Sir Robert Plumpton (died 1525) and his son William [iv] Plumpton (1485-1547) to resist rival claims to their inheritance, that religion came to the fore: in the 1530s William's son, Robert [iv] Plumpton (1516-1546), became a convert to protestantism, and in Elizabeth I's reign, ironically, the Plumptons became renowned in northern England for their unswerving loyalty to Roman Catholicism. By then, however, the family's political, economic, and social position had long since passed its fifteenth-century heyday. 
Thanks to the survival of the Plumpton correspondence, a collection of about 250 family letters ranging in date from 1461 to 1552, and the coucher book, a cartulary of almost a thousand charters, deeds, and miscellaneous records (the earliest dating from the twelfth century), the Plumptons are the best-documented of all later medieval Yorkshire gentry families. Both letters and papers probably owe their survival, in the first instance, to the prolonged and acrimonious wrangles between the heirs of Sir William Plumpton (1404-1480) for possession of his inheritance and, thereafter, to their transcription in the early seventeenth century ['see also 'Babthorpe family (per. c.1501-1635)]. By the time that Thomas Stapleton (1805-1849) began work on the archive in the early nineteenth century, the originals had vanished. Nevertheless Stapleton, using the seventeenth-century transcripts, was able to publish a scholarly edition of the letters for the Camden Society in 1839 and, in a long introduction, to include many items from the coucher book as well. A new edition was published by the Camden Society in 1996. 
The letters and papers make possible unusually full portrayals of Sir William Plumpton (died 1480) and his son, Sir Robert Plumpton (died 1525), and reveal the dynamics of gentry relationships at the time, especially evident in the litigiousness provoked by Sir William's eccentric marriage policy. Several of his legal advisers figure in the correspondence: during the 1460s Brian Roucliffe (died 1494), baron of the exchequer, served Sir William in this capacity, and in the 1460s and 1470s also Godfrey Green, who was notably active in conducting legal suits and reporting on their progress. Edward Plumpton (a trained lawyer and possibly a nephew of Sir William), John Pullan, and George Emerson frequently acted in a similar vein for Sir Robert. 


@@@@@


doc= 59062


Plumpton family (per. c.1165-c.1550), gentry, of Plumpton near Knaresborough in the West Riding of Yorkshire, receive their first historical notice in the mid-1160s when Sir Nigel of Plumpton (fl. c.1165) is mentioned as holder of a knight's fee of the Percy barony of Spofforth. Peter of Plumpton (fl. 1215), and heir, backed the baronial opposition to King John in the early thirteenth century and, as a result, was deprived of his estates: only following the king's death, when he swore fealty to Henry III, was his inheritance restored. Thereafter little is heard of the family until, in 1331, Sir William [i] Plumpton (d. 1361) represented Yorkshire in parliament. Sir Robert [i] Plumpton (1341-1407), Sir William's son and heir, campaigned in both France and Scotland in the later fourteenth century, and certainly made a prestigious match when he secured the hand of Isabel, daughter of Henry Scrope, first Baron Scrope of Masham, and sister of Richard Scrope who became archbishop of York in 1398. In the short term, however, this marriage proved a distinctly mixed blessing for the family. Sir Robert's eldest son, Sir William [ii] Plumpton (d. 1405), albeit after providing generously for the succession by producing at least nine children with his wife, Alice (died 1423), daughter of John Gisburn, a citizen, merchant, and three times mayor of York, became embroiled, partly as a consequence of the Scrope connection, in a major rebellion against the first Lancastrian king, Henry IV, in 1405. Not only was his uncle Richard Scrope a prime mover in the insurrection but so was Plumpton's probable patron Henry Percy, first earl of Northumberland, and, when the rebellion failed, both the archbishop and Sir William were executed at York in June 1405. Plumpton's head was placed on the city's Micklegate as a dire warning against future acts of treason. Fortunately for the family, however, this proved the limit of Henry IV's vengeance. The king allowed Sir William's widow to retain the Plumpton manors of Grassington and Studley Roger, as well as goods to the value of $40 out of her late husband's estate for the maintenance of her children, and the family was spared the disastrous political, social, and financial consequences of attainder: indeed, both Sir William's father and his eldest son rapidly obtained royal pardons. By the time Sir Robert [i] Plumpton died on 19 April 1407 his son's treason had already become no more than an uncomfortable memory. 

Sir Robert [ii] Plumpton (1383-1421), eldest son and heir of Sir William [ii], secured a notably advantageous marriage (by November 1401) to Alice Foljambe, a wealthy heiress who brought with her substantial estates in Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, and Staffordshire: as a result, the Plumpton sphere of influence, hitherto largely confined to the West Riding, came also to embrace a great swathe of territory in the north midlands. A firm supporter of the Lancastrian regime and a retainer of Henry Percy, second earl of Northumberland (died 1455), who was restored to royal favour by Henry V between 1414 and 1416, he established a tradition of loyal service that his son and grandson were to maintain for most of the rest of the century. Percy patronage probably helps to explain his appearance on several government commissions and, more importantly from his family's point of view, his appointment in April 1414 as steward of the royal honour of Knaresborough and constable of Knaresborough Castle, posts that carried not only a generous salary but also the potential for greatly enhancing his prestige and power in the local community. Sir Robert's eminence in his home county is reflected in his return to parliament by the electors of Yorkshire in 1411 and 1416, while his new status as a prominent midlands landowner is underlined by his representation of Nottinghamshire in the Leicester parliament of 1414. Like so many knights he also joined Henry V's French campaigns. Retained for life at a fee of 20 marks per annum in October 1415 to serve the king's brother John, duke of Bedford, in peace and war, he left Southampton in April 1418 in a force commanded by Henry, Lord Fitzhugh, to take part in Henry V's conquest of Normandy; moreover, although he returned to England in 1419, he once more set sail for France in October 1420 with a retinue of eight archers, and died on 8 December 1421, probably at the siege of Meaux. 
Sir Robert [ii] Plumpton's eldest son and heir, Sir William Plumpton (1404-1480), similarly served the crown in both France and England: indeed, his loyalty to the house of Lancaster, no doubt reflecting the political affiliations of his Percy patrons, caused him great trouble once Edward IV had secured the throne in 1461. Like his father he grasped every opportunity to enhance his family's social status and local influence, not least by a ruthless exploitation of the marriage market. Just as he himself had been married at an early age, to Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Brian Stapleton (died 1464), in order to establish a beneficial alliance between the Plumptons and their prosperous near neighbours the Stapletons of Carlton, so he treated his own children in a fashion cavalier even by fifteenth-century standards. From his first marriage he had two sons, Robert [iii] and William [iii], both of whom predeceased him and who married, successively, Elizabeth, the daughter of Thomas Clifford, eighth Baron Clifford of Westmorland (d. 1455). The daughters of this first, Stapleton, marriage were married into prominent local families, including the Roos of Ingmanthorpe, the Middletons of Kirkby Overblow, the Beckwiths of Clint, the Goldsboroughs, the Hamertons, and the Darells of Sessay. His only surviving son, from his second marriage, to Joan Wintringham of Knaresborough, married into the Gascoignes of Gawthorpe. 
Despite the catastrophic results of these devious manoeuvrings in the marital stakes, which led to years of litigation and substantial losses of land, this surviving son, Sir Robert Plumpton (1453-1525) ['see under 'Plumpton, Sir William (1404-1480)], entertained similar ambitions respecting his own children. Perhaps, too, such family priorities help to explain why no later medieval Plumptons became monks or nuns, or joined the ranks of the friars, and only two enjoyed careers as secular clerics. Sir Robert [ii]'s brother George became rector of Grasmere, Westmorland, in 1439 and of Bingham, Nottinghamshire, in 1447, and retired to Bolton Abbey, Yorkshire, 'c'.1451, where he was still living in 1459; and Richard Plumpton, nephew of Sir William (died 1480), became a chaplain and was probably still alive in 1519. Religious bequests, including the foundation of chantries at Ripon (in 1345) and Spofforth (in 1450), suggest that spiritual considerations were by no means absent from their minds, but it was only in the sixteenth century, when the family estates had been much depleted as a result of the failure of Sir Robert Plumpton (died 1525) and his son William [iv] Plumpton (1485-1547) to resist rival claims to their inheritance, that religion came to the fore: in the 1530s William's son, Robert [iv] Plumpton (1516-1546), became a convert to protestantism, and in Elizabeth I's reign, ironically, the Plumptons became renowned in northern England for their unswerving loyalty to Roman Catholicism. By then, however, the family's political, economic, and social position had long since passed its fifteenth-century heyday. 
Thanks to the survival of the Plumpton correspondence, a collection of about 250 family letters ranging in date from 1461 to 1552, and the coucher book, a cartulary of almost a thousand charters, deeds, and miscellaneous records (the earliest dating from the twelfth century), the Plumptons are the best-documented of all later medieval Yorkshire gentry families. Both letters and papers probably owe their survival, in the first instance, to the prolonged and acrimonious wrangles between the heirs of Sir William Plumpton (1404-1480) for possession of his inheritance and, thereafter, to their transcription in the early seventeenth century ['see also 'Babthorpe family (per. c.1501-1635)]. By the time that Thomas Stapleton (1805-1849) began work on the archive in the early nineteenth century, the originals had vanished. Nevertheless Stapleton, using the seventeenth-century transcripts, was able to publish a scholarly edition of the letters for the Camden Society in 1839 and, in a long introduction, to include many items from the coucher book as well. A new edition was published by the Camden Society in 1996. 
The letters and papers make possible unusually full portrayals of Sir William Plumpton (died 1480) and his son, Sir Robert Plumpton (died 1525), and reveal the dynamics of gentry relationships at the time, especially evident in the litigiousness provoked by Sir William's eccentric marriage policy. Several of his legal advisers figure in the correspondence: during the 1460s Brian Roucliffe (died 1494), baron of the exchequer, served Sir William in this capacity, and in the 1460s and 1470s also Godfrey Green, who was notably active in conducting legal suits and reporting on their progress. Edward Plumpton (a trained lawyer and possibly a nephew of Sir William), John Pullan, and George Emerson frequently acted in a similar vein for Sir Robert. 


@@@@@


doc= 59063


Plumpton family (per. c.1165-c.1550), gentry, of Plumpton near Knaresborough in the West Riding of Yorkshire, receive their first historical notice in the mid-1160s when Sir Nigel of Plumpton (fl. c.1165) is mentioned as holder of a knight's fee of the Percy barony of Spofforth. Peter of Plumpton (fl. 1215), and heir, backed the baronial opposition to King John in the early thirteenth century and, as a result, was deprived of his estates: only following the king's death, when he swore fealty to Henry III, was his inheritance restored. Thereafter little is heard of the family until, in 1331, Sir William [i] Plumpton (d. 1361) represented Yorkshire in parliament. Sir Robert [i] Plumpton (1341-1407), Sir William's son and heir, campaigned in both France and Scotland in the later fourteenth century, and certainly made a prestigious match when he secured the hand of Isabel, daughter of Henry Scrope, first Baron Scrope of Masham, and sister of Richard Scrope who became archbishop of York in 1398. In the short term, however, this marriage proved a distinctly mixed blessing for the family. Sir Robert's eldest son, Sir William [ii] Plumpton (d. 1405), albeit after providing generously for the succession by producing at least nine children with his wife, Alice (died 1423), daughter of John Gisburn, a citizen, merchant, and three times mayor of York, became embroiled, partly as a consequence of the Scrope connection, in a major rebellion against the first Lancastrian king, Henry IV, in 1405. Not only was his uncle Richard Scrope a prime mover in the insurrection but so was Plumpton's probable patron Henry Percy, first earl of Northumberland, and, when the rebellion failed, both the archbishop and Sir William were executed at York in June 1405. Plumpton's head was placed on the city's Micklegate as a dire warning against future acts of treason. Fortunately for the family, however, this proved the limit of Henry IV's vengeance. The king allowed Sir William's widow to retain the Plumpton manors of Grassington and Studley Roger, as well as goods to the value of $40 out of her late husband's estate for the maintenance of her children, and the family was spared the disastrous political, social, and financial consequences of attainder: indeed, both Sir William's father and his eldest son rapidly obtained royal pardons. By the time Sir Robert [i] Plumpton died on 19 April 1407 his son's treason had already become no more than an uncomfortable memory. 

Sir Robert [ii] Plumpton (1383-1421), eldest son and heir of Sir William [ii], secured a notably advantageous marriage (by November 1401) to Alice Foljambe, a wealthy heiress who brought with her substantial estates in Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, and Staffordshire: as a result, the Plumpton sphere of influence, hitherto largely confined to the West Riding, came also to embrace a great swathe of territory in the north midlands. A firm supporter of the Lancastrian regime and a retainer of Henry Percy, second earl of Northumberland (died 1455), who was restored to royal favour by Henry V between 1414 and 1416, he established a tradition of loyal service that his son and grandson were to maintain for most of the rest of the century. Percy patronage probably helps to explain his appearance on several government commissions and, more importantly from his family's point of view, his appointment in April 1414 as steward of the royal honour of Knaresborough and constable of Knaresborough Castle, posts that carried not only a generous salary but also the potential for greatly enhancing his prestige and power in the local community. Sir Robert's eminence in his home county is reflected in his return to parliament by the electors of Yorkshire in 1411 and 1416, while his new status as a prominent midlands landowner is underlined by his representation of Nottinghamshire in the Leicester parliament of 1414. Like so many knights he also joined Henry V's French campaigns. Retained for life at a fee of 20 marks per annum in October 1415 to serve the king's brother John, duke of Bedford, in peace and war, he left Southampton in April 1418 in a force commanded by Henry, Lord Fitzhugh, to take part in Henry V's conquest of Normandy; moreover, although he returned to England in 1419, he once more set sail for France in October 1420 with a retinue of eight archers, and died on 8 December 1421, probably at the siege of Meaux. 
Sir Robert [ii] Plumpton's eldest son and heir, Sir William Plumpton (1404-1480), similarly served the crown in both France and England: indeed, his loyalty to the house of Lancaster, no doubt reflecting the political affiliations of his Percy patrons, caused him great trouble once Edward IV had secured the throne in 1461. Like his father he grasped every opportunity to enhance his family's social status and local influence, not least by a ruthless exploitation of the marriage market. Just as he himself had been married at an early age, to Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Brian Stapleton (died 1464), in order to establish a beneficial alliance between the Plumptons and their prosperous near neighbours the Stapletons of Carlton, so he treated his own children in a fashion cavalier even by fifteenth-century standards. From his first marriage he had two sons, Robert [iii] and William [iii], both of whom predeceased him and who married, successively, Elizabeth, the daughter of Thomas Clifford, eighth Baron Clifford of Westmorland (d. 1455). The daughters of this first, Stapleton, marriage were married into prominent local families, including the Roos of Ingmanthorpe, the Middletons of Kirkby Overblow, the Beckwiths of Clint, the Goldsboroughs, the Hamertons, and the Darells of Sessay. His only surviving son, from his second marriage, to Joan Wintringham of Knaresborough, married into the Gascoignes of Gawthorpe. 
Despite the catastrophic results of these devious manoeuvrings in the marital stakes, which led to years of litigation and substantial losses of land, this surviving son, Sir Robert Plumpton (1453-1525) ['see under 'Plumpton, Sir William (1404-1480)], entertained similar ambitions respecting his own children. Perhaps, too, such family priorities help to explain why no later medieval Plumptons became monks or nuns, or joined the ranks of the friars, and only two enjoyed careers as secular clerics. Sir Robert [ii]'s brother George became rector of Grasmere, Westmorland, in 1439 and of Bingham, Nottinghamshire, in 1447, and retired to Bolton Abbey, Yorkshire, 'c'.1451, where he was still living in 1459; and Richard Plumpton, nephew of Sir William (died 1480), became a chaplain and was probably still alive in 1519. Religious bequests, including the foundation of chantries at Ripon (in 1345) and Spofforth (in 1450), suggest that spiritual considerations were by no means absent from their minds, but it was only in the sixteenth century, when the family estates had been much depleted as a result of the failure of Sir Robert Plumpton (died 1525) and his son William [iv] Plumpton (1485-1547) to resist rival claims to their inheritance, that religion came to the fore: in the 1530s William's son, Robert [iv] Plumpton (1516-1546), became a convert to protestantism, and in Elizabeth I's reign, ironically, the Plumptons became renowned in northern England for their unswerving loyalty to Roman Catholicism. By then, however, the family's political, economic, and social position had long since passed its fifteenth-century heyday. 
Thanks to the survival of the Plumpton correspondence, a collection of about 250 family letters ranging in date from 1461 to 1552, and the coucher book, a cartulary of almost a thousand charters, deeds, and miscellaneous records (the earliest dating from the twelfth century), the Plumptons are the best-documented of all later medieval Yorkshire gentry families. Both letters and papers probably owe their survival, in the first instance, to the prolonged and acrimonious wrangles between the heirs of Sir William Plumpton (1404-1480) for possession of his inheritance and, thereafter, to their transcription in the early seventeenth century ['see also 'Babthorpe family (per. c.1501-1635)]. By the time that Thomas Stapleton (1805-1849) began work on the archive in the early nineteenth century, the originals had vanished. Nevertheless Stapleton, using the seventeenth-century transcripts, was able to publish a scholarly edition of the letters for the Camden Society in 1839 and, in a long introduction, to include many items from the coucher book as well. A new edition was published by the Camden Society in 1996. 
The letters and papers make possible unusually full portrayals of Sir William Plumpton (died 1480) and his son, Sir Robert Plumpton (died 1525), and reveal the dynamics of gentry relationships at the time, especially evident in the litigiousness provoked by Sir William's eccentric marriage policy. Several of his legal advisers figure in the correspondence: during the 1460s Brian Roucliffe (died 1494), baron of the exchequer, served Sir William in this capacity, and in the 1460s and 1470s also Godfrey Green, who was notably active in conducting legal suits and reporting on their progress. Edward Plumpton (a trained lawyer and possibly a nephew of Sir William), John Pullan, and George Emerson frequently acted in a similar vein for Sir Robert. 


