@@@@@


doc= 6279


Coppock, James (1798-1857), election agent, was born at Stockport on 2 September 1798, the eldest son of William Coppock, a mercer of that town. He was educated at the school of the Revd Mr Higginson, Unitarian minister of Stockport. After serving an apprenticeship in his father's business, he was placed as a clerk with a wholesale haberdasher in London. He afterwards ventured a small amount of capital as a partner in a silk firm, but, owing to commercial disasters following on the French Revolution of 1830, he lost it all. He married in 1829. 
After careful consideration, Coppock resolved to enter the legal profession, and in 1832 articled himself to a solicitor in Furnival's Inn. He was admitted on the roll of attorneys in 1836. He had always been an active politician, and took a prominent part in the contest during the first election for Finsbury after the 'Reform Act' of 1832. After the second general election under the act, on the formation of the County Registration Society by the Liberal Party, with branches throughout England, Coppock was appointed secretary, with a residence in the society's rooms at 3 Cleveland Row, St James's. These rooms were the rendezvous of agents and solicitors from all parts of the country, and, by his rapid decisions and sound judgement, Coppock quickly became a power in politics. With F. R. Bonham on the Conservative side and Joseph Parkes with him on the radical, Coppock was a founder of centralized political organization. 
When, a few years later, the society's operations ceased, Coppock took the lease of the premises in Cleveland Row, and established himself as a solicitor and parliamentary agent. From this time forward there was scarcely a contested return before the House of Commons in which he had not an active interest. The coolness and daring with which he fought his opponents with their own weapons became proverbial. He helped to establish the London Reform Club and, after briefly serving as its secretary in 1836, he was elected an honorary life member, and appointed its solicitor. 
Although in his day no man was a fiercer partisan, Coppock was respected by friend and foe. In the August before his death he received the appointment of county court treasurer, but business, both private and public, of a harassing nature accumulated, and the strain of overwork was too great. He died at his house in Cleveland Row, London, on 19 December 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 6280


Coppock, Thomas (bap. 1719, d. 1746), Jacobite chaplain, was born in Old Millgate, Manchester, and baptized on 13 December 1719. He was the third of four children of John Coppock, a tailor, and his wife, Esther, 'nee' Ogden, both from Manchester. In the 1730s he attended the local grammar school and in 1739 went on to Brasenose College, Oxford. After graduating BA in October 1742 he started an adventurous career which eventually led him to the scaffold in October 1746. Two propaganda pamphlets, published after his death, offer colourful stories of Coppock's progress as a Jacobite villain from a career as a quack doctor in Oxford to the execution site at Harraby Hill, Carlisle. Although most of the stories are of questionable reliability, it is almost certain that in November 1744 Coppock forged a testimony in order to obtain a curacy in Kent. The forgery was discovered nine months later and he had to return to his paternal home. 
In November 1745 Coppock joined the Jacobite army, quickly becoming both the chaplain and the quartermaster of the Manchester regiment. On the way back north he stayed behind with his regiment at Carlisle, where he was captured and imprisoned. He gained some prominence as the 'rebel bishop of Carlisle' in the Hanoverian press, which exploited the fictitious story of his nomination by the Stuart pretender. After ten months in prison at Lancaster and Carlisle he was condemned for high treason in September 1746. 'It is observed, that he behaved very insolently on his trial; that when he was going from the bar, after having been found guilty, he said openly to the other rebel prisoners, 'Never mind it, my boys, for if our Saviour was here, these fellows would condemn him'. ('Scots Magazine')' He wrote numerous petitions and also tried to escape twice, but in the end was hanged and quartered with eight other Jacobites in Carlisle on 18 October 1746. Afterwards his head was displayed at the English gate. 


@@@@@


doc= 6281


Copsi, earl of Northumbria (d. 1067), magnate, first appears as the deputy of Tostig, earl of Northumbria (1055-65), and, according to a text on the earls of Northumbria incorporated into the 'Historia regum Anglorum' attributed to Symeon of Durham, was responsible for the government of the earldom. Copsi's origins are obscure but his name (probably the Old Norse Kofsi or Cofsi in Yorkshire 'Domesday Book') and the location of lands granted by him to the church of St Cuthbert suggest that he was a Yorkshire thegn. Symeon of Durham records a gift of several manors in north Yorkshire together with the church of St Germanus at Marske which had been dedicated by AEthelric, bishop of Durham (1042-56). Tostig's relations with members of the comital house of Bamburgh were strained and it is likely that Copsi's gift to St Cuthbert, like those of Tostig and his wife, was designed to bolster support for the regime north of the Tees. Copsi's gift was accompanied by the presentation of a silver cup which, Symeon noted, the church of St Cuthbert retained as a remembrance of the donation. 
Copsi was expelled with Tostig by the Northumbrians in 1065. The twelfth-century source, Gaimar, suggests that in the spring of 1066 Copsi met Tostig at Thanet bringing seventeen ships with him from Orkney. Subsequently they seem to have joined with Harold Hardrada's invasion force and Copsi may have fought with his lord and the Norwegians at the battle of Stamford Bridge on 25 September 1066, although, unlike Tostig and Harald Hardrada, he survived. Copsi made his submission to King William at Barking early in 1067 along with earls Eadwine and Morcar. Morcar had been appointed to the earldom of Northumbria after Tostig's downfall and 'because he was burdened with other matters' (Symeon of Durham, 'Opera', 2.198). Morcar handed control over the north of the earldom (that is the land north of the Tyne), to Osulf, the representative of the native comital house of Bamburgh. On Morcar's arrest by William, Copsi was granted Osulf's earldom and in February 1067 he ventured north and forced Osulf to take refuge in the woods and mountains. There Osulf managed to gather together a band of supporters and they attacked Copsi while he was feasting at the ancient comital manor of Newburn-on-Tyne. Copsi escaped but was trapped in the nearby church (possibly now St Michael's, Newburn). The Northumbrians set fire to the church and when Copsi emerged he was decapitated by Osulf. Copsi's death occurred on 12 March, only five weeks after his appointment to the earldom. The Norman sources, which call him Coxo, suggest that some of Copsi's men had tried to persuade him to abandon his oath of fealty to the Conqueror and that his refusal to do so had driven them into opposing and finally murdering him. For both William of Poitiers and Orderic Vitalis, Copsi was the very model of a faithful vassal, a 'statesmanlike and honest man' (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 2.207), and his death was eloquent testimony of his steadfast loyalty. His career highlights the very real difficulties which the later Anglo-Saxon and early Norman kings experienced in their attempts to govern Northumbria. 


@@@@@


doc= 6282


Coram, Thomas (c.1668-1751), philanthropist, was born in or near Lyme Regis, Dorset, but no baptismal record is extant. His parents were probably John Coram ('bap'. 1629) and his wife, Spes (died 1677), of that town, John Coram being in merchant shipping. Thomas Coram's earliest years can only be conjectured from autobiographical comments in letters written late in life. He wrote that his mother died when he was young and he went to sea in his eleventh year, that his father remarried and moved to Hackney, and that he, Thomas, was later apprenticed by his father to a Thames-side shipwright. 
In 1691-2 Coram was engaged by the government to audit the tonnage of troop and supply transports to Ireland. His abilities attracted the attention of London merchants, who in spring 1694 put him in charge of an enterprise to establish a new shipyard in Boston, Massachusetts. New England was a promising area at that time for a young man of obscure antecedents, but Coram was a staunch Anglican in a puritan colony. For the next ten years he built ships in Boston and Taunton, but attracted enemies, resulting in prolonged litigation and an attempt on his life. On 27 June 1700 he married Eunice Wait 
(Wayte; 1677-1740)
of Boston. Coram claimed it was a happy marriage, though apparently childless, and his letters suggest loving relationships with the Wait family. 
Coram's ten-year sojourn in New England made him an ardent mercantilist. His first project on his return to England in 1704 was to lobby for an act to encourage the importation of naval stores from North America in order to reduce dependence on Scandinavia (3 & 4 Anne c. 10). Thereafter he appears to have commanded merchant ships during the War of the Spanish Succession, acquiring the title of captain in consequence. His interest in the North American colonies led him to identify corrupt practices in contracting naval stores from there, and Boston harbour's need for a lighthouse. In 1712 he was elected to a role in a private corporation, Trinity House, Deptford, which combined public responsibilities with charitable purposes. His election signified Coram's growing reputation as a public servant knowledgeable in naval affairs. 
After the treaty of Utrecht (1713) Coram unsuccessfully promoted the colonization of lands in what later became upper Maine. Using discharged soldiers, Coram believed the colony could strengthen a vulnerable frontier and provide hemp and timber for the Royal Navy. In 1719 he visited Hanover to scout for timber. His ship, the 'Seaflower', fell victim to German wreckers out of Cuxhaven; none the less he was able to effect changes in regulations that allowed for the importation of timber from Germany for use by the navy. 
While living at Rotherhithe and pursuing his business interests in London, Coram regularly travelled a route on which he saw abandoned children, some dead, others dying. In 1722, motivated by an enduring blend of Christian benevolence, practical morality, and civic spirit, he decided to take action. Inspired by examples of foundling hospitals on the continent, he advocated one for London. However, failure attended these first efforts. In February 1727 he sought employment by the privy council, and his appeal was forwarded to the Admiralty. It is uncertain whether he was given a sinecure, but he used the Navy Office for his letters. While Coram is now best-known for the Foundling Hospital project, during the 1720s he continued to be interested in colonization ventures north of Massachusetts, at various times in the region of Maine, and later in Nova Scotia; these attracted both considerable support and opposition, the latter from those with prior economic interests there. With the support of Thomas Bray, with whom the Corams for a time lived, Coram also turned his attention to additional philanthropic ventures, including missionary work in North America, the development of parochial libraries there, aid for imprisoned debtors, and a colonial programme in the region of the Savannah River, in what became the royal colony of Georgia. 
In 1732 Coram assisted the hatters of London to obtain protection for their industry (5 Geo. II, c. 22) and declined recompense beyond a hat. In the same year he became a trustee for the new colony of Georgia, incorporated by royal charter, and thereupon took an active role in raising funds and seeing off colonists at Gravesend and Dover ['see 'Trustees for establishing the colony of Georgia in America]. In 1734 he fell foul of the colony's founder, James Oglethorpe, and his supporters, primarily over his opposition to restrictions enacted to deny the right of female inheritance in the colony. He publicized his opposition, was cut by his opponents, and ceased an active role in the colony's future. Yet by this time Coram had acquired a reputation for knowledge of colonial affairs. In 1735 Horace Walpole wrote to his brother Robert, the prime minister, that Coram was the 'honestest, the most disinterested, & the most knowing person about the plantations I ever talked with' (W. Coxe, 'Memoirs of the Life and Administration of Sir Robert Walpole', 1798, 3.243). 
Coram had by now a wide set of acquaintances, experience in petitions, and persistence, but his efforts to promote a foundling hospital initially attracted only modest interest, and opposition from those who believed a hospital would increase illegitimate births. Moreover Coram, the promoter, was poorly educated, relatively rough-mannered, advanced in years, and lacked a patron, as well as wealth and pedigree. The turning point in his campaign was the 'ladies petition' of 1729, signed by peeresses, and the patronage of Queen Caroline. Coram's comment on the men who had been initially apathetic was that he might as well have asked them to 'putt down their Breeches and present their Backsides to the King and Queen' (Coram to Colman, 22 Sept 1738, 'Letters of Thomas Coram', 43). The saltiness and candour of Coram's language, offensive to some, was a thread throughout his long career, contributing to litigation in New England and his eventual ostracism by the other governors of the Foundling Hospital. 
Coram's petitions came before the king in council on 21 July 1737. A committee of the privy council was charged to consider, and Coram was given the responsibility for finding the first governors. He recommended 375 individuals, approximately half of whom he personally approached, his two criteria for selection being wealth and influence. Of the governors 89 were peers, 35 country gentlemen, 66 merchants, and 72 MPs. In addition Coram was required to raise funds to cover costs. The Foundling Hospital charter was signed by the king on 14 August 1739, and the first meeting of the governors was held at Somerset House that November. Coram scouted sites for the hospital, designed a corporate seal, researched foundling hospitals on the continent, and inspected temporary quarters in Hatton Garden. At that site the hospital opened its doors on 25 March 1741. Later that year irregularities at the hospital were aired publicly and Coram was implicated in having been indiscreet in his criticisms. Details are murky, but Coram's active participation in the hospital's governance ended in the spring of 1742. The new purpose-built hospital, at Lamb's Conduit Fields, began to receive children on 1 October 1745. 
In his last years Coram witnessed a number of other successes: the lighthouse for Boston harbour was built, the Georgia trustees decided to permit female inheritance, and a civilian settlement was established in Nova Scotia. In addition the London hospital prospered, not only as a home for foundlings but as a centre for the capital's fashionable society, who combined benevolent gestures with an enjoyment of art works donated by leading British artists including William Hogarth, Francis Hayman, and Joseph Highmore, and the attendance (from 1750) of annual concerts organized by George Frideric Handel (like Hogarth, a hospital governor). In mid-July 1740 Coram's wife died, but Coram remained active to the end. Although heavy-set, he ate and slept well and could walk 10 to 12 miles in a day. He retained his interest in philanthropies even though his earlier causes were now the work of others. William Hogarth's oil on canvas portrait of Coram (1740), replete with symbols of his mercantilist and philanthropic interests, shows a man with natural, flowing white hair, ruddy cheeks, rugged features, and purposeful eyes. He had made his living building ships and transporting naval stores, but he had laid nothing aside for his later years. In 1749 his supporters raised a subscription for his maintenance. 
Alongside his successes Coram also faced the failure of several projects, among them a refuge for impoverished New Englanders stranded in London, a hostel for vagrants, a foundling hospital for Westminster, and an Anglican college in Massachusetts. One of his last efforts was a scheme -- in tune with his latitudinarian and patriotic ethos of philanthropy -- to promote the education of Native American girls as a means of spreading Christianity and strengthening the bonds of empire. He died, aged about eighty-three, at his lodgings on Spur Street, off Leicester Square, London, on 29 March 1751, and in accordance with his wishes he was buried, on 3 April, in the vault under the Foundling Hospital chapel. 
If the oft-told story is true that Coram sat in the Foundling Hospital arcade in his last years distributing gingerbread to the children, it was a momentary rest from more active projects. His greatest achievement was to provide the template for eighteenth-century philanthropy of a secular foundation modelled on the joint-stock company, of which the Foundling Hospital was the first and finest expression. 


@@@@@


doc= 6283


Corbaux, Marie Francoise Catherine Doetter (1812-1883), painter and biblical critic, was the daughter of the statistician and mathematician Francis Corbaux FRS ('c'.1769-1843), an Englishman who lived much abroad. Her sister, Louisa Corbaux ('b'. 1808), was also an artist. In 1827 her father's health was affected by financial losses and she immediately turned her early artistic talent to lucrative purpose. As women were not admitted to the Royal Academy Schools at this time (an exclusion which she campaigned to remove), and probably lacking funds for a private master, she taught herself by copying works in the National Gallery and the British Institution. She exhibited forty-eight works at the Society of British Artists (1828-40), eighty-six at the Royal Academy (1829-54), fifteen at the British Institution (1830-41), seven at the Royal Manchester Institution (1830-45), twenty-one at the Liverpool Academy (1832-54) and thirty-eight at the New Society of Painters in Water-Colour (1832-54); she was also represented by two works at the Paris Universal Exhibition in 1855. Most of her paintings were miniature portraits -- on which she relied initially for her living -- and larger figure compositions in watercolour. In the latter she favoured female subjects and, specifically, during the 1830s and early 1840s, literary heroines in emotional scenes from the works of Shakespeare, Scott, Byron, Letitia Elizabeth Landon, Felicia Hemans, and Caroline Norton. 
In the late 1840s and early 1850s Corbaux turned increasingly to the 'Bible' as a source, depicting Naomi, Ruth, Leah, Rachel, Hagar, Hannah, and Miriam. The 'Bible' was also the subject of her contributions to periodicals during this period. One series, called 'Letters on the physical geography of the Exodus', appeared in 'The Athenaeum' and another, 'The Rephaim', giving the history of this nation, in the 'Journal of Sacred Literature'. In addition she wrote an introduction to 'The Exodus Papyri' (1855) by D. I. Heath. 
Recognition came early: between 1827 and 1830 Corbaux was awarded five medals by the Society of Arts, including the large silver medal (1827) and the gold Isis medal (1830) for original miniature portraits, and the large silver Isis medal for an original historical composition in watercolour (1829). She was elected an honorary member of the Society of British Artists in 1830 and a member of the New Society of Painters in Water-Colour in 1839. A number of her pictures were engraved: for 'The Keepsake' (1834, 1839, 1844), 'Heath's New Gallery of British Engravings' by C. Heath (1846) and 'Heath's Book of Beauty' (1843), and for the almanac 'Emleny' (1839), published in Budapest. In addition she designed the illustrations in 'Finden's Byron Beauties' (1836), Thomas Moore's 'Pearls of the East, or, Beauties from Lalla Rookh' (1837), and J. C. von Schmid's 'Cousin Natalia's Tales' (1841). She herself lithographed her portrait of the opera singer Emma Albertazzi (exh. Society of British Artists, 1838; impression British Museum, London). Her exhibits were regularly mentioned in periodicals such as 'The Athenaeum', 'The Spectator', the 'Art Union' and the 'Art Journal'. In 1837 'The Spectator' commented that: 'Miss Corbaux is one of the first paintresses of the day: she excels both in oil and watercolours, and her power in watercolour painting especially is very great: she designs with taste and skill, paints with great depth and brilliancy of colouring, and has a truly intellectual feeling for her art. (18 Feb 1837, 164)' In 1871 she received a civil-list pension of $50. 
Corbaux and her sister, Louisa, often exhibited from the same London addresses: from 5 Hercules Buildings, Lambeth, between 1828 and 1837, and from 59 Upper Norton Street, Portland Place, between 1839 and 1851. After a long illness she died, unmarried, at her home, 2 Lansdowne Terrace, East Hove, Sussex, on 1 February 1883. 


@@@@@


doc= 6284


Corbeil, William de (d. 1136), archbishop of Canterbury, was probably born in Corbeil, a small town on the Seine a little way upstream from Paris, now absorbed in Evry Corbeil-Essonnes. He could have been born about 1070, in the reign of Philippe I of France. Nothing is known about his parents or upbringing, but two brothers, Ranulf and Helgot, appear much later in his company. 
William de Corbeil first emerges in 1104 as a clerk of Ranulf Flambard, bishop of Durham and previously William Rufus's factotum, at the inspection of the 'incorrupt' body of St Cuthbert on 24 August before its translation to a new tomb in the almost completed new cathedral. He could have attached himself to Flambard in 1101, when the bishop returned from exile in Normandy. And after Henry I had restored to the bishop the royal free chapel of St Martin, Dover -- a secular college -- Flambard granted William a canonry in it, worth, possibly, $70 a year. 
At some point William transferred his allegiance to Canterbury. Symeon of Durham, who admired the clerk, remarks that he had been in frequent and familiar contact with Archbishop Anselm, a relationship that unless formed abroad can be dated to 1107-9. William's desertion of Durham, however, may have been connected with a visit he made to the famous school of Laon between 1107 and 1112, when Waldric, formerly King Henry's chancellor, was bishop. According to the Laon account of a begging tour made by a party of its canons probably in 1123, these were warmly welcomed at Canterbury and lodged in St Augustine's Abbey by Archbishop William, a very old friend, who a good time before, while he was tutoring the sons of Ralph, King Henry's chancellor, had stayed for many days in the bishop's palace at Laon so as to attend Master Anselm's lectures. Ralph was indeed royal chancellor in succession to Waldric; but it would simplify the story if the boys' father was Ranulf Flambard. While still engaged in his studies the clerk had had an influential religious experience. When lying desperately ill in a house in Dover, he had a vision of being attacked by two successive mobs of devils and being rescued by the Virgin Mary, with the help of the archangels Michael, Gabriel, and Raphael. This, he explained some time between 1116 and 1120 to Alexander, the Canterbury monk who replaced Eadmer as Anselm's intimate and recorder of his master's words, made him, when already thinking of abandoning the secular life, even more devout. Every day, while a student, he recited the little office of Our Lady, and later he celebrated masses 'de angelis' (votive masses for a special, private intention) frequently, and with great devotion. 
By 1116 William had entered the service of Anselm's successor as archbishop, the nobly born Ralph d'Escures, whom he had probably first met at the Durham ceremonies in 1104, when Ralph was the exiled abbot of Sees. Ralph took William with him on his calamitous and fruitless journey to Rome of 1116-17 concerning the consecration of Thurstan, archbishop-elect of York. A week's stay at Sutri as the guests of Henry I's son-in-law, the emperor Heinrich V, may have been the only consolation for the many disasters which could have finally decided the clerk to enter a religious order. Some time in 1118 he became a regular canon at Holy Trinity Priory, Aldgate, in London, founded in 1107-8, where later he was followed by one of his brothers. In 1121 Richard de Belmeis, bishop of London (died 1127), founded an Augustinian priory at St Osyth in Essex, and appointed William as its first prior; and when Ralph d'Escures died on 20 October 1122, William was eventually, and surprisingly, elected in his place. 
Episcopal elections were traditionally held in the royal court, according to a procedure regulated since 1107 by the 'compromise of Bec', and since 1122 influenced by the imperial concordat of Worms. Henry summoned a traditional 'national' council to Gloucester for the beginning of February 1123. As well as the barons and royal servants, the bishops and abbots were there in force -- even Thurstan of York was present. Since the Christ Church monks claimed that they had the sole right to elect their archiepiscopal abbot and were determined to get a monk, while a powerful party among the bishops, led by Roger, bishop of Salisbury, and including Richard of London, was implacably opposed to both propositions, and insisted that the diocesan bishops should have a say in the choice of their metropolitan, the two days' debate was lively, with the king supporting the bishops and the barons the monks. 
In the end Henry secured a compromise: the monks could choose from four clerks put forward by the bishops. On 4 February, most reluctantly, the monks opted for the one they considered the least unsuitable. William, although not a monk, was at least a regular canon. And Symeon of Durham claims that the Canterbury monks, because of William's familiarity with Anselm, knew him to be a good and well educated man. The king, too, was assured by Thurstan of York and Athelwold, prior of Nostell, Yorkshire, that William was indeed a most suitable candidate, a man distinguished by his scholarship, good character, and religion. 
William inherited a dispute between the metropolitans of Canterbury and York over primacy and some related matters with which he was already familiar. The basic papal policy on this subject was to keep the two metropolitans in equilibrium. By subjecting the Scottish bishops to York the two provinces had been made geographically equal, and by confirming similar privileges to both archbishops the primacy was being reduced to a title of honour. English kings seem to have had no fixed views on the matter. In 1123 Thurstan's long-standing refusal to make a profession of obedience to Canterbury was punished by the substitution of William Giffard of Winchester as William's consecrator at Canterbury on 18 February. The feud thus rekindled was to last until William's death. In 1123 both archbishops took their cases to Rome. William sought a pallium, Thurstan the quashing of William's election on the grounds of various irregularities, including the rejection of his services. In the end, on 21 May, Calixtus II -- bowing to the pressure of Henry I and the emperor Heinrich V, with both of whom, because of recent concordats, he wished to remain on good terms -- confirmed William's election and granted him the pallium. But, after a dossier of forged papal privileges produced by Canterbury had been laughed out of court, the matter of the primacy was, as usual, deferred. 
In 1125 Calixtus's successor, Honorius II, sent to England a legate, the formidable cardinal-priest Giovanni da Crema, who in April 1121 had commanded the papal forces at the siege of Sutri, to deal with all the English problems. And in the autumn in Normandy king and legate produced a radical compromise which both archbishops were ordered to accept. Canterbury should surrender to York the bishoprics of Chester, Bangor, and the unnamed diocese of St Asaph; Thurstan should accept Canterbury's primacy verbally, and his successor should make a written submission. But when the legate and the parties appeared before Honorius at Rome, William objected to the terms, and the pope, who cared only for his own primacy, substituted his own solution, which probably also suited the king. At the end of the year he made William his vicar and legate in England (within which was comprised Wales) and Scotland, thus giving him a personal superiority dependent solely on papal grant. The office could be revoked at will, and lapsed automatically on the grantor's death. William's legation would subsequently be in abeyance for two years after Honorius died in 1130. But since William had not abandoned his claim to the primacy and its associated privileges, he had not suffered final defeat. And Thurstan remained defiant. At the king's Christmas court at Windsor in 1126, York not only claimed the right to crown Henry, but also had his cross carried before him in the royal chapel. His claim, however, was unanimously rejected, and his cross-bearer and cross were ejected from the chapel. Subsequently both parties coexisted uneasily. 
On his return from his fairly successful visit to Rome in 1123, William was enthroned, wearing his pallium, at Canterbury on 22 July. And on the same day he performed as metropolitan his first consecration of a bishop -- Alexander to Lincoln. He and Thurstan had arrived too late at Rome to attend Calixtus's Lateran Council (18-27 March), which signalled the renewal of the papal drive for reform. But in 1125 Giovanni da Crema was commissioned by Honorius not only to settle the Canterbury-York dispute but also to publicize the relevant conciliar decrees. On Easter day, to demonstrate his authority, he celebrated high mass in Canterbury Cathedral. The monks regarded William's demotion as a punishment for their having a clerk rather than a monk as archbishop, but observed scornfully that the legate arrayed himself in full pontificals although he was merely a cardinal-priest. Then, after making a widespread visitation of the kingdom, on 8 September Giovanni held a council at Westminster, and in the presence of both archbishops, twenty bishops, and some forty abbots promulgated seventeen canons, mostly based on the First Lateran Council. Those that caused most alarm in the audience were the condemnation of any hereditary claim to a father's church, prebend, or benefice (canon no. 5), and the prohibition of the presence of any woman, except a permitted relation, in a clerical household (canon no. 13). 
In 1127 William, fresh from his visit to Honorius II and himself a papal legate, took up the cause. He was clearly an enthusiastic reformer. On 13-16 May he held at Westminster a legatine council to which Thurstan refused to go, and to which Ranulf Flambard, taken ill, sent proctors. In a crowded and disorderly assembly eleven canons were issued. The decree not only that priests, deacons, subdeacons, and all canons who refused to dismiss their wives or concubines were to be degraded and deprived of their benefices (canon no. 5), but also that their women should be expelled from the parish (unless they had contracted a lawful marriage), judged by the bishop, and, in the last resort, condemned to slavery (canon no. 6), was received with hostility. And two years later, in October 1129, King Henry presided over a national council at Westminster, attended by both archbishops, at which he added his authority to the prohibition of clerical wives. They were all to be dismissed by 30 November. William's gullibility in conceding justice in this matter to the king, who simply allowed unchaste priests to keep their women at the cost of a fine to the royal exchequer, was blamed by the chronicler Henry, archdeacon of Huntingdon. 
William was a disciplinarian, and it would seem that he stood up for his rights within his own province. He treated the Welsh bishops just like the English. In 1124 he and Bishop Alexander of Lincoln quarrelled, apparently over Canterbury's claim to a peculiar in the latter's diocese known later as the deanery of Risborough, Oxfordshire; and they crossed to Normandy to litigate before the king. This discord probably contributed to the disparaging verdict pronounced on the archbishop by Henry of Huntingdon, in Alexander's diocese, in his 'Epistola de contemptu mundi': 'No one can sing his praises because there's nothing to sing about' (Huntingdon, 'Historia Anglorum', 608-9). But in his own diocese William was clearly an active pastor; and he sometimes used Bernard of St David's as a suffragan. An Augustinian canon himself, he was particularly interested in the reformation of collegiate churches, and he looked askance at Benedictine communities. His relations with his own chapter, although he was a doughty champion of Canterbury's rights, were probably cool. But he received the dedication of a spiritual letter from Elmer, who became prior of Christ Church in 1128, with whom he was obviously on excellent terms. He succeeded, if only with difficulty, in getting a profession of obedience from Hugh of Trottiscliffe, in 1126 elected abbot of St Augustine's, Canterbury, and he seems to have restored the decayed nunnery at Minster in Sheppey. Moreover he put regular canons into St Gregory's outside Northgate, Canterbury. 
In his last years William attempted to reform St Martin's, Dover, in which he himself had held a canonry, a church that the king had granted to the archbishop and church of Canterbury on the occasion of the cathedral's dedication in 1130. William built a fine new church outside Dover and, when dying, sent bishops John of Rochester and Bernard of St David's, Helewise, archdeacon of Canterbury, and Elmer, prior of Christ Church, to conduct an advance party of regular canons drawn from Merton Priory into the church. But they were intercepted by the insubordinate Christ Church sub-prior, Jeremiah, who forbade the canons' entry, on the grounds that St Martin's belonged to the monks, not the archbishop, and appealed to Rome. William's agents gave way; and as soon as the archbishop died, the monks, taking sweet revenge, sent twelve of their own number to colonize Dover. 
Dover was only one of William's building works. After King Henry had granted him Rochester Castle he improved it by constructing what Gervase of Canterbury described as a remarkable keep. And, taking over from Bishop Ernulf of Rochester, who died in 1124, he brought both Canterbury and Rochester cathedrals to completion. On Sunday 4 May 1130, with the king and queen and David, king of Scots, among the large and distinguished congregation, he dedicated his own cathedral. The splendour of the ceremony, claimed the monk Gervase, was without equal since the dedication of King Solomon's temple. And on the following day William consecrated Rochester Cathedral. 
King Henry died in Normandy on 1 December 1135, and was buried by William on 4 January following in the late king's foundation at Reading. Meanwhile the part he played in the succession of Henry's nephew, Stephen, inflicted serious damage on William's reputation. On 1 January 1127 he had sworn with the other bishops and abbots and the barons to acknowledge Henry's daughter, the Empress Matilda, as the heir to the throne. But in 1135, after some prevarication and debate, perhaps because he was overborne by that powerful pair of bishops, Henry of Winchester and Roger of Salisbury, William accepted Stephen's 'coup d'etat' and, together with them, crowned him at Westminster, probably on 22 December. He secured, however, from the new king two important concessions in writing: the coronation charter, which confirmed the rights of the king's barons and vassals, and the Oxford charter of April 1136, which elaborated Henry I's coronation charter of 1100, especially as regards the freedom of the church. That Stephen soon showed little respect for ecclesiastical liberties does not diminish the value of these royal undertakings. One more step had been taken on the road to 'Magna Carta'. 
William did not long survive Henry I. While attempting to complete his reform of St Martin's, Dover, he fell seriously ill at his manor of Mortlake, Surrey, and, deeply chagrined by the opposition of his monks, had himself carried to Canterbury. It was probably there that he died, on 21 November 1136; he was buried in the north transept of his cathedral. His conduct throughout his career had been mostly admirable, and his achievements were by no means negligible. He was a devout man, in the circle that fostered the cult of the Virgin Mary; and it was at the Council of Westminster in 1129 that the feast of the Immaculate Conception was generally authorized. He was a zealous reformer and his three visits to Rome were exceptional. William of Malmesbury considered him a courteous man, temperate in behaviour, and contrasted his sobriety with the flamboyance of the 'modern' bishop. But most of the contemporary chroniclers were prejudiced against him, and grudging in their tributes. His enacted reforms were unpopular. The author of 'Gesta Stephani', although allowing him the countenance of a dove and the dress of a monk, accused him of hoarding money. Monastic writers could not accept that a clerk or canon could be a proper archbishop of Canterbury; and those who supported the excluded Matilda, and later her son, Henry II, branded him a perjurer and a traitor. That he should, nevertheless, have been regarded favourably by Hugh the Chanter of York, and generally held to be basically a decent and religious man, must be considered a remarkable tribute. 


@@@@@


doc= 6285


Corbet, Clement (c.1576-1652), civil lawyer, was the sixth of eight sons of Sir Miles Corbet (died 1607) of Sprowston and his first wife, Katherine, daughter of Sir Christopher Heydon. His father was high sheriff of Norfolk in 1591 and was knighted at the sacking of Cadiz in 1596. Corbet was admitted a scholar of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, on 7 December 1592, took the degree of LLB in 1598, held a fellowship at his college from 1598 to 1611, and was created LLD in 1605. In May 1607 Corbet was appointed professor of law at Gresham College, London, and occupied that chair until November 1613. He was already chancellor of the diocese of Chichester when he became master of Trinity Hall in October 1611 at the early age of about thirty-five, immediately after the death of John Cowell. On 9 May 1612 Corbet was admitted a member of the College of Advocates at Doctors' Commons. He was vice-chancellor of Cambridge University in 1613-14. 
In 1613 Corbet married Elizabeth Kemp (died 1644), through whom he held Saham-Toney manor, Norfolk; they raised a family, of whom a son, Samuel, and at least four daughters survived him. The focus of Corbet's life moved to Norfolk in 1624 when he became registrar of audience and consistory courts at Norwich, continuing to adjudicate on civil litigation in the consistory court even after the abolition of the episcopacy in 1646. In 1625 he resigned the mastership of Trinity Hall and leased a house in the precincts of Norwich Cathedral, where he was appointed vicar-general and principal official to Matthew Wren, bishop of Norwich. Corbet sought a uniform and orthodox church, to which end he encouraged Wren to be more severe with the puritans. He died on 28 May 1652 and was buried in the chancel of Belaugh church, Norfolk. Samuel erected a monument to his parents, describing his father as 'a hammer of schism', but he was otherwise not a conspicuous figure. 


@@@@@


doc= 6286


Corbet, Edward (1601x3-1658), Church of England clergyman, was born at Pontesbury in Shropshire; his parents' names are unknown. He matriculated at Merton College, Oxford, on 16 November 1621, when he was said to be aged nineteen, graduated BA on 4 December 1622, was made a fellow in 1624, and proceeded MA on 25 June 1628. He became proctor on 4 April 1638. In the late 1630s he distinguished himself at Merton, where he became sub-warden under Sir Nathanael Brent, by his resistance to the innovations of Archbishop Laud. In particular, Corbet consistently refused to bow before the communion table. 
Corbet, who like Brent was absent from Merton by the time the king arrived in Oxford in 1642, was chosen as a member of the Westminster assembly of divines and as a parliamentary preacher. On 28 December 1642 he preached before the Commons a sermon entitled 'God's Providence' (1643), which demonstrates his speculative approach to theology. When Isaac Bargrave died in January 1643 the rectory at Chartham, Kent, was left vacant, but Laud, who at that time was in the Tower, refused to grant Corbet the living. In the resulting dispute parliament bypassed Laud's authority and instituted Corbet in the rectory by ordinance in May. The next month, citing Corbet's case, parliament sequestered Laud's 'estate' pending the resolution of the charges against him. Like Brent, Corbet subsequently gave evidence at Laud's trial, detailing newly erected crucifixes as well as the command to bow upon entering the chapel at Merton. 
Corbet continued at Chartham until 1646 when he returned to Oxford as one of the seven ministers appointed by parliament to preach royalist scholars into obedience, an assignment he found little to his liking. He was also elected one of the visitors of the university, 'yet seldom or never sat among them' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 2.117). In January 1648 Corbet was installed as public orator and canon of the second stall in Christ Church, in place of Henry Hammond, who had been ejected by the visitors, but being 'a person of conscience and honesty' (ibid.), he resigned both places the following August. On 12 April 1648 he proceeded DD. On the death of Thomas Soame, Corbet was presented to the valuable rectory of Great Hasely, near Oxford. 
By early 1649 Corbet had married Nathaniel Brent's daughter, Margaret. Together they had three children, Edward (who matriculated at Oxford on 16 November 1666 at the age of seventeen), Martha, and Margaret. His wife, Margaret, died in 1657, 'little above 28 years of age' and was described by Henry Wilkinson in his funeral sermon for her as both loving and wise. Corbet himself died in London on 5 January 1658 aged about fifty-five. He was buried on 14 January in the chancel of Great Hasely, near his wife, having requested that John Conant, rector of Exeter College, preach his funeral sermon. By his will he bequeathed books to the Bodleian Library and libraries of Merton College and Shrewsbury School, and left the education of his son to Henry Wilkinson and of his daughters to his cousin Elizabeth, wife of Sir Francis Butler of Hertford. 


@@@@@


doc= 6287


Corbet, John (1603-1641), religious polemicist and Church of Scotland and Church of Ireland minister, was probably born in the Gorbals, Glasgow, the son of William Corbet, a portioner of the city. He graduated MA from Glasgow University in 1623, and as 'a Person of Good learning' was subsequently employed as a schoolmaster at Renfrew ('Fasti Scot.', 3.331). He was ordained as minister of Bonhill, Dunbartonshire, in 1637 but his tenure was destined to be both brief and racked with controversy. As a supporter of episcopacy he refused to acknowledge the authority of the general assembly of 1638 and aroused the suspicion and animosity of the solidly presbyterian synod of Dumbarton. After vacillating, in an attempt to retain his position, he finally refused to subscribe to the assembly's declaration against the bishops and fled to Ireland, leaving behind him his heavily pregnant wife and four young children to follow later. In his absence he was deposed from the ministry on 16 April 1639. 
Once settled in Dublin, Corbet found powerful patrons in the form of John Bramhall, bishop of Derry, and Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford. Indeed, it was to this latter figure that he dedicated his pamphlet 'The Ungirding of the Scottish Armour' (1639). This work was intended as a direct, and highly critical, response to the Revd Alexander Henderson's 'Instructions for Defensive Arms' (1639). Rejecting both the legality of rebellion against 'great King Charles' and the validity of the national covenant, it attacked 'the Flood of our Scottish Disorders and Uproares', while thoroughly vindicating the role of the episcopate (Corbet, iv, vii). 
Having thus endeared himself to the authorities in Ireland, Corbet appeared to be the ideal candidate to fill the recently vacated, and highly lucrative, post of dean of Raphoe, Donegal. However, this sinecure fell within the gift of Archibald Adair, bishop of Killala, who objected strongly to the scathing language that had been employed in Corbet's anti-Scottish diatribe. As Gilbert Burnet recounted it this resulted in a stormy interview between the two men in which Adair bitterly mocked and reviled his junior, pointing out that in Scottish dialect a Corbet, or Corby, signified a raven and that 'it was an ill bird that defiled its own nest' (Burnet, 109), although John Vesey told it slightly differently. Storming back to Dublin 'full of wrath' Corbet lodged a complaint with Bishop John Bramhall against Adair's language and conduct, which was instrumental in having the latter removed by the high commission from his see (Burnet, 109-12; Reid, 1.262; Vesey, xxiv). 
The following year saw the publication of Corbet's 'The Epistle Congratulatorie of Lysimachus Nicanor of the Society of Jesu, to the Covenanters in Scotland' (1640). In this bitter and 'very smart Book' (Burnet, 109) Corbet upbraided the covenanters and used the character of a fictional Jesuit to express satisfaction at the troubles in Scotland, and on sixteen separate counts, to draw close parallels between the pretended doctrines of the presbyterians and the Society of Jesus. Having been rewarded in 1640 with the ministry of the parishes of Killabin and Ballintubride, in Queen's county, Corbet appears to have been caught unawares by the suddenness and ferocity of the outbreak of the Irish rebellion of October 1641. His house was sacked by the insurgents and, though he sought refuge in the arms of his wife, he was cut to pieces by the blows of two Gaelic swineherds; his wife seems to have survived. 


@@@@@


doc= 6288


Corbet, Sir John, first baronet (bap. 1594, d. 1662), politician, was baptized on 20 May 1594 at Stoke upon Tern, Shropshire, the second son of Richard Corbet (died 'c'.1602) of Stoke upon Tern and his wife, Anne, daughter of Sir Thomas Bromley, lord chancellor from 1579 to 1587. He may have been the John Corbet recorded as graduating BA at Cambridge in 1612 and he was a student at Lincoln's Inn in 1615. The date of his knighthood is not recorded, but he was made a baronet on 19 September 1627. He was a justice of the peace in Shropshire during the 1620s and 1630s. Corbet's family had been a significant presence in the shire since the mid-sixteenth century when his grandfather Reynold Corbet acquired the estates at Stoke and Adderley by marriage to Alice Gratewood, coheir to Sir Rowland Hill. John Corbet succeeded his elder brother, Richard, about 1618 and established his principal residence at Adderley. In 1620 he married Ann (died 1682), daughter of Sir George Mainwaring of Ightfield, Shropshire: they would have ten sons and ten daughters. 
Corbet's main claim to fame was his involvement in two celebrated local disputes during the 1630s. The first of these was a quarrel over honour and precedence with his near neighbour, Robert Needham, second Viscount Kilmorey, of Shavington. Disputes had arisen with Kilmorey's father over rentals, rights of way, and whether the Needhams were entitled to set up seats in the chancel of the parish church at Adderley where Corbet owned the rectory. Corbet was able to obstruct the elder Kilmorey's efforts to have a chapel consecrated for his use at Shavington, and when both received titles in 1627 he contested his claim to local precedence by insisting that 'an English Baronet was as good as an Irish Viscount'. However, the second viscount used his contacts at court to turn the tables when he succeeded his father in November 1631. Suits in king's bench and the court of arches secured his right of way across Corbet's estate and enabled him to go ahead with consecrating his chapel. Corbet attempted to retaliate in 1633 by having one of his servants, an Irish footboy, buried in the chancel at Adderley, immediately adjacent to the tomb of the first viscount. Kilmorey regarded this as a deliberate attempt to bring 'great scandall and disrepute' on 'his name and familie' (Harrod) and immediately appealed to the earl marshal's court where he secured an order to remove the footboy's body. He then pressed home his advantage by obtaining a licence from Archbishop Laud to build his own family chapel adjacent to the chancel at Adderley. Corbet was apparently beaten on all fronts, but the dispute rumbled on and in March 1642 led to an armed affray as Lady Corbet used her servants to deny Kilmorey and his family access to the chapel. The quarrel was finally subsumed in the events of the civil war in which Corbet and Kilmorey took opposite sides. 
The second dispute was over the more public issue of the crown's right to raise fees to pay the muster-master, responsible for training the county militia. At a quarter sessions held at Shrewsbury on 7 April 1635 the grand jury presented these as 'a great grievance and oppression'. Timothy Tourneur, esquire, one of the justices and steward to the county's lord lieutenant, the earl of Bridgewater, immediately rebuked the jury for meddling in matters which did not concern them, whereupon Corbet called for the statute book, asked the clerk of the court to read out the section referring to the petition of right, and attacked Tourneur for trying to prevent the grand jury from carrying out its duty. Corbet's intervention apparently had the support of most of the justices present but the matter was reported to Bridgewater, a privy councillor. Corbet was summoned to London and required to answer for 'making speeches to his Majesties disservice and the animating of others to refuse the payment of the muster master's fee' (Cope). He apparently refused to back down and on 10 June was imprisoned and bound over to appear for trial in Star Chamber. The trial never took place, but he remained in the Fleet prison for six months and was removed from the commission of the peace. He took his revenge in February 1641 when he petitioned against Bridgewater's proceedings in the Long Parliament. In June the Commons declared that imposing the fee for the muster-master was contrary to the petition of right, that Corbet's arrest had been illegal, and that he should receive reparation. In September the Lords took order to proceed with the impeachment, although they did not go through with it. 
Corbet's return as knight of the shire for Shropshire in the Long Parliament was probably a result of the reputation he earned for standing up for the liberties of the subject; but although he sat right through until 1648, when he was one of the members secluded at Pride's Purge, he made little impact on proceedings. In February 1642 he was one of the MPs chosen to conduct negotiations with the king over the militia ordinance and in March he presented a petition from Shropshire before the Commons. At the local level he was nominated as one of the leaders of the parliamentary committee for Shropshire in June 1642 and later on as colonel-general of the forces to be raised there. During July and August he was active in the county attempting to execute the militia ordinance but after this he returned to London, where he appears to have remained for much of the war. He has been identified as working during 1643-5 with 'the middle group' in the Commons and in religious terms he was a presbyterian, being listed as one of the elders for Shropshire. After his seclusion from parliament in December 1648 he took little further role in public affairs. He died in June 1662 and was buried in the chancel of the parish church at Market Drayton, Shropshire. His widow died on 29 October 1682. 


@@@@@


doc= 6289


Corbet, John (bap. 1619, d. 1680), clergyman and ejected minister, was baptized on 14 February 1619 at Holy Trinity, Gloucester, the son of Roger Corbet, a shoemaker of Gloucester. He matriculated from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, in 1636 and graduated BA on 5 July 1639 (in 1658 he supplicated for the degree of BD). In 1640 he was appointed rector of St Mary de Crypt, Gloucester, and he was for two years (1641-3) usher at the attached grammar school, of which his undergraduate contemporary at Magdalen Hall, John Biddle, afterwards imprisoned for his anti-trinitarianism, was then master. When Gloucester was garrisoned by the parliamentarian army Corbet was appointed chaplain to the governor, Colonel Edward Massey. 'Out of abundant respect to my deare native place' and because 'the Action of these times transcends the Barons Warres, and those tedious discords between the House of 'Yorke' and 'Lancaster'', in 1645 he published 'A historicall relation of the military government of Gloucester: from the beginning of the civill warre betweene king and parliament, to the removall of Colonell Massie' (sig. A2'v'). 
On 15 December 1646 Corbet became curate of St James's, Duke's Place, London, but he had given up this post by November 1647. After staying briefly in Bridgwater, Somerset, he was appointed preacher at Chichester Cathedral, Sussex, on 19 September 1648. On 7 May 1656 he became rector of Bramshott, Hampshire. In 1654 he was appointed an assistant to the Sussex commission for approbation of public preachers (or triers), and in 1658 to the Hampshire commission. 
Following the Restoration, in 'The Interest of England in the Matter of Religion' (1660) Corbet argued that 'the Upholding of both Parties by a just and equal Accommodation' is 'more desireable, and more agreeable to the State of 'England', then the absolute Exalting' of either the presbyterians or the episcopalians (title-page). In his reply, 'Interest Mistaken, or, The Holy Cheat' (1661), Roger L'Estrange denounced presbyterianism as a seditious movement acting under 'the Masque of Religion' (title-page). It was this opinion which prevailed, and following the 'Act of Uniformity' in 1662 Corbet gave up a stipend of $200 per annum and left the established church 'to keep the Peace of his Conscience' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.96, para. 206/1). 
Following his ejection Corbet moved to London and 'lived privately, taking no employment till his first wife died' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1265); of this first marriage, nothing is known. He then lived in the house of John Micklethwaite, a future president of the College of Physicians knighted in 1681, serving him as chaplain. In 1664 Corbet was reported to be preaching in Ironmongers Lane and at the Seven Stars, Ludgate Hill. In 1668 he was nominated by Thomas Manton 'in the roome of Mr. [William] Jenkyns' as a delegate in discussions concerning comprehension of nonconformists within the established church (Keeble and Nuttall, letter 760). In the episcopal returns of 1669 he was reported to be preaching at Fernhurst, Sussex, and at Chipping Barnet, Hertfordshire. About this time he married his second wife, Frances (died in or after 1685), a daughter of William Twisse, prolocutor of the Westminster assembly, and he joined the household of Alderman Webb, of Totteridge, Hertfordshire, as his chaplain. 
It may have been Corbet's presence in Totteridge which led Richard Baxter to choose it as his place of residence in the autumn of 1669 following his release from prison that summer. He had first met Corbet in 1642 when he took refuge in Gloucester for three months, and the two became lifelong friends who never had 'one displeasing word' (Baxter, 'Sermon', 27). When, in June 1670, Baxter and his wife, Margaret, took their second, larger, house in Totteridge, Corbet and his wife, Frances, moved in with them, and the two wives became as closely attached as their husbands. 
Corbet left Totteridge early in 1672 when the declaration of indulgence offered the chance for renewed public ministry. 'His old flock at 'Chichester'' invited him to return (Baxter, 'Sermon', 28) and he was licensed there as a presbyterian on 1 May 1672. At some point thereafter he engaged in oral disputation with Peter Gunning, then bishop of Chichester, at which Gunning inveighed against nonconformists as seditious schismatics, without allowing Corbet the right of reply, to the subsequent disapproval of John Tillotson, afterwards archbishop of Canterbury. In a letter to Gunning of 11 December 1679, Baxter recommended to the bishop 'The Kingdom of God among Men' (1671) by 'your old troubled Neighbour Mr. 'Jo. Corbet'', if Gunning would 'better understand us' (Keeble and Nuttall, letter 1037). 
Corbet, like Baxter, was committed to moderation in ecclesiastical affairs and to the incorporation of nonconformity within the established church. He consistently argued that the unity of the catholic Christian church lies in its confession of faith, not in any 'one ritual or set Form of Sacred Office, one policy or model of Rules and Orders', on which the 'New Testament' is silent ('Point of Church-Unity', 20). In his published works he wrote as one 'not eager for any Party,... with charity towards real Christians of all Parties', taking up Baxter's phrase 'meer Christianity' to define this interdenominational faith ('Kingdom of God', sigs. A3-A3'v', A4). In his prefatory epistle to Corbet's posthumous 'An account given of the principles & practices of several nonconformists. Wherein it appears that their religion is no other than what is profest in the Church of England' (1682) Baxter, noting 'the agreement of all here written... with what I have Published', added 'But as we were of one Mind and Heart, our agreement is no wonder' (sig. A2). The 'Account' is a classic defence of the nonconformists' faith as conscientious and practical protestantism, of 'healing principles' and the same 'Catholick Spirit' as the established church (Corbet, 'Account', 23), against caricatures of it as 'a mixture of folly and villany... turbulent and seditious' (ibid., 1). Like Corbet's anonymous 'Discourse of the Religion of England' (1667) and 'The Point of Church-Unity and Schism Discuss'd' (1679), and the tracts in his 'Remains' (1684), the 'Account' is marked by succinctness, lucidity, and accessibility. Baxter, both more prolix and more contentious than Corbet, so valued him as 'one of the most Calm, as well as Judicious Nonconformists' that he submitted the manuscript of his 'Cure of Church Divisions' (1670) to him before publication 'and altered every Word that he wished to be altered' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.72, para. 155). Corbet encouraged Baxter in the composition of his eirenical 'Catholick Theologie' (1675), and Baxter consulted him in the course of negotiations with Tillotson and Edward Stillingfleet in 1675. He described Corbet as 'a Man of extraordinary Judgment, stayedness, moderation, peaceable Principles, and blameless Life, a solid Preacher, well known by his Writings' (ibid., 3.96, para. 206 (1)). These writings included the first volume of John Rushworth's 'Historical Collections' (1659), which was 'much of his Composure' (ibid.), and later his 'Self-Imployment in Secret' (1681), prefaced by John Howe, a collection of Corbet's private meditative and introspective papers, frequently reprinted. Calamy is a partial witness, but his testimony to Corbet is quite exceptional among his accounts of the ejected nonconformist ministers: 'A great Man every way' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.333). 
Corbet made his will in Chichester on 30 January 1679. It mentions property in Chichester and elsewhere in Sussex, and refers to his wife, Frances, his sons John and Samuel, his daughter Susannah, his brother Arthur, and his sister Jane Thomas. Corbet was 'many Years afflicted... with the Stone, which at last was his death' on 26 December 1680, probably in London (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.335). He was buried in St Andrew's, Holborn, London, on 31 December, Baxter preaching the funeral sermon. Following his death his 'Exemplary Wife' lived with Richard and Margaret Baxter as Margaret's companion until the latter's death in June 1681 ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.189, para. 66). In a letter to Richard Baxter of 1 November 1685 Frances Corbet writes that she often thinks to herself 'if it were now with me, as it was in times past, how glad I should be', and she looks forward to 'a safe, and a comfortable death' (Keeble and Nuttall, letter 1154). 


@@@@@


doc= 6290


Corbett, Miles (1594/5-1662), politician and regicide, was probably born in Sprowston, Norfolk, where several generations of the Corbett family are buried, the second son of Sir John Corbett, baronet (died 1628), who married a daughter of Sir Arthur Capel. A pedigree compiled between 1655 and 1659 lists Thomas Corbett, usually referred to as Miles's father, as his great-uncle; Sir Thomas Corbett, Miles's elder brother, was still living in the 1650s. Miles Corbett matriculated as a pensioner at Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1612, and subsequently was admitted to Lincoln's Inn. His father was imprisoned for nearly a year in Westminster gatehouse for refusing to pay or support the collection of the forced loan of 1628: Miles was recorder of, and in 1628 MP for, Great Yarmouth, where he prepared a petition calling for the town to be excused payment of the loan. 
Corbett was elected for Great Yarmouth in the Short and Long parliaments of 1640. Edmund Ludlow praised him for 'joyning constantly with those who most eminently appeared for the cause of God and their country' over thirty-seven years. As a close colleague, Ludlow appears to have had access to Corbett's posthumous 'confession' (Ludlow, 'Voyce', 300). Corbett's opinion of his own diligent and faithful service stemmed from the many committees on which he efficiently served, as did his opponents' accusations of Corbett's arbitrariness, and a posthumous reputation as a cynical self-server. He chaired the committee which prepared a bill against scandalous ministers (22 March 1641), the committee for examinations, and that which drew up charges against Archbishop Laud. In 1644 he was created one of two clerks of the court of wards and, with Robert Goodwin, was granted the registrar's office in chancery in place of Walter Long in 1648. 
Corbett was a target of presbyterian stalwarts who responded to radical Independents who deprecated their commitment to liberties by accusing men like Corbett of arbitrary, self-seeking tactics. Denzil Holles called Corbett's committee for examinations a 'continual horse-fair... even like dooms-day itself, to judge persons of all sorts and sexes' (Holles, 1.265). Corbett was also satirized in 1645 in 'A most learned speech spoken in the House of Commons by Miles Corbet, taken in short hand by his clarkes'. The presbyterians accused Independents of captious proceedings which furnished huge estates, while the latter protested that their constancy had wasted them. 
Corbett was named to the high court of justice to try Charles I, attended one session, and signed Charles's death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. In October 1650 he was appointed one of four civil commissioners in Ireland, landing in Waterford in late 1650. A carefully worded letter to the commanders in Ireland presented Cromwell's assumption of power in 1653 as a sign of God's displeasure at the progress of his reformation, but Corbett kept his place under the protectorate. Appointed to the council in Ireland in August 1654, he opposed Irish elections that year, claiming unsettled military and climatic conditions. As a member of the council he was appointed one of its commissioners to hear and determine cases of proposed transplantation to Connaught. In July 1655 he was created chief baron of the exchequer of Ireland. 
Corbett's religious stance was shaped as one of a group of gentlemen at the inns of court influenced by the preaching of Preston and Ussher, and he was a particular friend of the Independent divine William Bridge. His extant professions, albeit composed shortly before his death, testified to his submission to providence, citing it as the key to his political actions. As an Irish commissioner he tried to use calls for days of humiliation to rally the godly, warning that the Lord should not find any 'beateing his fellow servants' (J. Mayer, 'Inedited letters of Cromwell, Colonel Jones, Bradshaw and other regicides', 'Transactions of the Lancashire and Cheshire Historic Society', new ser., 1861, 239-41, 241-3, 258-60). 
Under the restored Rump, Corbett regained the post of Irish commissioner, managing the affairs of the army, and conducting a campaign described by Clarendon as the systematic replacement of presbyterians. Yet men such as Corbett were 'odious to the army as well to the people' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 213), enabling presbyterians and royalists to move against them. In December 1659 (along with Ludlow and his fellow commissioners Jones and Tomlinson) Corbett was impeached by Sir Charles Coote, president of Connaught, for maintaining in Ireland the interest of the republican party in England. 
Corbett was returned for Great Yarmouth for the Convention Parliament in 1660, but lost his place in a double return. He then fled to the Netherlands, where he was betrayed by Sir George Downing, later expressing his bitterness towards a state supposedly sympathetic to the English republic. He was imprisoned in the Tower, dragged on a sledge to Tyburn, one of nine regicides to be partially hanged, disembowelled, and quartered and died, aged sixty-seven, on 19 April 1662, 'very cheerfully' and unrepentant (Pepys, 3.66). He described himself as grey-haired and, while escaping most scabrous, anti-Rump satire, was deemed 'bull-headed, splay-footed, bacon-faced Corbet' ('Lucifer's Lifeguard', 1662). He was close to his wife, Mary, who survived him, and had several children including a son, John, to whom he wrote the day before his death that he bequeathed him his cause and his faith, but no estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 6291


Corbet, Reynold (c.1510-1566), judge, was the third son of Sir Robert Corbet (died 1513) of Moreton Corbet, Shropshire, and Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Henry Vernon of Haddon, Derbyshire. The Middle Temple records no longer exist for most of the period of his membership, but he must have been admitted in the early 1530s and he became a bencher in 1552. Like Brooke, Dyer, and a number of other judicial contemporaries, he was trained as a pupil in the Middle Temple office of John Jenour. His reading in Lent 1552, on offices before escheators, was attended by Chief Justice Mountagu and three future chief justices (Serjeant Saunders, Brooke, and Dyer). Already as a junior barrister he had served as member of parliament (first for Wenlock, in 1542, and then for Shrewsbury), and had become recorder of Shrewsbury in 1547. He was also a justice of the peace for Shropshire. 
At an unknown date Corbet married Alice, the daughter of John Gratewood of Wollerton, Shropshire. In 1553 he became a member of the council in the marches, and in 1558 a judge on the Anglesey circuit; soon after that he received a serjeant's writ, and was created at the general call in April 1559. On 16 October 1559 he was appointed a puisne justice of the queen's bench, and sat there for seven years. Dyer came close to accusing him of partiality in 1560 when, in the case of Lord Powis, he was the only judge supporting the plaintiff, Vernon, a member of his mother's family. He died on 19 November 1566, and was buried according to his testamentary directions at Stoke upon Tern, Shropshire, where there is an alabaster effigy in judicial robes, with his wife and children; around his shield of arms is a ribbon with the motto 'Corona lege fulcitur' ('The crown is secured by the law'). His opinion in 'Stowell v. Lord Zouche' had the strange distinction of being reported posthumously by Plowden; although he died before he was able to deliver it in court, an autograph draft was found in his study. 
By his will, made at Stoke on 26 August 1566, Corbet made Alice his sole executor, and appointed as one of his overseers his nephew Sir Andrew Corbet (died 1578), barrister of the Middle Temple and vice-president of the council in the marches. Though seated at Stoke, he also had property in Cheshire and Staffordshire. He left six sons and five daughters. His grandson Sir John Corbet, the politician, was created a baronet in 1627; the title became extinct in 1750. 


@@@@@


doc= 6292


Corbett, Richard (1582-1635), bishop of Oxford and of Norwich, and poet, was born at Ewell, Surrey, the son of Vincent Corbett (died 1619), a nurseryman at Whitton, near Twickenham, and his wife, Benet (died 1634). He was educated at Westminster School before going up to Broadgates Hall, Oxford, in 1598. Later that year he was elected a student at Christ Church, where he graduated BA on 20 June 1602 and proceeded MA on 9 June 1605. In 1612 he was senior student at Christ Church and served as junior proctor, pronouncing funeral orations in the university for both Prince Henry and Thomas Bodley. On 26 March 1613, in defiance of the canons of 1604, he was ordained deacon and made priest on the same day by John Bridges and at much the same time he identified himself in Christ Church with the emerging anti-Calvinists in his Passion Sunday sermon for 1613 when he 'insisted upon the Article of Christ's descending into Hell, and therein grated upon Calvin's manifest perverting of the true sense and meaning of it' (P. Heylin, 'Cyprianus Anglicus', 1668, 68). In 1616 he was recommended for election to the projected Chelsea College. For his Oxford BD on 8 May 1617 he defended the tenet that sacraments do not confer grace 'ex opere operato', a discussion of the possible misinterpretation arising from article 30 of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'; he proceeded DD on the same day. In 1618 Corbett left Oxford for a tour of France, described in a letter to his friend and student contemporary at Christ Church, Sir Thomas Aylesbury, and the following year he inherited some landed property in the City of London after his father's death. 
It was in 1620, however, that Corbett's ecclesiastical career began to gather momentum. In Aylesbury he was fortunate to have a ready supplicant at court: having been secretary to the first earl of Nottingham when he was lord high admiral, Sir Thomas was retained when the Howards fell from power by Nottingham's successor as admiral, George Villiers, then marquess of Buckingham. In 1620 Corbett became not only rector of Puttenham, Hertfordshire, and a canon of Salisbury, but also in June dean of Christ Church; his 1622 poem 'A New Yeare's Gift to my Lorde Duke of Buckingham' (BL, Harley MS 1221, fol. 75'v') makes it clear that he regarded Buckingham as the agent for his securing the deanery. (This work was named only in the first printed volume of Corbett's poetry, 1648, when Buckingham was incorrectly described as a duke, a title he did not hold until May 1623.) Much of Corbett's poetry was aimed at post-hunting, and it was as a poet rather than a priest that his Oxford friends celebrated his elevation at Christ Church ('In admissionem decani Corbet oratio'; Christ Church, Oxford, MS 325, fol. 8). About 1620 Corbett married Alice (1602-1628), daughter of his subdean, Dr Leonard Hutten (1556/7-1632), the antiquary, and his wife, Anne Hamden. A journey north undertaken by Corbett and his father-in-law one August inspired 'Iter boreale', Corbett's most widely circulated poem. 
By 1621 Corbett was also a royal chaplain and from that time was routinely listed among the twenty-one annual Lent preachers at court. He was not always at ease in the royal pulpit. During the 1621 summer progress he was called to preach before James I at Woodstock and there mangled his words and managed to tie the strings of his preaching bands with the royal ring he had just received, an event which still provoked comment years later. Corbett's friendship with Buckingham allowed him sufficient intimacy to help dissuade the duke from inclining to Catholicism during 1622 and 1623. Soon after the abortive negotiations for the Spanish match Corbett wrote to his patron on 23 February 1624, again seeking his help toward further promotion in the church; but when, on 30 July 1628, shortly before Buckingham's assassination, Corbett was nominated to the vacant see of Oxford it was primarily to make room in the deanery for Dr Brian Duppa, at the behest of the queen's chamberlain, the fourth earl of Dorset. 
In the absence of any official residence for the bishop of Oxford, Corbett continued to live at Cassington, where he had become rector in 1622, despite repeated attempts to have his first fruits remitted and to regain the use of Gloucester Hall, Oxford. For a time Corbett seems to have been more concerned about his accommodation than his episcopal ministry: the only occasion on which he is recorded as consecrating other bishops was at the Croydon consecration of William Piers, for Peterborough, in October 1630, and from a letter from Archbishop Abbot to Secretary Dorchester it emerges that he had to be sent for by authority. It was presumably at Laud's request that Corbett assisted at the baptism of the duke of York at St James's in November 1633; Corbett had clearly sought to endear himself to Laud -- when the latter became chancellor of the university he was among the first in Oxford to write to congratulate him, sending him congratulatory verses by way of cultivating his patronage (Christ Church, Oxford, MS 325, fol. 35). 
Contemporaries knew Corbett as a wit, 'as his poems, jests, romantic fancies, and exploits which he made and performed extempore showed' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.594), but as a prankster he was not always so much liked and even as a bishop he could be inclined to inappropriate behaviour in the wine cellar if John Aubrey is to be believed ('Brief Lives', 1.186). He was later remembered, in the high table gossip of one college, more for his 'bons mots' than for action. In November 1634 the subject of the positioning of the holy table came up for discussion in the Queen's College and it was recalled that the conformist Corbett had said that 'he could not away with any tick-tack conformity' (diary of Thomas Crosfield, Queen's College, MS 390, fol. 174'v'). He also apparently complained that George Birkhead at Bletchingdon let his church 'lay more undecent' than Corbett's own stable but that it had been made good with marble (ibid.). In the diocese he insisted upon decorous church order in his primary visitation of 1629, asking expressly whether 'any man or boy in time of divine service cover his head, or sit with his hat upon his head... or doth not use all other gestures and behaviours in time of divine service required in that 18 cannon'. 
As his chaplains Corbett appointed men as gregarious as himself -- William Strode, the university orator, and Thomas Lushington, in whose favour he resigned his prebendal stall at Salisbury. Lushington followed Corbett from Oxford when on 7 May 1632 he was translated to the see of Norwich to make room for John Bancroft (who would do so much financially for the diocese and to assist Laud's buildings at St John's College). Corbett was bishop of Norwich for little more than three years, during which he made little impression on the vast diocese and may have inclined towards lax toleration. Whereas at his Oxford visitation Corbett had relied predominantly on those of John Howson (in 1619), his 1633 articles for the diocese of Norwich conformed closely to the 1619 set issued by John Overall. However, he followed Laud's policy of closing stranger churches, turning out the Walloon congregation that had used the bishop's chapel since 1619. He insisted upon the conformity of George Burdett, the truculent lecturer of Great Yarmouth, who had failed to make his Easter communion in 1633 and had roundly prayed that God was to be worshipped spiritually and not with any physical gestures. Corbett also encouraged his clergy to support the rebuilding of St Paul's Cathedral, admonishing one synod to bear in mind the benefits that all of them had had from sheltering in it. 
Corbett died in Norwich on 28 July 1635, 'like a Roman, bravely' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/298/10) as George Garrard reported to Viscount Conway, at the comparatively young age of fifty-three. By his will, drawn up three weeks earlier, he left $1000 to his daughter Alice (1625-1682) and the residue of his estate to his son Vincent ('b'. 1627). Probate was granted on 5 September to the executrix, Corbett's mother-in-law, Anne Hutten, to whose care the children had been entrusted, their mother having died of smallpox in April 1628. Corbett was buried in Norwich Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 6293


Corbet, Robert (d. 1810), naval officer, is probably best remembered for the controversy associated with his later career and the circumstances surrounding his death. Born of an old Shropshire family, Corbet was commissioned a lieutenant on 22 December 1796, and served with distinction in command of the cutter 'Fulminante' during the operations on the coast of Egypt in 1801; he was subsequently promoted commander on 29 April 1802. Upon the outbreak of the war against Napoleon in 1803 Corbet was given the brig 'Bittern' and sent to the Mediterranean where he came under the command of Vice-Admiral Nelson. His activities on that station, and particularly his 'officer-like and regular' conduct ('Dispatches and Letters', 6.363) attracted Nelson's support, and in April 1805 Nelson promoted him acting captain of the frigate 'Amphitrite'. Four months later Corbet was transferred to the frigate 'Seahorse' (38 guns) and, following the battle of Trafalgar, he was sent to the Jamaica station where his promotion to post captain was finally confirmed on 25 May 1806. 
In November 1806 Corbet commissioned the frigate 'Nereide' at Portsmouth and in March 1807 he was sent to escort transports carrying troops for the ill-fated campaign in the River Plate. After the withdrawal of British troops the 'Nereide' returned to the Cape of Good Hope station. In August 1808 she was sent for refit to Bombay, where Corbet assumed the duties of a senior officer, thereby attracting the displeasure of his commander-in-chief, Sir Edward Pellew. The crew of the 'Nereide' also raised a complaint against Corbet for cruelty, and Corbet responded by demanding a court martial. A shortage of post captains on the East India station meant that the frigate had to return to the Cape for the trial to take place. This was not explained to the crew and, believing that their complaint had been ignored, they mutinied. The mutiny was suppressed and when the ship arrived at the Cape, ten of the ringleaders were tried, found guilty, and sentenced to death. Nine were subsequently pardoned and one hanged. The trial of Corbet then took place. By 1809 Corbet had acquired a reputation for such brutality that it was noted that his seamen deserted even in hostile territory. 
Corbet was certainly a very severe commander. Between August 1806 and March 1807, for example, he ordered 134 floggings in just 211 days, with an average of seventeen lashes on each occasion. This was a brutal record by contemporary standards. At his court martial Corbet defended himself by stating that he was following the usual custom at sea even though 'the consequences in two instances have been unpleasant' (Lavery, 403). Corbet justified his actions by arguing that he had inherited a poorly disciplined crew and that 'Severity must depend upon circumstances, and whenever I have been severe, circumstances have rendered it necessary' (ibid., 404). Corbet was subsequently acquitted on all counts except that of having caused men to be 'started' (casually beaten) with sticks of an improper size, and for this alone he was reprimanded. As a wider consequence of the court martial, however, the Admiralty implemented steps to prohibit 'starting'. 
Corbet and the 'Nereide' were immediately returned to the Cape of Good Hope station, where they were attached to a squadron under the command of Commodore Josias Rowley. In September 1809 Rowley ordered a detachment of his ships, together with troops from the island of Rodriguez, to attack the French-held harbour of St Paul's on the Isle Bourbon which had become a rendezvous for French cruisers. Corbet, having a strong previous acquaintance with the islands, was given responsibility for landing the troops. After several days French forces abandoned St Paul's and the harbour was captured, together with the French frigate 'Caroline'. The 'Caroline' was renamed 'Bourbonnaise' and taken into the Royal Navy. Corbet, in recognition of his services at St Paul's, was given command of her and ordered to return to Plymouth; he arrived in the spring of 1810 and was immediately appointed to the more powerfully armed frigate 'Africaine'. Corbet's reputation as a harsh captain was now so well known that the crew of that frigate promptly mutinied, refusing to hear him read out his commission. The mutiny was quelled after the frigate 'Menelaus' was brought alongside and her guns run out in threat. 
By the early part of September the 'Africaine' was on station in the Indian Ocean. On 12 September the frigates 'Africaine' and 'Boadicea', together with the sloop 'Otter' (16 guns) and the gun brig 'Staunch', gave chase to two French frigates, the 'Iphigenie' and 'Astree', off the Isle Bourbon. During the night the 'Africaine' out-sailed the other British vessels which were unable to close with her. At 2.20 a.m. on 13 September Corbet, apparently concerned that the French frigates might escape to Port Louis, engaged the 'Astree', firing a double-shotted broadside into her starboard quarter. The 'Astree' immediately returned the fire, and on her second broadside Corbet was mortally wounded when a round shot struck off his right foot above the ankle and a splinter caused a compound fracture of the thigh on the same leg. After ten minutes the 'Astree', having suffered some damage, surged ahead to escape from the 'Africaine's' guns. The 'Iphigenie' by this time had ranged up on the leeward side of the 'Astree', and the 'Africaine', now commanded by Lieutenant Joseph Tullidge, ranged forward to engage her. As she did so the wind began to fall, leaving the 'Africaine' with the 'Iphigenie' on her starboard side and the 'Astree' on the larboard bow. 
Both French frigates now took full advantage of their positions. By 4 p.m. the 'Africaine' was in serious trouble, having lost her jib-boom, foremast and mizen-topmast. Her remaining officers were also either wounded or dead. By 4.45 p.m. the becalmed 'Africaine' could only man six of her guns, and with the 'Boadicea' still 4-5 miles away Tullidge decided to strike the ship's colours. At the end of the action the 'Africaine' had lost 49 dead and 114 wounded out of a crew of 295. Corbet himself had his leg amputated below the knee during the action, but died six hours later as a result of the wound. 
Rumours about Corbet's death may have begun to circulate almost immediately. In his 'Naval History of Great Britain' (1822) William James noted that there were many who insisted that Corbet was wounded by his own men, and had torn the bandages from his wounds rather than survive to face the loss of his ship (James, 5.183). In 1823 Edward Brenton wrote that because Corbet was hated by his men they 'would not defend their ship or 'his' honour, because they had been ill treated, -- a bad reason, but a true one. I have been told that they cut the breechings of their guns, and put 'no shot' in them after the first or second broadside. (Brenton, 2.370)' A decade later Basil Hall claimed that the crew of the 'Africaine' had refused to reload their guns, preferring to be mown down by the French broadsides. Hall's comments invoked a spirited defence of Corbet by Captain Jenkin Jones, who had been on board the 'Africaine' at the time of Corbet's death. Jones's account made Hall publicly retract his earlier comments, and even today the account constitutes a warning against reaching a hasty conclusion about Corbet, whose professional advancement clearly owed much to his skill and reputation for courage. Nevertheless, Corbet's system of discipline was at times exceptionally severe, and it is this as much as the circumstances of his death which has ensured his notoriety. 


@@@@@


doc= 6294


Corbet, William (1779-1842), revolutionary and soldier, was born at Ballythomas, co. Cork, on 17 August 1779, one of eight children in a protestant family. He was well educated by his father, who was a classical scholar and schoolmaster. He and his brother Thomas entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1794. At college he took more interest in politics than in his work, and became a member of the Society of United Irishmen and a friend of T. A. Emmet and Hamilton Rowan. He was also a leading debater in the Trinity College Historical Society, of which he was for some time secretary, and was one of the students who signed the address to Grattan in 1795 in support of Catholic emancipation. In 1798 there was an inquiry by Lord Clare, the chancellor of the university, and Patrick Duigenan into the conduct of the undergraduates; it was alleged that a treasonable song had been sung at a social meeting in Corbet's rooms. Lord Clare asserted the existence of an assassination committee, and Corbet was solemnly expelled with eighteen others, including T. A. Emmet. He subsequently became more deeply involved in revolutionary politics and fled to France, where he received a commission as captain, and was appointed to accompany the staff in Humbert's expedition to Ireland in 1798. He was on the same ship as Napper Tandy, which did not land in Ireland, and he therefore got safely back to France. He was then made an adjutant-general, and while he was at Hamburg, planning another descent upon Ireland, he was arrested there, contrary to international law, by Sir James Craufurd, the English resident, together with Napper Tandy, Blackwell, and Morres, in November 1798. After being confined for some months at Hamburg, he was sent off to England in an English frigate in September 1799. Lord Grenville did not quite know what to do with these prisoners; Bonaparte loudly denounced their arrest, and declared his intention of executing certain English prisoners at Lille if any harm came to them; and they were held in Kilmainham prison at Dublin without being brought to trial. From Kilmainham, Corbet and Blackwell made their escape in 1803, and after many risks and adventures arrived safely in Paris. Corbet gave an account of his escape in his autobiography, published in Paris in 1807, and Maria Edgeworth used the episode in her novel 'Ormond' (1817). 
Corbet's commission of 1798 was recognized, and he entered the Irish Legion, from which he was soon transferred as a captain to the 70th French regiment of the line. With the French army he served in Massena's expedition to Portugal, and greatly distinguished himself in the retreat from Torres Vedras and especially at the battle of Sabugal. When Marmont succeeded Massena he took Corbet onto his staff, and after the battle of Salamanca, Clausel made him 'chef de bataillon' of the 47th regiment. He served in this capacity until 1813, when Marmont summoned him to Germany to join his staff, where he served throughout the campaigns of 1813 and 1814; he was made a commander of the Legion d'honneur. After the first abdication of Napoleon he was promoted colonel in January 1815, and acted as chief of the staff to General d'Aumont at Caen. After the second restoration he was placed on half pay, and was looked upon with disfavour by the Bourbons because of his friendship with General Foy, the leader of the opposition, whose acquaintance he had made in Spain. In 1828 he accompanied Marshal Maison in his expedition to the Morea, in the face of the opposition of Lord Stuart de Rothesay, the British ambassador at Paris. His services in Greece were extensive. After serving as governor of Navarino, Messina, and Nauplia, he relieved Argos from Colocotroni's attack. This victory was of the greatest importance; it finally overthrew the Russian party, upset the schemes of Count Capo d'Istria, and practically placed King Otho upon the throne. Corbet was rewarded by being made a knight of the order of St Louis and of the Redeemer of Greece, and was promoted general of brigade. He succeeded General Schneider as commander-in-chief of the French forces in Greece in 1831, and returned to France in 1832 with them. He was soon after promoted general of division, and commanded at Caen and Tulle. Corbet died, unmarried, at St Denis on 12 August 1842. 


@@@@@


doc= 6295


Corbett, Thomas (d. 1751), secretary of the Admiralty board, was the eldest son of William Corbett (died 1699), a barrister at the Middle Temple, London, and Eleanor Jones, third daughter of Colonel John Jones of Nanteos, near Aberystwyth. After attending Westminster School he is recorded on 24 March 1704 as serving unofficially as an ordinary seaman on board the 'Ranelagh', the flagship of Rear-Admiral George Byng. This was the start of a close association with Byng that was to take Corbett to the secretaryship of the Admiralty board. The 'Ranelagh' was part of the allied fleet in the Mediterranean during 1704 and was present at the successful attack on Gibraltar and the battle of Malaga (13 August). On 14 December Corbett was rated as Byng's clerk and four days later moved with Byng to the 'Barfleur'. Corbett continued to move with Byng as his clerk and on 29 December 1705 he was appointed his secretary. On 8 November 1709 Byng was appointed to the Admiralty and on 6 December Corbett became Admiral Matthew Aylmer's secretary on board the 'Royal Sovereign', where he remained until 19 October 1710. Corbett resumed his career with Sir George Byng, now admiral of the white, when the latter took over command in the channel in July 1711, and joined him as his secretary on board the 'Cumberland' on 22 July. 
Byng returned to shore in September 1711 and Corbett was discharged on 28 December. Early in 1712 Corbett went to Utrecht to try to obtain a post among the diplomats who were gathering for the preliminary peace negotiations. A particular opportunity arose in March, with rumours of a vacancy of secretary to Thomas Wentworth, third earl of Strafford, the chief English plenipotentiary for the peace negotiations, but by August, Corbett was disappointed. All the while he reported his progress back to Byng. The disappointment was made worse on 30 September 1712 when Strafford became first lord of the Admiralty and, as the political crisis around the succession mounted, Byng was dismissed from the Admiralty commission on 19 January 1714. 
After the Hanoverian succession Byng returned to the Admiralty on 14 October 1714 and Corbett was appointed a clerk to the board on 17 January 1715. Corbett maintained a close attachment to Byng. In a fulsome dedication to his translation of Michelet's 'Mediterranean Pilot', published in 1715, Corbett called Byng 'the best of friends' and he accompanied the admiral on the summer operations during the Jacobite rising. In 1716 Corbett was appointed secretary of Greenwich Hospital. Byng, who after 1718 was styled Viscount Torrington, left the Admiralty on 30 September 1721, but Corbett kept his post. Torrington was treasurer to the navy and probably played an important role in advancing Corbett to the post of chief clerk on 15 March 1723, despite the general convention of seniority. After the accession of George II, Torrington returned to the Admiralty in the commission appointed on 2 August 1727. The post of deputy secretary was revived for Corbett on 27 July 1728, probably reflecting the fact that the secretary, Josiah Burchett, at the age of sixty-two, was beginning to feel the strain of service. 
It may be assumed that Corbett's role became more significant after his appointment as deputy secretary. The administrative records are not clear on this, but there are circumstantial indicators to suggest that Corbett possessed both the social status and professional expertise to make him a valued member of the Admiralty office. The twenty-one volumes of precedents that currently bear his name, some of which have annotations that appear in the hand of Torrington's successor, Sir Charles Wager, are testimony to his grasp of Admiralty affairs. He was confident enough to address both Torrington and George Anson as friends. When the duke of Bedford was brought into government as first lord of the Admiralty on 27 December 1744, his parliamentary supporters quickly came to appreciate Corbett's professionalism. Henry Legge, writing to Bedford on 17 August 1745, wrote of Corbett, 'We go on very lovingly and comfortably with our monocular secretary: when one comes to be better acquainted with him, he is not as bad as he looks for. It is true he has but one eye, but then he takes more exact aim at the matters in question with the remaining one. ('Correspondence', 1.37)' In the 1734 election, Corbett became member for Saltash in Cornwall, a borough controlled by the Admiralty, which he represented until April 1750. In the House of Commons, Corbett spoke for the ministry on a number of occasions. Six years after Torrington's death he published 'An Account of the Expedition of the British Fleet to Sicily' (1739), including the victory at Cape Passaro which had earned Byng his title. The work, which was partly based on personal papers provided by the second Viscount Torrington, reflects Corbett's closeness to his patron. In the year following publication of his book Corbett married Mary Lloyd of Duke Street, London; they had one daughter. 
With Burchett ailing and under pressure from the demands of the war that broke out with Spain in 1739 Corbett was appointed joint secretary with him on 29 April 1741, thereby reviving the practice that had periodically existed in wartime until it had been abolished in 1705. Burchett could not continue long and retired on 14 October 1742, leaving Corbett as sole secretary. Corbett retained the office until his death, but his declining health led to the establishment of a new post of second secretary, given to John Clevland, on 1 August 1746 to assist with the expanding workload. Corbett held the office of secretary to the Admiralty board for a shorter period of time than his distinguished eighteenth-century colleagues, Burchett, Clevland, and Philip Stephens, but his service to the board stretched over thirty-six years and his knowledge was clearly valued by the commissioners. He died on 30 April 1751. 


@@@@@


doc= 6296


Corbett, William (bap. 1680?, d. 1748), violinist and composer, was possibly the William Corbett, son of Henry and Sarah, baptized at St Margaret, Westminster, on 18 July 1680. St Margaret's is cited in Corbett's will as his family's parish. The coat of arms depicted in one of his portraits suggests Shropshire ancestry. His early musical training remains a mystery, although it is likely that he enjoyed a period of study in Italy. He quickly established himself in England as a composer and instrumentalist, assisted by his natural flair for self-promotion and the presentation of the novel in performance and composition that he demonstrated throughout his career. 
Corbett was given a benefit at York Buildings, London, on 17 March 1699, and his op. 1, a set of twelve trio sonatas in the Italian style, was published in Amsterdam (possibly 'en route' for or from Italy) about 1700. Already associated with Thomas Betterton's company at Lincoln's Inn Fields as a composer and performer, he wrote music and songs (published three years later) for Shakespeare's 'Henry IV' performed there on 9 January 1700 and also given in Oxford that same year. Incidental music and songs for other productions followed in 1703. He was also actively involved in the long-running and pioneering London concert series organized by Thomas Britton, and his pupils included the Scottish violinist and composer William McGibbon. 
Benefits and concerts featuring Corbett's own music followed in 1704-5, at York Buildings and Lincoln's Inn Fields. He was leader of the band at the opening of the Queen's Theatre in the Haymarket on 9 April 1705 and held that position for a number of years (although not during the period 1707-10). He wrote the overture and act tunes for the semi-opera 'The British Enchanters' by George Granville, Baron Lansdowne, given there on 21 February 1706 with eleven further performances, and his contributions were published during the same year. His annual salary of $40 at the theatre was equalled only by the violinist John Banister. He held a benefit on 18 March 1706 and performed a new Italian solo, billed as 'the first he ever play'd in public' (Edwards, 'Espionage', 327), on 19 March 1707 at York Buildings. In addition to giving frequent performances there, he appeared at Nottingham races (August 1707 and 1709), York (August 1709), the duchess of Shrewsbury's, Kensington, Home's Dancing School, and Hickford's music room. As the lord chamberlain's records testify, Corbett also remained a member of the royal band from the end of 1709 until his death in 1748, gaining prestige, money, and freedom during this period. 
With the appointment of a new band following the production of Handel's 'Rinaldo' at the Queen's Theatre in 1711, Corbett lost the post of leader. However, contrary to Sir John Hawkins's version of events, Corbett did not then leave for Italy. He remained in England, performing (notably at court on Queen Anne's birthday in 1712) and composing. His op. 4, consisting of twelve trio sonatas in two books, appeared in 1713, and 'Hail happy day', a song to commemorate the coronation of George I, in 1714. The ode 'Lost is my Love' also dates from about this time. 
On 25 March 1713 Corbett shared a benefit with the Italian opera singer Anna Lodi, 'nee' Signoni, of Milan, the widow of Francesco Lodi. It was the first concert to be given in Hickford's New Room in James Street, and also featured a new mandolin concerto. He made other concert appearances there the following month and held further joint benefit concerts with Lodi in 1714 (28 April) and 1715 (26 April). It was not generally known that Corbett had in fact married Signora Lodi in 1703. Corbett and Lodi had a daughter in 1713 and lived together, presumably in London, until the end of 1715, when Anna parted from him. Corbett followed her to Milan, via Amsterdam, and there they settled in September 1716. The daughter remained with relatives in London. 
The pay that Corbett continued to receive in absence from the royal band (said to be an annual stipend of $300) gave rise to the story, kept alive by Hawkins, that Corbett was serving as a spy on James Francis Edward, the Pretender. However, this money may have been intended to fund his valuable collection of music and instruments accrued during his extensive travels around the great cities of Italy, and there is no conclusive evidence either way. 
Back in England on 18 March 1724, Corbett played at the New Haymarket Theatre on the 'viol de venere' (a variant of the viola d'amore with twenty-two strings), which, it was claimed, had never previously been heard in England. On 16 May the first of Corbett's sales of instruments, music, and other items was advertised, and during the same month the 'Session of Musicians' ridiculed his new instrument. 
At some time after September 1724 Corbett returned to Milan with his daughter. He continued to tour Italy, and the family settled in Bologna in 1726. The cantata 'Lost is my Love' dates from this period. However, the death of George I in 1727 required Corbett to return to London and renew his oath of allegiance to the crown. A benefit, billed as the only opportunity to hear him during his stay, took place on 20 March 1728 at Hickford's room and featured his 'new Bizzaria's', op. 8, as well as pieces on the viola d'amore and the supposedly all-new 'chamber horns'. Corbett published the first instalment of his op. 8, 'Le bizzarie universali, a quatro', his most significant and curious works, while in London in June 1728. These twelve string concertos were written 'on all the new Gusto's in his Travels thro' Italy' (title-page) and so reflected the general penchant for Italian music. A second edition, dedicated to Corbett's patron Richard, first Baron Edgcumbe, appeared in 1742 entitled 'Concerto's, or, Universal Bizzaries... in VII Parts' and consisting of thirty-five concertos in three volumes. Competent and assured, these works combine effective instrumental writing, contemporary Italianate features, and parody. Each is prefixed with the name of an Italian city or European country. By this time Corbett had been granted a royal privilege, giving his music copyright protection for fourteen years. An advertisement for the sale of his instruments appeared in 1728, and he joined his family in Milan in September of that year. 
Corbett's eventful private life then took a turn for the worse. By pretending to arrange a concert tour on which he was to be accompanied only by his daughter, he compounded an earlier controversy caused by his sister-in-law's staying with him in Rome in 1730, before the arrival of his wife and daughter. Such indiscretions led to his family going into hiding in May 1731 and living off valuables they had taken from the home. Corbett petitioned in passionate terms for their return; but while his efforts provide details of their relationship, they were ultimately in vain. He departed from Italy probably during the summer of 1731. Royal Archives place him back in England and present at court from 1732. 
Several of Corbett's new ''Bizzaria Universall'' concertos, with the composer playing first violin, were given on 8 March 1734 at York Buildings, where a benefit was held the following month. Billed as lately arrived from Italy, he presented 'An essay of different kinds of harmony, intermix'd with some pieces on the new Viol D'Venere'. His last solo recitals took place in 1739. Concerts on 4 and 11 August of that year featured the 'viol de venere', viola d'amore, and 'viol volubile'. On 28 August 1739 he became one of the original members of the Royal Society of Musicians. In 1741 he tried, once again, to sell part of his collection of music and instruments, but without success. 
Although often accompanied by controversy and subject to bouts of impetuosity, Corbett was evidently an extremely talented musician. He died, probably in London, on 7 March 1748. His will (dated 3 March 1747) was proved on 19 April by Richard Dawson, Daniel Cogdell, and Bridget Bohannon, widow. He requested a private burial in his family grave in the churchyard of St Margaret, Westminster, 'at some short time' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA') before midnight, with only two coaches in his cortege. The will includes a sum for his brother-in-law, Isaac Wattlington, late of St Leonard, Shoreditch, although for some reason his sister Ann, referred to as Wattlington's wife, was to receive 1's'. only 'if demanded' (ibid.), and Corbett's wife and daughter are not mentioned. The largest bequest, his collection of music, instruments, and other valuables, was left to Gresham College 'to be deposited and put in a Room belonging thereto' (ibid.), although Corbett's connection with the college remains a mystery. He provided $10 annually for Bridget Bohannon to be curator of the collection during her lifetime. Items included Cremonese and Stainer violins, a violin played by Corelli (destined for Giardini), a viola, a cello, double basses, bows, a harpsichord, and pictures, candlesticks, Italian silks, and music books. Included in the music were three sets of concertos, seven books of operas, and fifty-three individual concertos, some of which were to be given to deserving foreign performers but not sold on any account. Nevertheless, internal squabbles resulted in Gresham's turning down the bequest, and the collection was sold at auction in 1751: the instruments at Mercer's Hall, and the books and manuscripts at a house in Silver Street, Golden Square, which Corbett appears to have been renting at the time of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 6297


Corby, Ambrose (1604-1649), Jesuit, was by his own account born in Yorkshire on 25 December 1604, the youngest of the four sons of Gerard Corby or Corbie (1558-1637) and his wife, Isabella Richardson (died 1652). Both his parents were Catholic converts and future religious, while his two surviving brothers, Robert Corby and Ralph Corby, became Jesuits and his two surviving sisters Benedictine nuns. Educated first in Yorkshire, at the age of twelve he entered the English College at St Omer, where he studied humanities and was reported 'among the first rather than the last in class' (Kenny, 2.348). On 11 October 1622 he entered the English College, Rome, and received minor orders on 16 September 1625 before ill health caused him to return to join his father in the Low Countries. He was admitted into the Society of Jesus at Watten on 7 September 1627, and successively taught syntax, rhetoric, and grammar at St Omer from 1628. Ordained priest on 22 September 1633 he undertook his Jesuit theological studies at Liege and his tertianship at Ghent. He again taught humanities at St Omer before his profession of the four vows on 15 August 1641. Appointed minister at Ghent in 1644 he was sent to Rome the following year, where he served as confessor in the English College. He was the author of 'Narratio gloriosa mortis... P. Henricus Mors' (1645), an account of the recently executed English Jesuit Henry Morse, and of 'Certamen triplex' (1645), comprising accounts of Morse and his fellow Jesuits and fellow sufferers Thomas Holland and Corby's own brother Ralph. An English translation of the latter work was published in 1858. He also wrote a brief account of his father, subsequently published by Foley in 1877. He died in Rome on 11 April 1649. 


@@@@@


doc= 6298


Corby, Gerard (1558-1637), Roman Catholic exile, was the son of Ralph Corby ('fl'. 1591), a wealthy dealer in surface coalmining at Hett in co. Durham. Although his mother was a Catholic recusant, Gerard was brought up a protestant, but was converted to Roman Catholicism through meeting missionary priests. About 1585 he married Isabella Richardson (1552-1652), also a convert, and they went to live in exile in Kildare, Ireland, in the service of Lady Kildare. They had seven children, four sons and three daughters. The eldest daughter died in infancy; three of their sons, Ambrose Corby, Ralph Corby, and Robert, joined the Society of Jesus. Their son Richard died when a student at the Jesuit college at St Omer, and their two daughters, May and Catharine, became Benedictine nuns at Brussels. Gerard and his wife at length went into permanent exile in the Spanish Netherlands, where they agreed to separate and to consecrate themselves to religion. He accordingly entered the novitiate of Society of Jesus at Watten as a lay brother in 1628. In 1633 Isabella, when turned eighty, became a professed Benedictine nun at Ghent, the house having been founded from Brussels in 1624. She died there a centenarian on 25 November 1652. Gerard became blind five years before his death, which occurred at Watten on 18 September 1637, on the ninth anniversary of his entry into the society. 


@@@@@


doc= 6299


Corby, Ralph (1598-1644), Jesuit, was the son of Gerard Corby (1558-1637) and his wife, Isabella Richardson (died 1652), and was born on 25 March 1598, at Maynooth, co. Kildare, his parents having been compelled to retire to Ireland from co. Durham to escape persecution for recusancy. He was taken at five to England by his parents and he spent his childhood in the bishopric of Durham or in Lancashire. Afterwards he studied at the English College in St Omer (1613-19), at St Gregory's College, Seville (1619-21), and at St Alban's College, Valladolid (1621-5), where he was ordained priest about 1624. He entered the Society of Jesus at Watten in 1625. Two of his brothers, Ambrose Corby (1604-1649) and Robert Corby, also joined the society. About 1631 he was sent to the English mission, and worked in Yorkshire and in co. Durham. He was arrested by parliamentary soldiers at Hamsterley Hall, near Ebchester, co. Durham on 8 July 1644, when vesting for mass; he was conveyed by sea to London and committed to Newgate on 22 July, together with John Duckett, a secular priest. At their trial at the Old Bailey on 4 September they both admitted that they were priests; they were condemned to death and were executed at Tyburn on 7 September 1644. Corby was beatified by Pius XI on 15 February 1929. Corby's remains were burned by order of the sheriff. 


@@@@@


doc= 6300


Cormac mac Eogain (fl. 6th cent.) was given a saint's life by John Colgan in his 'Acta sanctorum... Hiberniae' (1645) on the basis of a genealogical tract in the late-medieval 'Book of Lecan' (Royal Irish Academy, Dublin, MS 23 P 2). The tract is on a saintly family said to be descended from a collateral branch of the Eoganachta, the ruling dynasties of Munster. The most distinguished member of the family was not, however, Cormac, but his supposed brother, Beccan (died 690) of Cluain Ard Mo Beccoc, Toureen Peacaun (co. Tipperary). Colgan's life takes Cormac to Connacht and settles him at the mouth of the River Moy (co. Mayo), but the chronological details are quite inconsistent with the annalistic obit for Beccan. The date of Cormac's death is unknown, his feast day uncertain. 


@@@@@


doc= 6301


Corbould, Henry (1787-1844), draughtsman and book illustrator, was born in London (or possibly Robertsbridge, Sussex) on 11 August 1787, the third son of Richard Corbould (1757-1831); he was baptized on 11 September 1787 at St Andrew's, Holborn. His father was a prolific book illustrator and a landscape artist, and his mother, Charlotte, according to Joseph Farington's diaries, was a daughter of the Heath family of engravers: it is therefore unsurprising that both Henry and his elder brother George (1786-1846) displayed youthful artistic talent. They both trained in painting with their father, and from 1801 both 'Master' Corboulds had begun exhibiting at the Royal Academy. While George was eventually apprenticed to the line engraver James Heath, Henry was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools on 29 March 1805 at the age of seventeen. Having already shown a preference for subjects such as 'Paris and Menelaus Fighting for Helen' (exh. RA, 1803), his neo-classical taste was no doubt consolidated by his training under Johann Heinrich Fuseli and his friendship with fellow students such as Francis Chantrey and Richard Westmacott. During his time at the Royal Academy Schools Corbould gained some recognition. In 1807 he was awarded a silver medal for a life study, and he received support from more established academicians such as John Flaxman and Benjamin West, who employed him as a model for several religious paintings. 
It is not clear exactly when Corbould left the Royal Academy Schools, but in April 1812 he married a Miss Pickles of Chelsea, and three years later she gave birth to Edward Henry Corbould, the first of their four sons. It is perhaps as a result of these family commitments that Corbould chose not to pursue a career as a history painter -- concentrating his efforts instead on perfecting a delicate, rather feminine, neo-classical style which suited the purposes of refined Regency book illustration. During the remainder of his career he was 'extensively employed by publishers to make drawings for engravings, and the number of his designs, which adorn many books amount to several hundreds' (Britton, 2.172). This is also reflected in those works he continued to send to the Royal Academy exhibition, which were predominantly compositions of a sentimental and literary genre, commissioned to illustrate the novels of Walter Scott or the poetry of Byron and Crabbe. As was the case with J. F. Dove's edition of Fanny Burney's 'Cecilia, or, Memoirs of an Heiress' (1825), many of Corbould's illustrations were turned into steel-engravings by his cousin Charles Heath; in other instances they were reproduced in fashionable media such as lithography and stipple engraving. 
Aside from gaining a reputation for designing some of the most 'graceful and effective productions of the age' ('Art Union', 7, 1845, 37), Corbould was renowned as an antiquarian draughtsman, and his commitment to this study is confirmed by his membership of both the Society of Dilettanti and the Society of Antiquaries. According to his obituary in the 'Art Union', he was 'distinguished by courteous and gentlemanly manners', and these qualities must have assisted his easy movement in such varied social circles. He also worked for the aristocracy; from early in his career he had been employed to draw the antiquities in the duke of Bedford's and Lord Egremont's marble collections for private publication in lavish presentation volumes such as 'Outline Engravings and Descriptions of the Woburn Abbey Marbles' (1822). These noblemen undoubtedly appreciated Corbould's manners and had confidence in his abilities after his employment, by the trustees of the British Museum, in a long-term project to produce similar transcriptions of the Elgin marbles for 'Description of the Marbles of the British Museum' (1845). 
Corbould died on 9 December 1844 at Robertsbridge and was buried at Etchingham church in Sussex. The cause of his death remains a matter of some confusion. Most biographers blame a fall from his horse, while John Britton records that Corbould was a victim of an accident on the Eastern Counties Railway, when a train fell from an embankment, killing a number of passengers. Corbould was survived by his four sons; however, judging from an obituary in the 'Literary Gazette' which mentions his engagement to Lady Chantrey, the widow of his old friend the sculptor Sir Francis Chantrey, it would appear that his wife had died some time earlier. Certainly, in his will, written in 1832, he directed that his property was to be divided equally among his children, with no mention of their mother; he also bequeathed a diamond shirt pin -- 'a very trifling token of my love and esteem' -- to Charles Heath's wife, and the choice of one of his pictures 'with its frame' to his brother Richard. 


@@@@@


doc= 6302


Corbould, Richard (1757-1831), artist, was born in London on 18 April 1757, and baptized at St Edmund the King and Martyr, Lombard Street, on 24 April, the son of George Corbould and his wife, Anne. He painted, both in oils and watercolours, portraits, landscapes, still life, and history; miniatures on enamel and ivory, also on porcelain; and occasionally he etched. He was thought very clever at imitating the style of the old masters, and yet could show an originality of his own. He first appears as an exhibitor in 1776 at the Free Society of Artists, to which he sent 'The Morning', after Claude Lorrain, a stained drawing, 'A Bunch of Grapes', and another landscape. In 1777 he sent a miniature to the exhibition of the Royal Academy, and continued to exhibit there numerous pictures in varied styles up to 1811. These included 'Cottagers Gathering Sticks' (1793); 'The Millennial Age: Isaiah Xi. 6, 8' (1801), a picture very much admired at the time; and 'Hero and Leander' (1803). With his wife, Charlotte, he had two sons, Henry Corbould (1787-1844) and George Corbould, also notable painters. He last appeared as an exhibitor in 1817 at the British Institution. 
It is, however, as a designer of illustrations for books that Corbould is most widely known. He was largely employed by publishers, and his illustrations, engraved by the best artists, showed both skill and judgement. He contributed to Cooke's pocket editions of English classics (1795-1800), including illustrations for Richardson's 'Pamela'. He also illustrated children's books and non-fiction. Corbould lived for some years in John Street, Tottenham Court Road, but later in life moved to the north of London. He died at Highgate on 26 July 1831, and was buried in the churchyard of St Andrew's, Holborn, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 6303


Corbridge, Thomas of (d. 1304), archbishop of York, presumably came from Corbridge in Northumberland, a small town adjacent to the archbishop of York's liberty of Hexhamshire. No details survive of his parentage and early years but he became a master, and then a doctor, of theology, and Oxford has been claimed (though without definite proof) as the place of his university education. Indeed his erudition and scholarship, not just in theology but in all the liberal arts, were remarked on by chroniclers. There were several clerks in the York diocese with the territorial surname of Corbridge in the late thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries, but no precise relationship can be established. 
Throughout his career before his elevation to the archbishopric Corbridge had very strong connections with York, and indeed, rather surprisingly, is not known to have held any ecclesiastical preferment outside the city; no evidence of any parochial preferment has been found. He was a canon of York Minster in the time of Archbishop Giffard ('r'. 1266-79) -- in 1277 he occurs as the prebendary of Osbaldwick -- and is found as a clerk of Archbishop Wickwane in 1279 when he was commissioned to proceed in the matter of the election of Robert of Scarborough as dean of York. He acted for the archbishop as his proctor in Rome in 1281, in the course of the latter's bitter dispute with the bishop of Durham, and he was also active in the perennial source of conflict between the two English archbishops over the carrying of their respective primatial crosses erect in the other province. He succeeded Wickwane as chancellor of York Minster, and in 1280 vacated his prebend of Osbaldwick for the richer minster prebend of Stillington, which he held until his own appointment to the archbishopric. He continued to act as an archiepiscopal clerk after the succession of Archbishop Romeyn in 1286, but he later came into conflict with the archbishop in 1290 over his own promotion to the sacristy of the chapel of St Mary and the Holy Angels, a twelfth-century foundation adjacent to the minster in York. Romeyn appointed him as sacrist and Corbridge resigned (conditionally, it is claimed) the chancellorship of the minster. The archbishop then promoted Thomas of Wakefield, at that time subdean of York, to chancellor. Unfortunately Corbridge had difficulty in entering upon the sacristy and tried to resume the already filled chancellorship. Romeyn excommunicated him and Corbridge appealed to the pope, but in 1291 the excommunication was revoked and he was able to obtain peaceful possession of the sacristy. 
Following the death of Archbishop Henry Newark on 15 August 1299, Corbridge was elected his successor on 12 November by a majority of the canons of York Minster. Having obtained royal assent from Edward I, who was present in York at the time, the archbishop-elect set off for the Roman curia to obtain papal confirmation and consecration. Pope Boniface VIII set aside the election but provided Corbridge as archbishop, consecrating him on 28 February 1300. The royal mandate for the restoration of the temporalities of the see was issued on 30 April. 
As a diocesan Corbridge seems to have been exemplary, if the evidence of his register and related archival material is taken into account. The itinerary constructed from his recorded acts shows that for his years as archbishop he was in his diocese for almost all of the time, except for brief attendances at parliament. Almost immediately he undertook a systematic visitation of parishes and religious houses in his diocese, and when this had been completed during 1300-01, began a second series of visitations in late 1302. The 106 folios of his register bear testimony to an efficient and methodical administrator. 
Like so many other medieval archbishops, Corbridge's defence of archiepiscopal claims led inevitably to conflict with others -- with the archbishop of Canterbury over the primatial cross business and the attempt by Canterbury to visit the York archiepiscopal jurisdiction of Churchdown in Gloucestershire; with the provost of Beverley over visitations; and with Edward I over the patronage of the sacristy of the chapel of St Mary and the Holy Angels. In this last-mentioned conflict he found himself between competing papal and royal claims. Upon Corbridge's consecration as archbishop the pope had provided his own nephew, Francisco Gaetani, to the new archbishop's vacant prebend of Stillington and the sacristy of St Mary and the Holy Angels, and in due course an archiepiscopal mandate was issued for Gaetani's admission. In the meantime, during the vacancy of the see, King Edward had presented one of his own clerks, John Bussh, to the same positions, since in a vacancy the archiepiscopal patronage belonged to the crown. Gaetani gave up the sacristy in 1303, and the archbishop appointed Gilbert Seagrave in his place, notwithstanding Bussh's claims. Corbridge thereupon found himself arraigned by Bussh in the royal courts, and the king was led to seize the archiepiscopal temporalities. Bussh eventually proved his case against the archbishop (the papal provisions being rejected by the courts) and gained possession in 1304, shortly after Corbridge's death. According to Walter of Guisborough, Corbridge's death was brought on by the hard treatment to which he was subjected by the king and courts in this case. 
In his relations with Antony (I) Bek, bishop of Durham ('r'. 1284-1311), Corbridge had more success than his predecessors. The bishop's conflict with the prior and convent about rights of visitation over his cathedral priory involved the archbishop in the matter of appeals, but Corbridge and Bek were able to come to an agreement about such appeals to the papal curia, which specifically states its purpose as that of avoiding the bitter quarrels of the time of archbishops Wickwane (1279-85) and Romeyn (1286-96). 
In 1304 Corbridge fell ill at his residence at Laneham in Nottinghamshire, where he had been staying since early July, and died there on 22 September following. From his register it is clear that he continued to transact business until five days before his death. He was buried in Southwell Minster. 


@@@@@


doc= 6304


Corcoran, Michael (1827-1863), army officer, was born at Carrowskill, co. Sligo, Ireland, on 21 September 1827, the son of a British army captain. Commissioned into the Irish constabulary in 1845, he resigned in 1849 and emigrated to America, working as a clerk in the New York city post office. He joined the 69th New York militia, becoming colonel in 1859. At the outbreak of the civil war he was under court martial for refusing to parade the 69th in honour of Prince Albert. However, he was allowed to rejoin his regiment and led them at the first battle of Bull's Run, where he was wounded and made prisoner. Exchanged on 15 August 1862, he was made a brigadier-general, and raised an Irish legion. He took part in the battles of Nausomond and Suffolk in North Carolina in 1863, and checked the advance of the Confederates on Norfolk. He died, from the effects of a fall from his horse near Fairfax, Virginia, on 22 December 1863. 


@@@@@


doc= 6305


Cordell, Charles (1720-1791), Roman Catholic priest, was born on 5 October 1720, the son of Charles Cordell of Holborn, London, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Darell, of Scotney Castle, Sussex, and Calehill, Kent. Educated at Dame Alice's school at Fernyhalgh, Lancashire, he entered the English College at Douai in March 1734, and was ordained priest at Arras in December 1744. He was chaplain at Arundel Castle 1748-55 and then at Red Hall, an estate also owned by the Howards, at Roundhay, Leeds, Yorkshire. On 10 June 1765 he took charge of the secular chapel in Newgate Street, Newcastle upon Tyne, where he continued until his death. 
Cordell was a Jacobite in politics but an ecclesiastical progressive. He was admired for his preaching skills and he was an advocate of an English liturgy. His first literary effort was the controversial publication, at his own expense, of a four-volume edition of 'The Divine Office for the Use of the Laity' (1763). To the further disapproval of the bishops, he introduced Sunday vespers in English at the chapel in Newcastle and in 1780 he issued a second edition of his 'Divine Office' in a more convenient two-volume format; it was reissued in Manchester in 1806. Pope Clement XIV (the Franciscan Giovanni Ganganelli) suppressed the Society of Jesus in 1773 and Cordell reprimanded William Warrilow, his colleague and former Jesuit missioner in Newcastle, for criticizing the pope in the local press; relations between them never recovered. Cordell pursued his interest in Clement: in 1776 he published translations from the French as 'The Life of Pope Clement XIV' and in the following year two volumes of 'Interesting Letters of Pope Clement XIV'. In a 'Letter' of 1785 he attacked the former Jesuits John Thorpe and John Jones, who had published 'A Candid and Impartial Sketch of the Life and Government of Pope Clement XIV' (1785) which vilified the pontiff. 
Cordell's later publication of translations from the French of some obscure works prompted Henry Rutter, a fellow missioner in the area, to remark that he had 'cacoethes scribendi'; Rutter also questioned Cordell's wisdom because many unsold copies of the books were left on Cordell's hands (Gooch, 'Revival'). Cordell was influential in the development of the book trade in Newcastle. His scholarly reputation led to an offer of the presidency of the English College at St Omer in 1778 but he declined it. Cordell became odd, though whether this was a symptom of eccentricity or illness is unclear; Rutter said that Cordell was never invited to participate in Holy Week services because he would create confusion, and he reported that in his later years Cordell was unable to carry out any ecclesiastical duty and had asked to be buried in his garden (ibid.). Cordell died on 26 January 1791 and was buried in St John's Church, Newcastle. 


@@@@@


doc= 6306


Cordell, Sir William (1522-1581), lawyer and speaker of the House of Commons, was the eldest son of John Cordell, originally from Edmonton, who had become the principal servant to Sir William Clopton (died 1531) of Kentwell in Long Melford, Suffolk, and Lincoln's Inn. His mother was Emma, daughter of Henry Webb of Kimbolton, Huntingdonshire. He was probably brought up in Clopton's household, and sent to Lincoln's Inn through his influence. A William Cordall was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1534, but can hardly have been the same person. The future master of the rolls was only sixteen when he joined Lincoln's Inn in 1538, and was called to the bar while still very young in 1544. He became a bencher in 1553 and gave a reading in 1554. Besides his extensive private practice, he was a founder member of the Russia Company, and his standing in society became sufficient to require a grant of arms for his father in 1548 and another for himself (quartering Webb) in 1549. 
Cordell's election to the bench of his inn coincided with his appointment as solicitor-general to Mary I in 1553, a position that he held until 1557 when he became master of the rolls and a member of the privy council. He served in five parliaments between 1545 and 1571, and was speaker in 1558, when the queen knighted him. He was executor to Queen Mary, to Cardinal Pole, and to Archbishop Parker. Elizabeth I did not include him in her reduced privy council, but he continued as master of the rolls until his death in 1581. 
Cordell married Mary (died 1584), granddaughter of his father's master, being the daughter of Richard Clopton of Groton, and was able to buy the manor of Long Melford for himself from the crown in 1554. There he built Melford Hall, which was completed in 1559 and where he received Elizabeth I in 1578. However, he left no surviving children of his own. He founded a hospital of the Holy Trinity at Long Melford, and supported the foundation of St John's College, Oxford, of which he was the first visitor. 
Cordell was responsible for a set of chancery ordinances in 1574, and for reorganizing the six clerks in 1578, but a historian has described his tenure as 'a praiseworthy record of competence' in contrast with the more enthusiastic tenure of Sir Thomas Egerton at the end of the century. Egerton was later to complain that Cordell had surrendered the House of Converts to the crown, and given up some rights of the office in connection with the public records. Cordell died at The Rolls in Chancery Lane on 17 May 1581, and was buried in Long Melford church, where there is an alabaster effigy in armour. There is also a three-quarter length portrait in Melford Hall, which shows that he had a short face with reddish hair and beard. He left numerous small charitable bequests including $20 to be distributed among the poor scholars of Cambridge and Oxford 'unto suche as be moste towardes in vertewe and learninge'. His legacies included a jewel with a unicorn's horn, which he settled to go in succession, and a book on parchment 'conteyninge a matter betweene King Henrie the seaventhe and Edmonde Dudley esquier', which he left to Sir William Cecil. His executors were his sister Jane (died 1604), George Carew, and his brother Edward (died 1594), a six clerk in Chancery. On the failure of his issue, his lands were inherited by Jane, who married Richard Allington. 


@@@@@


doc= 6307


Corden, William, the elder (1795-1867), painter, was born at Ashbourne, Derbyshire, on 21 January 1795, the son of Robert Corden (or Cordin) and his wife, Sarah. He was apprenticed at the china works at Derby under Robert Bloor, where he was employed to paint portraits, landscapes, and flowers on china. He painted much of a dessert service with illustrations after John Thurston for William Tegg's edition of the plays of Shakespeare (1812). On 25 September 1816 he married at St Alkmund's, Derby, Hester Simpson (1798/9-1855); they had at least two sons and five daughters. About 1820, on completing his apprenticeship, Corden began to concentrate on portrait painting, painting first his employer, Bloor, and his wife. In 1820-21 Corden painted figure subjects on a dessert service for the third Lord Henley-Ongley. The sixth duke of Devonshire acquired Berlin porcelain plates which Corden was allowed to copy; one, with a view of Chatsworth, may be from Corden's design. He seems to have been among the painters who decorated with landscapes and figures the enormously elaborate Rockingham dessert service (144 plates and 56 large pieces), made at Swinton between 1830 and 1837 for William IV, at the cost of $5000. It was first used at Queen Victoria's coronation celebrations (Royal Collection). 
Careless in firing, Corden was not technically a very good enamel painter, but was an excellent colourist. At Coalport, where he worked from 1820, Corden painted portraits onto blanks made in the factory for outside decoration. These china plaques became a popular new genre, especially in Derby and Nottingham. From 1824 Corden had a London address and exhibited three times at the Royal Academy; 'Hebe', on porcelain, was shown in 1826, and, in 1836, his last exhibit was a copy on china of Sir Thomas Lawrence's portrait of Sir Walter Scott (Royal Collection). 
In July 1829 Corden was commissioned to paint one of the king's pages, a Mr Batchelor, at Windsor. He also painted Admiral Sir Edmund Nagle for George IV in 1829. Illness prevented the king from sitting to him, but the Marchioness Conyngham employed him at Windsor. Corden had settled at Windsor by 1836 where, in June 1838, he drew Queen Victoria on the East Terrace, and copies were made in miniature of his drawing (Royal Collection). A similar portrait ('Art Journal', 1901, 99) was there described as the first sketch made of her after her accession and was extensively copied by him on ivory and porcelain. For Queen Victoria, Corden painted very many life-size oil copies after portraits in the Royal Collection. In 1844 Prince Albert arranged that Corden should visit Coburg to copy Saxe-Coburg family portraits. 
From 1854 Corden was again employed in the Staffordshire potteries. There he worked with the miniature painter and photographer, Mr Scaife of Baker Street, on a project (which proved unsuccessful) to combine enamelling with photography. Following the death of his first wife he married, in 1859, Betsey Wood Mannin. Corden died at Nottingham on 18 June 1867. 
His son, 


@@@@@


doc= 6308


Corder, William (1804-1828), murderer, was born in Polstead, Suffolk, on 22 June 1804, the son of John Corder, farmer, and his wife, Mary. He attended the local village school and then an academy at Hadleigh. At that time he was described as slender with a stoop. He took off for London and met up with some undesirable companions, among whom was Hannah Fandango, a young prostitute whose pimp was Samuel 'Beauty' Smith. In 1824 his father summoned him home to work on the farm and there he met 
Corder had by now married at St Andrew's, Holborn, in November 1827, a respectable schoolmistress, Mary Moore; he had placed an advertisement in the 'Morning Herald' of 13 November 1827, which generated an enormous response. Mrs Corder had set up a school for ladies in Brentford, and there Corder was arrested and brought for trial at Bury St Edmunds. The trial was a public sensation, and extensively reported in 'The Times'. Corder pleaded not guilty, and said that Maria had shot herself and died while he was seeking help; he claimed to have hidden her body through fear of a murder accusation. However, a great deal of evidence was brought forward to prove his guilt. Chief Baron Alexander summed up against Corder and the jury brought in a guilty verdict. In court Corder, who was said to be aged about forty (but who was in fact twenty-four), and who was 5 feet 5 inches tall, with fair hair, a large mouth and eyes, and a turned-up nose, appeared in a frock coat with a velvet collar, black waistcoat, and blue trousers. He was hanged on 11 August 1828, having admitted his guilt and asking his wife's forgiveness. She had been regularly in court and visited him assiduously in gaol. 
The execution was witnessed by a huge crowd, estimated at ten thousand; even more came to listen to sermons preached near the Red Barn. On 12 August Corder's body was dissected and anatomized for the benefit of students at the University of Cambridge. It was then flayed, the skin tanned, and the skeleton preserved in the local hospital where the surgeon, George Creed, carried out the autopsy. The skeleton, from which it is possible that the skull was removed and replaced by that of an unknown person, ended up in the Hunterian Museum in London. The real skull is reputed to have changed hands many times, bringing with it bad luck to any owner. The tanned skin was used to cover a book by James Curtis about the crime; the Moyse's Hall Museum, Bury St Edmunds, had the object, along with other relics such as Corder's scalp and a replica of the death mask (the original of which was in Norwich Castle), at the end of the twentieth century. In August 2004 the skeleton was removed from the Hunterian Museum and cremated. The ashes were buried in the churchyard of St Mary's, Polstead, where Maria Marten's body was also buried. 
The murder was the subject of various contemporary peepshow productions, including one by Lord George Sanger, and many broadsheets (for example those published by J. Catnach) and 'penny dreadfuls'. Ceramics of the Red Barn were also made shortly after the trial. A 'serial' book by W. Maginn entitled 'The Red Barn' appeared in 1828. Theatrical performances on the subject were widely given, such as 'The Red Farm, or, The Well of St Marie', adapted from the French of D'Ennery and Lemoine by W. T. Moncrieff and first produced at Sadler's Wells on 29 August 1842. Another play on the subject of the murder was put on at the Elephant and Castle in the 1920s. A film was made by MGM in 1935, 'Maria Marten, or, The Murder at the Red Barn'. A melodrama by Brian J. Burton, 'The Murder of Maria Marten, or, The Red Barn', was published in 1964. These works, along with a stream of novels and non-fiction, testify to the lasting impact of this sordid crime. 


@@@@@


doc= 6309


Corderoy, Jeremy (b. 1562/3), religious writer, was the son of a Wiltshire gentleman. He matriculated in February 1581, aged eighteen, at St Alban Hall, Oxford. After taking his degree in arts he proceeded to his MA (Hart Hall, 1584) and continued to reside there to study theology. He took holy orders and in July 1590 was appointed junior chaplain of Merton College, a post in which he is recorded alongside Robert Brierley until 1595 and which he may have held for at least thirteen years and possibly longer. Although not fellows, both were granted borrowing rights in the newly shelved college library. 
Both Corderoy's published works are framed as theological disputations between a scholar of orthodox convictions and religious controversialists. The earlier, 'A Short Dialogue' (1604), is an attack on church papistry and sets out to establish that no one may be saved without good works. It was issued in a second corrected edition in 1604 and reprinted a decade later. The second discourse, 'A Warning for Worldlings' (1608), was dedicated to Lord Chancellor Ellesmere and was an appeal for support against the 'outragious dealing of Atheists'. In the latter disputation the 'scholler' would appear to be Corderoy himself, and he writes of his not having been preferred to any living, since, although two had been offered to him, they were not such as he could enter into with a good conscience. Wood slightingly observed that 'his life and conversation was without exception' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.47). The date and place of Corderoy's death are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 6310


Cordiner, Charles (1746?-1794), Scottish Episcopal clergyman and antiquary, lived most of his life in Banff, and became minister of St Andrew's Chapel there in 1769. Few other biographical details concerning him survive. He died at Banff on 18 November 1794, leaving a widow and eight children. James Cordiner (1775-1836), the educator and author of 'A Description of Ceylon' (1807), was his third son. 
Cordiner's significance centres on two publications: 'Antiquities and Scenery of the North of Scotland, in a Series of Letters to Thomas Pennant' (1780) and 'Remarkable ruins and romantic prospects of north Britain, with ancient monuments and singular subjects of natural history' (2 vols., 1788-95). Both works, relying on visual and verbal description, were early contributions to the construction of a romantic image of the Scottish highlands; and both were conceived as supplements to Thomas Pennant's very successful Scottish tours of 1769 and 1772. Pennant claimed to be responsible for Cordiner's work, noting: 'When I had published the last volume of my tours in Scotland, I reflected that there were certain parts which I had not been able to visit. I prevailed on Mr. Cordiner to undertake the tour which appeared in 1780... He afterwards published, and continues to publish, in numbers, the most remarkable ruins, and subjects of natural history he met with in his journies ['sic'] through the northern parts of his country. ('General Collection', ed. Pinkerton, 3.66-7)' Cordiner's earlier work follows the narrative pattern of the tour used by Pennant, but the later work -- published in parts, one every three months, each containing two plates of landscape, one of antiquities, and one of marine animals -- is a miscellany of illustrations with commentary. His choice of subjects appears to derive from a circular Pennant distributed to Scottish clergymen prior to his 1772 tour indicating topics on which he sought information. The drawings in both books were Cordiner's own work, and the engraver working with him was Peter Mazell, who also did the engravings for Pennant's tours. 


@@@@@


doc= 6311


Cordiner, James (1775-1836), Scottish Episcopal clergyman in Ceylon and India, was born probably in Banff, one of eight children of the Episcopalian minister and antiquary Charles Cordiner and his wife, Jean Shand. He was educated locally, and then at King's College, Aberdeen, where he graduated MA in 1793. In 1797, while still a divinity student, he was appointed to superintend the Military Male Orphan Asylum at Madras, for Eurasian sons of British soldiers. In October, 'en route' for India, he was ordained deacon by the bishop of Carlisle. 
Cordiner reached Madras by way of Bombay in June 1798 and remained at the asylum until the following April. At that time he was introduced to the Hon. Frederick North, later fifth earl of Guilford, and the first civil governor of Ceylon. As the chaplain to the garrison of Colombo had recently died, Cordiner was invited by North to take his place. He also became chaplain to the 51st regiment, having previously acted as chaplain to the 80th. He was chaplain from 1799 to 1804 and during this time he was also principal of all the schools on the island. As the only episcopalian clergyman on the island he conducted services at Government House each Sunday. He was also responsible for the formation of three schools in Colombo for Sinhalese, Tamil, and European pupils. In 1800 he made a six-month tour of the island with the governor, after which he made an official report on the schools. When Cordiner left Ceylon in 1804 he was presented with a piece of plate worth 200 guineas. 
Cordiner set sail for England and reached Dover in February 1805; he then returned to his native north-east Scotland. While living at Peterhead he prepared his two-volume 'Description of Ceylon' (1807) for the press. The work, which was handsomely illustrated with engravings taken from Cordiner's own drawings, described his experiences of the country including his observation of an elephant hunt, pearl fishing, and cinnamon cultivation, as well as a tour of the island. The second part of the work described, on the basis of second-hand information, details of military operations in 1803. A further work, 'A Voyage to India' (1820), completed his descriptions of his life in the East. 
In May 1807 Cordiner became second minister of St Paul's Episcopal Chapel, Aberdeen, a collegiate charge. He was promoted from second minister to first minister in the following year. In November 1834 ill health prompted him to retire from his ministerial duties. He died in Aberdeen of congestion of the lungs on 13 January 1836, and was buried locally in St Nicholas churchyard. Not much is known of the personal life of this man, whose claim to distinction lay in the fact that he visited Ceylon just as it was being brought under British administration, and published elegant descriptions of his experiences. He had married and had a son, Charles, who later became a Church of Scotland minister in the 'quoad sacra' parish of Kininmonth, Aberdeenshire. His obituary emphasized his cheerful disposition, his humility, and his eagerness to avoid giving offence ('Aberdeen Journal', 20 Jan 1836). 


@@@@@


doc= 6312


Corey, John (fl. 1699-1735), actor and playwright, was, according to the 'Biographia dramatica', 'descended from an ancient family in Cornwall, but was himself born at Barnstaple, in Devonshire' (Baker, 148). It has been suggested that he may alternatively be the son of the actress Katherine Corey, nee Mitchell, and her husband, John Corey, baptized at St Clement Danes on 26 April 1668 (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). 'Biographia dramatica' records that he abandoned the study of law at the New Inn for a career on the stage. It is possible that this change of direction coincided with, or was precipitated by, the production of his first play, 'A Cure for Jealousy', at Lincoln's Inn Fields during the 1699-1700 season. This slight comedy, set in and around Covent Garden, was eclipsed by the success of George Farquhar's 'The Constant Couple', but it was published in 1701, the year in which Corey made his first recorded appearance as an actor, in the undemanding role of Faithless in Charles Johnson's 'The Gentleman Cully'. His name continued to appear on playbills until the close of the 1734-5 season at Drury Lane, invariably in secondary roles. He was, however, sufficiently esteemed by Thomas Betterton to be granted a solo benefit on 4 July 1704. It was also in 1704 at Lincoln's Inn Fields that his second and last play, 'The Metamorphosis', was performed. This unremarkable farce was derived from the sub-plot of 'Albumazar', a comedy presented to James I at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1614. Its provenance suggests that Corey was, for an actor, uncommonly well read, and may have been of service to his successive theatrical managers by proposing additions to the repertory. Without some such supplementary source of income, his modest status as an actor would barely have sustained him. 
Corey's traceable career is representative of that of a jobbing player in the early years of the eighteenth century. Beginning with the joint company under Betterton, he moved with the patent holders to the Queen's Theatre from 1705 to 1708, then to Drury Lane from 1708 to 1714, but advanced only to the Player King in 'Hamlet' and Malcolm in 'Macbeth'. Most summers until 1727 found him working on the booth stages of London's fairs. Perhaps in the hope of better roles, he shifted allegiance from Drury Lane to John Rich's Lincoln's Inn Fields from 1714 to 1719, and was rewarded with Laertes, in which he made little impact. He returned to Drury Lane, and, with the exception of a season at Goodman's Fields in 1732-3, remained there until his last recorded appearance, as the Lord Chamberlain in 'Henry VIII', on 8 May 1735. He was, says the 'Biographia dramatica', 'a just and sensible speaker, yet being but low in stature, and his voice none of the best, he was ever obliged to work against the stream, and labour with difficulties'. No details of his private life seem to have survived, and it is eloquent of Corey's unobtrusiveness that Colley Cibber, who acted with him often and became his manager, makes no reference to him in his 'Apology'. It may also say something of his quality that, when Theophilus Cibber engineered a walkout of actors from Drury Lane in May 1733, Corey did not join the exodus. 


@@@@@


doc= 6313


Corfe, Arthur Thomas (1773-1863), organist, third son of Joseph Corfe (1740-1820), was born on 9 April 1773, at Salisbury, where his father was later organist. In early life he was a pupil of a Mr Antram of Salisbury, and in 1783 he became a chorister of Westminster Abbey under Benjamin Cooke. He was for some time a pupil of Clementi for the piano. In 1796 he married Frances, the daughter of J. Davies, vicar of Padworth, Berkshire; they had fourteen children. In 1804, on the resignation of his father, Corfe succeeded him as organist of Salisbury Cathedral, and by 1813, if contemporary accounts are to be believed, he had moulded the choir into a state of remarkable perfection. In 1828 he organized and undertook at his own risk a festival at Salisbury, which took place with very great success on 19-22 August of that year. He himself conducted the whole of the performances, and the organ was played for him by his eldest son, 
Corfe's work as a composer was not remarkable. He wrote a service, a few anthems, songs, and glees, as well as some piano pieces. He also published arrangements of different kinds, and a book on 'The Principles of Harmony and Thorough-Bass'. Towards the end of his life his health showed signs of failing, but he attended the daily service regularly until the end. On 28 January 1863 he was found dead at his house, in the close at Salisbury, early in the morning, kneeling by his bedside as if in prayer. He was buried in the cloister of the cathedral, where a tablet was erected to his memory by his thirteen surviving children. 
Several of Corfe's sons were choristers at Magdalen College, Oxford. His fourth son, George Corfe, became resident medical officer at the Middlesex Hospital, and wrote several medical treatises. Another son, 


@@@@@


doc= 6314


Charles William Corfe (1814-1883), took the degree of DMus at Oxford in 1852, and was organist of Christ Church, Oxford, from 1846 to his retirement shortly before his death on 16 December 1883. He was appointed choragus to the university in 1860, and published several glees, partsongs, and anthems. 


@@@@@


doc= 6315


John Davies Corfe (1804-1876), who was organist of Bristol Cathedral from 1825 for more than fifty years, as well as the long-time conductor of the Bristol Madrigal Society Choir, at that period one of the most famous choirs in England. Among the solo singers at the festival were Mary Ann Paton, Rosalbina Caradori-Allan, and John Braham. 


@@@@@


doc= 6316


Corfe, Joseph (1740-1820), singer and organist, was born in Salisbury on 25 December 1740 and baptized on 9 February 1741, the son of Joseph Corfe ('b'. 1705). The family had evidently lived there since 1692, when his paternal grandfather (John, (died 1743)) was appointed a lay vicar of the cathedral. Of the five sons in the next generation, all but Corfe's own father were musicians. It is hardly surprising therefore that the boy was brought up as a chorister under Dr John Stephens, then organist of Salisbury Cathedral, and subsequently apprenticed to him. In 1759 Corfe was made a tenor lay vicar, and, with the encouragement of James (Hermes) Harris, he became increasingly involved in the musical life of the city; he also sang regularly at the Three Choirs festival between 1764 and 1768 (and elsewhere later). On 14 April 1766 he married Mary Bernard, and the first of their six children, four sons and two daughters, was born the following year; only three, however, were still alive when Corfe made his will in 1814. 
When Stephens died in December 1780 Corfe made an unsuccessful bid for the organistship of the cathedral, which post eventually came his way on the death of the victorious candidate, Robert Parry, in July 1792. In the meantime, however, his vocal ability (supported no doubt by the interest of Robert Lowth, bishop of London, to whom he had been introduced by Harris) had gained him, in February 1783, a place as gentleman of the Chapel Royal. Six months later he was elected a member of the Royal Society of Musicians, in whose admissions records he is described as 'Director of the Concert' at Salisbury. This latter appointment -- regarded by some simply as a consolation prize for his earlier having failed to gain the cathedral organistship -- evidently gave rise to much acrimonious dispute among local music lovers, a vivid account of which is to be found in the diary of John Marsh. From numerous other references in the same source, it is clear that Corfe was not only an accomplished vocal soloist, but also a competent organist and violinist who could, as need arose, play the double bass as well. 
Though a service in B[flat] and one or two anthems were still in use some fifty years after his death, Corfe is of no consequence as a composer, and most of his published work consists of arrangements, either of Scottish folksongs or of music by well-known composers of the period (such as Sacchini, Paisiello, Haydn, and Pleyel); for example, three sets of 'Twelve Glees' (1791-8) and two volumes of 'Sacred Music' (1800?). He was also the author of 'A Treatise on Singing' (1799) and a book entitled 'Thorough Bass Simplified' (1805). In November 1804 Corfe resigned his post of organist of Salisbury Cathedral in favour of his eldest surviving son, Arthur Thomas Corfe (1773-1863), a pupil of Benjamin Cooke and Clementi. Another son, John ('b'. 1769), had been active on the London musical scene as singer, cellist, and double bass player in the Drury Lane orchestra, but was apparently dead by 1799. Joseph Corfe himself died at his home in Salisbury on 29 July 1820 and was buried in the north-west transept of the cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 6317


Corker, James (1636-1715), abbot of Lambspring, was the son of Francis Corker (died 1667), vicar of Bradford, a royalist who changed sides and became a spy against the royalists during the interregnum. He was brought up as an Anglican, but was converted to Catholicism, abhorring his father's disloyalty to the monarchy, and, joining the English Benedictines, was professed in the monastery of St Adrian and St Denis at Lambspring in Lower Saxony on 23 April 1656. He was sent on the English mission in the Benedictine south province in 1665, and for twelve years he was chaplain to Mrs Frances Cotton, a relative of Sir Robert Cotton, and later to Queen Catherine of Braganza at the Savoy. In 1677 he was appointed Benedictine censor of books, setting about the task of building up a library for the use of young Benedictine missioners while he continued to be a generous benefactor to the English Benedictine houses on the continent. 
Being alarmed at the narrative of Titus Oates and his party, who had included him among those concerned in the pretended Popish Plot and had intimated that a papal bull appointed him bishop of London, Corker concealed himself for several months, but on the eve of the opening of parliament in October 1678 he was arrested in his lodgings by Titus Oates as part of a plan to discredit the queen through her chaplains and was committed prisoner to Newgate. On 18 July 1679 he was tried at the Old Bailey with Sir George Wakeman and the two monks William Marshall and William Rumley, but their innocence was so evident that the jury returned a verdict of not guilty. Corker was detained, however, on account of his being a Catholic priest, and on 17 January 1680 was tried for high treason in having taken holy orders from the see of Rome. Despite a well-rounded speech given in his defence he was found guilty and was sentenced to death, but was reprieved by the king and remained in Newgate until 1685. In prison he was confessor and spiritual guide to many of the Popish Plot prisoners, and published accounts of the trials, dying speeches, and devotions of those who died on the scaffold, including 'Stafford's Memoires' (1682) and 'A Remonstrance of Piety and Innocence' (1683). It is stated that during his confinement there he reconciled more than a thousand persons to the Catholic church, and was a great comfort to many in distress. He said that he was comforted when under sentence of death by the hope that his sufferings would expiate the guilt of an ancestor in accepting Nostell Priory. In prison he acted as spiritual director to the unfortunate St Oliver Plunket, Catholic archbishop of Armagh, who allowed him to view his last speech. He was elected president-general of the English Benedictines in 1680, being installed as such on 15 September 1681 in Newgate prison by Dom John Huddleston, and in the following year he was made cathedral prior of Canterbury. This same year was published anonymously his 'Roman Catholick Principles in Reference to God and the King', which had been written in prison and which soon became recognized as the clearest formulation of Anglo-Gallican principles by clarifying the duties which Catholics owed to their monarch. In 1683 he was responsible for the exhumation of the quartered remains of St Oliver Plunket and supervised their transfer to Lambspring. 
On the accession of James II Corker was restored to liberty, but the king was reluctant to have him become Benedictine president again in 1685 because of his involvement in the Popish Plot, and Corker became briefly Benedictine procurator in Rome. In 1685 too he became the administrator of a bursary at the school in Lambspring provided by his patron Frances Cotton so that a student might be educated in the mystical teachings of Dom Augustine Baker. He returned to London and was appointed resident ambassador of the elector of Cologne to the court of St James on 31 January 1688. This office had been held in the past by abbots of Lambspring. On the occasion of his reception at court he was publicly accompanied by six other monks in the Benedictine habit, on the instructions of the king, which gave offence to some. During the reign of James II he was responsible for receiving the poet John Dryden into the Catholic church, and established a chapel in the Savoy. 
Owing to a dispute with the Jesuits Corker was persuaded by the king to remove to St John's, Clerkenwell, and having first obliged the Jesuits to pay him what his chapel had cost him, there built 'a mighty pritty convent, which the revolution of 1688 pulled down to the ground, to his very great loss, for as he was Dean of the Rosary [confraternity] he melted down the great gold chalice and patten to help towards this building, supplying the want of them with one of silver just of that make. He counted this convent, for the conversion of souls, amongst those things which the Holy Fathers of the Church allow the church treasures to be spent on. (Weldon, 5.312)' The chapel had only a brief existence, being the first object of attack by the populace when the news reached London of the safe landing of William, prince of Orange. On Sunday 11 November 1688 a crowd assembled round the building and was about to demolish it when a military force arrived. The monks succeeded in removing most of their furniture before any report of their intentions got abroad, but the last two carts were stopped in Holborn, and all that they contained was publicly burned in the middle of the street. 
Forced to seek refuge on the continent, Corker became chaplain to the English Benedictine nuns in Paris between 1688 and 1690, to whom he donated an arm of St Oliver Plunket as a relic. There he was the spiritual director of the nun Dame Justina Gascoigne, a disciple of Dom Augustine Baker. On 21 September 1690 he was installed as fourth abbot of Lambspring, having been appointed titular abbot of Cismar in 1689, and helped to consecrate the new abbey church on 26 May 1691. In this he had a monument erected in 1693 to St Oliver Plunket in the crypt and donated to the church a set of vestments made from James II's royal robes. As abbot he was often at loggerheads with his community, attempting to force a German model of stricter Benedictine observance, such as obtained in the Bursfeld congregation, on the monks, and was absent for long periods in the Netherlands, France, Italy, and England. He found himself briefly under arrest in England in 1694 on account of some money he had earlier borrowed when an ordinary missioner. The impostor William Fuller met him on one of his journeys 'accoutred more like a Dragoon than a ghostly Father, having on him a Red Coat, with a swinging Belt about a foot broad about his Wast, a terrible large long sword, a Campaigne Wig, and a laced Hat, and he looked most Furiously. (W. Fuller, 'The Whole Life of Mr William Fuller', 1703)' Finally, on 27 July 1696 he resigned the abbacy and returned for good to England to continue his favourite task of making converts. There, about 1698, he wrote his 'Rational Account... by M. B.' which explained his conversion to Catholicism and which elicited William Wake's reply, 'The Church of Rome No Guide' (1700). It was followed about 1710 by another apologetical tract, 'Queries to Dr. Sacheverell from North-Britain'. Retaining his title of abbot of Cismar, he lived 'in a recluse solitary manner' at 'Stafford House, near the park'; his room was lined with books and 'ghastly pictures drawn dead with ropes about their necks', representing the victims of the Popish Plot ('DNB'). He died at Paddington, Middlesex, on 22 December 1715 and was buried at St Pancras. 


@@@@@


doc= 6318


Cormac mac Airt (supp. 196/7-267), legendary king and sage, features prominently in early Irish tradition. According to the annals of the four masters, he became king of Tara in the year 227 and reigned until 266. However, Irish annalistic records at such an early period are not to be taken as historically authentic, and it is likely that Cormac was a purely legendary figure. 
Cormac was reputed to be the grandson of another prominent mythological king, Conn Cetchathach (Conn the Hundred-Battler). His father was Art, often called Art Oenfher (Art of the One Man), evidently because he had only one son. Cormac was conceived as a result of a single encounter between Art and Achtan, the beautiful daughter of the druid Olc Aiche; Art was then killed at the battle of Mag Mucrime. When Cormac was born, in 196 or 197, his grandfather Olc Aiche put magical protection on him against wounding, drowning, fire, witchcraft, and wolves. 
Soon afterwards, Cormac was abducted by a female wolf and suckled by her. He was rescued by a hunter named Luigne Fer Tri, who kept him for a year. His mother Achtan then discovered where he was and brought him to Fiachnae Cassan, the foster father of Art. While he and his mother were on their journey northwards at night, the wolves of Ireland attempted to recapture the boy. However, he was saved by the intervention of a herd of wild horses. Cormac was fostered by Fiachnae Cassan for thirty years. The purpose of the association of Cormac with Luigne Fer Tri was to assert an alliance between the Ui Neill (who claimed Cormac as their ancestor) and the Luigni and Corco Firthri of northern Connacht and also of the neighbourhood of Kells. 
On a suitably auspicious day, Cormac set out for Tara with his father's sword and ring and assembly garment. As he approached Tara he saw a woman who was weeping. On enquiring the cause, it was explained to him that the woman was the owner of some sheep which had broken into the queen's woad garden and eaten the leaves off the plants. The king, Mac Con, had ordered that the sheep be forfeit for their offence. Cormac immediately pointed out that the judgment should have been 'one shearing for another', that is, that the woman should merely have had to forfeit the shearing of her sheep in recompense for the shearing of the woad plants. When Mac Con was informed of Cormac's judgment, he realized that he had been guilty of an injustice and that Cormac was the rightful king. According to another version of this episode, the side of the house in which Mac Con made his false judgment collapsed. Cormac subsequently assumed the kingship. 
Because of his justice, Cormac's reign was characterized by peace and plenty. The rivers teemed with fish, the woods with mast, and the plains with honey. Tara was restored by Cormac so that it was grander than ever before and he added the most magnificent palace ever built there. The tale 'Esnada Tige Buchet' ('The melodies of the house of Buchet') describes his meeting with Eithne of the Long Side, who became his wife. She was a daughter of Cathaer Mor, king of Ireland, and was fostered by Buchet, a rich hospitaller in Leinster. However, the frequent visits of her twelve brothers reduced Buchet to penury and he and his wife were forced to flee to Kells (Cenannas), where they lived in a hut in the woods. Eithne loyally stayed with her foster father and looked after his bull and seven cows -- all that remained of his wealth. She continued to honour him by reserving for him the best milk, rushes, and water. Cormac sent a message to Buchet asking for Eithne as his bride, but he replied that only her father, Cathaer, could give her in marriage. Cormac ordered that Eithne be brought to him by force and had intercourse with her that night. She escaped the following morning, but was pregnant with a son, Cairpre Lifechair. Subsequently she became Cormac's queen, but only after a large bride-price had been paid to her foster father, Buchet. Cormac gave him all that he could see from the ramparts of Kells, including cows, oxen, horses, and tenantry. 
The sources constantly stress the wisdom of Cormac: it is said that only Solomon son of David was wiser. He is also reputed to have embraced Christianity and to have refused to worship stones or trees. According to one Middle Irish text, only three Irishmen became Christians before the coming of St Patrick. The first was Conchobar mac Nessa, the second was Morann mac Cairpri Cinn Chaitt, and the third was Cormac mac Airt. A ninth-century collection of wise observations is attributed to Cormac. It is entitled 'Tecosca Cormaic', 'The teachings of Cormac', and consists of a series of replies to questions posed by his son Cairpre. Cormac advises in some detail on the proper qualities and behaviour of a king and stresses the importance of fostering poetry, learning, and art. He extols the virtues of receiving instruction from one's elders, but also describes how he acquired wisdom by solitary meditation: 'I was a listener in woods, I was a gazer at stars'. He replies to his son's queries on such topics as proper behaviour at a feast, types of weather, care of the body, and how to plead a law case. Much of the text is devoted to a discussion of different psychological types and gives some general observations on human behaviour. In reply to his son's query 'How do you distinguish women?', Cormac launches into a bitter diatribe, accusing them of jealousy, silliness, haughtiness, greed, sulkiness, and many other vices. This is one of the most savagely anti-female passages in medieval literature. 
Cormac is associated with technical innovation as well as learning. According to one tradition, he impregnated a slave named Ciarnait. As her pregnancy advanced, she became unable to carry out her duty of grinding the corn for the king's household in a hand-quern. Cormac therefore sent for a millwright from overseas, who constructed the first mill built in Ireland. There are some references in the sources to Cormac's prowess as a warrior, but in general he does not feature as a military hero and there are accounts of his being forced into exile on at least two occasions. In one text he is also said to have been blinded in one eye, a blemish which made him ineligible for the office of king. A further reference to his physical characteristics is found in the epithet Ulfhota, which may be translated as 'of the Long Beard'. 
Because of the five magical protections placed on him by his maternal grandfather, Cormac was not vulnerable to most forms of death. However, his death occurred none the less, due to an accident while feasting in the house of Spelan the hospitaller at Clettech, on the Boyne in Meath. A salmon bone had fallen into a bowl and had been inadvertently kneaded into bread which was given to Cormac. As he ate, the crowd outside watched a fight between two warriors. A sudden roar was raised, which startled Cormac. He swallowed a piece of bread with the bone in it and it stuck in his throat and killed him. Because of his Christian beliefs, Cormac had ordered that he was not to be buried in the pagan site of Brug na Boinne, but at Ros na Rig, near Slane, in Meath, with his face towards the east. His people disregarded his instructions. However, the River Boyne (Boinn) rose up and carried his body three times to Ros na Rig. On the third occasion his people followed his wishes and raised a gravemound for him at Ros na Rig. 


@@@@@


doc= 6319


Cormac mac Cuilennain (d. 908), king of Munster and bishop, belonged to one of the lesser branches of the Eoganacht and his assumption of the kingship of Munster seems likely to have been a compromise arrangement (Byrne, 214, 292). It is likely that his marriage to Gormlaith (d. 948) is a later fiction. The fullest version of his biography is to be found in the seventeenth-century compilation, the annals of the four masters. According to this, he was brought up by the sage, Snedgus of Disert Diarmada, who died in 890. In 902 he assumed the kingship of Munster in place of Cenngegan. Five years later he and Flaithbertach led a Munster force against Flann Sinna, high-king of Ireland, at Mag Lena. After defeating him, they marched on into southern Meath and also defeated the men of Connacht and brought home hostages from the Ui Neill. The victories brought no lasting peace. In 908 Flann with Cerball, king of Leinster, and Cathal, king of Connacht, brought a great army against Cormac at Belach Mugna (Ballymoon, Kildare). The annals record the doom-laden prophecies accompanying Cormac and his death is described in detail (Radner, 153-9). The Munstermen were subject to great slaughter. As Cormac was escaping on horseback, his horse slipped on the blood-covered road; it fell backwards crushing the king, breaking his back and neck. As he fell, Cormac said, 'In manus tuas, Domine, commendo spiritum meum' ('into your hands, Lord, I commend my spirit'). In the coda of the annal entry, he is described as: 'a scholar in Irish and in Latin, the wholly pious and pure chief bishop, miraculous in chastity and prayer, a sage in government, in all wisdom, knowledge and science, a sage of poetry and learning, chief of charity and every virtue; a wise man in teaching, high king of two provinces of all Munster in his time. (Radner, 159)' This description is supported by the wide range of works attributed to Cormac. They include the 'Lebor na cert' (the 'Book of rights'), 'Sanas Cormaic' ('Cormac's glossary'), the manuscript compilation known as the psalter of Cashel, and numerous poems and tales (for a selection, see the indexes of the catalogues by Flower and by Abbott and Gwynn). However, recent scholarship has tended towards the view that many of these attributions should be treated with scepticism. 'Lebor na cert' consists of sections on each of the kingdoms of Ireland in which two poems detail the stipend received by the provincial king from the king of Ireland and the stipend paid to the provincial king by the tribes of the province. At various times the work has been attributed 'en bloc' to Cormac or he has been seen as one of the contributors. However, Dillon has demonstrated that the work is a compilation of poems on the rights of provincial kings, probably put together in the reign of Brian Boruma in the eleventh century. At some stage it had been thought that 'Lebor na cert' had been part of the psalter of Cashel and this was used as part of the argument for connecting it with Cormac. The psalter of Cashel is no longer extant though a number of works claim, in their scribal colophons, to be derived from it. The contents list of the psalter has been reconstructed by O Riain and he has argued that a link between Cormac and the psalter cannot be demonstrated before the last quarter of the fourteenth century. 
One particular link which has been broken by O Riain's work is that between the psalter and an early fragment of 'Cormac's glossary' in the Bodleian Library (MS Laud 610). 'Cormac's glossary' (entitled 'Sanas Cormaic' in the 'Yellow Book of Lecan' version) is an encyclopaedic form of alphabetical glossary on Irish words; it contains not only explanations of difficult words, and in some cases lengthy tales explaining the origin of a word, but also etymological explanations of simple words in a style probably derived from Isidore of Seville. There are several versions of this glossary extant; they divide into two groups, a short version and a longer one with extra entries at the end of many of the letters. Sometimes the work is attributed to a Cormac, but the evidence for its connection with Cormac mac Cuilennain would be entirely circumstantial were it not for a marginal gloss in the prose 'Dindsenchas' (explanations of place names) on Tara at page 159a of the 'Book of Leinster', where an entry on Tara which is identical with an entry in 'Cormac's glossary' is glossed 'Corm[ac] m[ac] Cul[ennain]' (Russell, 10-11). Supporting evidence, though circumstantial, is offered by the use of 'sanas' in the title of the glossary: it basically means 'secret' and is not used of any other glossary; but it does occur in references to the secret council of the king of Munster. However, even if Cormac mac Cuilennain can be linked to this glossary, it is not clear what role he played in its creation. It has emerged from recent work that material in 'Cormac's glossary' can also be found in other early glossaries and that the glossarial tradition can be traced back to a very early period of Irish scholarship. Indeed the etymological techniques employed can be found in Isidore and Jerome. The growth of glossaries was ongoing and it would seem that 'Cormac's glossary' represents a fairly late stage in the process. If Cormac had anything to do with the glossary attributed to him, it was at best as a compiler of pre-existing glossarial material, not as a collector of hard words directly from texts. Moreover, it seems that after Cormac's input the process of growth continued throughout the manuscript tradition right up to the period of the extant manuscripts. 
Many of the poems and tales attributed to Cormac await re-evaluation, although it seems that there was a tendency to attribute works to him in order to enhance their status and that of the manuscript containing them. In contrast to the prevailing trend, Breatnach has recently attributed the 'Amra Senain', a poem in praise of St Senan, to Cormac on the basis of the historical associations in the poem and language and vocabulary also attested in 'Cormac's glossary'. 


@@@@@


doc= 6320


Cormack, Sir John Rose (1815-1882), medical editor and physician, was born on 1 March 1815 at Stow, Midlothian, the only son of the Revd John Cormack (1776-1840), minister in the Church of Scotland, and his wife, Helen Rose, youngest daughter of John Rose, of Holm, Nairnshire. He attended the grammar school at Jedburgh before entering Edinburgh University in 1829 to study classics, mathematics, and philosophy. Cormack did not take his MA but stayed on to study medicine. In 1836 he won the university's Harveian prize for his 'Treatise on the properties of creosote'. He graduated MD in 1837, receiving a gold medal for a thesis on the presence of air in the organs of circulation. In the same year he was senior president of the Edinburgh Royal Medical Society, in which capacity he presided over its centenary celebrations. After graduating Cormack visited Paris, where he attended some medical lectures, before travelling in Spain and Italy. 
Cormack then returned to Edinburgh to practise medicine. He was appointed physician to the Royal Public Dispensary, to the Fever Hospital, and to the Royal Infirmary. He became FRCPE in 1841. On 4 November 1841 he was married in London, at St George's, Bloomsbury, to Eliza Anne, second daughter of William Hine, of Hampshire, Trelawney, Jamaica. They were to have four sons and seven daughters. Refused permission to give clinical lectures at the infirmary, Cormack resigned his post in 1845 and moved to Putney in south-west London, where he set up in practice as a general practitioner. In the 1850s he moved to central London. Although 'an amiable man of enterprising and industrious disposition', Cormack had limited success as a practitioner. A colleague, Charles Williams, attributed this to a lack of 'firmness and strength of character' (Williams, 411). 
Cormack became a medical editor and author at a comparatively young age. In January 1841 he founded the 'Edinburgh Monthly Journal of Medical Science', which he edited until June 1846. In 1843 he wrote 'The natural history, pathology, and treatment of the epidemic fever prevailing in Edinburgh and other towns', and in 1848 he published a pamphlet on the 'Universities of Scotland Bill'. In January of the following year he resumed his editorial activity, founding the 'London Journal of Medicine', which he edited until September 1852, at which point it was amalgamated with the 'Provincial Medical and Surgical Journal (PMSJ)' to form the 'Association Medical Journal' ('AMJ' -- the 'British Medical Journal' or 'BMJ' from 1857). Cormack had been appointed to the part-time editorship of 'PMSJ', the weekly publication of the Provincial Medical and Surgical Association (PMSA -- the British Medical Association or BMA from 1855), in the previous August. He took up his editorial duties with the association at an annual salary of $250, a sum he considered inadequate, in January 1853; he carried them out for a period of thirty-three months, tendering his resignation in August 1855. 
Cormack was the first editor to produce the PMSA's journal in London, though he actually conducted most of his editorial work at his home, undertaking to be present at the journal office for no more than 75 minutes per week 'when not unavoidably prevented by other duties' ('AMJ', 24 Nov 1852). In September 1854 he became 'de facto' PMSA secretary. He was editor of the 'AMJ' at a time when, through no fault of his, the association was riven with dissension about the journal's format, frequency and place of publication, high cost, and even its continued existence. Although Cormack's editorial regime was in many ways successful, he received much criticism, particularly from those PMSA members who resented the journal's transfer to London and its expansion to the point at which it threatened to become more important than the association which had established it. Matters came to a head at the PMSA's anniversary meeting at York in August 1855, when it was agreed that the editorship of the journal could not be held by the secretary of the association, and that the 'AMJ' should revert to being the 'PMSJ'. Despite having the support of many members, Cormack resigned both positions, though he remained a PMSA member. In 1856 he unsuccessfully applied to become medical officer of health for Holborn. Two years later he was also unsuccessful in an attempt to secure appointment as general medical registrar and secretary to the newly created General Medical Council. 
In 1866 ill health prompted Cormack to move with his family to Orleans in France. In 1869, on the death of Sir Joseph Olliffe, physician to the British embassy, he then moved to Paris. He continued to write on medical subjects, though less prolifically than in the past. He translated volumes 2-5 of Armand Trousseau's 'Clinical Lectures' (1868), and published a two-volume collection of his main papers under the title 'Clinical Studies' (1876). In August 1870 he was awarded the degree of MD in Paris with a thesis entitled: 'De l'entree de l'air dans les orifices beants des veines uterines consideree comme cause de danger et de mort subite peu de temps apres la delivrance'. In reporting the award the 'BMJ' stated that Cormack was the only physician in Paris to hold both British and French MD degrees. 
Cormack was also in Paris when it was besieged during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71 and throughout the commune. He served as surgeon to the Ambulance Anglaise, tending to the war wounded and to British residents of the city. In December 1870 he described in the 'BMJ', for which he was war correspondent, how the previous week was 'in many respects the most eventful, exciting, and laborious week of my whole life' ('BMJ', 17 Dec 1870, 664). In recognition of his work during the crises he received several awards. The French government made him chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1871, and in Britain, on 14 March 1872, he received a knighthood at Buckingham Palace. Cormack remained in Paris after the commune, becoming physician to the Hertford British Hospital, a post he retained for the rest of his life. 
For some time before his death Cormack suffered from chronic disease of the prostate and bladder. In early 1882, in an attempt to recover his health, he spent several weeks in Monte Carlo, but on returning to Paris his condition deteriorated. He died at his home, 364 rue St Honore, Paris, on 13 May 1882. His widow survived him by a few months. 


@@@@@


doc= 6321


Corneliszoon, Lucas (b. 1495, d. in or before 1552), painter, was born in Leiden, the third son of the painter Cornelis Engelbrechtszoon and his wife, Elysabeth Pietersdochter. Corneliszoon was presumably trained by his father and was noted by the painter and biographer Karel van Mander as a painter in oil and watercolours. His family were of prosperous burgher class and so there is reason to question the assertion that 'he could barely maintain himself in his native town by means of the art of painting' (van Mander, 129) and was thus compelled to take up cooking. He probably went to England during the reign of Henry VIII, as did several other artists from the Low Countries, although the only work which may be autograph and date from this time is an oval portrait of Sir Thomas Wyat (priv. coll.), which is inscribed 'Lucas Cornelii'. Van Mander, who mentions a number of his works still surviving in 1604, states that his paintings were much sought after by Englishmen who arrived in the Netherlands during the earl of Leicester's governorship (1585-7) and this statement may be based on van Mander's personal observation. Corneliszoon was back in Leiden on 16 June 1542, but the length of this visit cannot be determined and it cannot therefore be assumed that he did not spend a considerable amount of time in England. Attempts have been made to ascribe a number of works in various media to him, but these attributions remain inconclusive, especially because his identity has been confused with Jan (Wellens?) de Cock. Corneliszoon died before 27 June 1552. It is not known whom he married, but according to van Mander he had seven or eight children, who were living abroad, conceivably in England, at the time of his death, which may also have taken place in England. 


@@@@@


doc= 6322


Cornelius, John (c.1557-1594), Roman Catholic priest, possibly a son of Gervase Cornelius and Maud (or Mary) Buckingham, was born in Bodmin, Cornwall. His parents were Irish and, though living in the humblest station, are said to have sprung from the illustrious family of the O'Mahons. His patron, Sir John Arundell of Lanherne, sent him to Oxford. Elected a fellow of Exeter College on 30 June 1575 he was expelled for popery by royal commission on 3 August 1578. He arrived at the English College in Rheims on 26 September 1579. He was sent on to the English College in Rome on 9 February 1580, arriving on 1 April. Ordained deacon on 10 October 1581 he preached in the presence of Pope Gregory XIII on the feast of St Stephen, 26 December 1581. He departed for England in September 1583 shortly after his ordination to the priesthood. Sir John Arundell received him; in March 1588 he was living with Arundell at his house in Muswell Hill. After Arundell's death on 17 January 1591 Cornelius accompanied his widow, Anne, daughter of Edward, third earl of Derby, and formerly widow of Charles, seventh Lord Stourton, to Chideock Castle, Dorset. 
Like his friend the Jesuit William Weston, Cornelius was a noted exorcist. According to the Jesuit John Gerard, Cornelius was 'so famous in preaching that all Catholics followed him as children do their nurse when they long for milk, and the man so full of the Apostle's charity, that with one fervent speech in imitation of the offer which St. Paul made to be ''anathema pro fratribus'', he expelled a devil out of a person whom he was exorcising. I know the time and place where it was performed; and where another wicked spirit confessed in a possessed person that his fellow was cast out by Cornelius his charity. (Morris, 17-18)' On 14 April 1594, however, Sir George Trenchard raided Chideock Castle. After a search of five or six hours someone led the pursuivants to the priest hole where Cornelius was hiding. Thomas Bosgrave, a Cornish gentleman and kinsman of Sir John Arundell, was taken into custody at the same time, as were two servants of the Arundell family. 
Imprisoned in Trenchard's house Cornelius met a number of protestant divines and engaged them in debate. One of these divines, named Charke (possibly William Charke), was 'easily their leader and principal in the whole of the county' ('Elizabethan Jesuits', 224). According to More, Sir Walter Ralegh also discussed unspecified issues with Cornelius for one night in order 'to remove his doubts'. Despite Ralegh's displeasure at something Cornelius said about atheism the courtier promised to intercede with Elizabeth I on the priest's behalf. At the end of April, Cornelius was ordered to London, to Marshalsea prison, where, despite being tortured, he revealed nothing that would prejudice his benefactors. In late June he was remanded to Dorchester for trial, where he and his three companions were found guilty: Cornelius of high treason for being a priest and coming into the kingdom and remaining there, Bosgrave and the servants of felony for aiding Cornelius, knowing him to be a priest. They were executed at Dorchester on 3 or 4 July 1594. 
Whether Cornelius died a Jesuit is somewhat controversial. In late 1588 Henry Garnet reported to Claudio Acquaviva, Jesuit superior-general, that John Cornelius wished to enter the Society of Jesus. Garnet, however, was reluctant to send him to the Spanish Netherlands. He feared that Jesuit authorities there would reject Cornelius's application on account of his health, and he was unwilling to take Cornelius away from his flock. Garnet admitted that Cornelius always lived with a Jesuit and would not suffer if his noviceship was postponed or, indeed, if he were allowed to make it in England. In a letter to Garnet some time after his capture Cornelius still hoped to be admitted into the society. After Cornelius's martyrdom, Garnet explained how much he had tried to console the priest, but it was not within his power to accept him into the society. However, on his own initiative Cornelius pronounced Jesuit vows before his execution and instructed three unnamed principal Catholics who witnessed the event to inform Garnet of what he had done. 


@@@@@


doc= 6323


Cornelys, (Anna Maria) Teresa (1723?-1797), singer and impresario, was born in Venice, probably in 1723, to the Genoan actor and impresario Giuseppe Imer (died 1758) and his wife. Many particulars of her life, especially before 1759, derive from Giacomo Casanova's 'History of my Life', a not wholly reliable source. Teresa and her older sister Marianna were trained as professional singers. Casanova (1725-1798) met Teresa for the first of several times about 1740 and says that being caught making love to her cost him a job. The outlines of her moderately successful career between 1741 and 1754, mostly as a 'seconda donna', can be traced through casts printed in opera librettos, though she almost certainly sang in other productions for which no book was printed. She is listed as Cleopatra in the libretto for the 1741 production of 'Cesare in Egitto' in Verona, her earliest known performance. She sang Vitellia in 'Tito Manlio' during the carnival season at Florence in 1742 in a company that included her sister. In Venice on 2 May 1742 she appeared as Barsene in the premiere of Gluck's 'Demetrio'. In 1743 she sang Creusa in 'Demofoonte' in Padua as well as Albina in 'Alessandro Severo' and Araspe in 'Farasmane re di Tracia' at Genoa, both with her sister. The Sartori index lists her as Dircea in 'Demofoonte' in Turin in 1744, but the entry for the libretto is lacking. 
At an unknown date about 1744-5 Teresa married the dancer Angelo Francesco Pompeati ('c'.1701-1768), with whom she had a son, Giuseppe (1746- 'c'.1797). The sisters sang at the King's Theatre, Haymarket, in London during the 1745-6 season, when Gluck was the house composer. Teresa created the role of Iride in 'La caduta de giganti', sang Erifile in 'Il trionfo della continenza', an unknown role in 'Artamene', and Erissena in 'Alessandro nell'Indie'. After this season the sisters' careers diverged, and there is a small gap in documentation of Teresa's engagements. In 1748 she went to Hamburg to sing Rosmiri in 'Arsace' and Irene in 'Bajazet'. According to Howard, she probably participated in the premiere of Gluck's 'La contesa de'numi' in Copenhagen in 1749, and the next year she sang Aristea in 'L'Olympiade' at Brunswick. 
Then there is a blank in Teresa's career. Aspects of her life can be sketched in from Casanova, who, while acknowledging her intelligence, asserts that 'her good fortune had not depended entirely on her talent; her charms had contributed to it more than anything else' (Casanova, 3.243-4). The first instance he offers is that she became the mistress of Friedrich, margrave of Brandenburg-Bayreuth (1711-1763). In February 1753 she bore a daughter, baptized Wilhelmine Frederike. The child's paternity is uncertain, as is the total number of Teresa's children. About this time she and her husband separated permanently, and Casanova reports that she had begun an affair with a gentleman of the bedchamber, Theodore Camille, marquis de Montperny. Casanova admits to a very brief liaison he himself had with Teresa during a visit she made to Venice in 1753, and he eventually acknowledged paternity of a daughter known in London as Sophie Wilhelmina, who was Teresa's second or perhaps third child. 
After resuming her career, Teresa appeared in 1754 as Animia in 'L'huomo' at Bayreuth and as Asteria in 'Bajazet' in Turin, where she placed her maiden name after that of her estranged husband and described herself as 'virtuosa di camera delle Loro Altezze Eccellenze e Reali di Barayt' (Sartori, 3.643). Casanova says that at an unknown date, presumably after this, the discovery of her affair with Montperny ended her tenure as the margrave's mistress. Casanova records what he says is the history she gave him of her next several years: she had 'gone to Brussels with a lover, where for a few days she had taken the fancy of Prince Charles of Lorraine, who gave her a special patent granting her the direction of all theatrical performances throughout the Austrian Netherlands' (Casanova, 5.138). Prince Karl Alexander of Lorraine was governor of the Austrian Netherlands between 1748 and 1756, and a 'Mlle Pompeati' was listed as 'directrice des spectacles en Flandre' among the subscribers to Robert Daubat's 'Cent contre-danses' (1757), but otherwise this part of her life is obscure. According to Casanova, 'with this patent she had embarked on the most extensive enterprises which had led her to spend enormous sums, so that in less than three years, after selling all her diamonds, her laces, her wardrobe, and everything she owned, she had been obliged to go to Holland to avoid being sent to prison. (Casanova, 5.138)' Casanova says he heard this story when he came across Teresa unexpectedly in 1758-9 in Amsterdam, where she was singing at public concerts around a circuit of Dutch cities in very reduced circumstances under the name Madame Trenti. He was no longer interested in her sexual favours but professed concern for the child Sophie, who was introduced to him as his own. He therefore agreed to give Teresa money with which to move to Britain, where she thought she could make a better living, and he temporarily took charge of her son Giuseppe. 
Teresa arrived in London in October 1759. She travelled with further financial help from another lover, the Dutch merchant Jan Cornelis Rigerboos (or Jan Rigerboos Cornelis), whose name she used during most of the rest of her life. No particulars about their relationship are known, though late in his memoirs Casanova alleges that she 'ruined' Rigerboos (Casanova, 9.162). Teresa chose London for a new beginning because she thought she had an entree to musical circles through a cellist and double-bass player performing in the Dutch concerts. He called himself John Freeman and claimed to be a beneficed clergyman in the Church of England with many contacts who would be useful in her attempt to support herself via concerts in London ('Survey of London', 33.74). There he used the name John Fermor (he appears as 'Sir Frederick Fermer' in Casanova, 9.163-4), and although he proved not to have the contacts needed, he did have money to lend. 
In a lawsuit Teresa noted that together they gave a series of concerts at the Little Theatre in the Haymarket shortly after their arrival in October 1759. She worked hard at meeting potential aristocratic patrons for an ambitious scheme of subscription assemblies that she and Fermor had worked up together. As she did not yet speak English and was not in a position to be too choosy about her supporters, at the beginning she used the notorious Elizabeth Chudleigh as a spokesperson for the project, but other (at least slightly) more respectable ladies soon endorsed her plans. Horace Walpole names Elizabeth Percy, countess of Northumberland, Caroline Stanhope, countess of Harrington, and 'some other great ladies' (whom he disliked) as her eventual sponsors (Walpole, 'Corr.', 23.271). 
Teresa leased Carlisle House, Soho Square, in May 1760 and began her 'entertainments' that autumn. The key to her success was limiting the subscription to the nobility and people vouched for by them. Aristocrats bought 5 guinea tickets to a series of gatherings to which only members of 'the Society' were admitted. Dancing and refreshments were available, but probably a more potent lure was gambling. Few records of the early meetings remain. A highly irregular pattern of advertising suggests that Teresa communicated with her subscribers principally by private means. Tickets were never available for sale to the general public, nor were her assemblies usually reviewed, as more public gatherings sometimes were. Encouraged by her success, she commissioned a major remodelling of the premises, between June and December 1761. To settle construction debts she gave large numbers of tickets, or the promise of the income from them, to certain creditors. 
During the 1760s Teresa undertook several kinds of expansion. She engaged the best musicians available in London, and the Johann Christian Bach-Karl Friedrich Abel concert series began at Carlisle House in 1763-4; when it transferred in 1767-8 to her competitor, Almack's Rooms, she turned to Felice Giardini and Mattia Vento for music. She branched out to include concerts, balls, and masquerades among her 'entertainments', and boldly sang in oratorios in 1764 and 1765. A plan to open a parallel set of rooms in the City was bruited in 1766, but not well received. Further development of the Carlisle House property in 1768 included costly rooms with a Chinese motif and a Chinese bridge between buildings, probably designed by the cabinetmaker Thomas Chippendale. Teresa's balls and masquerades were increasingly both splendid and (perhaps undeservedly) notorious for loose conduct. 
Writing to Horace Mann on 22 February 1771, Horace Walpole summarized her progress in retrospect: 'She took Carlisle House in Soho Square, enlarged it and established assemblies and balls by subscription. At first they scandalized, but soon drew in both righteous and ungodly. She went on building, and made her house a fairy palace, for balls, concerts and masquerades.' While he regarded 'her taste and invention in pleasures and decorations' as 'singular', he also acknowledged that 'of late years she has been the Heidegger of the age, and presided over our diversions' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 23.271). 
Teresa's success was, financially at least, superficial. She was never able to accumulate capital or pay off her debts, so from as early as February 1762 she was constantly harassed by creditors' lawsuits. Casanova, visiting London in 1763-4, found her confined to the house except on Sundays, lest bailiffs arrest her. On 1 February 1768 she signed an agreement with four creditors that left her with only nominal control of the entertainments and an $800 expense budget, for a business that was valued at $20,000 (TNA: PRO, C12/1518/6). Still borrowing and finagling, in 1771 she took advantage of disagreements between the administration of the King's Theatre, Haymarket, and its imported stars, particularly Gaetano Guadagni, to expand into opera. Under the disguise of 'harmonic meetings' she, Guadagni, and the dancer Simon Slingsby presented fully costumed and at least semi-staged 'opera seria' at Carlisle House. Performances of Vento's 'Artaserse' on 24 and 31 January 1771 brought complaints from the opera managers at the Bow Street magistrates' court that they were violating the 'Licensing Act' of 1737. The theatre managers supported these complaints, since their monopoly too would have been vulnerable, had this scheme succeeded. She was twice fined $50, but the rumour of a prosecution for running a bawdy house is not true. Several satirical pictures of Teresa were published about this time. 
According to lawsuit testimony, Teresa cleared more than $3000 in 1771, though only $1300 by 28 October 1772 (TNA: PRO, C12/1518/6). The failure of her opera brought out creditors, and by October she had gone into retirement at 'The Hotel' in Southwark, in which she briefly had a part interest. The list of bankrupts in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' of November 1772 described her as a 'dealer' ('GM', 1st ser., 42, 1772, 544). On 22 December Carlisle House and its furnishings were sold to a consortium of her creditors (among them Chippendale) for $10,200 in what she claimed was a rigged auction. Her daughter deserted her at this time and lived on the charity of various noble families for the rest of her life. Teresa was granted a $200 annuity after the auction, though how long it was paid is not clear. However, Carlisle House did not flourish after her demotion: she was unable to regain her public in the few masquerades to which her name was attached in the next five years. 
Teresa 'remained in obscurity many years' under the alias Mrs Smith, according to her obituary ('GM', 1st ser., 67/2, 1797, 890). She had recently reappeared, to the amusement of that writer, keeping a herd of asses in Knightsbridge, whose milk she occasionally offered as a 'public 'dejeune' for people of fashion' (ibid.). Again she managed to overspend: an allowance made her by her son, who was tutor to George Fermor, third earl of Pomfret, and the annuity provided by a member of the Cowper family were not enough to keep her out of the Fleet prison, where she died on 19 August 1797, still full of 'visionary projects' ('GM', 1st ser., 67/2, 1797, 891). The generous assessment in the obituary seems remarkably apt: she was 'a distinguished priestess of fashion' (ibid., 890), who 'being of an enterprizing spirit, possessing a good understanding, great knowledge of mankind, and specious manners' (ibid.), was able to make Carlisle House 'the favourite region of amusement among the nobility and gentry' (ibid.) for more than ten years; she provided such 'diversified amusement' (ibid.) that for many years 'no other public entertainments could pretend to rival' (ibid.) Carlisle House. Despite her fall, her ''projecting turn'' (ibid., 891) kept her dreaming that she might recapture her position at the height of society. A female entrepreneur who could not control her expansionist tendencies, for more than a decade she directed fashionable entertainments for the British nobility, despite being a foreign adventuress and stage performer. 


@@@@@


doc= 6324


Corner, George Richard (1801-1863), antiquary, born in the parish of Christ Church, Southwark, London, was the eldest of the six children of Richard Corner (died 1820), a solicitor in Southwark, and Maria, daughter of James Brierley. He was educated at Gordon House, Kentish Town, and after having been admitted an attorney in 1824, followed his father's profession with success. 
In 1828 Corner married Sarah, the youngest daughter of Timothy Leach of Clapham, with whom he had two sons and two daughters who survived him. About 1835 he was appointed vestry clerk of the parish of St Olave, Southwark, a parish in which he was greatly active, particularly during the 1832 cholera epidemic. On 28 November 1833 Corner was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and from this date published many antiquarian papers, often connected with the history of Southwark. Of these the best-known were 'A Concise Account of the Local Government of the Borough of Southwark' (1836) and 'The Rental of St. Olave and St. John Southwark' (1838, 1851). His first communication to the Society of Antiquaries was made on 9 January 1834, when he pointed out in 'Archaeologia' the distinction, not previously recognized, between the three manors of Southwark. He contributed other papers to 'Archaeologia' from 1835 to 1860, including 'An account of excavations on the site of Roman buildings at Keston, near Bromley, in Kent' (vol. 36) and a paper on the abbot of Waltham's House, St Mary-at-Hill, London (vol. 36). 
Corner was one of the original members of the Numismatic Society of London, founded in 1836, but apparently did not make a special study of coins. He left the society ten years later, in January 1846. He was also a member of the British Archaeological Association from the time of its establishment in 1843: he exhibited many antiquities before this society, and contributed accounts of them to its journal. Corner also showed great interest in the Archaeological Society of Surrey, and contributed to its 'Proceedings', as also to the 'Sussex Archaeological Collections' (vol. 6), the 'South London Journal' (1857), and the 'Collectanea Topographica et Genealogica' (vols. 5, 7). He was also an occasional contributor to the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. 
In the last years of his life, Corner seems to have experienced 'difficulties occasioned... by family misfortunes'. He died suddenly on 31 October 1863, at Queen's Row, Camberwell, where he resided, and was buried in Nunhead cemetery. His brother Arthur Bloxham Corner (died 1861) was her majesty's coroner and attorney in the court of queen's bench. Another brother, Richard James Corner, was appointed chief justice of the Gold Coast colony, and was joint author, with Arthur Bloxham Corner, of 'Crown Practice' (1844). 


@@@@@


doc= 6325


Corner, John (fl. 1788-1825), printmaker, worked in London from the late eighteenth century to the end of the Regency. Nothing is known of this engraver apart from his 'oeuvre'. Working primarily in etching and stipple engraving, he specialized in portraiture, but most of his output is unremarkable and served to illustrate the cheaper end of the market for literature and periodical publications. He is best-known for his theatrical portraits for the 'European Magazine' and 'Bell's British Theatre', and for his series of twenty-five portraits of artists published under the title 'Portraits of Celebrated Painters'. Although Redgrave criticized the heads in this last work as 'ill drawn, weak and ineffective', this series was stylish in its grouped medallion format and decorative devices (Redgrave, 'Artists', 99). Apart from these series Corner also etched a few history subjects and proudly 'engrav'd from the original by permission' a version of Edward Penny's moralizing, yet titillating, subject 'Apparent Dissolution'. His daughter, Julia Corner, was a children's writer. 


@@@@@


doc= 6326


Corner, Julia (1798-1875), children's writer, was born in London, the daughter of John Corner (fl. 1788-1825), a printmaker. Her first publication was a silver fork novel, 'The Baronet' (1834), a rather uneven production in which a sprightly narrative is oddly interrupted by a dream-like murder scene. She continued to produce occasional novels throughout her literary career, including 'The Brothers Basset' (1855) and 'Culverley Rise: a Tale' (1861), both workmanlike productions of mid-nineteenth-century domestic realism. 
Corner was, however, far more significant as the writer of history textbooks. In 1837, she produced a sequel to Richmal Mangnall's popular 'Historical and Miscellaneous Questions' (1800), entitled 'Questions on the History of Europe'. Then, in 1840, she published 'The History of England' and 'The History of France', with Thomas Dean & Son, well-known publishers of juvenile works. These were the first volumes in a series known as 'Miss Corner's Historical Library' (1840-48), which covered the history of European countries as far apart as Ireland and Turkey; some were illustrated from designs by Sir John Gilbert (1817-1897), a painter and illustrator as prolific in his production of historical images as Corner was of historical texts. Some volumes of the 'Historical Library' were later reprinted as 'Every Child's History'. The English volume in the series is a brisk, largely conventional narrative, although Corner was less credulous of traditional historical anecdotes and gave more space to social history than many contemporary textbook writers; the foreign volumes were more conservative in these respects. In 1850, a singularly productive year, Corner published (with Dean & Son) accounts for young children of the ancient Britons, Saxons, and Normans, followed by descriptions of England in the middle ages, the sixteenth and seventeenth, and eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. With Henry Bohn, she published 'China' (1853) and 'India' (1854). 
Corner's other educational works for children included 'The Picture Nursery Sunday-Book' (1852), 'Merry Multiplication' (1867), and 'The Play Grammar' (1848), the last of which was an admirably lucid (if rather challenging) guide to parsing. She also produced revised versions of historical textbooks by other authors, including Anne Rodwell's 'A Child's First Step to the History of England' in 1853. But Corner also published lighter works, contributing in 1854 five or six tales to Dean's series of 'Simple Tales and Little Stories', including 'Rose and her Bird' and 'The Good Children'. In addition, she wrote many short plays for children, based on fairy stories and published in Dean's series of 'Little Plays for Little People'. In the Preface to 'The Little Play of Mother Goose' (1854), she claimed to have been inspired by seeing some children amusing themselves and their elders at Christmas by this 'innocent and lively recreation'. Conscious that some parents would object to home theatricals, she argued that amusement was an essential part of education and could be used to teach useful and moral lessons. 
Julia Corner died unmarried, at her home, 92 Clarendon Road, Notting Hill, London, on 16 August 1875. Although well received by contemporaries, her publications brought her no lasting reputation; Allibone's 'Critical Dictionary', however, described her as 'one of the most useful writers of the age' (1.430). 


@@@@@


doc= 6327


Cornwall, Charles (bap. 1669, d. 1718), naval officer, was baptized on 5 August 1669 at Eyre, Herefordshire, the son of Robert Cornewall (1646-1701) of Berrington, and his wife, Edith Cornwallis (died 1696). He entered the navy in 1683, commanded two prizes in 1691-2, and on 19 September 1692 was made post captain of the sloop 'Portsmouth'. In 1693 he commanded the 'Adventure' (44 guns), and accompanied Admiral Edward Russell to the Mediterranean; he remained there until 1696, at about which time he married Dorothy Hanmer; they had eight sons and seven daughters. This was Cornewall's second marriage; details of his first wife are unknown. On 18 January 1695 he shared in the capture of the French ships 'Trident' and 'Content'. Captain James Killigrew of the 'Plymouth', the senior officer present, was killed in the action, and Cornewall was promoted to command the 'Plymouth'. 
Cornewall left the navy after the treaty of Ryswick (1697), having latterly commanded the 'Kent', and in 1701 he attempted unsuccessfully to enter parliament for Herefordshire, at which time it was said that he possessed an estate of $10,000-$12,000 and an annual income of $500-$600. He returned to naval service in command of the 'Shrewsbury' in 1701, but resigned after a few months in order to settle the complicated family affairs caused by the sudden death of his father. Although appointed to the 'Exeter' in 1702, he was unwilling to serve in her if he was to be effectively a 'second captain' under John Leake, who was appointed to command the Newfoundland station; Cornewall protested that 'their sending a private captain to command... me in my own ship [was] a modest way of terming me a blockhead' ('Portland MSS', 8.102), and he rejected a proposed transfer to a smaller ship. Because of the chequered nature of his recent career, and his uneasy political relationship with Robert Harley, he was finding it difficult to obtain suitable employment, despite regular requests to leading ministers. However, in 1705 he was appointed to command the 'Orford'. 
In the 'Orford' Cornewall again went out to the Mediterranean, where he remained for the next two years, under the command, first, of Sir Cloudesley Shovell, and afterwards of Sir Thomas Dilkes. In the autumn of 1707 he commanded a detached squadron on the coast of Naples. In March 1708 he returned to England, and in 1709 he changed his name to Cornwall in an attempt to distinguish between different branches of his family. He sat as a whig MP, first for Bewdley -- 1709-10 -- and later for Weobley, from 1715 until his death. In December 1709 he was appointed to command in the Downs and off Dunkirk; and in October 1710 he left England in command of the 'Dreadnought', in charge of the trade for the Levant. This he escorted safely to Smyrna, and by December 1711 he was again in England where his strong political leanings excluded him from further employment under the tory administration. 
At the accession of George I Cornwall was appointed comptroller of storekeeper's accounts at the Navy Board; he retained this post until promoted rear-admiral on 16 June 1716. In the following October he became commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, with instructions to take appropriate measures to prevent the depredations of the Sale corsairs, and to enter into a treaty with the emperor of Morocco. In this work he was occupied for the next year, residing at Gibraltar, where a quarrel -- one which was to become increasingly bitter -- sprang up between Cornwall and the governor; it arose out of the soldiers' unwillingness to admit the admiral's authority even in matters relating to the ships in the port. The blame for this may have lain chiefly with the governor, who maintained that either he or Cornwall was 'the vilest fellow upon earth', and permitted, if he did not encourage, his officers to 'drink damnation to the admiral and the negotiation he was conducting'. Cornwall too may have used strong language, for he seems to have been a man of hot temper; but the correspondence between the two ended in the admiral's expressing determination to refer the matter to the king or to the speaker of the Commons. He seems to have been prevented from doing so by his being called away from Gibraltar on active service. He had been promoted vice-admiral in March 1718, and in June he hoisted his flag in the 'Shrewsbury', as second in command of the fleet under Sir George Byng, before playing a prominent part in the victory off Cape Passaro on 31 July. Afterwards he shifted his flag to his former ship, the 'Argyle', convoyed the prizes to Port Mahon, and sailed for England. His health had been poor for some time, and after putting into Lisbon on the homeward passage he died there on 7 October 1718. He was buried in Westminster Abbey. 
Among Cornwall's sons, Jacobs was the father of Charles Wolfran Cornwall, who was named after Charles's uncle, another naval captain, Wolfran Cornwall, who had been a prominent Williamite agent during the revolution of 1688. Cornwall's younger brother, Frederick (died 1748), vicar of Bromfield for forty-six years, was the grandfather of Folliott H. W. Cornewall, bishop of Worcester. 


@@@@@


doc= 6328


Cornewall, Folliot Herbert Walker (bap. 1754, d. 1831), bishop of Worcester, was baptized Folliot Herbert Cornewall on 9 May 1754 at Ludlow, Shropshire, the second son of Frederick Cornewall (1706-1788), of Delbury, Shropshire, a naval officer and MP for Montgomery from 1771 to 1774, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Francis Herbert, a first cousin of Henry Arthur Herbert, first earl of Powis. His elder brother, Frederick Cornewall (1752-1783), was MP for Leominster from 1776 to 1780, and for Ludlow from 1780 until his death. Cornewall entered Eton College on 27 April 1765 and was admitted pensioner at St John's College, Cambridge, on 24 June 1772. He graduated BA in 1777. On 14 December that year he was ordained deacon by John Hinchcliffe, bishop of Peterborough, and on 20 December 1778 he was ordained priest. He proceeded MA in 1780, the same year that he was appointed chaplain to the House of Commons, nominated by the speaker, his second cousin Charles Wolfran Cornwall. His sermon before the House of Commons for 30 January, the anniversary of the execution of Charles I, was given and printed in 1782. Cornewall continued to accumulate preferment. He was rector of Frilsham, Berkshire, from 1781 to 1784, canon of Windsor from 1784 to 1793, master of Wigston's Hospital, Leicester, from 1790, and dean of Canterbury from 1793 to 1797. In Ludlow he was a common councilman from 1781 to 1797. 
On the death of his brother in 1783 Cornewall inherited the estates of a relative, Francis Walker, and took the additional name of Walker. On 19 June 1787, at Taplow, Buckinghamshire, he married Anne (died 1795), daughter of George Hamilton, canon of Windsor; they had two sons and two daughters. On 9 April 1797 Cornewall was consecrated bishop of Bristol. His fast sermon preached before the House of Lords was published in 1798. He was translated to the diocese of Hereford, a wealthier see than Bristol, on 28 January 1803. In 1805 he deputized for Richard Hurd, the elderly bishop of Worcester, on a confirmation tour, as the octogenarian Hurd was too infirm to travel. Following Hurd's death, he was nominated to succeed him. The prime minister, William Henry Cavendish Cavendish-Bentinck, third duke of Portland, wrote to George III that Cornewall's character and learning were highly distinguished, that his appointment was 'much wished for by the principal gentry as well as clergy' ('Later Correspondence of George III', 5.3668), and that his political opinions would help secure the diocese's loyalty to the administration. He was consecrated in 1808. 
Cornewall died at home at Hartlebury Castle, Stourport, Worcestershire, on 5 September 1831, and was buried in the family vault at Delbury, Shropshire. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' remembered him as 'possessed of fair scholarship, strong good sense, polished manners, and an amiable temper:... [he] passed a virtuous and exemplary life' ('GM', 370). 


@@@@@


doc= 6329


Cornewall, James (bap. 1698, d. 1744), naval officer and politician, was baptized on 17 November 1698 at Moccas, Herefordshire, the fourth son of Colonel Henry Cornewall (died 1717) of Bradwardine, near Hereford, and the second son with his second wife, Susanna, daughter and coheir of Sir John Williams, second baronet, of Elham, Kent. James's half-brother and brother, Henry and Velters Cornewall, were MPs for Hereford and Herefordshire respectively, while his uncle Vice-Admiral Charles Cornwall (formerly Cornewall) came to prominence for his role in the victory off Cape Passaro in July 1718. 
Cornewall appears to have begun his career as a volunteer per order in the 'Chatham' in March 1721, moving in the same rate to the 'Torbay' in December of that year (TNA: PRO, ADM 6/477, pp. 326, 415). On 3 April 1724 he was promoted captain of the frigate 'Sheerness', in which for the next four years he was employed on the North American coast, principally at Boston, in protecting legitimate trade from piracy. He returned to England in August 1728 and two years later stood unsuccessfully as the parliamentary candidate for Weobley, Herefordshire. He was subsequently returned for that seat in April 1732 and held it until 1734. In December 1732 he was appointed to the frigate 'Greyhound'. During the following summer he was employed in her on the Moroccan coast where, during 1733, he established friendly relations with the Sale corsairs and the bashaw of Tetuan. In the following March he returned to England and three months later he took command of the 'Deptford' (50 guns) which served in the channel and along the Portuguese coast with Sir John Norris. 
Early in 1737 Cornewall commissioned the 'Greenwich', in which he oversaw the regulation of trade on the west African coast. Rumours surfaced that he had carried slaves to Barbados, though this charge was not substantiated and led to nothing more than a caution addressed to his successor, George Anson. In March of that year he had been returned as MP for Weobley on petition; seldom in the house, he voted (for the administration) in only two divisions and did not contest his seat at the 1741 election. In 1739 he had been appointed to the 'St Albans' (50 guns), in which between September and October, with the company of the 'Weymouth', he cruised off the Azores in quest of homeward-bound Spanish ships. Plans to send Cornewall on to the China seas and western Pacific to co-operate with Anson's squadron in the eastern Pacific came to nothing on account of the strain of the West Indian expedition. In 1741 he was appointed to the 'Bedford' in which, a year later, he accompanied Vice-Admiral Thomas Mathews to the Mediterranean. 
Cornewall was transferred to the 'Marlborough' (90 guns) in 1743 and supported the 'Namur' (Mathews's flagship) during its engagement with the Spanish flagship, 'San Felipe', and her seconds at the battle of Toulon (11 February 1744). The 'Marlborough' and 'Namur' bore the brunt of the encounter, the 'Namur' being dismasted while the 'Marlborough' was reduced to a wreck. The ship suffered heavy casualties (43 killed and 120 wounded) including Cornewall who died, unmarried, after his legs had been shot away, an injury which left him with life only 'to express the agony he was in, by shaking his head at the surgeon' ('Narrative of the Proceedings of his Majesty's Fleet in the Mediterranean', 1744, 89). Writing in June 1747, Horace Walpole commented how 'in the present dearth of glory' Cornewall 'is canonized, though poor man! he had been tried twice the year before for cowardice' ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 37.271). In the same year parliament voted to commemorate his actions with a 36 foot monument for Westminster Abbey, designed by Sir Robert Taylor and completed in 1755. Cornewall's cousin, Frederick Cornewall, then first lieutenant of the 'Marlborough', assumed command after Cornewall's death until he too was severely wounded. He later commanded the 'Revenge' in the action off Minorca in 1756 and died in 1786. 


@@@@@


doc= 6330


Corney, Bolton (1784-1870), literary critic and antiquary, was born at St Lawrence, Thanet, on 28 April 1784 and baptized in the parish church of St Lawrence, the son of Henry Corney (died 1801) and his wife, Mary Stock. It has been stated that he served for some time in the revenue service, but this is doubtful and little is known of his early life and education. In 1803 he obtained a commission as ensign in the 28th regiment of foot, and in 1804 a medal for good marksmanship inscribed 'Royal Greenwich Volunteers'. The middle portion of his life was spent at Maze Hill, Greenwich, where he held the post of first clerk in the steward's department at the Royal Hospital ('Navy List', 1840, 138). From this he did not retire until about 1846 or 1847, when he married Henrietta Mary Pridham, elder surviving daughter of Captain (afterwards Admiral) Richard Pridham of Plymouth; he then moved to 29 The Terrace, Barnes, in Surrey. 
In early life Corney formed an attachment to literature, and after his move to Barnes he plunged more deeply than ever into his bibliophilic researches, and lived and died literally in the midst of his books. In 'Researches and Conjectures on the Bayeux Tapestry' (1836), he contended that the tapestry was not executed until 1205, and his view was adopted by Dr Lingard (J. C. Bruce, 'Bayeux Tapestry Elucidated', 11, 163). Edouard Lambert published a reply to Corney in 'Refutation des objections faites contre l'antiquite de la tapisserie de Bayeux' (1841). Corney's caustic criticism of Isaac D'Israeli in 'Curiosities of Literature by I. D'Israeli Illustrated' (1837) prompted D'Israeli to reply in 'The Illustrator Illustrated' (1838), whereupon Corney brought out a second edition of his work, 'revised and acuminated, to which are added, Ideas on Controversy, deduced from the practice of a Veteran; and adapted to the meanest capacity' (1838). The 'London Metropolitan Magazine' thought the illustrations 'by far the best specimens of historical and bibliographical criticism that we have seen anywhere this many a day' (Allibone, 'Dict.'). One hundred copies of the 'Ideas on controversy' were separately printed. 'On the new general biographical dictionary: a specimen of amateur criticism, in letters to Mr Sylvanus Urban' (1839) was a collection of letters which originally appeared in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', in which he severely criticized the earlier portions of the well known biographical compilation published under the name of the Revd Hugh James Rose. In the 1860s he published 'Comments on the evidence of Antonio Panizzi, esq., before the select committee of the House of Commons on the British Museum, AD' 1860 (in 1856 Corney, who had often clashed with Panizzi, protested to Palmerston against Panizzi's appointment as principal librarian); 'The Sonnets of William Shakspere: a Critical Disquisition Suggested by a Recent Discovery' (by V. E. Philarete Chasles, relating to the inscription which precedes the sonnets in the edition of 1609) (1862); and 'An Argument on the Assumed Birthday of Shakspere: Reduced to Shape, 1864'. 
Corney also edited, from a manuscript in his own possession, 'An Essay on Landscape Gardening' by Sir John Dalrymple, one of the barons of the exchequer in Scotland (1823); 'The Seasons' by James Thomson, with illustrations designed by the Etching Club (1842); Goldsmith's 'Poetical Works, Illustrated, with a Memoir' (1846); 'The Voyage of Sir Henry Middleton to Bantam and the Maluco Islands in 1604' (1855), for the Hakluyt Society, of which his son attested that he was one of the original founders in 1846; and 'Of the Conduct of the Understanding, by John Locke' (1859). He was a frequent contributor to 'Notes and Queries' and 'The Athenaeum', and he made special collections concerning Caxton, which he placed at the disposal of William Blades (Blades, 'Life and Typography of William Caxton', 7. xi, 282-5; 2.259). He was a member of the council of the Shakespeare Society and the Camden Society, one of the auditors of the Royal Literary Fund, and a long-time member of the Royal Society of Literature. 
Corney died at his home, 29 The Terrace, Barnes, on 31 August 1870 from 'natural decay' and was buried in the parish cemetery on Barnes Common. He left an only son, Bolton Glanvill Corney, born in 1851, who became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons and was appointed government medical officer in Fiji. 


@@@@@


doc= 6331


Cornhill, William of (d. 1223), bishop of Coventry, belonged to a London family who rose in the service of Henry II and his sons. He was probably the nephew, or possibly the son, of Reginald of Cornhill (died 1209/10), a close adherent of John, and doubtless owed his elevation to this fact. 
About 1204 William of Cornhill's name begins to appear frequently in the records as a royal clerk and an officer of the exchequer. His first ecclesiastical preferment was the rectory of Maidstone to which he was presented in 1205 by the king. The following year he was made 'custos' of the vacant bishopric of Winchester and abbey of Malmesbury, and in 1206 he acquired a similar role in relation to the see of Lincoln. On 30 June 1207 the king made him archdeacon of Huntingdon and a prebendary of Chichester: he presumably paid the price of 500 marks for these promotions ('Rotuli de oblatis et finibus', 412). In 1208 Cornhill served as a royal justice, and for the next two years was in constant attendance on the king, being appointed royal chamberlain in succession to Hubert de Burgh (died 1243) and Peter des Roches (died 1238). On occasions he transmitted orders for the preparation of royal letters, which consequently bore the mark 'per W. de Cornhill'. One of the most trusted of John's advisers (though sometimes out of favour), in 1207 he was appointed assessor for the thirteenth in Lincolnshire, while in 1208, as part of the king's response to the interdict, he was given custody of the clergy's lands in the diocese of Lincoln. In 1213 there is evidence for his participating in the marriage market, when he was granted the right to dispose of the heirs and widows associated with two rich estates -- this was the usual type of secular reward for John's servants. Finally, some time before 9 July 1214, through the king's influence, he was elected bishop by both the monks of Coventry and the canons of Lichfield, though he continued to be called archdeacon of Huntingdon until at least 16 August, and probably did not resign this office until he received the temporalities of his see on 20 October of that year (his successor as archdeacon is first recorded on 15 November). He was consecrated by Archbishop Stephen Langton (died 1228) at Reading on 25 January 1215 ('Ann. mon.', 2.282), the king making him a large grant of venison from Windsor Forest towards his consecration feast. 
Cornhill remained active on the side of John until the very end of the reign; he went on unsuccessful missions to persuade both the Londoners and the Welsh princes to support the king (Rymer, 'Foedera', 1.121, 127) and accompanied him to Runnymede, being named in 'Magna Carta' as one of the magnates by whose advice it was issued. He was present when the legate Guala crowned Henry III at Gloucester on 28 October 1216. Of his acts as bishop little is recorded, almost certainly because the practice of keeping episcopal records on rolls did not become prevalent in his diocese, unlike that of Lincoln. Cornhill attended the Fourth Lateran Council in 1215 and has been said by some modern scholars to have been so influenced by it, and the principles of church government enunciated there, that he was responsible for the 'Constitutiones cuiusdam episcopi', one of the earliest sets of diocesan constitutions (BL, Cotton MS Vespasian E.iii; 'Councils & Synods', vol. 2, ed. F. M. Powicke and C. R. Cheney, 2 vols., 1964, 2.781-97). C. R. Cheney, however, considered that Hereford diocese was the more likely origin of this document. Cornhill granted the canons of Lichfield the privilege of electing their own dean. 
In September 1221 Cornhill was deprived of speech by a sudden stroke of paralysis during an ordination service. He died on 19 August 1223, and was buried in Lichfield Cathedral, where his coffin was discovered in 1662. The prior of Coventry's contemporary epitaph was 'Vir simplex et liberalis, fidelis regi et utilis regno' ('a generous low-born man, faithful to the king and of service to the realm'; Dugdale, 'Monasticon', 6.1242). 


@@@@@


doc= 6332


Cornish, Henry (d. 1685), local politician, was apparently a native of Wiltshire and was originally of 'a mean servile condition', according to a detractor ('CSP dom.', 'Jan-June 1683', 315). A cloth factor resident in London, perhaps from as early as 1659, he became a freeman of the Haberdashers' Company in 1668 and served as its master in 1680-82. After 1671 he lived in Cateaton Street, Cheapside, in the parish of St Lawrence Jewry. He carried on his business there, eventually with partners Thomas Cornish and John DeVink, one of his sons-in-law. He also maintained a country house at Bromley, owned other London properties, and possessed lands in Somerset. An occasional conformist, he probably had presbyterian preferences: a daughter married a son of Henry Ashurst, the city's most prominent presbyterian layman, and Cornish had business connections to the dissenting Foley family of Worcestershire. His relationship to a contemporary west country dissenting divine of the same name (an ejected canon of Christ Church, Oxford) is unknown. 
In May 1679 Cornish was one of the first to sign a city petition intended to encourage parliamentary adoption of a bill to exclude James, duke of York, from the succession. For the remainder of Charles II's reign he took a leading part in civic politics. The election of Cornish and Slingsby Bethel as sheriffs of London and Middlesex in June 1680 signalled a seizing of the political initiative in the city by those who would soon be called whigs. It was also intended to promote accommodation between the state church and reformed protestants outside the church. However, neither Cornish nor Bethel had qualified by taking the oaths intended to prevent dissenters from holding office, so their elections were disallowed. Despite the king's appearances in the city to assist the secretary of state, Leoline Jenkins, in promoting loyalist candidates, Cornish and Bethel headed the poll in a second election. By that time they had also satisfied the religious tests. Jenkins 'fear[ed] more from Cornish' than from Bethel, although Bethel was generally regarded as a republican ('CSP dom.', '1679-80', 620). Charles declined to knight either of the new sheriffs, as would have been customary. Cornish was also returned as alderman for Vintry ward in 1680, and he was eventually accepted by the court of aldermen despite loyalist objections. 
Bethel and Cornish were not friends: they clashed almost immediately over the choice of an under-sheriff. Bethel insisted upon the attorney Richard Goodenough, whom Cornish openly distrusted as hostile to the government. He was also offended by Bethel's much ridiculed frugality in office, insisting that he would, during his shrievalty, provide the accustomed hospitality. Politically, however, the two sheriffs were partners and tribunes of the civic whig movement and regarded themselves as accountable to the electors who chose them. They were quite useful to Shaftesbury and the parliamentary whigs because they impanelled the urban juries with an eye towards the prosecution of those accused of complicity in the Popish Plot. They also co-operated in an unsuccessful scheme to grant the civic freedom to Shaftesbury and the duke of Buckingham so that they might, in time, assume magisterial office in London. 
In 1681 Cornish was instrumental in securing the deposition of the Irish informant, Edward Fitzharris, with whose fanciful revelations Shaftesbury hoped to revive fears about Catholic plotting. He was faulted by fellow whigs for immediately informing the king about Fitzharris's information. When the crown sought to silence Fitzharris through a treason prosecution Cornish and Bethel delayed summoning a jury. According to Cornish's testimony at the trial, Charles had told him that Fitzharris was actually employed by the court. After being condemned Fitzharris charged Cornish and other whigs with suborning his evidence about plotting, but when Cornish and Bethel officiated at Fitzharris's execution they sought to encourage further revelations. Cornish facilitated whig efforts to petition for another parliament after the brief sitting at Oxford in March 1681. He helped select the London jury that threw out the crown's treason case against Stephen College, 'the protestant joiner'. After the crown's unsuccessful treason prosecution of Shaftesbury, Cornish was said to be collecting depositions for ministerial impeachments. 
Cornish was similarly visible in the controverted events of 1682-3 in which the crown recovered control of the corporation of London. In January 1682 he was named to the committee to defend the civic charter against the crown's 'quo warranto', and he was one of the whig aldermen who refused to co-operate in legal actions against conventiclers. An organizer for whig candidates Thomas Papillon and John Dubois during the protracted shrieval election of 1682, he was indicted, with other leading civic whigs, for a riot. When tory sheriffs supported by the crown were declared elected by the loyalist lord mayor, despite a poll that favoured their rivals, Cornish protested. He told the lord mayor that the citizens would not be 'baffled' by such 'encroachments on their privileges' or 'suffer an Arbitrary unjust one to Rule' in London (Library of Congress, London newsletters, 8.121, 28 Sept 1682). But Cornish himself was baffled in the ensuing election for a new lord mayor: he and a whig colleague headed a poll for the office only to see the court of aldermen adjust the results in favour of loyalist Sir William Prichard. 
Cornish was present at strategy sessions throughout 1682 in which civic and parliamentary whigs discussed responses to what they perceived as Charles's infringements upon electoral rights. He was, for instance, a late arrival at a gathering in November 1682 at the home of merchant Thomas Shepherd where the duke of Monmouth, Lord Russell, Lord Grey, Robert Ferguson, and Colonel John Rumsey apparently discussed an urban insurrection that was subsequently aborted. In April 1683 Cornish met Thomas Papillon and John Dubois just before his former assistant, Richard Goodenough, arrested Lord Mayor Prichard for failing to respond to a whig suit on behalf of Papillon and Dubois as the legitimate sheriffs. Goodenough had earlier been privy to a scheme to assassinate Charles II, restore parliamentary government, and get Cornish made mayor of London. In May 1683 Cornish was fined 1000 marks after he and his whig colleagues were found guilty of riot in the 1682 shrieval election. Undaunted, he toured the clothing towns of Wiltshire and eastern Somerset, where he was met by enthusiastic crowds and looked into purchasing an interest in the parliamentary borough of Hindon. 
Cornish was implicated in some of the revelations about whig plotting that were heard before the privy council during the summer of 1683. He was apprehended four times in the next two years, once on suspicion of distributing pamphlets that suggested the earl of Essex had been murdered by the government, and again during Monmouth's rebellion against James II. The capture of Richard Goodenough after Monmouth's rebellion sealed his fate: the crown now had another witness willing to support Colonel John Rumsey's claim that Cornish had been involved in the conspiracies against Charles II's life in 1682-3. Arrested and found guilty in a hasty trial, he was executed on 23 October 1685, before his Cheapside house. He was comforted by Dr Benjamin Calamy, the vicar of his parish, who had sought to save him, and Cornish claimed from the scaffold that 'the crimes laid to my charge were falsely and maliciously sworn against me by the witnesses' ('State trials', 11.451). James eventually granted Cornish's estate and his remains, which were displayed over Guildhall and the city gates, to his widow, Elizabeth, and to his children. He was buried at St Lawrence Jewry in November 1687. An inventory drawn up after his death included more than a hundred accounts with credits and debts amounting to $87,000, a figure that indicates the considerable scale of his business. 
Although lords Grey and Howard regarded Cornish as a plot participant, most of his whig contemporaries regarded him as the victim of judicial murder. Robert Ferguson and Thomas Shepherd insisted that he was not yet present when rebellion was discussed at Shepherd's house in November 1682. What he knew about subsequent whig conspiracy is unclear. Some plotters regarded him as too cautious, and some exiles doubted his commitment to their cause. Gilbert Burnet regarded Cornish as 'a plain, warm, honest man' who was manifestly innocent ('Bishop Burnet's History', 2.248). The circumstances of his death secured his place in the pantheon of whig martyrs that included Algernon Sidney and Lord Russell. His attainder for treason was reversed after the revolution of 1688, and the foreman of his trial jury was burnt in effigy by a London crowd in December 1689. His London son of the same name followed him in business, held a government place under William III, and was briefly MP for Shaftesbury in Dorset. 


@@@@@


doc= 6333


Cornish, Joseph (1750-1823), Presbyterian minister and religious writer, was born at Taunton, Somerset, on 16 December 1750, the youngest of seven children of Joseph Cornish (died 1776), woollen-dresser, and his second wife, Honour Ham (died 1769). His parents' attachment to the dissenting ministry of Thomas Amory at Pauls Meeting and Tancred Street, Taunton, may indicate a long-standing family connection, especially given the publication in 1731 of 'A sermon preach'd at the ordination of the Rev. Mr. Thomas Amory, and Mr. William Cornish, at Taunton, Somerset, Oct. 7, 1730'. Certainly, two of his father's eight brothers were Presbyterian ministers: John at Leather Lane, London, and James at Dulverton, Somerset. 
Cornish received a classical grounding locally from a clergyman named Patch and from a Mr Glass of Westminster School. In 1765 he became one of the first pupils of Joshua Toulmin, the learned Baptist minister who had recently accepted a call to the Mary Street meeting-house in Taunton and who, in September 1767, gained him admission as a foundation student in Coward's academy, Hoxton. The divinity tutor was Samuel Morton Savage, a moderate Calvinist, who was assisted by Andrew Kippis and Abraham Rees, both Arians. While at Hoxton, Cornish began his lifelong adherence to what he called the 'very high Arian scheme', associated with Samuel Clarke ('Monthly Repository', 18, 1823, 617). Shortly before leaving the academy in 1772, Cornish published 'A Serious and Earnest Address to Protestant Dissenters', which went through three large editions, and his pointed and telling 'Brief and Impartial History of the Puritans', later revised by Samuel Palmer, the editor of Calamy's 'Nonconformist's Memorial', in 1797. In 1772, at the suggestion of Philip Furneaux, Cornish also applied unsuccessfully for the afternoon lectureship at Salters' Hall in succession to Hugh Farmer. 
Amory, impressed by Cornish's learning, recommended him to George's Meeting, a small Presbyterian congregation at Colyton, east Devon, which had been vacant for four years since the departure of Matthew Anstis for Bridport, Dorset, in 1768. Toulmin had also served there from 1761 until 1765. As Colyton was relatively near his father's home, Cornish began his ministry there in July 1772 despite a unanimous call to Epsom, which he had occasionally supplied from Hoxton. He subsequently received Presbyterian ordination at Taunton on 11 May 1773. 
Cornish never married and was to stay at Colyton for the remaining fifty-one years of his life. During his long ministry the meeting-house was enhanced by a new entrance with iron gates, built about 1800, a burial-ground, in use from 1832, and an organ, installed in 1820. His stipend at Colyton, including endowment, averaged no more than $40 per annum, but until 1783 he boarded with Mr Slade, one of his leading hearers, whose house was 'the chief resort of various ministers visiting the town'. The charge was under $20 a year and Cornish therefore always found it possible 'to spare something for charitable purposes' ('Monthly Repository', 18, 1823, 619). At the same time he saved hard to clear the debts arising from the failure of his late father's business that had been ruined by the American war, and as soon as he was able to do so he honoured his father's memory by paying every creditor in full. Calls from Tewkesbury late in 1781 and from Banbury in 1792 offered the prospect of a larger income, but Cornish resisted such temptations out of regard for his existing friends. 
Cornish's finances were improving as a result of running a classical school, which he opened at Colyton in 1782. He initially taught in the gallery of his meeting-house, but the undertaking proved so successful that at Christmas 1796 he was able to buy a house and take boarders. The school was not confined to dissenters and continued in one shape or another until Christmas 1819. Some of his students proceeded to careers as surgeons or in the Royal Navy; others became clergymen. 
As minister and schoolmaster Cornish earned much local affection and he was on intimate terms with three successive vicars of Colyton, George Nutcombe, Richard Buller, and Frederick Barnes. He was long remembered for 'his peculiar bachelor habits, his quaint old world courtesy, his chivalry to women, and his never-failing kindness to children' (Murch, 22). In old age some of those children recalled 'a man in knee breeches, black silk stockings and shoes, with a fund of true humour and joke', someone who was 'always the scholar and the gentleman' (Evans, 'Colytonia', 22). He showed a particular fondness for his apple trees, whist parties, children's tea parties, and long walks up Colyton Hill and in Shute Park. 
Cornish remained a particularly active writer until the 1790s, several of his works being published locally in Taunton, where Mrs Jane Toulmin was long engaged as a bookseller. As a writer he is a good specimen of the class of men to whom dissent meant religious liberty rather than sectarian organization or theological system. His works sold rapidly and addressed not only theological questions but also practical religion, religious biography, and classical learning. He was paid a much needed 5 guineas for the copyright of 'A Blow at the Root of All Priestly Claims' (1775) by John Johnson of St Paul's Churchyard. In 'A Letter to the Venerable Bishop of Carlisle [Edmund Law]' (1777) he argued for extensive alterations to the liturgy and 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. He wrote an improved account of the life of Thomas Firmin, the seventeenth-century philanthropist, with the help of Andrew Kippis and Joseph Bretland; his defence of Firmin's decision to remain within the established church was criticized by the Unitarians. Cornish also projected a 'Life of John Lilburne', but the work, though announced, was never published. His last works were an article 'On the decline of Presbyterian congregations', published in the 'Monthly Repository' (1819), and some short pieces, foremost among which was a supportive letter of September 1798 which he sent, together with 5 guineas, to Thomas Williams, who had been imprisoned for selling Paine's 'Age of Reason'. 
Cornish's comments on dwindling congregations appear to have been based upon first-hand experience. By 1793 he had successfully built up a following at Colyton of 'about eighty', but on 28 April 1814 four neighbouring ministers wrote to him suggesting that he should retire in favour of a Calvinistic successor (Polwhele, 2.314). He flatly refused, quoting in his defence John Lavington, himself a high Calvinist, 'Should the number of your hearers lessen, do not be discouraged so as to grow remiss in your endeavours: remember Jesus Christ preached an excellent sermon to one woman' (Murch, 336). Consequently, a new meeting-house was built in 1819 for the Calvinistic dissenters. Cornish continued to discharge his ministerial duties until August 1823, when he was attacked by illness. He assisted at the Lord's supper on 5 October, but died four days later. He was buried beneath the entrance to his meeting-house on 17 October, and a memorial tablet to his memory was placed above the spot. James Manning, minister of Exeter, officiated and subsequently published an abridged version of Cornish's autobiography in the 'Monthly Repository' (1823). His death was 'universally lamented' 'by men of all parties' who had come to respect his charity, classical scholarship, instruction of youth, and writing (Murch, 336, 342). Among Cornish's benefactions was a sum of $400 given to the London Presbyterian Fund. 


@@@@@


doc= 6334


Cornish, Sir Samuel, baronet (c.1715-1770), naval officer, was believed by John Charnock to have risen from modest origins, and to have served his apprenticeship on a collier before being appointed to an East Indiaman (Charnock, 5.139). However, it remains possible that these details relate to his father. Cornish is known to have entered the navy as a volunteer 'per order' in 1728. He was commissioned lieutenant in the 'Litchfield' on 12 November 1739, and on 11 November 1740 he moved, with Captain Charles Knowles, to the 'Weymouth', in which he served in the ill-conducted combined operation at Cartagena during March and April 1741. On his return to England he was appointed to command the bomb-ketch 'Mortar'; and on 12 March 1742 he was posted flag captain of the 'Namur' under Vice-Admiral Thomas Mathews, with whom he served in the Mediterranean. 
On 21 September 1742 Cornish was appointed to command the 'Guernsey' (50 guns); he continued in her until the end of the war, doing occasional good service in the destruction of the enemy's privateers, and taking part in the action off Toulon on 11 February 1744. His part in that discreditable engagement occasioned no comment, which must be considered an achievement in the light of the number of careers destroyed on that day and in the subsequent courts martial. On 9 March 1749, as a 'gentleman well skilled in mathematicks and natural knowledge', Cornish was elected to the Royal Society (record of election of members). In 1755 he commissioned the 'Stirling Castle' for service in the channel, and in 1758 he was transferred to the 'Union' (90 guns), and was ordered by Lord Anson to wear a distinguishing pennant. 
On 14 February 1759 Cornish was promoted rear-admiral of the white, and in May he was sent out to the East Indies with a small squadron to reinforce Vice-Admiral George Pocock. Having been delayed on passage by the need to escort East India Company ships to Trincomalee, he was not present at Pocock's engagement with D'Ache on 10 September 1759, but after consultations with the governor, George Pigot, and the council at Fort St George, Madras, Cornish undertook operations to clear the coast of Coromandel; this established his reputation as a commander able to co-operate effectively with the army. Pocock had resigned his command of the station to Rear-Admiral Charles Steevens, and when Steevens died on 17 May 1761, Cornish succeeded him. He immediately found himself embroiled in a dispute with the East India Company over the plunder taken at the surrender of the French fortress of Pondicherry, in which Cornish betrayed an ominously unconstructive attitude which certainly suggests that his or his father's earlier dealings with the company had left bitter feelings. This bitterness affected his relations with Madras when he was asked to assist in the creation and execution of a plan to seize the French post on Mauritius, the Ile de France, but his professional competence in combined operations and respect for the military officers of the company enabled him to overcome his feelings. 
The plan Cornish prepared was a model of its kind, but when Spain was drawn into the war it was laid aside in favour of a proposal to capture the Spanish port of Manila. Cornish commanded the seven ships of the line and three frigates carrying Colonel William Draper's troops. By posting a frigate in the Strait of Malacca Cornish ensured that no news of the impending strike reached Manila prior to the fleet's arrival on 23 September 1762. The city walls were breached on 5 October and on the following day the place was taken by storm. Draper did his utmost to put a stop to the spoliation of the town, and with Cornish agreed to accept a ransom of $4 million. The hinterland, however, was soon raised against the British, and Cornish, who had taken the position of governor of Cavite, quarrelled over the means of defence, the collection of the ransom, the administration of justice, and measures to be taken to secure the Spanish Acapulco galleons. With the conclusion of the treaty of Paris, Manila was returned to Spain. 
Cornish, who had been advanced to vice-admiral of the blue on 21 October 1762, returned to Europe in February 1763 before news of the peace treaty was known in Asia, and he participated in an unsuccessful campaign to persuade the government to use forceful means to obtain payment of the Manila ransom. A pamphlet written to support this claim, 'A Plain Narrative of the Reduction of Manila', although published anonymously, appears to have been his work. Despite this disappointment he had acquired a comfortable income from prize money. In 1765 he purchased the manors of Sharnbrook, Tafte, and Temple Hills in Bedford. The duke of Norfolk supported his election as MP for Shoreham, a seat he held from December 1765 until his death, and on 9 January 1766 he was created a baronet, taking his style as Sir Samuel Cornish of Sharnbrook. About this time he married Susan, daughter of James Gambier of Holborn and sister of Admiral James Gambier; they had no children. Cornish died on 30 October 1770, whereupon his title became extinct and his estate passed to his nephew, Samuel Pitchford, captain in the navy, who took the name Cornish. 


@@@@@


doc= 6335


Cornwall, Charles Wolfran (1735-1789), speaker of the House of Commons, was born on 15 June 1735 and baptized ten days later at St Thomas's Church, Winchester, the only son of Jacobs Cornwall (1709/10-1736), of Berrington, Herefordshire, and his wife, Rose (1706/7-1783), the daughter of Robert Fowler, of Barton Priors, Hampshire. His paternal grandfather was Vice-Admiral Charles Cornwall (bap. 1669, d. 1718). Educated at Winchester School from 1748 and trained for the law at Lincoln's Inn from 1755 and Gray's Inn in 1757, he was called to the bar in 1757. He then became involved politically with his cousin Charles Jenkinson, later first earl of Liverpool, whose influence secured him the post of commissioner for examining the German accounts in 1763. The following year, on 17 August, he married Jenkinson's sister Elizabeth ('bap'. 1730, died 1809), who was the daughter of Colonel Charles Jenkinson and Amarantha Cornwall. They had no children. 
After quitting office in 1765 Cornwall came under the influence of both Lord Rockingham and Lord Shelburne, and at the latter's recommendation he entered parliament in May 1768 as one of the MPs for Grampound, Cornwall. In the Commons he quickly established himself as a frequent and effective spokesman for the opposition, specializing in East India affairs. When Lord North offered him the opportunity to supervise and regulate the East India Company's activities in Bengal in 1773, Cornwall declined, but within a few months he succumbed to North's more attractive offer of a pension of $500 from West Indies revenues. Cornwall formally crossed the floor of the house when he accepted a place at the Treasury board in 1774, and thereafter he defended the government's American policy, despite his misgivings about the conduct of the war. In October 1774 he was returned as MP for the Treasury seat of Winchelsea, which he exchanged for another Cinque Ports seat, Rye, in April 1784. 
On 31 October 1780 Cornwall was elected speaker of the Commons and it was hoped, according to Nathaniel Wraxall, that 'a sonorous Voice, a manly as well as imposing Figure, and a commanding Deportment' would ensure success ('Historical and Posthumous Memoirs', 1.374-5). Wraxall went on to denounce Cornwall's record as speaker and accused him of being both drunken and bored, a caricature perpetuated by the writers of the satirical 'Rolliad'. This was a distorted view of Cornwall's record for, though he never achieved distinction as speaker, his frequent and well-informed interventions from the chair demonstrated initiative and judgement. He called MPs to account for unparliamentary behaviour and ruled on procedural matters, such as allowing the innovation of parliamentary questions in May 1783. Re-elected in 1784, he even had the temerity to vote against a government measure on 27 February 1786 when, after an all-night debate on a motion in favour of fortifying the dockyards, the division was tied. He also held the office of chief justice in eyre north of the Trent from 1780 until his death and was sworn of the privy council on 8 November 1780. 
Cornwall died in office on 2 January 1789 at his house in Privy Garden, Whitehall, and was buried on 12 January at the church of St Cross Hospital, Winchester, where a monument was erected to him. One obituarist praised him for having conducted himself with 'an affability, dignity, and rectitude of conduct highly becoming his elevated situation' ('GM'). An aphorism conveyed to a later speaker asserted that 'Mr Speaker Cornwall said of his office: 'It is laborious, but not so painful as being forced to defend measures for which I was not properly responsible, and which I did not approve'' (Sidmouth MSS). 


@@@@@


doc= 6336


Cornwallis, Caroline Frances (1786-1858), author and feminist, was born on 12 July 1786 at Wittersham, Kent, the second of two daughters of Revd William Cornwallis (1751-1827), rector of Elham and Wittersham in Kent. Her mother, Mary ('nee' Harris), wrote a number of religious works, including 'A Preparation for the Lord's Supper... Intended for the Use of Ladies' (1826; 3rd edn, 1838), which revealed views similar to those of the evangelical Hannah More. Caroline Cornwallis demonstrated remarkable intellectual capacity as a child and wrote prodigiously from the age of seven. In 1803 her sister, to whom she had been extremely close, died following the birth of her first child. In her grief, Cornwallis pledged herself to a frugal way of life, devoting herself to scholarship and to her parents, and living 'as if there had been no gaieties in the world' (Cornwallis to Miss Liscomb, 25 Dec 1844; Cornwallis, 268). During this period, despite poor health, she learned many languages, including Latin, Greek, Hebrew, German, Anglo-Saxon, and Ancient Egyptian, as well as studying philosophy, science, history, law, theology, and politics. In 1826 she moved to Pescia, Italy, where she was lent a house by a close friend, the historian Jean Charles L. Simonde de Sismondi. The change in environment and beauty of the Italian landscape appear to have given her a new zest for life. However, she continued to study as hard as ever, focusing on mineralogy and Tuscan law. In 1827 she travelled to England to be with her mother, following the death of her father, and returned to Italy in 1829 before settling permanently in Kent, where she owned farm property. 
In 1842 Cornwallis's first published work appeared, 'Philosophical Theories and Philosophical Experience, by a Pariah'. This formed the first volume of an ambitious project, 'Small Books on Great Subjects'. The aim was to popularize difficult subjects for a general readership and was the result of a collaboration between Cornwallis and a small group of unnamed friends, whom she called the ABC Society. The majority of the twenty-two volumes, covering a remarkable variety of subjects, including philosophy, chemistry, theology, grammar, geology, and criminal law, were written by Cornwallis herself, and enjoyed a wide readership in both Britain and America. 
A committed Christian, Cornwallis also wrote on the decline of Christianity and the need for it to be understood as a philosophical system based upon rational principles (see, for example, her contribution to the 'Small Books' series, 'On the State of Man Subsequent to the Promulgation of Christianity', 1851-4). She had earlier been involved in the production of her mother's theological works, though she came to describe herself as an episcopalian, distancing herself from her mother's evangelicalism. In 1846 Cornwallis wrote a historical novel, 'Pericles', which received some favourable reviews, but she did not carry out her intention of writing a sequel. 
In the latter part of her life Cornwallis became particularly interested in schemes to prevent crime, arguing firmly that prevention was better than punishment. The solution she most favoured was the establishment of 'ragged schools', offering a basic education to the most destitute of children. She suggested that school meals might be provided and that children should also be instructed in a trade. In 1853 her essay on juvenile delinquency was bracketed with that of Micaiah Hill for a prize of $200 offered by Lady Byron. Cornwallis believed that the suffrage might be extended to all classes of society once education was enjoyed by all. 
Throughout her life Cornwallis felt frustrated and inhibited by the position of women within contemporary society. She longed to have enjoyed the academic opportunities open to men of her class and chafed against the domestic duties which had distracted her from her studies. By the 1840s her private letters reveal that such feelings were developing into a deeply held feminist consciousness -- comparing women's position to that of black slaves and calling for women's emancipation and the vindication of their rights. These sentiments were given their fullest expression in two seminal articles on the inequities of married women's legal position which appeared in the advanced Liberal journal the 'Westminster Review' in 1856 and 1857. Written at the height of the bitter debates then raging in parliament over proposed changes to married women's legal rights, the anonymous essays became widely cited and proved to be very influential. It is by these essays that Cornwallis is best remembered. She used her extensive grasp of the workings of the law to trace the development and social purposes of the system of common law. With the use of telling examples she argued that by denying property rights to married women the law revealed itself to be a relic from a 'semi-barbarous' age. Cornwallis maintained that such a system degraded not only marital relations but the whole tenor of society. She advocated legal reform based upon the principle of the 'inalienable rights' of every human being. Only then, she insisted, might women make their full contribution to society. At the time of writing the articles Cornwallis was extremely ill, but she persevered in their composition, believing that it was a cause 'of the deepest import to the highest interests of humanity' ('Selections', vii). 
In addition to her scholarly interests Cornwallis was also artistically gifted -- a favourite pastime was to create models from wax. However, this interest was overshadowed by her great passion for science. She was extremely knowledgeable on contemporary developments and discoveries. She was friendly with Michael Faraday, who, she was pleased to report with characteristic self-confidence, 'allows me to question his notions' (Cornwallis to Miss Mansfield, 1844; 'Selections', 260). A single woman (she turned down a marriage proposal from Sismondi), Cornwallis enjoyed the companionship of a circle of many such accomplished friends. She was particularly close to David Power QC, the author of several works on electoral law, and to Samuel Birch, the orientalist, who shared her views on women's position. She was cousin to the mother of Dorothea Beale, the celebrated pioneer of girls' schools, and while Miss Beale did not know Cornwallis personally, she claimed that her relative's literary achievements had been a great inspiration to her. Cornwallis was described as 'large-featured, tall and thin' ('DNB'), though in her self-portrait she presented herself as tall and rather glamorous, with striking eyes. She suffered from debilitating illness for much of her life and was often bedridden. However, this physical weakness was greatly belied by her vigorous and dominant personality. Cornwallis died at her home, Sidwells, Goudhurst, Kent, on 8 January 1858, and was buried in the churchyard of Linton, near Maidstone. 


@@@@@


doc= 6337


Cornwallis, Sir Charles (c.1555-1629), courtier and diplomat, was the second son of Sir Thomas Cornwallis (1518/19-1604), and his wife, Anne (died 1581), daughter of Sir John Jerningham or Jernegan of Somerleyton, Suffolk. Cornwallis's father was a noted Catholic who had taken part in the coup which gave Mary I the throne, and under her was appointed a privy councillor and comptroller of the household. Despite his religion he raised both his sons as protestants, perhaps realizing that they would need to conform in order to advance. Cornwallis matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1566, and in 1578 he married Anne ('bap'. 1551, died 1584), daughter and coheir of Thomas Fincham of Fincham, Norfolk, and widow of Richard Nicholls of Islington, Norfolk. Their union produced two sons, including Sir William Cornwallis the younger, essayist, before Anne died. In 1585 Cornwallis married Anne (died 1617), daughter of Thomas Barrow of Barningham, Suffolk, and widow of Sir Ralph Shelton, of Shelton, Norfolk. 
Cornwallis pursued a life at court and he had a meteoric rise under the patronage of Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury, to whom he was connected by marriage. On 11 July 1603 he was knighted. The following year he was elected MP for Norfolk, and he was allowed to retain his seat in the Commons even when, the next year, he was appointed resident ambassador to Spain. He had an uncomfortable trip to Madrid, being ill and confined to a litter for most of the journey, as well as quarrelling over precedence with the earl of Nottingham, who had been sent to Spain to ratify the 1604 peace treaty. Cornwallis's main task in Madrid was to oversee the provisions of the treaty which allowed the English to practise their religion in private and protected merchants from the harassment of the Inquisition. He was required to deal with many complaints from English merchants that their goods had been seized by the Spanish under the pretence of searching for forbidden protestant literature. While in Madrid he provided valuable intelligence on Spain for Salisbury and busied himself writing treatises on the state of the country, the history of Aragon, the structure of the Spanish court, and the wealth of the nobility (BL, Add. MSS 4149, 39853). From 1607 he petitioned to be relieved from his post, claiming poverty and harassment from English Catholic exiles. He was finally granted leave to return to England in 1609. 
Cornwallis resumed his place in the Commons when he returned and in 1610 was appointed treasurer of the household to Henry, prince of Wales. He was often in attendance upon Henry and found him an impressive figure, later writing 'A discourse of the most illustrious Prince Henry, late prince of Wales' (1641). It was rumoured in 1612 that he would be made master of the court of wards but after the deaths of Henry and Salisbury the same year he received no further court or government office. In 1613 he was appointed a commissioner to investigate the elections to the Irish parliament and while there he set down his views on the people and the nation, describing them as 'naked barbarians' (BL, Add. MS 39853, fol. 2'v'). 
Upon his return to England, Cornwallis sought election to the 1614 parliament for Eye in Suffolk but before he arrived there he learned that the election had already taken place. During the parliament John Hoskins bitterly denounced the Scots and their influence over James I and, when questioned, claimed that he was echoing the views of Cornwallis, whom he had met on the road to Eye. Called before the privy council, Cornwallis denied that he had suggested Hoskins attack the Scots but his guilt was seemingly confirmed when a letter was published in London in which he asked the king for forgiveness. He was committed to the Tower and on his release in June 1615 retired to the country to live at his ancestral home, Brome Hall, Suffolk, and at Harborne, Staffordshire. His second wife died in 1617 and three years later on 29 April 1620 he married Dorothy, daughter of Richard Vaughan of Nyffryn in Llyn, Caernarvonshire, bishop of London, and widow of Bishop John Jegon of Norwich. Cornwallis died at Harborne on 21 December 1629, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 6338


Cornwallis, Charles, first Marquess Cornwallis (1738-1805), governor-general of India and lord lieutenant of Ireland, the sixth child and eldest son of Charles Cornwallis, fifth Baron and first Earl Cornwallis (1700-1762), and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1785), daughter of Charles 'Turnip' Townshend, second Viscount Townshend (1674-1738), was born in Grosvenor Square, London, on 31 December 1738. Lord Townshend, his maternal grandfather, was brother-in-law to Sir Robert Walpole. James Cornwallis (1743-1824) and William Cornwallis (1744-1819) were his younger brothers. The family's origins are obscure, possibly Irish, though both the name and the Cornish choughs that adorn the family arms suggest a Cornwall connection. In the fourteenth century Thomas Cornwallis (died 1384), a sheriff of London, and his son John settled the family at Brome, near Eye, in Suffolk. By the mid-sixteenth century, the Cornwallises had consolidated their position by exceptional loyalty to the crown, a trait which Charles Cornwallis inherited. Sir Thomas Cornwallis (1518/19-1604) built the family manor, Brome Hall. His grandson Sir Frederick (died 1662), who had fought for Charles I, followed Charles II into exile. After the Restoration he was rewarded by being made treasurer, privy councillor, and, in 1661, first Baron Cornwallis of Eye. His status as a peer was supportable in part because he had inherited in 1660 the estate of Culford, also in Suffolk, near Bury St Edmunds, but it was not until the first marquess's time that the family achieved a fortune to match its acres. Charles Cornwallis's father has been described by his son's biographers as 'a loyal but plodding servant of the crown' (Wickwire and Wickwire, 'War of Independence', 15), who held no office of the first rank. Nevertheless, he was well connected at court and, through his wife, to Walpole, and in 1753 he was created Earl Cornwallis and Viscount Brome. In 1768 the same connections helped secure the election of a younger brother, Frederick Cornwallis (1713-1783), as archbishop of Canterbury. 
Charles Cornwallis, styled Viscount Brome during his father's lifetime, attended Eton College for at least a year; in December 1753 he was listed in the sixth form. He always viewed Eton with affection, and in 1790 he joined the new Eton Club in Calcutta. A passionate hunter and sportsman, he yearned for military glory from childhood, but his chances of an army career were almost scuppered at Eton when Shute Barrington, later bishop of Durham, struck him in the eye during a hockey game. The injury eventually healed, leaving him with slightly skewed vision and a permanently quizzical look. On 8 December 1756 he obtained a commission as an ensign in the 1st foot guards. He had matriculated at Clare College, Cambridge, in Easter 1756, but he sought a military education and in 1757, with the king's permission, he toured the continent with a Prussian officer, Captain H. G. de Roguin, and studied at the Turin military academy. At Geneva in the summer of 1758, he learned that the guards had been ordered to join Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick for the defence of Hanover against the French and Austrians. Having missed joining his regiment, he attached himself as a volunteer to Frederick's army, and for his forwardness was rewarded with appointment as aide-de-camp to the marquess of Granby. He served Granby for over a year, and was at the battle of Minden. In August 1759 he was made captain in the 85th regiment and in June 1761 he was promoted lieutenant-colonel of the 12th regiment. He and his regiment served with distinction at the battle of Kirch Denkern on 15 July 1761 and, in the following summer, at the battles of Wilhelmstadt and Lutterberg. 
Meanwhile, Cornwallis had also embarked upon a political career both conventional and yet curiously principled. With a number of siblings and his own military career he urgently needed lucrative office, but he disliked politicking and always put his own sense of honour and personal loyalties above party. Elected MP for the family scot and lot pocket borough of Eye, Suffolk, in January 1760, he inherited the earldom following his father's death on 23 June 1762, and sat in the Lords from the following November. In many ways a natural conservative, especially in his views on the hierarchical ordering of society, he nevertheless allied himself with the Rockingham whigs. He was loyal to the crown and establishment but, in the manner of the old country whigs, whose mantle the Rockinghamites claimed, he was wary of overweening monarchical power and 'big', financially irresponsible government. In 1763 these views, and his friendship with the duke of Newcastle, sent him north to Scotland to rally support for the whig opposition. They also led him to support Wilkes in his battle against charges of sedition. Government spies reported that the two men had met privately in autumn 1763 and in November Cornwallis was one of seventeen peers who signed Lord Temple's protest against the Commons' resolution that 'the privilege of parliament does not extend to cases of seditious libel'. In 1765 he voted with the Rockinghamites against the imposition of the 'Stamp Act' on the American colonies, and when Rockingham won government later that year he was rewarded for his support by being made an aide-de-camp to the king and a lord of the bedchamber. He relinquished the latter in return for the promise of a regiment, and in March 1766 became colonel of the 33rd foot. In 1766 he also voted with the Rockinghamites to repeal the 'Stamp Act' and to outlaw general warrants (by which the previous government had arrested Wilkes and confiscated his property). But he was not a blind follower of party, and when Rockingham attempted to ameliorate the implications of the 'Stamp Act's' repeal by passing the 'Declaratory Act', which asserted Britain's right to legislate for the colonies under all circumstances, Cornwallis joined the five peers who voted against it. Moreover, when the ministry fell in August 1766, Cornwallis did not go into opposition. One of his closest friends was Lord Shelburne, alongside whom he had fought in Germany, and who had also opposed the 'Declaratory Act'. Shelburne was willing to serve in Chatham's new administration and in December 1766, following his friend's lead, Cornwallis accepted from the government the chief justiceship in eyre south of the Trent. In 1768, when Shelburne resigned from the government, Cornwallis also withdrew his support and thereafter did not align himself with any political grouping. Nevertheless, he continued to receive the government's favours, and in 1769 he resigned his chief justiceship to obtain the office of vice-treasurer of Ireland. On 21 November 1770 he was made a privy councillor, and on 10 January 1771 constable of the Tower of London. In 1770 'Junius' publicly attacked him for an unprincipled love of sinecures, but other observers were surprised that Cornwallis remained in royal favour when he had never hidden his opposition to the king's well-known opinions on America and a free press. The probable explanation is that, of all the whigs, George III respected this sober young earl, who stated his beliefs openly but also undertook to put his duty to his monarch and country above all else. 
Cornwallis's withdrawal from active politicking in the late 1760s was prompted by more than just an awareness that he was not very good at it. On 14 July 1768 he married Jemima Tulikens (1747-1779), daughter of Colonel James Jones of the 3rd regiment of foot guards. It was a love match. The daughter of a professional soldier, Jemima brought no dowry, but she was an elegant beauty who returned her husband's adoration. They had few years together before her premature death, but these years, and their children, Mary (1769-1857) and Charles (1774-1823) ['see below'], gave Cornwallis his greatest happiness. After his youthful passion for action and glory, he came soon to prefer the comforts and consolations of domesticity to every other existence. At the peak of his career only his devotion to duty prevented him from refusing the high commands and offices that dragged him from his beloved family. 
This duty was tested to the full when hostilities broke out in America in 1775. Cornwallis, promoted major-general on 29 September 1775, promptly offered his services against the rebellion, even in a subordinate position. He had consistently opposed the policies that had sparked the rebellion, and his wife begged him not to go, but to him his duty was clear. He sailed from Cork on 12 February 1776 in command of seven regiments, including the 33rd, which, after ten years in his care, had earned a reputation as one of the finest and most disciplined regiments of foot. Throughout the long years of war ahead, the loyalty of the rank and file to Cornwallis was undoubted. He displayed a rare humanity in his attention to their interests and sufferings, which they repaid in obedient service and genuine grief at his final defeat at Yorktown. 
Cornwallis arrived at the Cape Fear River in North Carolina on 3 May, too late to help restore royal government there. After a hapless assault on Charles Town, commanded by Sir Henry Clinton, Cornwallis and Clinton shipped their troops up to New York to reinforce the commander-in-chief, General Sir William Howe. Under Howe, Cornwallis commanded the reserve wing of the army that defeated Washington in the battle of Long Island on 27-8 August. Hotly engaged in the fighting himself, he afterwards refused to condemn Howe for not having pressed home his advantage and for allowing Washington's army to escape across the East River to Manhattan. This reluctance to criticize Howe damned him in the eyes of other British officers, notably Clinton, but he stood by it. In later years his defence of Howe possibly owed something to a consciousness of his own missed opportunities in the war. The first of these occurred after the battle of Fort Lee, on 18 November. Chasing Washington's army south across New Jersey, Cornwallis almost caught up with his quarry on the banks of the Raritan at New Brunswick on 1 December, but there he stopped, acting on orders from Howe to go no further. His critics argued that with just one more push he could have caught Washington and defeated his weary troops, but Cornwallis always insisted that the week-long chase had stretched his own men to the limit and that immediately fording a river and fighting a battle was beyond them. A month later, however, he was given another chance against Washington when Howe ordered him to Trenton, near Princeton, to avenge a defeat Washington had inflicted on the Hessians in British service. Bogged down in winter mud and harried by sniper fire, Cornwallis's 8000 men took a whole day, 2 January 1777, to march the 10 miles from Princeton to Trenton. Arriving at twilight, with a swollen waterway, the Assanpink Creek, between him and Washington's men, Cornwallis decided to rest his men rather than attempt an assault in the dark. Fatally, however, he failed to put the proper outposts in place, and while his men rested in the village of Trenton, Washington again escaped, under cover of darkness. Another furious pursuit by Cornwallis came too late to catch him, and in shock the British pulled back to the Raritan River. The winter campaign was over. It was of this affair that Clinton was to observe famously that Cornwallis was guilty 'of the most consummate ignorance I ever heard of [in] any officer above a corporal' (Wickwire and Wickwire, 'War of Independence', 98). 
After Trenton, Washington declined to be drawn into an open fight, and for much of the spring of 1777 Cornwallis was bogged down in minor skirmishes in and around New Brunswick, where he commanded the garrison. Perhaps frustrated by this limited warfare, he supported Howe's decision in the summer to attack Philadelphia, even though it meant diverting the war effort from New Jersey and New England, and split the British forces into three smaller, weaker camps at Philadelphia, Albany, and Manhattan. Washington obliged the British by fighting for Philadelphia, and Cornwallis shone militarily at the battle of Brandywine on 11 September 1777, a classic British battle of cannonading followed by an orderly bayonet charge. Subsequent attempts to draw Washington into open battle failed, however, and in December, with winter closing in and campaigning slowing, Cornwallis was granted permission to go home on leave. 
Cornwallis returned to Philadelphia in the spring of 1778 as lieutenant-general and second in command to Sir Henry Clinton, now commander-in-chief in America. The entry of the French into the war after General Sir John Burgoyne's surrender at Saratoga (17 October 1777) convinced Cornwallis that a bold plan of occupation of ports where the French might disembark and vigorous aid to the southern loyalists was essential for the British to regain the initiative. But Clinton frittered away the remainder of the campaigning season in small predatory expeditions. Cornwallis then returned to England again on learning of the dangerous illness of his wife, who died on 16 February 1779. Despite his personal distress, he returned to America. Only then was he able to put into operation his bolder plans. Clinton and Cornwallis moved their operations to South Carolina in May 1780 and quickly captured Charles Town. Following Clinton's return to New York, Cornwallis held the south against the American armies for the rest of the year, defeating General Gates at Camden on 16 August 1780. In 1781 Cornwallis decided to strike a decisive blow by marching north to Virginia, the most important insurgent colony, in an attempt to link up with Clinton. He contrasted a successful battle in Virginia which 'may give us America' with a 'defensive [plan], mixed with desultory expeditions' ('Correspondence', 1.87). On his way north, Cornwallis was ordered by Clinton to establish himself at Yorktown, though he realized his force was not strong enough to hold such an exposed post. Washington recognized Cornwallis's mistake and joined with the French to attack the British on 14 October 1781. When Clinton finally sailed from New York on 24 October, it was already too late. Cornwallis had been forced to surrender on 19 October and the American War of Independence was effectively at an end. 
From his very first campaign most of the problems which were to dog Cornwallis until the final defeat at Yorktown in 1781 were in evidence. The British were hampered by long lines of communication and their desire to fight throughout the thirteen colonies. These problems were exacerbated by the entry of France and Spain into the war from 1778. British military and political co-ordination were threatened by personal and political rivalries. Cornwallis's own relations with Clinton had quickly deteriorated. He was also in conflict with the colonial secretary, Lord George Germain. In addition, parliament and the ministry were hampered by the king's intervention. There were intractable difficulties in America. The British defeated the continental army in almost every major engagement, but could not destroy the American will to fight. The Americans, supported by an increasing proportion of the civil population as British armies visited hardship and brutality on them, simply regrouped, avoiding battle wherever possible. The loyalist militias were regarded with more or less undisguised contempt by Cornwallis and his brother commanders. On the other hand, Cornwallis never seems properly to have understood the spirit of independence which animated his enemies. While at a local level the British maintained their military superiority, their intelligence was poor, and despite his efforts Cornwallis found it difficult to guarantee the troops ample supplies. All the same, the conduct of the war and military administration revealed some constants in Cornwallis's attitudes and approach. In principle, he had sympathized with American liberties, but his essential allegiance to royal authority shone through. He disliked and distrusted settlers, having no time for either loyalist or republican 'banditti'. He was to have little more time for the non-official British in India or the ascendancy elites in Ireland. During his brief period of administration in the Carolinas he was to insist on the sanctity of private property and the unfettered rights of the landlord, another theme which was to resurface in India and Ireland. The best that can be said of Cornwallis's American career was that he emerged as a good commissary general, if a flawed strategist. From the outset he had devoted himself to logistics and to supplying and feeding his men. He seems to have remained genuinely popular among his troops. This concern was to serve him well in the conditions of warfare during the Indian campaigns, with its vast distances and huge armies of camp followers. 
The political world in Britain was dimly aware of these deficiencies, so Cornwallis was never really blamed for the collapse in America. As early as May 1782, when still on 'parole', he was asked to go to India as governor-general, but, distrusting the ministry, he refused. He resigned as constable of the Tower in January 1784 when his political friend Lord Shelburne lost office to William Pitt. Having again refused the offer of India when pressed by Pitt and Dundas, he went off on a short military mission to Frederick the Great in August and September 1785. 
Cornwallis was the first governor-general appointed under the terms of William Pitt's 'East India Act' (1784). According to its author, the act's intention was 'to give the crown the power of guiding the politics of India with as little means of corrupt influence as possible' (Moon, 229). Cornwallis was appointed over the only other serious candidate, Lord Macartney, previously governor of Madras, who had made far too many enemies among the East India Company directors for ministerial comfort. Cornwallis's reputation as a good soldier who had been put in an impossible position at Yorktown and his probity attracted Pitt and Henry Dundas, the dominant minister in the new Board of Control for India. Cornwallis had seen the effects of divided control in America and he insisted on enhanced powers in India. Having been assured that he would, if necessary, be able to override his council and that he would also be appointed commander-in-chief in India, Cornwallis accepted the office in February 1786. 
Both military efficiency and probity were indeed very valuable commodities in India in these years. The sultans of Mysore had battered the enfeebled Madras administration with constant sallies into their territory over the past quarter of a century. In 1782 the presidency had nearly collapsed under the assault of Tipu Sultan. The lax two-year rule of Sir John Macpherson as governor-general had fully exposed the extent of the corruption and peculation which was thought not only to be undermining the East India Company's reputation, but even to be weakening the British constitution itself. Cornwallis later remarked that Macpherson's government 'was a system of the dirtiest jobbery' ('Correspondence', 1.371). What he found in India when he arrived in October 1786 strengthened his already strong aversion to the untrammelled activities of British subjects overseas, who he believed were undermining the crown. Cornwallis's relations with Dundas in his first few years, however, were to be rendered difficult by Macpherson's attempts to return to India and by ministers' apparent willingness to countenance this. Back in England, Macpherson, presumably irritated by Cornwallis's stoic reputation, circulated a story to the effect that the new governor-general was on the point of marrying a sixteen-year-old girl. Pained that Dundas had given credence to this, Cornwallis complained that if he had so far forgotten his duty 'at the age of forty-nine... forgetting likewise his grey hairs and rheumatism' (ibid.), then Macpherson's return would be of little note as his own administration would already be sliding into a similar decadence. 
Fighting corruption consumed much of Cornwallis's time in India. It was to have long-term consequences not only for the nature of British rule but for the place of Indians within colonial government and society. On an early visit up-country to Benares he remarked that almost all the company's servants were involved in commerce under the names of friends and relatives and that they used their parallel position as judges and collectors to undermine the company's interests, becoming 'the greatest oppressors of the manufacturers' ('Correspondence', 1.271). Cornwallis moved urgently to ensure that company servants were not involved in private trade and he separated the judicial from the revenue-collecting branch of government in the districts. Yet the root of this corruption, Cornwallis thought, lay in close British dealings with Indians. In Benares, he asserted, 'The Rajah is a fool, his servants rogues, every native of Hindostan (I really believe) is corrupt and Benares six hundred miles from Calcutta' (ibid.). Later, in Bengal, he castigated a British official who had 'a strong propensity for jobbery and intrigue... [and] has formed connections with the worst black people in Bengal' (ibid., 2.134). Before 1791 Cornwallis therefore instituted a new system of law courts in which Indian agency was greatly decreased. He introduced 'European principles' into legal judgments, dispensing with measures of Muslim law (shari'a) such as the right of relatives of a murdered man to play a role in sentencing. He also brought the local Indian police in Calcutta, and later across the whole of Bengal, more closely under British supervision. The governor-general's strong aversion to the administration of 'natives of influence' effectively created a racially divided government, whereas under Warren Hastings a mere ten years before, Indians could still reach major administrative positions. 
Scarcely had Cornwallis begun to see the fruits of his reform measures than he was forced to spend the best part of 1791 and 1792 in the field in southern India fending off the threat from Tipu Sultan of Mysore. Tipu feared British encirclement and had repeatedly spurned British offers of treaty relationships on the grounds that other princes had lost independence by entanglement with the Europeans. Seeing a build-up of British influence on the south-west coast of India, Tipu had moved, in December 1789, against a British ally, the raja of Travancore. Cornwallis did not trust the abilities of the Madras government and its army; he was suspicious of his Indian allies, the Marathas and the nizam of Hyderabad, and he felt that, in view of the outbreak of the French Revolution, this was a good time to try to restrain what he saw as the enmity and implacable ambition of Tipu Sultan. Hesitating to intervene prematurely, Cornwallis only took command in Mysore in late 1790, worried by early military set-backs to the company's forces. By April 1791 he had taken Mysore's key city, Bangalore, and captured 'vast numbers of cannon' and a huge quantity of grain. But not until more than a year later (25 February 1792) did Cornwallis finally force Tipu to accept peace terms, and even then the sultan was only obliged to cede half his territory, outlying districts which included much of the kingdom's poorer and less productive land. 
A logistical commander 'par excellence', Cornwallis found himself in a potentially vulnerable condition throughout the campaign. His advance was several times delayed by his massive baggage train and army of camp followers. But the baggage train was necessary because the Mysoreans adopted a scorched earth policy and destroyed all villages and crops. The Maratha light horse which was sent to deal with the still powerful Mysorean light cavalry failed dismally. Cornwallis had few maps and charts and 'a lack of all satisfactory information' ('Correspondence', 2.20). Terrain and weather were also against him. The monsoon made the countryside treacherous and in the 1791 campaign he had found it impossible to get his heavy cannon across the wide and boulder-strewn flood plain of the Kavery River which protected Tipu's final redoubt, the fortress city of Seringapatam. When, during the spring campaign of 1792, Cornwallis effectively defeated Tipu in front of Seringapatam, the governor-general did not risk an all-out attack on the city, sensing the underlying weakness of his own position. His troops were exhausted, his allies were unreliable, and disease had broken out among his European troops. Politics counselled otherwise also. He did not want to build up his dangerous allies, the Marathas and Hyderabad, too much. A balance of power in south India was better, with Tipu's wings neatly clipped. Cornwallis was also enough of a politician to see that the significant body of British opinion which rightly believed that Tipu had been antagonized by long-term British ambitions in the south would protest if the sultan was destroyed. The imminence of war with France was also a strong argument for strategic caution. The view of some that Cornwallis had simply shrunk from the final battle was less easy to maintain, given the huge loss of territory and massive indemnity which Tipu had been forced to accept. 
The 'India Act' of 1784, spurred by claims that Warren Hastings's government had been despotic, noted the complaints that 'diverse rajahs, zemindars and other native landholders had been deprived of their lands, jurisdictions and privileges'. On arriving in India, Cornwallis was plunged into a long-standing official debate about the best way to administer the system of land taxation which the British had inherited from the Mughals. This was to culminate in the governor-general's permanent settlement of the land revenues of Bengal in 1793, his most important act in the view of economic and social historians. Philip Francis had broached the idea of a permanent settlement in the 1770s, but opinion remained divided. John Shore, Cornwallis's ablest aide on the financial side of government, collected a huge amount of data on the nature of tenures and the past history of landholding during 1788 and 1789. Ultimately, Shore came down on the side of a ten-year settlement with the landholders rather than permanency. It was Cornwallis's personal intervention, therefore, which in 1793 set the Bengal revenues at $3 million and ensured that 'they [the zemindars] and their heirs and lawful successors will be allowed to hold their estates at such an assessment for ever' ('Selections from the State Papers', 1.206). In this Cornwallis was inspired by pragmatism. War with France seemed inevitable, and it was important for the British government to placate the Bengal countryside and put itself into a position in which it could count on stable revenues for some years ahead. But Cornwallis was not entirely immune to the teachings of theory. He appears to have believed that, while Indian politics were decadent and corrupt, Indian landlords were nevertheless motivated by an underlying spirit of economic rationality. Some have perceived the indirect influence of Adam Smith here. Given stability, the landlords would invest in the land, succour the peasantry, and boost the sluggish internal trade of Bengal. Later administrators, Indian nationalists, and modern historians have often blamed Cornwallis for abandoning the Bengal cultivators to a rapacious landlord class. But this is unjust, as he believed that the zemindars' rights could coexist with an equally inviolable peasant right of occupancy. Only under the later dispensation of regulation 7 of 1799, when Cornwallis had long left India, was the balance tipped decisively in favour of the landlords. As the 'permanency' was pushed through the cabinet and court of directors against considerable opposition, Cornwallis's first tenure of the governor-generalship was ending. Within six months of France's declaration of war on Britain in February 1793, he was homeward-bound from Madras on the 'Swallow', after accepting the capitulation of the French enclave of Pondicherry. 
On his return to Britain Cornwallis was rapidly enlisted in an attempt to boost the allies' ailing fortunes against the French republican armies. Fending off attempts to make him a local field marshal in central Europe to replace the duke of York, who was regarded as incompetent, Cornwallis was persuaded in February 1795 to become master-general of the ordnance, with a seat in cabinet. His task was to prepare the defences of England against an expected French invasion, but there were more imminent dangers threatening other British dominions. In February 1797 he was again sworn in as governor-general of India with a brief to suppress the mutiny which was brewing among white officers of the company's armies. Their unrest resulted from plans which Cornwallis, as part of his programme of Indian reform, had devised to transfer the company's troops to the crown. In the event, timely pecuniary concessions from the court of directors quelled the discontent and Cornwallis did not embark. 
The threat of an uprising in Ireland, aided by the French, had clouded Britain's war counsels for months. By early 1798, with the United Irishmen in open rebellion, Pitt's need for a cool-headed administrator in Ireland had become urgent. With his extensive military and administrative experience, Cornwallis was the obvious choice, but he was unenthusiastic when Lord Spencer floated the idea that he should become both commander-in-chief and lord lieutenant: 'I said, You are too good to me, to wish to place me in so easy a situation' ('Correspondence', 2.334). Nevertheless, by early June he had accepted Pitt's entreaty to take up the double burden, while retaining his cabinet post as master-general of the ordnance. The immediate military responsibilities were not as onerous as expected. On 21 June, the day after he arrived in Dublin, generals Lake and Moore defeated the rebels in battles at Vinegar Hill (Enniscorthy) and Wexford. Cornwallis had only to take the field once, in a short campaign against General Joseph Humbert's French invasion force which landed in late August. It surrendered to Cornwallis near St Johnstown on 8 September. 
Rebellion aside, Cornwallis was appalled at the task before him in Ireland. His primary duty, he believed, was to strengthen the empire by coaxing Ireland into a lasting and peaceful co-existence with Britain. To his shame and anger, however, he found that the most ardent champions of the British connection were the least likely advocates of peace and conciliation. It was the loyalists, he decided, who, by their hatred of Catholics, had succeeded in transforming a small Jacobinical rebellion against church and state into a religious civil war. He marvelled at the bloodlust of the loyalist troops, complaining variously that they 'delight in murder', or that 'murder appears to be their favourite pastime' ('Correspondence', 2.355, 357). Worse, however, was the attitude of the leading protestants. There was little to be looked for in the Irish parliament, he informed the duke of Portland, as both houses were 'adverse to all acts of clemency'. Left to their own devices Irish MPs would 'pursue measures that could only terminate in the extirpation of the greater number of the inhabitants, and in the utter destruction of the country' (ibid., 2.358). Even his own dinner guests partook of this barbaric 'system of blood', enlivening the viceregal table with the happy news of the murder of yet another Catholic priest. Within ten days Cornwallis had concluded that 'the life of a Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland comes up to my idea of perfect misery' (ibid., 2.356). By the following April, even India looked attractive. 'Sincerely do I repent that I did not return to Bengal', he lamented to his brother (ibid., 3.93). 
Cornwallis's one source of consolation in Ireland was the young Viscount Castlereagh, an Ulsterman and MP for County Down who shared his faith in the efficacy of clemency and conciliation. Castlereagh had been acting chief secretary in Ireland since March 1798 and in November Cornwallis pressed to have him confirmed in the post. By unwritten law the Irish chief secretary was almost never Irish, but Cornwallis asked for an exception to be made in this case because, as he put it, Castlereagh was 'so very unlike an Irishman' ('Correspondence', 2.439). It was a clumsy compliment: Cornwallis meant that of all the leading protestants he had met, only Castlereagh seemed willing to put the future of his nation above personal ambition and religious prejudice. Perhaps Cornwallis relied upon Castlereagh's judgement and local knowledge too much. Certainly it was during these years that the chief secretaryship began to rival the lord lieutenancy in executive importance at Westminster. From the outset Castlereagh shared Cornwallis's view that it was essential 'to soften the hatred of the Catholics to our Government'. This meant conceding religious and political rights to Catholics -- a change that could safely be accommodated only within the confines of an Irish union with Britain, as this would have the effect of reducing Catholics to a manageable minority of the population. A union might even save Ireland's protestants from the consequences of their own actions, though Cornwallis did not look for gratitude from them: 'they arrogate to themselves the exclusive knowledge of a country, of which, from their mode of governing it, they have, in my opinion, proved themselves totally ignorant' (ibid., 2.404-5). Pitt and his ministers agreed that union was the only way forward for Ireland, and Cornwallis and Castlereagh were authorized to sound out Irish attitudes towards it. Cornwallis was soon disappointed to learn, however, that there was no intention of granting concessions to Catholics at the same time. He pleaded his case in an impassioned letter to Pitt of 17 October. Where was the sense, he asked, in making an alliance with a small party in Ireland which already enjoyed Britain's protection and, moreover, had exploited it 'to wage eternal war against the Papists and the Presbyterians... about nine-tenths of the community' (ibid., 2.418)? Pitt sympathized, but denied that it was either practicable or proper to link Catholic emancipation to the union. The lord lieutenant would have to be satisfied with the undertaking that no clause in the act of union would explicitly bar Catholics from future participation in parliament. Cornwallis was never fully reconciled to this position, and henceforth his faith in the union as a panacea for Ireland's ills wavered. After the initial vote against the union in the Irish parliament in January 1799, he left it up to Castlereagh to negotiate most of the payment -- in money, patronage, and honours -- required to persuade a majority of Irish MPs to end their institution and associated perquisites. To Cornwallis this was jobbery, not compensation, and he recoiled from it, even while allowing that it had to be done. He concentrated instead on wooing Ireland's Catholic voters to back the union. His relations with the Catholic bishops were cordial, even sympathetic, and with their blessing he toured the southern market towns drumming up support for the union among Catholic professionals and merchants. In London, however, complaints grew louder that he did not communicate freely with the cabinet. He had previously excused himself on the grounds that, as a newcomer to Ireland, he found it hard to come to definite conclusions. In fact he had formed his opinions within days of arriving; he simply did not see his way clear to implementing them with the unpromising material of the Irish parliamentarians. He allowed that none of the MPs or their backers had legitimate or rational grounds for opposing the union. In his eyes, all were in pursuit of their 'own private objects of ambition or avarice' (ibid., 3.8). To the chagrin of his fellow unionists, and in spite of his studied attempts at courtesy, Cornwallis's disdain for the government's friends was visible to all. Edward Cooke, the civil under-secretary, complained that half the battle for the union was occasioned by Cornwallis's 'total incapacity, self-conceit and muleishness' (McDowell, 'Ireland', 699). Protestants resented his disapproval of their severity towards Catholics, Cooke explained, feeling that Cornwallis did not understand their difficulties. This failure to find common ground with the loyalists was another indication that, for all his time in America and India, Cornwallis remained essentially metropolitan in outlook, unable to empathize with the concerns and culture of a colonial class. 
Cornwallis may have hated the horse-trading that preceded the Irish parliament's vote for union in June 1800, but he was determined to salvage some honour from the proceedings. When, a few days after the victory, Portland wrote brusquely saying that he and Castlereagh had been too liberal in their offers of peerages to secure support for the union and that he would have to find a way of extricating the government from their promises, he was furious and threatened to resign. The cabinet and George III backed down. Pitt had hoped that, once union was a fact, a united cabinet might be able to persuade the king of the wisdom of Catholic emancipation. Like Cornwallis and Castlereagh, he had hinted to Catholics that emancipation was imminent, though he had also quietly promised anti-papist peers that they could safely vote for the union. With the union safe, however, the cabinet's flimsy undertaking to Cornwallis and Castlereagh to grant Catholics relief fell apart and, lacking vital support, Pitt dared not broach the issue with the king. His ministerial malcontents were not so reticent. They spent the months before the union parliament was due to meet stiffening George's resolve against emancipation until, on 29 January 1801, he declared his implacable opposition to any measure of relief. This, added to the dissension in the cabinet, guaranteed that Pitt could never force a relief bill through the Lords. Already ill with worry about the war and the national debt, he seized the opportunity to resign. A few days later, in mid-February, Cornwallis and Castlereagh followed him out of office, Cornwallis also resigning as master of the ordnance. naively underestimating the anti-Catholic feeling in the cabinet, Cornwallis had let himself become almost cheerful about the imminence of emancipation, and his disappointment was correspondingly bitter. To General Ross at the ordnance he explained that he could no longer serve an administration 'so blind to the interest, and indeed to the immediate security of their country, as to persevere in the old system of proscription and exclusion in Ireland' ('Correspondence', 3.337). He had to remain in Dublin until May, when his successors arrived to take office, but once freed he looked forward to exchanging the detested factionalism of public life for a quiet retirement at Culford. 
However, in early July 1801, with rumours of a French invasion, Cornwallis was prevailed upon to accept the command of the eastern district, with headquarters at Colchester. He grumbled, but was settled there within the week. Towards the end of September, and with much more enthusiasm, he agreed to serve as the British plenipotentiary to negotiate peace with France. With his son, Viscount Brome, he sailed from Dover on 3 November. He was favourably received in Paris by Napoleon Bonaparte on the 10th but, finding that further talks with the first consul eluded him, he moved at the end of the month to Amiens to open negotiations with the French plenipotentiary, Napoleon's elder brother Joseph, and his formidable adviser Charles de Talleyrand. As ever, Cornwallis's sense of duty informed his undertaking, but perhaps pride played a part too. Pitt is said to have observed that Cornwallis had always wanted to head a diplomatic mission, which, if true, was a measure of Cornwallis's delusion, for he was not a natural diplomat. To bluff or hedge or lie was anathema to him, and his scrupulous adherence to a notion of gentlemanly conduct rendered him helpless before the wily charm and intrigues of the elder Bonaparte and Talleyrand. Soon his lugubrious pen was complaining of the French negotiators' want of candour and 'unsteadiness and tergiversation', and of the little dependence that could be placed on private conversations with them ('Correspondence', 3.439). Too late, it dawned on the British plenipotentiary that he was 'too much a 'John' to delight in foreign society' (ibid., 3.406). 
Cornwallis was further handicapped in the negotiations by the unhelpful terms of the preliminary articles signed in London and the extent of his own military knowledge. Even before the Austrians' defeat at Marengo (14 June 1800), which deprived Britain of her last ally, he had shuddered at the sight of British raw recruits being sent off to battle, fatally lacking in training, discipline, and hope. Whereas politicians suspected that Britain's war effort was unsustainable, Cornwallis knew it for a painful, bloody fact. By January 1801, when Austria agreed terms with France, he was desperate for peace. It is unfair, however, to say that he underestimated France's own need for peace. His biggest fear was that Bonaparte would be swept from power before the definitive treaty could be signed. He was not helped by the conciliatory terms of the treaty preliminaries that Britain had agreed before his departure; nor was Lord Addington's flailing government able to infuse him with either confidence or authority. In the end he settled for a 'peace that will not dishonour the country and will afford as reasonable a prospect of future safety as the present very extraordinary circumstances of Europe will admit' ('Correspondence', 3.437). The peace of Amiens was signed in March 1802, though in the meantime many of the considerations which had led the British to agree the preliminaries had evaporated. 
For three years after Amiens Cornwallis led the peaceful country life which he had desired for so long. Then, abruptly, he was again sent to India as governor-general, arriving with great misgivings in July 1805. After the hectic career of expansion embarked on by Richard Wellesley which had tripled the company's debts, the directors yearned for peace in India. After a rapid assessment Cornwallis decided to make immediate overtures to the Maratha leaders, Holkar and Shinde, although the outgoing commander-in-chief, Gerard Lake, regarded this as a virtual capitulation. Historians of the imperial era criticized Cornwallis for a move which would have allowed central India to slip back into its pre-colonial 'anarchy', but this has since been disputed. Besides, Cornwallis knew that the company's troops were on the point of mutiny because their pay was seriously in arrears following the collapse of the company's credit on the Indian money market. But peace on these terms was never concluded because, after only two months in India, Cornwallis fell ill on his way up-country and died on 5 October 1805 at Ghazipur, near Benares. He was buried just outside this small town and a monument to him in the style of a classical temple was erected on a high bluff overlooking the River Ganges. 
A corpulent man of rather severe appearance, Cornwallis has often been treated by historians as a leader of outstanding competence rather than brilliance, promoted again and again because Britain possessed so few outstanding proconsuls at this time of international emergency. Cornwallis's formal minutes do indeed seem staid and orotund, his devotion to duty almost too classical for his contemporaries or for the post-colonial age to bear. The charge of dullness is, however, belied by the vigour of his less official letters to his friend General Ross and to Dundas, and that of mere competence by the clarity and persuasiveness of his vision. Cornwallis should be seen as a transitional figure. His devotion to the crown had at its heart something archaic. It rose in part from his peculiar position in aristocratic society as a man who was independent yet without patronage: 'Here was no fortune to be mended... Here was no beggarly mushroom kindred to be provided for. No crew of hungry followers, gaping to be gorged!' (Moon, 231), as Dundas colourfully proclaimed of him in parliament. At the same time, Cornwallis's career also pointed forward to the new Victorian type of crown servant. He saw the world in stark colours of race and moral independency. Indians were corrupt; Americans little more than banditti; the Irish tiresome and petulant. Yet this was not the racism of high imperialism with its urge to 'improve'. Still less was Cornwallis a harbinger of colonial capitalism. Caste and the Muslim religion were, he wrote to the bishop of Salisbury, 'insuperable bars' to the progress of Christianity in India. His reverence for the principle of property came not from a desire to encourage a vigorous market in land, but from his sense that a society's moral worth was underpinned by agrarian stability. 
Cornwallis's only son, 


@@@@@


doc= 6339


Charles Cornwallis, second Marquess Cornwallis (1774-1823), landowner, styled Viscount Brome until he inherited on his father's death in October 1805, was born on 19 October 1774 at Culford, Suffolk, and educated at Eton College ('c'.1783-4, 1786-9) and St John's College, Cambridge (admitted October 1792, MA 1794). His health was delicate and his father did not want him to have a military career. He was a tory MP for the family pocket borough of Eye, Suffolk (1795-6), and for Suffolk (1796-1805). He married, on 17 April 1797, Lady Louisa Gordon (1776-1850), daughter of Alexander Gordon, fourth duke of Gordon, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Maxwell: 'having expressed to the Duchess some hesitation about marrying her daughter on account of supposed insanity in the Gordon family, he received from her the gratifying assurance that there was not a drop of Gordon blood in Louisa!' (GEC, 'Peerage', 3.457). They had five daughters. He was a captain in the Suffolk yeomanry from 1795 to 1802 and colonel of the Suffolk militia from 1802 until his death. He was master of the buckhounds from 1807 until his death. Following disease, for which he was about to visit the continent, he died on 9 August 1823 at his residence in Old Burlington Street, London, and was buried at Culford, Suffolk. At his death the marquessate became extinct. The first marquess's brother James Cornwallis, bishop of Lichfield, became fourth earl. 


@@@@@


doc= 6340


Cornwallis, Frederick (1713-1783), archbishop of Canterbury, was born in London on 22 February 1713, the seventh son of Charles, fourth Baron Cornwallis of Eye (1675-1722), politician and army officer, and his wife, Lady Charlotte Butler (died 1725), daughter of Richard Butler, first earl of Arran. He was the twin of the military commander Edward Cornwallis (1713-1776). After an education at Eton College (1725-8) he matriculated at Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1732 and graduated BA in 1737. In 1739 he was ordained deacon and became a fellow of his college; he was ordained priest in 1742. At Cambridge, according to a contemporary source, he was not only a 'studious man', but 'always consistent, decent and beloved' ('Kentish Parson', 40). He clearly adapted well to the effects of a palsy that deprived him of the use of his right hand and he graduated DD at Cambridge in 1748; according to one source, he came close to election as master of Christ's College (ibid., 73-4). 
Meanwhile, Cornwallis's aristocratic connections had assisted him to a series of ecclesiastical preferments. He became rector of Chelmondiston, Suffolk, in 1740, and of Tivetshall in Norfolk two years later. Proof that he was a rising clergyman came in 1746 when he was made chaplain to George II and a canon of Windsor. He became a prebendary of Lincoln in 1747, canon of St Paul's Cathedral in 1750, and dean of the cathedral in 1766. His geniality of manner and avoidance of theological controversy helped to make him a suitable candidate for the bench, and in 1750 he became bishop of Lichfield and Coventry through the patronage of the duke of Newcastle. On 8 February 1759 Cornwallis married Caroline, daughter of William Townshend and granddaughter of Charles, second Viscount Townshend. She shared his intellectual interests. There were no children and she died on 5 January 1809. 
Cornwallis's attempts to obtain translation to Worcester or Salisbury were unsuccessful, but friendship with the duke of Grafton helped to secure his nomination as archbishop of Canterbury in 1768 on the death of Thomas Secker. He immediately won popularity among his diocesan clergy by his conviviality. A letter to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' immediately after his death, from a Kentish vicar (Samuel Denne), praised his 'liberality of soul' in abolishing 'that odious distinction of a separate table for the chaplains' ('GM', 1st ser., 53, 1783, 280) for clergy dinners at Lambeth Palace. He displayed a similar gregariousness in his diocesan visitations. There were some, indeed, who believed that he carried merriment too far and George III, apparently prompted by the evangelical countess of Huntingdon, chided him for proposing to hold a 'rout' at Lambeth (Rowden, 331). As archbishop, Cornwallis played little part in debates in the House of Lords, though he lent consistent support to Lord North's administration. He expressed sympathy with some of the campaigners for amendment to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' test for clerical and university subscription, but consultation with his fellow bishops convinced him that he should not endorse the Feathers tavern petition of 1772. He led the episcopal contributions to the fund for the dispossessed American episcopalian clergy in 1776 and gave general succour to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. One of his very few publications was a sermon to that society preached on 20 February 1756, in which he expressed the standard fears about the subversion of the American colonies by Spanish Catholicism. However, he did not share the contemporary paranoia over 'popery' and on 6 June 1780 Lambeth Palace was in some danger from the Gordon rioters. 
Cornwallis died after a short illness on 19 March 1783 at Lambeth Palace and was buried in Lambeth church eight days later. He was a conscientious administrator and an entirely conventional Georgian churchman. A recent historian has observed: 'As a consequence of the complaisant Establishmentarianism of the likes of Cornwallis, the Church would lay itself open to the incursions of Evangelical thought and the reaction of 'Orthodoxy' which culminated in the Oxford Movement' (Young, 79). That he published little, however, did not reflect a lack of intellectual interests, and both he and his widow bequeathed valuable items to the archiepiscopal palaces at Lambeth and Croydon. Perhaps his most appropriate epitaph was provided by the Revd John Denne of Maidstone who, on Cornwallis's translation to Canterbury, commented: 'We have now got what we wanted -- a gentleman' ('Kentish Parson', 124). 


@@@@@


doc= 6341


Cornwallis, James, fourth Earl Cornwallis (1743-1824), bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, was the third son of Charles Cornwallis, first Earl Cornwallis (1700-1762), and his wife, Elizabeth Townshend (died 1785), daughter of Charles Townshend, second Viscount Townshend of Raynham, and was the younger brother of Charles Cornwallis, first Marquess Cornwallis (1738-1805) and elder brother of William Cornwallis (1744-1819). He was born in Dover Street, Piccadilly, London, on 25 February 1743, and was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated BA in June 1763, before being given a fellowship at Merton, from which college he took the MA degree in 1766. On leaving Oxford he entered as a member of the Temple, and intended practising at the bar, but on the advice of his uncle Frederick Cornwallis (1713-1783), archbishop of Canterbury, he changed his mind and was ordained. 
Cornwallis commenced his career in the church by acting as chaplain to his cousin Lord Townshend, lord lieutenant of Ireland, until in 1769 he was presented by his uncle to the living of Ickham, Kent, to which that of the neighbouring parish of Adisham was added the following year. In this same year (1770) he was made a prebendary of Westminster, rector of Newington, Oxford, and then of Wrotham, Kent. On receiving this last appointment he resigned the livings of Ickham and Adisham, but six months later he was for the second time inducted as rector of Ickham, a dispensation having been granted which allowed him to hold the rectory of Wrotham conjointly with that of Ickham and the chapel of Staple. In 1771 he married Catherine (1742-1811), daughter of Galfridus Mann (1706-1756) of Newton and Boughton Malherbe, and younger sister of the politician Sir Horatio Mann. They had a daughter, Elizabeth, two children -- Charles and Susan -- who died in infancy, and a son, James. 
In 1773, having in the meantime again resigned the living at Ickham, Cornwallis became, still by his uncle's patronage, rector of Boughton Malherbe in the same county. From being a prebendary of Westminster he was preferred in 1775 to the deanery of Canterbury, while he continued to hold his parochial cures, and at about the same time he received the honorary degree of DCL from his university. In 1781 he was consecrated bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, and then at length retired from his Kentish livings. On the translation of Bishop Douglas of Carlisle to the see of Salisbury in 1791, Cornwallis succeeded him as dean of Windsor, a position which three years later he exchanged for that of dean of Durham. 
The bishops of Lichfield lived at Eccleshall Castle rather than the more modest palace in the close. Although the house at Eccleshall adjoined the churchyard, Cornwallis insisted on driving through the town in his four-horse carriage to the church gates, and no one left the church before him after services. A turnpike was set up near his gate, whereupon he moved to Richmond, Surrey: from thence he made a visitation every three years. This resulted in more than 1200 confirmations at one time in Stafford and 700 in Tamworth. It is said that Cornwallis's example encouraged widespread pluralism in the diocese. He wrote a subservient letter to Pitt in 1791 asking for the deanery of St Paul's but received a crushing reply. Between 1777 and 1811 he published five of his sermons. 
Following the death of his brother-in-law, Sir Horatio Mann, in April 1814 Cornwallis inherited the Mann family's property. In August 1823 the second Marquess (and third Earl) Cornwallis died; the marquessate became extinct, but the earldom reverted to James Cornwallis. The bishop was by now in his eighty-second year, and on 20 January 1824 he died at Richmond. He had been bishop of Lichfield for nearly forty-three years, and was buried in his cathedral. According to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', his funeral cortege was splendid, going from Richmond to St Albans where it stayed one night and proceeding to Lichfield on the following day. Cornwallis's memorial tablet in Lichfield Cathedral states merely that he was 'Highly respected throughout his diocese'. 


@@@@@


doc= 6342


Bacon, Jane, Lady Bacon (1580/81-1659), letter-writer, was the daughter of Hercules Meautys of West Ham, Essex, and Philippe, daughter of Richard Cooke of Gidea Hall, Essex. Her grandfather Sir Peter Meautys, who was descended from an ancient French family which had come from Normandy with Henry VII, was made ambassador to France by Henry VIII. 
Jane is known mainly through a collection of correspondence written to her by family and friends in the period 1613-44 and lodged in the Braybrooke archives at Essex Record Office (D/DBy C11-27). 200 of these letters were transcribed and edited by Richard Neville, third Baron Braybrooke (1783-1858), and published anonymously in 1842 as 'The Private Correspondence of Jane, Lady Cornwallis, 1613-1644'. 
In the first quarter of 1609 Jane married, as his second wife, Sir William Cornwallis (died 1611) of Brome, Suffolk, eldest son and heir of Sir Thomas Cornwallis (1518/19-1604), sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk. Sir William died in 1611, when Frederick, his and Jane's only child, was just one year and three days old, leaving Jane a substantial fortune and entitlement to the profits of the manors of Brome, Oakley, Stuston, Thrandeston, and Palgrave. Previously she had had settled upon her the manor of Wilton in the North Riding of Yorkshire, with lands in several adjoining parishes. Her husband's will, unusually for the time, stipulated that she alone would become legal guardian of their son and heir, with full responsibility for his upbringing, education, and training. Jane took on this role with serious and protective intent. 
Being young and richly endowed Lady Cornwallis had several suitors, although she was in no particular hurry to remarry. In early 1613 negotiations began for a union with Nathaniel Bacon (1585-1627), amateur painter and youngest son of twelve children of Sir Nicholas Bacon of Redgrave in Suffolk, premier baronet of England, and Anne Thornage; the courtship's delicate negotiations are recorded in Jane's published correspondence, which includes several letters from her future husband. Jane was evidently quite competent in managing her own affairs and showed herself an excellent woman of business. Her primary concern was to protect her son's inheritance but she also needed assurance that she was being sought for herself and not merely for her fortune. She insisted that Nathaniel both relinquish all claim to the Cornwallis estate and increase his own settlement, making proper provision for her in the event of his death. She seems to have driven a hard bargain for the Bacons finally agreed to settle the family estate at Culford in Suffolk, which by rights should have gone to the eldest son, Edmund. 
The marriage took place quietly in the spring of 1614 and Jane's brother, Sir Thomas Meautys, wrote that he did not hear about it until the following winter, being with the forces of the prince of Orange in the Low Countries. Jane kept the Cornwallis name until her second husband was made knight of the Bath at the coronation of Charles I in 1626, after which time she is referred to in the letters as Lady Bacon. 
Lady Bacon's preference was for the peaceful life of the country, and she only reluctantly visited London, much to the regret, as is revealed in the correspondence, of her friends in the city, who included Lucy Russell, countess of Bedford (1581-1627). The letters suggest that Lady Bacon must have been unwell in her confinements and was at times of a melancholic disposition. She was, however, exceedingly generous to her family and friends, and she particularly supported her brother and sister-in-law, whose pleading letters from abroad give some indication of the hardships endured at the time by soldiers' wives. Moreover she became guardian of her nephew as well as of her son Frederick's children. 
There are few letters written by Lady Bacon herself but the reader gets to know her well through the letters she received, including those from King Charles and Queen Henrietta Maria. Altogether her correspondence provides not only a lively and informative insight into her family and social relations but also illuminates her more public concerns, such as the war in Europe and the conflict between king and parliament. 
In addition to Frederick, Jane had three children from her second marriage: Anne, born 1615, Nicholas, born 1617, and Jane, who was born in February 1624 (she died at the age of three). About 1637 Anne married her mother's cousin, Thomas Meautys (died 1649), the secretary and close confidant of Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam. Nicholas remained unmarried. 
On the death of her husband in 1627 Lady Bacon inherited his estate; she subsequently arranged for the erection of his bust, in white marble within an oval, in the chancel of Culford church. She died on 8 May 1659, at the age of seventy-eight, and was buried in the chancel of Culford church, where her Cornwallis family monument, executed by Thomas Stanton, is to be found. She was succeeded by her eldest son, Frederick, whose portrait is in the picture gallery at Audley End, Essex, with those of his wife and his son Charles. A full-length portrait, formerly at Audley End and now in a private collection, is inscribed 'Jane, Lady Bacon' but might represent her mother-in-law, Anne, Lady Bacon. 


@@@@@


doc= 6343


Cornwallis, Sir Thomas (1518/19-1604), administrator, was the eldest son of Sir John Cornwallis ('c'.1491-1544), steward of the household of Prince Edward from 1538 to 1544, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Edward Sulyard of Otes, Essex. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1539. Thomas had married Anne (died 1581), daughter of Sir John Jerningham of Somerleyton, Suffolk, by 1540 and was knighted at Westminster on 1 December 1548. In the summer of 1549 he joined other East Anglian gentry under the command of William Parr, first marquess of Northampton, to quell the rebellion led by Robert Ket. Cornwallis was taken prisoner when the rebels captured Norwich, but regained his freedom after the earl of Warwick defeated Ket's forces. Perhaps because of that assistance to the government, in 1553 Cecil listed Cornwallis as a supporter of Queen Jane. As sheriff in that year of Norfolk and Suffolk, Cornwallis was swept up in the succession crisis of July 1553. In response to Northumberland's letter, he had dutifully proclaimed Lady Jane at Ipswich, but Thomas Poley's declaration of Mary the same day left him wondering which side to support. According to Wingfield's account he stood at 'the crossroad' as he weighed Mary's legitimate claim and local popularity against the armaments and 'the wealth of the entire kingdom together with the nobility' (MacCulloch, ''Vita'', 255-6). Reliable news indicating the possibility of violence and London's dissatisfaction with Northumberland induced Cornwallis to change his mind. He proclaimed Mary and rushed to swear allegiance as she made her way to Framlingham Castle on 12 July. Mary rewarded him with a seat on her council and appointed his wife to her household as a lady of the privy chamber. 
Cornwallis represented Gatton, Surrey, in Mary's first parliament, but his increasingly onerous assignments often took him away from the court and council. In October 1553 he was appointed with Sir Robert Bowes to treat with the Scottish commissioners on border matters, and a code of march law was agreed by them at Berwick on 4 December. Cornwallis played a leading part in attempts to defuse Wyatt's rebellion. On 22 January 1554 Mary sent him with Sir Edward Hastings to Dartford to confer with Wyatt, whom they were instructed to tell that she 'marvelled' at his 'unnatural stire and commotion' for 'thimpeachment of the marriage' (TNA: PRO, SP 11/2/9). Nothing came of these approaches, and in March Cornwallis served on the commission for Wyatt's trial. In the previous month he was dispatched with Lord William Howard and Sir Edward Hastings to bring the Princess Elizabeth from Ashridge in Hertfordshire to London. They found her 'willing and conformable' although she tried to delay the journey on the grounds of her recent illness. When his political allies, the conservative and Catholic members of the council, suggested sending Elizabeth to the Tower, Cornwallis joined the princess's supporters in opposing that plan. As a councillor and MP for Grampound, Cornwall, in Mary's second parliament he joined those who tried to block Gardiner's plan for a speedy Catholic restoration. On 7 May 1554 he was appointed treasurer of Calais under his cousin, Sir Thomas Wentworth, second Lord Wentworth; he remained there until about two months before the town fell into the hands of the French in January 1558. The suspicions of Sir Thomas's complicity with the French which are recorded in the lines: '
Who built Brome Hall? Sir Thomas Cornwallis 

How did he build it? By selling of Calais. 

' appear to have been unfounded. Wentworth, Cornwallis, and others at Calais had warned the queen of the weakness of the garrison, and urgently requested a larger force. 
On 25 December 1557 Cornwallis was made comptroller of the household in the place of Sir Robert Rochester, and in the following month he was elected MP for Suffolk. In her will Mary named him one of her six assistant executors. But at the end of 1558 Elizabeth removed him from his post in the household as well as from the privy council, and he retired to Suffolk. As a Catholic, a trusted servant of Mary, and a client of the duke of Norfolk, he was an object of suspicion after the northern rising in 1569. Cornwallis was arrested with his son-in-law Sir Thomas Kitson, and both men were interrogated about their involvement with Norfolk and their religious practice. After remaining in custody for a year Cornwallis made his submission on 20 June 1570, protesting loyalty to the queen. He agreed to conform to the extent that 'Almyghte God wyll gyve me grace to be further persuadyd' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/43/10). Cornwallis exemplified that generation of Catholics who were torn between their loyalty to the crown and their faith. The question of religious preference, loyalty, and preferment split his family as well. His sons William, whose unsuccessful attempts to forge a career at court caused his father considerable concern, and Charles Cornwallis, later ambassador to Spain, conformed, while his wife and daughters remained Catholic. Cornwallis attended church for a time, but while others prayed on their knees, he was reported to have sat reading Catholic devotional works. By 1578 he had returned to recusancy, and he had become involved in what became the long-running dispute over the legitimacy of the secret marriage of his youngest daughter, Mary, a devout Catholic, to the young earl of Bath. His long-standing friendship with Lord Burghley could not solve Mary's problem, but it did protect Cornwallis and his family from the most severe consequences of recusancy. 
Cornwallis remained recusant while also continuing to protest his loyalty to the crown. In a letter to Lord Burghley, dated 9 July 1584, transmitting a copy of his letter to the bishop of Norwich justifying his non-attendance at church, he asserted that 'no action of his life discovered a disobedient or unquiet thought towards her majesty', but 'much unquietness bredd in myselfe to satisfy Hir Majesty' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/172/17). His name, along with the female members of his family, continued to appear on Suffolk recusant rolls until his death on 24 December 1604 in the eighty-sixth year of his life. Wingfield had described him in 1553 as 'a young man of ready eloquence and conspicuous worth', and a portrait of 1590 depicts a handsome and sensitive man. He was buried on 28 December in the church in Brome, Suffolk, where the inscription on the monument erected to his memory notes his loyalty to the crown. His son William survived him by only seven years and died in 1611 leaving a year-old son, Frederick (1610-1662), later first Baron Cornwallis, and the estates in the hands of Frederick's mother, Jane ['see 'Bacon, Jane]. 


@@@@@


doc= 6344


Cornwallis, Thomas (1663-1731), commissioner of lotteries, was born in Brome, Suffolk, on 31 July 1663, the fourth son of Charles, second Baron Cornwallis (1632-1673), and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Playsted (died 1669). The Cornwallis family had a long tradition of service to the royal household. In April 1676 Thomas and his elder brother William were admitted fellow-commoners of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. Thomas left Cambridge without taking a degree and in January 1680 obtained a commission as ensign in the 1st foot guards. He was promoted captain in 1683, serving in Portsmouth in succession to his brother Frederick. Between 1685 and 1687 he captained a company of grenadiers in the regiment known as 'our Holland'. 
In 1710, when the system of parliamentary lotteries was reintroduced after a break of ten years, Cornwallis was appointed one of the managers and directors at a salary of $200 p.a., and retained this position for the remainder of his life. The lottery was intended to raise $150,000 by sales of $10 tickets, the majority of which earned 5's'. annually, the few winning tickets being worth up to $1000 annually, for thirty-two years. Such was its popularity that two lotteries were run each year to 1714, when Jacobite troubles brought proceedings to a temporary halt. When they recommenced in 1719 Cornwallis's own annuity was raised to $400, with an additional pension of $100. The lottery was run erratically until 1726 when many of the tickets remained unsold and it then ceased until 1731. 
Cornwallis was childless, though twice married, first to Jane, widow of Colonel Vernam, and second, on 18 April 1723, to Anne, daughter of Sir Hugh Owen and widow of John Barlow of Lawrenny, Pembrokeshire. He died at his home in St James Street, Westminster, on 29 December 1731. His widow died at Bath on 7 April 1732. 


@@@@@


doc= 6345


Cornwallis, Sir William, the younger (c.1579-1614), essayist, was probably born in Fincham, Norfolk, eldest child of Sir Charles Cornwallis (c.1555-1629), diplomat and court official, and his first wife, Anne Nicholls ('bap'. 1551, died 1584), daughter of Thomas Fincham of Norfolk. An unconfirmed report suggests that he studied at Queen's College, Oxford. He married Katherine Parker (1582?-1634) on 26 August 1595; they had eleven children. Serving in the earl of Essex's Irish campaign, he was knighted on 5 August 1599. Whether or not he was involved in Essex's rebellion, he lived quietly for the rest of Queen Elizabeth's reign and was for a time in Edinburgh, where he introduced Sir Thomas Overbury to Robert Carr. Confusion of Cornwallis with his uncle, Sir William the elder ('c'.1551-1611), father of Anne Cornwallis, has made nonsense even of recent discussions of his work, attributing to him his uncle's greater age, retired life, and friendship with Ben Jonson. In 1600 and 1601 he published two volumes of familiar 'Essayes'. About 1600 he began writing paradoxical essays, some published posthumously as 'Essayes, or Rather, Encomions' (1616) and 'Essayes of Certaine Paradoxes' (1617). Among the latter is his encomium of Richard III, dedicated in an extant manuscript to John Donne. Other works include a verse epistle to Donne, an elegy on the death of Prince Henry, and 'Discourses upon Seneca the Tragedian'. 
Cornwallis writes as a gentleman amateur on such subjects as ambition, resolution, youth, essays and books, and humility. His tone is meditative, his style fluent but discursive, his periods short and balanced. Illustrative examples are drawn from his own experience, though with evident modesty. He is concerned with self-improvement, particularly for statesmen, stressing stoic virtues such as resolution, fortitude, and endurance. His method is influenced by Montaigne, his ethics by Seneca. The paradoxes range from satirical praise of misfortunes (the French pox, debt) to what seem at least partly serious defences of historical figures (Julian the Apostate, Richard III). The essay on Richard III is the first extant attempt at a defence of that king. There have been suggestions (Zeeveld; Kincaid and Ramsden), based on the changes in the manuscript versions, that Cornwallis was adapter rather than author of this work. Though limited to excusing Richard for reason of state rather than disproving the accusations against him, it influenced later defenders, beginning with Sir George Buck. 
On James I's accession in 1603, Cornwallis became a member of the king's privy chamber. He won favourable notice from the earls of Northampton and Salisbury and from Sir Henry Wotton, and they tried to persuade his father -- who complained of Cornwallis's extravagance -- to support him more liberally. In 1605 he carried dispatches to England from Spain, where his father was resident ambassador. Sir William was MP for Orford, Suffolk, in 1604 and 1614. During the earlier tenure he spoke in parliament supporting the union of England and Scotland. He received a gift of $2000 from the king in 1612, but when he died in the summer of 1614 his widow complained that she and their eight surviving children had been left destitute. He was buried on 1 July in St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. 
Cornwallis vies, with Sir Francis Bacon, for the distinction of being the first familiar essayist in English and, with his friend John Donne, for that of being the first English paradoxical essayist. In each case it is impossible to tell who wrote first. He was a pioneer in using Montaigne. Popular in his own time, he is rarely noticed now, obscured by his more famous and older contemporaries. However, the essay tradition, as it re-emerged in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, is nearer to Cornwallis's method than it is to Bacon's. 


@@@@@


doc= 6346


Cornwallis, Sir William (1744-1819), naval officer, was born at Eye, Suffolk, on 20 February 1744, the fourth son of Charles, fifth Baron and first Earl Cornwallis (1700-1762), a royal household official, and his wife, the Hon. Elizabeth Townshend (died 1785), daughter of Charles Townshend, second Viscount Townshend. Charles Cornwallis (1738-1805) and James Cornwallis (1743-1824) were his elder brothers. He entered Eton College in 1753 and joined the navy in 1755, under the patronage of the duke of Newcastle. 
Cornwallis's first ship, the 'Newark', went to North America under Admiral Edward Boscawen to intercept a French reinforcement for Canada; she was present at the capture of Louisbourg in 1758, and at the battle of Quiberon Bay. Shortly afterwards Cornwallis went to the Mediterranean. In December 1760 Cornwallis moved into the flagship of Admiral Charles Saunders, and on 5 April 1761 he was appointed lieutenant. After the death of his father in June 1762 and the retirement of his father's patron Newcastle, Cornwallis's mother and eldest brother, Charles (now second Earl Cornwallis), expressed some anxiety about his career, but he was able to secure peacetime employment through his ability, presence of mind under fire, and family interest. In July 1764 he was promoted commander, and on 20 April 1765 he was made captain by the new Rockingham ministry, which his brother supported. Cornwallis was an early convert to the divisional system whereby each lieutenant took charge of a division of the ship's company, which he introduced aboard his first captain's command. Cornwallis knew the value of his political friends and family, all of whom were whigs. In 1768 he was returned as MP for the local family constituency of Eye in Suffolk, a seat he retained until 1774. In 1784 Lord Howe (at that time first lord of the Admiralty) persuaded him to stand as the government candidate at Portsmouth. In 1790, after Howe left the Admiralty, Cornwallis returned to Eye, and he remained in parliament until January 1807. 
Cornwallis was appointed to the 'Pallas' in 1774, and, operating on the west African coast, he arrested several rebel American vessels, which were loading gunpowder in the African rivers. In 1776 he moved to the West Indies and North American stations, before going home. Moving to the 'Lion' (64 guns) in August 1778 Cornwallis returned to the West Indies in time to take part in the battle of Grenada on 6 July 1779. The 'Lion', in the van, suffered severely, being effectively dismasted, but Cornwallis managed to spread some sails on the stumps of his masts and limp to Jamaica. While the 'Lion' was refitting Cornwallis met Horatio Nelson. A shared commitment to the highest professional standards, and a dynamic approach to tactical problems cemented a warm personal relationship that would last until Nelson's death. The following March Cornwallis commanded a small squadron cruising in the Windward passage. Off Monte Christi he encountered a French convoy escorted by a more powerful squadron, which attacked him on 21 March. Although heavily outnumbered Cornwallis kept up a running fight throughout the day, until reinforcements arrived the following morning and the French broke off. At the end of the year Cornwallis returned to England, with Nelson, more dead than alive after the Nicaragua expedition, as a passenger. In the spring the 'Lion' joined Admiral George Darby's fleet for the second relief of Gibraltar. 
In August 1781 Cornwallis took the 'Canada' (74 guns) to North America. The attempt to relieve his brother at Yorktown proving futile, the 'Canada' was detached to Admiral Samuel Hood in the West Indies. Cornwallis took a prominent part in the three major battles of 1782: St Kitts on 26 January, and the battles off Dominica on 9 and 12 April. On 12 April, in the Saints passage, Admiral George Rodney caught de Grasse with his fleet badly formed, exploited a shift in the wind to break through his line, and imposed close action. Although he took the enemy flagship, Rodney's hesitant conduct of the latter stages of the battle, when he restrained Cornwallis from pursuing a broken, fleeing enemy, excited the derision of a young whig captain, already predisposed to find fault with a tory officer. The 'Canada' returned home that autumn, and with Cornwallis's high reputation, and his political friends in office, he was appointed to the yacht 'Royal Charlotte' in March 1783, an honorary command he held until October 1787. In September 1787 he was appointed colonel of marines. When his brother Earl Cornwallis was appointed governor-general of Bengal, Cornwallis was sent out as commodore and commander-in-chief in the East Indies in October 1788; and when the French Revolutionary War broke out Cornwallis seized all the French ships within reach, and helped capture the French trading posts at Chandernagore and Pondicherry. He reached England in April 1794. 
After his promotion to rear-admiral on 1 February 1793 Cornwallis hoisted his flag in the Channel Fleet in May 1794. He missed the battle of 1 June 1794 because he was escorting a convoy. On 4 July he became a vice-admiral, and in December he moved to the new three-decker 'Royal Sovereign' (100 guns). On 16 June 1795 Cornwallis was cruising off Ushant with his flagship, four battleships, and two frigates when a powerful French force of nine battleships and nine frigates under Vice-Admiral Villaret-Joyeuse came into contact early. Cornwallis hauled off and formed a line ahead. The French closed, two of the British ships sailing badly. At daylight on 17 June the French were closing in three divisions, one directly astern and one on each quarter. At 9 a.m. two French ships opened fire, damaging the rigging of the 'Mars'. Seeing she was falling to leeward and might be cut off, Cornwallis wore round to support her in his flagship, and ran down to engage the enemy. This bold move caused four French ships steering to attack the 'Mars' to pause, enabling her to regain the line of battle. Desultory firing continued until 6 p.m. Shortly after 6.30 the French ships shortened sail and made off to the east, victims of a classic 'ruse de guerre'. Cornwallis had detached the frigate 'Phaeton' (Captain Robert Stopford), who pretended he was in communication with the main British fleet. 'Cornwallis's retreat' was a monument to his resolve and his skill. In October Cornwallis joined an admiral's revolt, protesting against new regulations which removed soldiers serving on warships from naval discipline. This strained relations with the first lord, Earl Spencer. Cornwallis was ordered to take command of the West Indies fleet and proceed with the army transports in February 1796. When the 'Royal Sovereign' was damaged in a collision, Cornwallis, having seen his fleet safely into the Atlantic, returned to Spithead. The Admiralty ordered him to proceed in a frigate. Although willing to proceed as soon as the 'Royal Sovereign' was repaired, he declined to go in a frigate, his health being precarious. He was court-martialled for disobedience, and although censured for not proceeding in a ship of the original squadron, he was acquitted. Cornwallis struck his flag and had no more service while Spencer remained at the Admiralty. On 14 February 1799 he became a full admiral, and bought a country seat, Newlands, near Milford in Hampshire. 
In February 1801 Earl St Vincent became first lord, and selected Cornwallis to replace him in command of the Channel Fleet. The 'Ville de Paris' (110 guns), the largest ship in the service, would carry his flag, with little interruption, for the next five years. St Vincent had already drilled the Channel Fleet to the highest standards of seamanship and initiative, but Cornwallis's blockade of Brest was a masterpiece of naval operational art in the age of sail. Denying the French access to stores and supplies exhausted the large Franco-Spanish fleet, while effective British victualling arrangements ensured that the only limits on his fleet were seamanship and human endurance, qualities that Cornwallis possessed in abundance. This was vital, for the collapse of the second coalition left Britain once again single-handedly fighting France. The blockade of Brest was the hub around which British strategy revolved, covering operations in the Baltic and Mediterranean, protecting shipping, and preventing an invasion. At the peace of Amiens Cornwallis came ashore briefly, but St Vincent reappointed him to the channel command before war resumed, and he was on station off Ushant on 17 May 1803, the day before war was declared. The command wore out even the best officers, and Cornwallis went ashore twice for his health, being relieved by Sir Charles Cotton in July and August 1804, and Lord Gardner between April and July 1805. Cornwallis was now sixty, of medium height, and rather stout with a florid complexion. 
In the early stages of the blockade St Vincent and Cornwallis were eager to take the initiative, and considered a combined attack on Brest; but there were never enough troops. Cornwallis hoped to attack the fleet in Brest Roads with fireships, but this plan was blocked by Admiral Gambier, the petty and spiteful first sea lord who made the last eighteen months of Cornwallis's sea career a severe trial of his less than perfect patience. 
When William Pitt returned to office in May 1804, Henry Dundas, Lord Melville, replaced St Vincent. Melville was soon afterwards succeeded by Admiral Lord Barham, who provided the central direction of the 1805 campaign, but left his commanders to use their initiative on the basis of the available intelligence. Throughout 1805 Napoleon's plans were constantly shifting to meet each new set of circumstances, and may have had more to do with disguising his intention of attacking Austria, and pinning down the British, than invading the British Isles. In early 1805 he planned a grand raid on the British West Indies. This and all subsequent schemes collapsed in the face of coherent British strategic and tactical doctrine, superior British leadership, and his own ignorance of the peculiar problems of war at sea. The major French movement of 1805, Villeneuve's cruise to the West Indies, planned as an attack on trade and colonies, only belatedly became part of an invasion scheme. When Barham divined that Villeneuve was not returning to the Mediterranean he directed Cornwallis to detach Vice-Admiral Sir Robert Calder to pick up the ships blockading Rochfort and Lorient and intercept Villeneuve off Cape Finisterre (Spain). In mid-July Cornwallis stretched to the south to search for Villeneuve, leaving Brest with only a frigate screen for eight days; he had correctly calculated that Admiral Ganteaume would not come out. He did not make contact with Villeneuve, and returned to his post depressed, having once again missed the chance of a battle. On 13 August Calder rejoined the flag, after his inconclusive battle with Villeneuve on 22 July. Nelson, returning from the West Indies, fell in with him on 15 August, and left his squadron with Cornwallis. Cornwallis now commanded thirty-six battleships. The centre was safe, but there were no British battleships in the Mediterranean, and precious few south of Brest. Although Cornwallis's main task was to hold the mouth of the channel, to prevent an invasion of Britain or Ireland, he recognized that French fleets could now control the Mediterranean, which had been abandoned by Nelson, or cruise against British trade. 
Cornwallis had to balance these conflicting priorities, and in this crisis he demonstrated his true worth as a strategist of genius. Cornwallis was convinced that Villeneuve, with at least twenty-five sail, was either at Ferrol or already moving south. While Allemand's small Rochefort squadron was supposed to have joined Villeneuve, if it had not it would pose a serious threat to trade. Something had to be done. The initial concentration at the centre had been correct, but with Ganteaume held inside Brest, and morally already beaten, it was time to take the initiative. This led to the most controversial decision of Cornwallis's career. On 16 August, the day after Nelson had reinforced him, Cornwallis divided his fleet. He sent half his ships, under Calder, to Ferrol, to blockade Villeneuve, or to pursue him if he left. Calder had twenty battleships. Barham, who had anticipated the movement, was quick to approve. In fact Cornwallis had not divided his fleet quite as much as mere numbers would suggest. The seventeen ships remaining with his flag included ten three-deckers, including the three most powerful ships in the navy. Against this Villeneuve had twenty-nine ships, but only one three-decker. The relative effectiveness of the two fleets ensured that Cornwallis, as St Vincent had recognized, would not be beaten by any number of French and Spanish ships. Even Ganteaume in Brest only had three three-deckers. Consequently the risk in dividing the Channel Fleet was small, and the prize to be secured was vast. The fleet that Cornwallis detached under Calder was the one that Nelson led at Trafalgar. Had it not been sent Villeneuve would have been able to operate against trade, as Barham feared, return to Toulon, or go to Sicily as Napoleon desired. Between 1803 and 1805 British strategy had been complicated by the sheer number of French and Spanish battleships. Now they were at sea they could be destroyed. 
Throughout the campaign Cornwallis knew that every other squadron would, in an emergency, fall back on him. He was also in possession of superior intelligence of French movements. Consequently he knew that if Villeneuve came north to Brest, Calder would be hot on his heels. This understanding proved critical when Ganteaume finally tried to leave Brest on 21 August, following peremptory orders from Napoleon. He had twenty-one battleships, Cornwallis had seventeen. At 4.30 the following morning Cornwallis led the fleet towards the French in a single line. The French made sail, but when the British closed, they went about and ran for the harbour under the cover of heavy shore batteries. Cornwallis tried to cut off a flagship at the rear of the French line, but Ganteaume scrambled back. Cornwallis was slightly wounded by a shell fragment. Once again he had demonstrated exemplary skill. His aggression, based on well-founded confidence, was tempered by a cool head, and informed by strategic wisdom. Although Cornwallis would have preferred to let Ganteaume out to sea, where he could be destroyed, the strategic situation required that he be driven back into harbour. Cornwallis's greatness lay in his ability to see the big picture, and adapt his tactics accordingly. He had to be content with a partial action, the moral significance of which was as great as any fleet battle. Recognizing there was now no danger of an invasion, Cornwallis quickly instructed Calder to pursue Villeneuve if he left Ferrol, and warned Collingwood to expect him off Cadiz. 
The position off Brest was complicated by the extended cruise of Allemand's squadron, which was sufficiently powerful to overwhelm any of the extremely valuable commercial and military convoys then on passage. Cornwallis detached five battleships in early September, and at the end of the month took the entire fleet in pursuit, but Allemand's luck held. The Channel Fleet was back off Ushant on 8 October. Within days Barham reported Napoleon's invasion of Germany; the crisis of the naval war had passed. After Trafalgar Cornwallis regretted that he had not been able to speak with Nelson that summer. Cornwallis's inshore division, under Sir Richard Strachan, searching for Allemand, captured the last fugitives from Trafalgar, but Allemand got home, unscathed, on Christmas eve 1805. After Trafalgar the Channel Fleet was divided to meet Barham's overriding concern for the defence of trade. When the blockade was relaxed for the winter, to reduce the damage to the fleet, two French battle squadrons escaped from Brest. They achieved nothing; one was destroyed off San Domingo in January, the other suffered severely from the weather. 
Deeply affected by the death of Nelson, exhausted in mind and body, and convinced there would be no more fleet actions, Cornwallis became paranoid. The 'ministry of all the talents' replaced him with St Vincent and he hauled down his flag on 22 February 1806. The death of his brother Charles in 1805, followed by that of his flag captain, John Whitby, on 6 April 1806, ended Cornwallis's earthly ambitions. He saw no further service, and effectively retired from public life, giving up his seat in parliament in early 1807. He spent his remaining years at home, with his horses and parrots, latterly in the company of Whitby's widow. He had never married, had few close friends, and little interest in society. At the peace he was made GCB. He died on 5 July 1819, at Newlands, near Milford, Hampshire, leaving his estate to Mrs Whitby. He was buried in Milford churchyard, alongside Captain Whitby, in an unmarked grave. 
Cornwallis lacked the polish and refined manners of his elder brother, preferred the company of other naval men, and considered outward show to be vulgar. He was devoted to the Church of England, and loathed blood sports. Universally admired and respected by his officers, and loved by the sailors, his nicknames were complimentary. The sailors called him Billy Blue, from his constant use of the Blue Peter to keep the fleet at short notice when anchored in Torbay, and Billy-go-tight in mocking tribute to his relative abstemiousness and florid complexion. His fellow admirals used Billy. Given to depression and ill humour, he was always cheered by the prospect of action. Professional to the core of his being, Cornwallis demonstrated the highest qualities of an admiral; his leadership, vision, and determination were unsurpassed, and only the accident of history, the one that denied him a great battle, has kept him out of the pantheon of naval immortals. Although he never had the opportunity to win a great victory, his pivotal role in the years of maximum danger, between 1800 and 1805, reflected leadership, judgement, and professional qualities of the highest order. Like his friend Nelson he had the insight to function at the highest level, and the steadiness to do so at the one place where the war could be lost. Rather than defeating a French fleet he secured a greater victory, defeating Napoleon's strategy. His blockade of the coast of Brittany, through all seasons and all weathers, remains the ultimate achievement of seapower in the age of sail. He held the centre, around which the greatest contest between land and sea power yet waged was played out. 


@@@@@


doc= 6347


Cornysh, William (d. 1523), composer and court impresario, is of unknown parentage. It is likely that he was close kin, perhaps even a son, of 
By 1485 Cornysh was renting from the abbey a substantial residence located in Sanctuary Yard, regranted to him in 1489 at a greatly reduced rent. Between 1489 and 1491 he married Joan and on 29 March 1491, four days after leaving the abbey's service, he renewed the lease on this residence in their joint names. As inducement for continuation of his goodwill towards the abbey he was permitted to continue paying only the much reduced rent. He retained possession for the rest of his life, and his widow after him until 1519. 
Cornysh's new employment after 1491 is not known. However, his compositions include works which, for their ample scoring and great technical intricacy, seem unlikely to have lain readily within the competence of a small lady chapel choir. This consideration, taken with his need to make independent arrangements for possession of a settled domestic residence, suggests that in 1491 he moved not to a residential job at another church but to membership of one of the dozen or so peripatetic household chapel choirs, of the highest quality, maintained at this period by members of the nobility. It may have been at the instigation of such an employer that from Christmas 1499 Cornysh found himself in receipt of an annual pension of $5 6's'. 8died, payable to him by Westminster Abbey in recognition of his past services there. 
The attribution of certain works to one William Cornish junior in a manuscript of (apparently) 1501 discloses the existence at that time of an older composer of renown from whom the younger man needed to be distinguished. Eight major compositions attributed simply to William Cornysh were included in the Eton choirbook, a collection of Marian votive antiphons and 'Magnificats' compiled between about 1502 and 1505; four survive complete, the remainder being incomplete or lost ['see 'Composers of the Eton choirbook]. The style of the surviving music is characteristic of a mature composer of the 1480s and 1490s, expansive in concept, ornate in detail, and requiring of its performers much virtuosity of vocal technique; it thus appears to be the work of a man born in the 1440s rather than thirty years later and (as first proposed by David Skinner in 1997) may be attributed to the elder William Cornysh. These works were well known and widely copied. (Further lost works attributed simply to Cornysh may be the work of either the older or the younger man of that name.) 
Even if Cornysh the elder did not achieve the profundity of his greater contemporary John Browne or the extended control of sheer display manifested by Richard Davy, his work impresses for its boldness of execution and confidence of design. Further, 'Stabat mater' exhibits refined deployment of vocal scoring for apparently calculated, even affective, ends, while the 'Gloria patri' in the 'Magnificat' includes one of the most memorably extrovert and virtuosic passages in all early Tudor music. 'Ave Maria, mater Dei' and 'Gaude virgo, mater Christi', both for four men's voices, are in a style at once more concentrated and compact. 
Cornysh died between 5 May and 29 September 1502; the fraternity of St Nicholas, the guild of parish clerks and professional church musicians of London and its hinterland, to membership of which he had been admitted during 1480-81, was informed. He was buried with death-knell and torches in St Margaret's churchyard, Westminster, of which his residence in Sanctuary Yard rendered him a parishioner. During the following year the churchwardens received from his widow a bequest of 6's'. 8died, and in 1509 the abbey's almonry possessed a silver bowl donated by William Cornysh, 'syngar'. 
William Cornysh the younger may have been the elder William's son, but not from his marriage to Joan. Both men have been confused with one another. Of Cornysh the younger's education and musical training nothing is known. By 1493 he had become a lay gentleman of the Chapel Royal, and so remained until his death. 
The Chapel Royal was England's foremost ecclesiastical choir, and Cornysh's membership coincided with the beginning of its greatest flowering as a cynosure of liturgical and musical practice. Its personnel of forty professional singers (thirty men, ten boys) conducted the greater part of the daily ecclesiastical liturgy of Salisbury use. Extending to some five or six hours of work each day, this comprehended not only the intricately detailed complexities of the ever changing text, ritual, movement, and plainsong of the liturgy but also the ornate and extended polyphony of this period, composed for unaccompanied virtuoso voices in up to six independent parts. 
On 29 September 1509 Cornysh was appointed to succeed William Newark as master of the choristers. The duties of this very exacting job extended to teaching fundamental music theory and notation, highly developed techniques of singing, all the intricacies of the liturgy, the basic Latin needed for their comprehension, and the vocal parts to be sung by the boys in the polyphonic repertory, including, for instance, masses by Robert Fayrfax, John Taverner, Hugh Aston, Thomas Ashwell, and John Marbeck. The boys were rewarded particularly for their execution of two great set pieces from the liturgical year, 'Audivi vocem' at matins of All Saints, and 'Gloria in excelsis Deo' at Christmas day matins. Cornysh supervised all arrangements for the choristers' boarding and feeding, and was responsible also for their recruitment, using a royal commission empowering him to take from other choirs their very best boys already fully trained. Gratuities paid to him by Thetford Priory, Norfolk, in 1511/12 and by Westminster Abbey in 1522 may well have been bribes to induce him not to take singing-boys from their respective lady chapel choirs. 
Cornysh and the boys attended Henry VIII in France on the Therouanne expedition of 1513 and at the Field of Cloth of Gold, held at Guines between 7 and 24 June 1520. Perhaps this latter occasion was the most demanding single event in Cornysh's entire career; at its climax the English and French chapels royal jointly sang high mass in (doubtless competitive) alternation, concluding the service with several motets, 'which was a heavenlie heareing' (Russell, 214). No sacred music set to Latin words can confidently be ascribed to Cornysh as composer. Nevertheless, certain settings of Lady mass sequences copied for the choir of King's College, Cambridge, in 1508/9 may well, from their late date, have been his work rather than that of his earlier namesake, as also may have been the four-part masses and single six-part mass recorded among that choir's repertory in 1529. 
Cornysh married Joan (died in or after 1523) before January 1513. As well as many cash rewards, some very large, he received from Henry VII and Henry VIII a grant of the administration of a territorial windfall to the crown (1494), monastic corrodies in the royal gift (Malmesbury Abbey in Wiltshire in 1495, Thorney Abbey in Cambridgeshire in 1496, Thetford Priory in 1523), and a lease of the manor of Hilden (near Tonbridge, Kent), with survivorship to his wife, Joan, and son, Henry, on 20 August 1523. His service at court was not uninterrupted; he wrote his poem 'A treatise between truth and information', dated July 1504, while incarcerated in the Fleet prison. This text constituted his claim that the charge laid against him by some informant was untrue and his resulting imprisonment unjust. Its use of imagery drawn from musical experience is of great interest, and although the style of Cornysh's writing lacks any conspicuous elegance, the concepts he conveys were generated with a noteworthy degree of intelligent imagination and perceptiveness. 
This incident did not at all jeopardize Cornysh's future career in the royal household. Indeed, with Henry VIII he seems to have enjoyed terms of jovial familiarity sufficient to allow him, perhaps, some of the licence of a court jester. In March 1518 he was able, by exploiting his easy relationship with the king, to draw to Henry's attention a prevailing shortage of victuals for the court, making joking supplication for provision of 'a botell off haye and an horselofe' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/16, fol. 176'r'). 
The skills and attributes which qualified men and boys for Chapel Royal employment were exclusively musical, and their duties as practitioners of liturgical observance can have left but limited time for extra-curricular activities. However, Cornysh exhibited a certain leaning towards theatrical enterprise, and he was fortunate to have been in service as an employee of the court at a period which, albeit briefly, proved particularly propitious for the exploitation of such inclinations. On 6 January 1494 the court discovered Cornysh's capacity for making a theatrical entrance when he executed a cameo performance costumed as St George, suddenly interrupting on horseback a play being performed by Henry VII's professional troupe of players. After declaiming his speech he led the gentlemen of the Chapel Royal in a lusty rendering of some setting of 'O Georgi Deo care', a text of somewhat martial character first set to music during the wars of Henry V. He made a substantial contribution to the disguisings mounted in November 1501 to celebrate the marriage of Arthur, prince of Wales, and Katherine of Aragon, devising a production consisting of three sequential dramatic pageants showing a degree of elaboration unprecedented at the English court. Further, it is possible that from 1505 until 1512 he and three or four Chapel Royal colleagues collaborated once a year to mount a play or other entertainment before the king. Cornysh, John Kite, and William Crane, particularly mentioned together (for their musical, not their theatrical, expertise) in Alexander Barclay's 'Second eclogue' of about 1513-14, appear to have belonged to this informal group. 
Cornysh participated in pageants performed on 13 February 1511 and at new year 1512 and 1515; presumably he also coached those boys of the Chapel Royal who contributed songs and in 1515 joined him in recitation of the prologue. He next made both a foray upon dramatic writing and, despite the weight of his responsibilities as master of the choristers, a significant return to undertaking production. For the pageant on 6 January 1516 he shared responsibility for the creation of its central scenic structure, wrote some of the speeches, and acted the Herald. Further, he was credited with the production of a play presented in May 1516, and in 'Le gardyn de esperans' (twelfth night 1517) he, as usual, declaimed the prologue, assisted again by two of his boys. 
With varying degrees of plausibility modern scholarship has sought to identify Cornysh as deviser and manager of several other examples of court spectacle at this time. Certainly he created two pageants for presentation before Charles V on 12 July 1520 at Calais, and he was responsible for not merely the production but also the writing of a major dramatic presentation mounted on 15 June 1522 as part of the celebrations marking the creation of an Anglo-imperial alliance against the French. In this unsubtle allegory characters including Amity, Prudence, and Might combined to bridle an unruly horse representing Francois I. 
Cornysh also developed an intriguing production enterprise peculiarly his own. On 6 January 1516 he presented an interlude called 'The story of Troilus and Pandor' performed just by himself and, for the first time as actors, his Chapel Royal singing-boys. Thereafter he devoted much of that theatrical work with which he chose to supplement his primary Chapel Royal duties to the presentation at court on two or even three occasions per year of plays acted by himself and his boy choristers. These productions were relatively modest, all his expenses and expectations of reward being covered by a charge to the king of but $6 13's'. 4died There is record of nine such productions between new year 1517 and new year 1521. The entertainments of September 1519 specifically included 'a pastym that master kornyche mad', consisting of an interlude of evidently traditional character acted by seven of his choristers. 
The Chapel Royal boys, of course, were never more than makeshift actors. In no sense were they ever subjected to transformation into a formally organized playing company; such pastimes could not be suffered to encroach upon their principal daily work as members of the sovereign's personal, and England's most prominent, professional liturgical and musical ensemble. Indeed, when in March 1518 something -- most probably some distraction of his attention towards theatrical enterprise -- was leading Cornysh to neglect his duties towards the musical training of the Chapel Royal boys and the general direction of the choir, Henry himself demonstrated to his choirmaster how the musical standards of his own chapel had begun to slip below those of Cardinal Thomas Wolsey's. After this incident it was only in their own plays mounted by Cornysh, and in no other type of production conducted at court, that the Chapel Royal boys participated. (The singing-boys not of the king's but of Wolsey's chapel played in 'Chateau vert' on 4 March 1522.) 
Cornysh was involved in the secular as well as the ecclesiastical music-making of the court; in particular, he composed to texts in English, for use at court in non-ecclesiastical contexts. The most substantial extant piece is a four-part setting of 'Woefully arrayed', a meditation on the passion of Christ exhibiting a precociously skilful response to the mood of the text. Probably the 'carrall' for the composition of which Cornysh received a fee of 13's'. 4died from Elizabeth of York at Christmas 1502 was a further vernacular piece of comparable character. 
The vagaries of survival mean that Cornysh is best known as a court composer for his lightweight vernacular partsong, to texts hinting strongly at the nature of their courtly milieu. After early endeavours engaging lengthy and complex repetition forms with integrated refrain or burden, the songs for the court of Henry VIII are far simpler, some being very slight indeed. At its best Cornysh's compositional style exhibits a degree of balance and poise belying its simplicity of structure, the inventive jollity of the songs of rustic merry-making complementing the reflectiveness of the songs of 'fine amour'. Two surviving instrumental pieces are far more intellectual and rarefied. One fantasia is lengthy and contrapuntally intricate, while a briefer piece includes in its tenor four successive palindromes, respectively of fifteen, five, nine, and three pitches; the mathematical patterning is obvious, its significance utterly obscure. 
Within his very limited circle of courtly pursuits Cornysh in his own time was probably a man of some consequence. In the longer run, however, most of his accomplishments appear but transitory. Renaissance ideals had as yet reached neither English music nor English letters; Cornysh was a late medieval figure who was merely quite good at quite a number of things which on the whole proved to have little long-term future. Unfortunately not a single word of any pageant or play written by him has survived. Yet he made one lasting contribution to English drama, namely the free-standing interlude of the type which from 1516 onwards was performed by his amateur choirboy actors. Hereby Cornysh invented a genre yielding particular and lasting satisfaction as entertainment, which both helped to keep alive the thread of occasional drama at court through the remaining years of Henry's reign and beyond, and also spawned a tradition which eventually contributed modestly to the flowering of English drama later in the century. 
Cornysh retired as master of the choristers at Easter 1523, retaining his position as gentleman of the Chapel Royal until death. He died very soon after receiving his last mark of royal favour on 20 August 1523, for by 16 September his corrody from Thetford Priory had become available for award to a successor. Probate of his will was granted on 14 October. He requested burial in the nave of the chapel of the rood in East Greenwich, the location of his home, and he bequeathed his numerous properties and leases in Greenwich to Joan, his wife, and after her to their son, Henry (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/21, sig. 13). 


@@@@@


doc= 6348


Coirpre Crom mac Feradaig (d. 904), bishop of Clonmacnoise, whose feast day was 6 March. A story probably put into circulation by Clonmacnoise declared that this Coirpre, who was himself included in the martyrologies as a saint, had succeeded in bringing to heaven, by dint of prolonged and intense prayer, the soul of Mael Sechnaill mac Maele Ruanaid, king of Tara. Although, therefore, Clonmacnoise flourished by dint of good relations, genuine and fictional, with the most powerful kings of both Meath and Connacht, it also sustained a reputation as the home of holy men and scholars, such as Coirpre and also 


@@@@@


doc= 6349


Domenico Corri (1746-1825), composer, music publisher, and teacher, born in Rome on 4 October 1746. His father, a confectioner, was employed in the palace of Cardinal Portocarero and sent Domenico, who showed early musical promise, for violin and singing lessons. By the age of ten the boy was performing in Roman theatre bands, although the cardinal took him under his wing and set about turning him away from music in favour of the church. His (rather covert) musical studies did continue, however, up to the cardinal's death. He then began harpsichord and composition lessons, put on private concerts (attended by Muzio Clementi), and, at his parents' expense, eventually boarded with and received tuition from the famous composer and singing teacher Nicola Porpora in Naples between 1763 and 1767. Following his teacher's demise Domenico returned to Rome, where he conducted concerts for the Roman and visiting British nobility. He lived for two years with the exiled pretender to the British throne, Charles Edward Stuart, who was also an amateur cellist. His opera 'La raminga fedele' (now lost) appeared in 1770, and in September of that year Dr Charles Burney heard performances in Rome given by Corri and the miniaturist and soprano Alice Bacchelli (died 'c'.1800), a former pupil of Corri. The result of this encounter and the highly favourable impression made on Burney (relayed in his writings) was an invitation to them both from the music society of Edinburgh to perform at the St Cecilia's Hall concerts there as conductor and singer respectively. By the time this invitation had arrived they were married, and so they travelled to Edinburgh together, arriving in August 1771. They were warmly welcomed and an initial three-year contract became the beginning of an eighteen-year stay in the city. There was a sojourn to London when Domenico's opera 'Alessandro nell' Indie' was given at the King's Theatre in 1774 (with his friend and former fellow pupil Venanzio Rauzzini making his debut in the title role). It enjoyed some success, but according to Burney the 'young composer of genius' and his work did not receive the attention they deserved (Burney, 'Hist. mus.', 2.880). His wife performed in high-profile concerts at the new Hanover Square Rooms and elsewhere at this time. Back in Edinburgh, Domenico, now a successful performer and singing-master, took on risky managerial posts, including appointments at the Vauxhall Pleasure Gardens and the Theatre Royal, which resulted in financial disaster. Not to be deterred in an expanding market for music, he moved into publishing about 1779, setting up business in Bridge Street with his brother Natale Corri (1765-1822) and using the name of his eldest son, John (or Giovanni). Natale had been a singing teacher, guitarist, and composer in Rome, and may have travelled from Italy with his brother in 1771. He established himself in Edinburgh as a concert promoter as well as a practical musician and married one of the artists he promoted, the soprano Camilla Giolivetti, on 19 February 1794. Despite financial troubles about the turn of the century, Natale remained in business in Edinburgh until he travelled to the continent with his daughters in 1821. His own works included three keyboard sonatas with, as was common at the time, violin accompaniment (1790?), 'Scales for Practice and Fingering the Piano forte' ('c'.1815), and various arrangements of popular works. 
About 1780 Domenico and his brother were joined by James Sutherland, and the firm Corri and Sutherland survived until Sutherland's death a decade later. Domenico published his harpsichord tutor (advocating scale practice) in 1784 and 'A Complete Musical Grammar' three years later; both later appeared in modified versions. Natale took over the Scottish business, Corri & Co., when the Corris returned to and settled in London about 1790; there they entertained and enjoyed the company of the city's most eminent musical figures and visitors, including Dr Burney, Joseph Haydn, and, later, John Braham. Domenico continued to publish music in Soho, concentrating, as in Edinburgh, on songs and operatic numbers published both separately and in various collections (many bear the prince of Wales's feathers as a mark and appeared in association with the Edinburgh firm). As well as canzonettas by Haydn, four volumes of 'A Select Collection of the most Admired Songs, Duetts', arranged and edited by Corri and dedicated to Queen Charlotte, were published in Edinburgh and London between 'c'.1779 and 1795. These were pioneering for British publications in providing written-out accompaniments rather than just a shorthand 'figured' bass. The collections (along with his writings) also provide useful information on contemporary vocal and keyboard performance practices, including ornamentation. Signora Corri appeared in Johann Peter Salomon's concerts in 1792 but may have retired soon afterwards. In 1794 the Corris were living together at 67 Dean Street, Soho, where Domenico established a publishing firm in partnership with his son-in-law, the acclaimed pianist and composer Jan Ladislav Dussek (1760-1812). The firm Corri, Dussek & Co. also acted as agent for Broadwood's piano firm in Scotland (Dussek was intimately involved with Broadwood's extension of the piano keyboard) and appears to have thrived for a time, including Lorenzo da Ponte (Mozart's librettist) among its associates and investors. The German-born composer Ignace Pleyel too appears to have been connected in some way, judging by 'Pleyel, Corri & Dussek's Musical Journal', published by Corri, Dussek & Co. in London and Edinburgh (1797). Many of Dussek's works were printed by the firm. However, financial difficulties intervened once more, and towards the end of 1799 Dussek's debts prompted him to flee to Hamburg or Paris. Domenico was gaoled for a short time at Newgate prison as a result of the first of several bankruptcies, but managed to carry on the business alone; it was based at 28 Haymarket from about 1801 to 1804, when his son Montague ['see below'] took over. Corri's wife had died some time previously (the family's move from Scotland was partly due to her poor health), and he remarried on 3 April 1803 at St Martin-in-the-Fields. His second wife, Alice Henley, was an English music teacher. Domenico had earlier written a 'Musical Dictionary' (1798), had composed and published a piano concerto (1800) and keyboard sonatas, including some with 'tambourine accompaniment' (Ward Jones and others), and had contributed a 'Bird Song' to Charles Dibdin's 'The Cabinet' (1802). His five-act opera 'The Travellers' was finally produced at Drury Lane in January 1806, following a long delay as a result of apparent reservations on the part of theatre impresarios (the work was conceived shortly after he had arrived in London). This has been attributed in part to the 'pseudo-Oriental' (ibid.) music used to accompany scenes set in China and Turkey that broke with his generally conservative, 'galant' style. Domenico composed and taught (his pupils included the composer Isaac Nathan) for another decade or so before a decline in his health. His later compositions for the stage include music for the operatic farce 'In and out of Tune' (1808), including the quartet 'Past Ten O'Clock', and for David Garrick's play 'Lilliput' (1808). He continued to write for the keyboard (completing twenty-one sonatas in all) and to edit collections including a volume of hymns and psalms ('c'.1820). 'The Singer's Preceptor' (1810), an important guide to the art of performance, also features Corri's autobiography to that date. He was 'subject to fits of insanity during the last six months of his life' (ibid.) and died in Hampstead, London, on 22 May 1825. Lorenzo da Ponte, rueful of his disastrous involvement with Corri's business (which caused a loss of 1000 guineas), questioned both his business acumen and honesty. His most enduring contribution remains his legacy as a pedagogue and writer. 
The singer and composer Sophia Justina Dussek (1775-1847) was Corri's daughter. 



@@@@@


doc= 6350


Gorrie, Archibald (1778-1857), agriculturist, was born on 15 May 1778 at Logiealmond, Perthshire. He was educated at the local school, and from 1797 to 1807 he held various gardening posts; for a time he was in charge of the hothouse at the Leith Walk nursery in Edinburgh. From 1807 until his death he was manager of the estate of Annat, Kilspindie, near Errol, Perthshire, farming also on his own account at Shanry. He was responsible for introducing into gardens the pansy, known in the wild as 'love-in-idleness', and he raised new fruits, including the Annat Park apricot, the Annat scarlet apple, and the Annat beurre pear. He introduced the Perthshire red potato, and also cultivated grasses such as wood millet grass ('Milium effusum'). 
In his early years Gorrie was associated with George Don, who published 'A System of Gardening and Botany', founded on Philip Miller's 'Gardener's Dictionary'. Gorrie contributed to many agricultural and horticultural magazines, including the 'Gardener's Magazine', and wrote monthly agricultural reports for the 'Perthshire Courier' and the 'Dundee Advertiser'. His paper, 'Preventing the depradations of the turnip fly', was presented to the Caledonian Horticultural Society in 1811. 
On 6 November 1809 Gorrie married Euphemia Moyes. They had two sons and two daughters. He was an elder of the Free Church of Scotland and was chosen as a representative at its general assembly. Gorrie died at Annat Cottage, near Errol, on 21 July 1857, and was buried nearby in the churchyard at Rait, Perthshire. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 6351


Corrie, Daniel (1777-1837), bishop of Madras, was born at Ardchattan, Argyll, on 10 April 1777, the second son of John Corrie and his wife, Anne McNab. George Elwes Corrie (1793-1885), eventually his biographer, was a younger brother. His father was for many years curate of Colsterworth and vicar of Osbournby in Lincolnshire, and afterwards rector of Morcott in Rutland. Daniel appears to have received his early education partly at home and partly at the house of a friend of his father in London. He then went into residence at Cambridge, first at Clare College in October 1799 and afterwards from 1800 as an exhibitioner at Trinity Hall. He was ordained deacon in 1802 and priest in 1804, and graduated LLB in 1805. While at Cambridge he came under the influence of Charles Simeon, which affected him for the remainder of his life and led to his appointment to a chaplaincy in Bengal in 1806. 
Corrie reached Calcutta in September 1806. He became the guest of the Bengal chaplain, David Brown, at whose house he renewed his friendship with Henry Martyn. During the following eight or nine years he held various chaplaincies in the North-Western Provinces, including those of Chunar, Cawnpore, and Agra, in all of them carrying out missionary work in addition to his duties as chaplain to the British troops. He founded churches and schools and did much to nurture the growth of the Anglican church in north India. He was a great supporter of the Church Missionary Society (CMS), of which he was a governor, and this led to tension with Bishop Middleton. He was a superior scholar in Hindi, which he wrote with elegance and spoke with ease. He translated a number of works into Hindi. On 16 November 1812 at Barrackpore he married Elizabeth Myers (1789-1836), only child of William Myers and Hannah Ayres. They had four children; a son and daughter died in infancy. 
In 1815 Corrie was compelled by the state of his health, which had suffered much from the Indian climate, to visit England. The CMS asked him to preach and speak on its behalf and in 1816 he gave the anniversary sermon. He returned to India in 1817 and was soon promoted to the senior chaplaincy at Calcutta, where, first as secretary to the local CMS committee and afterwards as president of the Church Missionary Association, he continued his active services to the missionary cause. In 1823 he was appointed by Bishop Heber as archdeacon of Calcutta, in which capacity the administration of the diocese devolved upon him at three different times, following the deaths of Bishop Heber (1826), Bishop James (1828), and Bishop Turner (1831). In 1835, Madras and Bombay having been constituted separate sees under the 'Charter Act' of 1833, Corrie was appointed the first bishop of Madras; he began his duties on 28 October 1835. He survived his installation little more than fifteen months, and died a few weeks after his wife, at Madras, after a few days' illness, on 5 February 1837; but short as the period was, it was long enough to impress the community of the Madras presidency with a very high estimate of the piety, devotion, and untiring zeal with which he had discharged his duties. After his death subscriptions were collected to erect a monument in the cathedral at Madras and to endow scholarships in the grammar school he had recently founded. Corrie's devotion to missionary work is enshrined in Weekes's impressive statue in the cathedral. Similarly in Bengal his thirty years of service were commemorated by marble slabs in two of the churches in which he had long been accustomed to minister, and scholarships were named after him in the Calcutta high school. As a missionary chaplain Corrie ranks with David Brown, Claudius Buchanan, Henry Martyn, and Thomas Thomason. A gentle and humble man of great generosity, Corrie left his family poor by his gifts to others. Bishop Wilson, in his funeral oration, paid tribute to the much loved and respected Corrie as 'the parent of the CMS in India, the centre of union and the soul of all its operations'. 


@@@@@


doc= 6352


Corrie, George Elwes (1793-1885), Church of England clergyman and college head, was born at Colsterworth, Lincolnshire, on 28 April 1793, youngest of eight children of John Corrie (1746-1829), the curate there, and his first wife, Anne McNab (1751-1798). One of his three brothers, Daniel Corrie, became bishop of Madras. The family was Scottish but a tradition claiming descent from Cluny Macpherson is decidedly improbable. Corrie was educated at home, followed country pursuits, and entered St Catharine's College, Cambridge in 1813. Upon graduating in 1817 he was elected to a fellowship and soon after, at what was for the time a young age, was made tutor of his college. He held that post until 1849, with growing distinction because his old-fashioned churchmanship in unsettled times, studied courtesy, and concern for the spiritual development of the young, gave an attractive tone to the society and greatly increased its numbers. He took a BD degree in 1831 (DD 1853), and filled most college offices, often holding several at the same time. 
Corrie had a huge appetite for business and for ecclesiastical and theological scholarship, and in the years between 1845 and 1858 edited Latimer's 'Sermons and Remains' and 'The Homilies', Nowell's 'Catechism', Twysden's 'Historical Vindication', Burnet's 'History of the Reformation', and Wheatly's 'Common Prayer'. Other works included a timely 'Historical notices of the interference of the crown with the affairs of the English universities' (1839), and a biography (with his surviving brother, Henry) of Bishop Corrie. The anonymous 'On Endowments of the Parish Churches in England' (n.d. ['c'.1835]) is attributed to him. He also wrote for the Cambridge Antiquarian Society of which he was a founder and four times president, and was for many years president of the Cambridge Architectural Society. As Norrisian professor of divinity (1838-54) Corrie, a little under middle height, silver-haired, and with a patrician mien, was a strong influence on the Cambridge educated clergy. He was expected to succeed to the mastership of St Catharine's in 1845, but his pupil, Henry Philpott was elected. It was a grievous and unmerited disappointment to him. In 1849, however, his friend Bishop Turton of Ely (to whom he was chaplain) presented him to the mastership of Jesus College, Cambridge, and later added the rectory of Newton near Wisbech. He remained as active as before in college and comfortable in his parish, for at heart he was a country priest. Corrie theological prizes were established at St Catharine's and Jesus. 
Corrie prided himself on consistent conservatism and spent much time and energy going against the tide of affairs in church and university. He opposed Catholic emancipation and the admission of dissenters to degrees, and cordially disliked both ritualists and radicals. As master of Jesus (and in 1850 as vice-chancellor), he refused to co-operate with parliamentary commissioners, and snubbed the chancellor, Prince Albert. He lived to see fellows married when he believed their duty lay in celibacy: he remained a bachelor. The last ditch was his spiritual home, and Adam Sedgwick, Prince Albert's local secretary, described him as 'obstinate as a mule... he, perhaps, never believes himself to be in the wrong' (Winstanley, 234). Yet he had a dry, sometimes self-conscious humour as in his letter to a railway company to say that proposals to bring 'foreigners and others' to Cambridge on Sundays were 'as distasteful to the authorities of the University, as they must be offensive to Almighty God and to all right-minded Christians' (Holroyd, 271-2). And when the 1877 commissioners asked about the main wants of the university he replied that the first was 'exemption from the disturbing power of Royal or Parliamentary Commissions'. Too frail to take much part in public affairs, he nevertheless retained his mental faculties until he died 'of natural decay' at Jesus lodge on 20 September 1885; he was buried at Newton. His large library was sold by Sothebys. 


@@@@@


doc= 6353


Corrigan, Sir Dominic John, first baronet (1802-1880), physician, was born in Thomas Street, Dublin, on 1 December 1802, the second son of John Corrigan, a well-known dealer in agricultural tools, and Celia O'Connor. At the age of ten Corrigan entered the lay college of St Patrick, Maynooth, where a local doctor, Talbot O'Kelly, kindled in the boy a passion for medicine. In 1820 he enrolled briefly in the school of physic in the University of Dublin (Trinity College), where he studied under professors Arthur Jacob, James Macartney, and John Crampton. During his time at Kirby's anatomy school in Peter Street ('c'.1820- 'c'.1821) he became an amateur grave robber whenever fresh cadavers were in short supply. In old age he recalled the excitement of nocturnal forays into the paupers' cemetery next to the Royal Hospital, Kilmainham, where he and a few fellow students would dig up the coffins of the recently interred, extract the bodies, remove the shroud, wrap the bodies in sheets, and haul them back to the school for dissection. (This preceded the 'Anatomy Act' of 1832, which regulated the supply of bodies to dissecting academies.) 
One of Corrigan's ablest contemporaries, William Stokes, encouraged him to pursue his medical studies at Edinburgh University, from which he took his medical degree along with Stokes in 1825, after writing a thesis on scrofula or tuberculosis. Once back in Dublin he began to climb the tall ladder of medical and social success. Keen to excel in a profession dominated by members of the protestant ascendancy, who guarded the higher rungs with sectarian zeal, Corrigan faced formidable obstacles. His humble social origins and Roman Catholic faith stamped him firmly as an outsider with neither money nor connection. Promotion, in other words, would depend entirely on hard work and marked ability. He opened a modest practice at 11 Upper Ormond Quay, where most of his patients were indigents or paupers who could not afford to pay his fees. Appointed physician to the Sick-Poor Institute of Meath Street in the Liberties, one of Dublin's worst slum areas, he decided to specialize in diseases of the heart and lungs. Among the more important papers he published in the 1830s, 'On permanent patency of the mouth of the aorta' ('Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal', 37, April 1832, 225-45) impressed doctors in London and on the continent. His work on heart murmurs, known then as 'bruit de soufflet' and 'fremissement cataire', palpitations, aneurysms, and aortic valvular impairment did not prevent him from studying the epidemic diseases arising out of severe malnutrition. 
Slowly but surely Corrigan's career prospered. He accepted posts at the Meath Dispensary, the Cork Street Fever Hospital, and the Charitable Infirmary in Jervis Street. He also became a lecturer at the Peter Street medical school as well as the Dublin school of anatomy, surgery, and medicine in Digges Street, and Apothecaries' Hall. As his income and patient list grew he moved his consulting rooms from Ormond Quay to 13 Bachelor's Walk, and then in 1834 to elegant quarters at 4 Merrion Square West, where his neighbours included some of Dublin's leading families. On 2 June 1829 he married Joanna Woodlock, the daughter of a wealthy Dublin merchant. They had three sons and three daughters, only one of whom survived beyond 1882. 
In 1839 Corrigan was appointed physician-in-ordinary to the lord lieutenant of Ireland and a year later physician to the House of Industry Hospital, a post he held until 1866. But he failed in 1841 to secure the coveted regius professorship of physic at Trinity College. Corrigan's combination of medical expertise, drive, and personal charm soon attracted patients from the top tiers of landed and professional society. Among the elite who competed for his services were Lady Castlerosse, Lady Granard, and the marquess of Headfort. By the late 1850s he was earning well over $4000 a year and this wealth enabled him to treat the poor and carry out research on heart and lung diseases as well as cholera. 
If Corrigan's researches led to no major medical breakthroughs, his eagle eye and practical turn of mind, combined with years of treating patients of all kinds and conditions, enabled him to explain with unusual clarity such diseases as pulmonary fibrosis, cirrhosis of the lung, aortitis, and heart murmurs. At a time when anaesthesia and antiseptic procedures were unknown in Dublin's hospitals he explored the symptoms and causes of aortic valvular insufficiency or impairment, which came to be called Corrigan's pulse. This water-hammer pulsation of the brachial and radial arteries was described by a later authority as 'a jerky pulse with a full expansion, followed by a sudden collapse, occurring in aortic regurgitation' ('Dorland's Dictionary', 1387). Following in the footsteps of Stokes, Corrigan promoted the use of the stethoscope. However, like other physicians of his day, he prescribed opium to relieve inflamed joints and leeches for victims of fever. 
In the early 1840s Corrigan lectured and published papers on the close connection between famine and fever. As he observed in an 1846 pamphlet, 'if there be no famine, there will be no fever' (O'Brien, 'Conscience', 188). This argument proved more than prescient in view of the devastating effects of the blight or fungus that struck the Irish potato crop between 1845 and 1849. In 1846 he joined the newly created central board of health, which was trying to cope with the huge public health crisis that overwhelmed Ireland's medical as well as economic resources. His aversion to financial waste moved him to recommend that dispensary doctors hired to treat fever victims be paid only 5's'. a day. But because these men risked serious illness or even death from contagion this board-approved fee struck both the medical establishment and the public as stingy. Corrigan soon became the object of much abuse from the public for this paltry pay and a senior colleague, Robert James Graves of the Meath Hospital, not only accused him of parsimony but also blocked his bid to become an honorary fellow of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland in 1847, despite his admission to the Royal College of Surgeons of England in 1843. It took Corrigan years to recover from this blow. Not until 1855 did he become a licentiate of the college; a year later he was elected a fellow. 
In 1847 the whig government officially recognized Corrigan's services to public health by making him physician-in-ordinary to Queen Victoria in Ireland -- the first Catholic to be so honoured. Two years later Trinity College awarded him an honorary doctorate of medicine. He also served as a commissioner of lunatic asylums in Ireland from 1856 to 1868. In 1859, he reached the pinnacle of his career by becoming president of the College of Physicians -- a position to which he was re-elected for an unprecedented five years. Once again he was the first Catholic to hold this office. To his lasting credit Corrigan negotiated the purchase from the Kildare Street Club of the site on which the college built its imposing headquarters. The first official meeting of the college in its new premises was held on 5 July 1864. During his presidency it awarded fellowships to graduates of any medical school in the British Isles or Europe. 
Corrigan's colleagues honoured him with a portrait by Catterson Smith and an imposing statue by the sculptor John Henry Foley. The latter was installed in the entrance hall of the college on 3 June 1869 before a crowd of devoted medical colleagues and friends that included William Stokes. Appointed a commissioner of national education in 1859, Corrigan served as president of the Royal Zoological Gardens and the Irish Pharmaceutical Society. In January 1866 the government conferred on him a baronetcy of the United Kingdom and in the same year he became consulting physician and joined the board of the House of Industry (Richmond Surgical) Hospital. For more than twenty years he served with distinction on the General Medical Council in London. In 1871 he accepted the vice-chancellorship of the Queen's University of Ireland, having served as a senator since the 1840s. 
Elected to parliament in 1870 as member for Dublin City, Corrigan spent more time in London, espousing traditional Liberal ideas and devouring sumptuous dinners at the Reform Club. His advocacy of the early release of Fenian prisoners and promotion of secular education in universities alienated the Catholic hierarchy -- especially Cardinal Cullen. A true Christian, he attacked every form of sectarianism and dreamed of a national University of Ireland free from religious dogma and prejudice. But his ecumenical idealism had scant appeal, and once Gladstone's ambitious 'Irish University Bill' of 1873 ran foul of religious zealots Corrigan decided to retire from parliament. 
On the issue of female doctors Corrigan displayed some distinctly patriarchal prejudices. While he defended their right to attend medical school, he did not want women to practise medicine because he was convinced that such work would defeminize or 'unsex' them. This outlook did not, however, prevent the College of Physicians from registering five women as licentiates in 1877. A champion of stricter regulation of both the medical and pharmaceutical professions, he also worked hard to purify Dublin's water supply, being fully cognizant of the link between dirty water and sickness. 
As he grew older and gout made travel painful, Corrigan spent more time in his suburban house, Inniscorrig, Dalkey, south of Dublin. Despite a mild stroke in 1878 that left him partially paralysed, he continued to see patients. But a second stroke at the end of December 1879 left him permanently disabled. Nursed by his wife and children during his final illness he died in his Merrion Square house on 1 February 1880. His funeral proved one of the biggest seen hitherto in the city. Following a service attended by hundreds of admiring patients, friends, and colleagues, he was buried in the family vault in St Andrew's Church, Westland Row, Dublin, on 5 February. 
Noted for his ambition, compassion, and cheerful bedside manner, Corrigan also earned professional respect for his work on aortic inadequacy, heart murmurs, pulmonary fibrosis, and bronchial dilatation. A liberal in church-state relations and education, he opened wider the doors of his profession to fellow Catholics who were born without the privileges of the Colles, Cramptons, Graves, Smylys, Stokes, and other members of the Dublin medical establishment. With the death of his eldest grandson, John Joseph Corrigan (1859-1883), the baronetcy became extinct, but his name survives, emblazoned on the Beaumont Hospital in north Dublin; while visitors to the Royal College of Physicians on Kildare Street can still see his handsome features carved in marble and painted in oil in the elegant rooms that arose under his presidency. 


@@@@@


doc= 6354


Corro, Antonio del (1527-1591), theologian, was born at Seville, the son of Antonio del Corro, doctor of law, and a prostitute. He entered the Observantine Hieronymite monastery of San Isidoro del Campo, near Seville, about 1547, and soon afterwards renounced the Roman Catholic faith. He ascribed this step to the influence of certain disclosures made to him by a member of the Spanish Inquisition, who also introduced him to the writings of Luther and Bullinger. He fled Spain about 1558 and spent the next nine years in Lausanne, where he studied at the university, and Flanders. Though not formally identifying himself with any protestant communion, he exercised ministerial functions for five years in Reformed communities in Bearn, Bergerac, and Montargis. Invited to Antwerp, he was chosen in 1566 pastor of the Walloon church, but the civil authorities, under Spanish influence, refused to confirm his settlement. In his defence he published 'Lettre envoyee a la majeste du roy des Espaignes' (1567; English edn, 1577), addressed to Philip II of Spain, in which he explained his evangelical views and pleaded for liberty of conscience. He also set out to combat Lutheran triumphalism at Antwerp with a 'godly admonition', 'Epistre et amiable remonstrance' (1567; English edn, 1569), recommending a greater moderation in the matter of eucharistic doctrine, with a view to protestant unanimity, in accordance with the ideas of John a Lasco. 
On the arrival of a Spanish garrison at Antwerp in April 1567 Corro went to London with his wife, Marie Lenaerts (whom he had married about 1560), their sons John and James, and two servants, took up residence in a house belonging to the duchess of Suffolk in Cripplegate ward, and attached himself to the Italian congregation of the Strangers' Church. Soon after, by favour of Sir William Cecil and Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, he became pastor of the Spanish congregation. As early as 1563 he had written from France, concerning the printing of a Spanish version of the 'Bible', to Casiodoro de Reina (also a native of Seville), the first pastor of the Spanish congregation in London. But when the letter arrived Reina was no longer in London, having fled under a charge of sodomy, and the Spanish congregation had been divided between the French and Italian churches, until the arrival of Corro with other exiles gave occasion for reviving it. On 16 January 1568 he addressed a letter to Archbishop Parker, accompanied by his two publications in French, which he thought would be good reading for two children of the archbishop, who were then learning that language. Doubts about the orthodoxy of Corro's trinitarian views were raised by the French pastors in London, led by Jean Cousin. In seven letters Corro laid the case before Beza at Geneva, who did not like 'the hot, accusing spirit of this Spaniard', and left the matter in the hands of Grindal, in whom, as bishop of London, was vested the superintendence of the Strangers' Church ('Beze', 10.47-51). Grindal recognized Corro's learning but disapproved of the spirit in which he acted. 
On 17 March 1569 Corro was suspended by Grindal for slander and obstinacy, but not for any doctrinal aberration. Doctrinal differences then arose between Corro and Gerolamo Ferliti, pastor of the Italian congregation, the main charge being that in his teaching, and in his 'Tableau de l'oeuvre de Dieu' (1569), Corro showed Pelagian and universalist tendencies. Cecil continued to support his friend, and in May 1571 persuaded Edwin Sandys, Grindal's successor, to appoint Corro Latin reader in divinity at the Temple. He held this post for three years, but did not get on well with Richard Alvey, the master of the Temple, and was disliked for 'speaking not wisely on predestination and suspiciously uttering his judgement on Arianism' ('Correspondence of Matthew Parker', 476). William Barlow, afterwards archdeacon of Salisbury, praised his eloquence and learning, but thought him wanting in respect for recognized authorities, and too great an admirer of Sebastian Castellio. On 5 March 1576 the earl of Leicester, chancellor of Oxford University, sent letters to the vice-chancellor and convocation asking that Corro might proceed DTh without fee. On 2 April convocation granted the request on condition 'that he purge himself of heretical opinions before the next act' (McFadden, 455, n. 1). Corro had already subscribed the Anglican articles before the privy council, but John Reynolds on 7 June wrote to Lawrence Humphrey, the vice-chancellor, reviving the charges against Corro and hinting that he was the source of the heresies of Francesco Pucci, an erratic Florentine who had given trouble to the university in the previous year. Corro's application was rejected on 13 June. 
As Corro styles himself 'professor of sacred theology' in a publication as early as 1574, he may have had a foreign or a Lambeth degree. In 1578 he published a commentary on 'Ecclesiastes', 'Sapientissimi regis Salomonis concio' (English edn, 1586), which was widely admired and used. In the summer of that year the earl of Leicester supported him in an application for a post at Oxford. After severe examination he was admitted as a divinity reader in 1579. At Oxford, Corro lived as a student in Christ Church, and became reader of divinity to the students in Gloucester, St Mary, and Hart halls. He was 'censor theologicus' at Christ Church (1578-86), and matriculated as a member of Christ Church in 1586. In 1582 he obtained the prebend of Harlesden in St Paul's, London, and in 1585 was installed in Lichfield Cathedral as prebendary of Eccleshall. In 1586 he published a Spanish grammar, 'Reglas gramaticales' (English edn, 1590), his only work in his native language, based on notes made about 1560 when he was tutor to the future Henri IV of France; most of its examples are drawn from scripture. 
The charge of heresy was reiterated against Corro at Oxford in 1582, and has clung to his memory. Bonet-Maury places him among those who have rejected the doctrine of the Trinity, and McFadden asserts that one of his works, 'Monas theologica' (unpublished in Corro's lifetime), 'is frankly unitarian', though he notes that Corro is essentially concerned with practical religion, not theological speculation (McFadden, 692-5). His published articles of faith (1574) are quite orthodox on that doctrine. Some of his London congregation may have been anti-trinitarian, but he does not seem to have been personally heterodox, except in the article of predestination and cognate doctrines, as held by Calvinists. He was a man of open mind, and a vigorous defender of toleration, not only among Christians but also toward Jews and Muslims; had his temper been less hot and his disposition more conciliatory, his career might have been brighter. Corro died in London on 30 March 1591, and was buried at St Andrew by the Wardrobe on 3 April. His wife and a daughter, Susan, survived him. In the eyes of posterity Corro has come to be perceived as 'a proto-Arminian... a pioneer of the intellectual reaction against John Calvin' (Collinson, 151), but this was also a perception current in his own lifetime. In the late 1570s Sir Henry Killigrew, Burghley's brother-in-law, was including regular reports on Corro's activities in his dispatches to William Davison, ambassador in the Netherlands, who shared his deep suspicions of Corro's theology, and when in 1585 Richard Hooker began preaching at the Temple, where Corro had briefly held sway, 'comparisons were at once drawn with the Spaniard' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 6355


Corry, Henry Thomas Lowry (1803-1873), politician, was born in Dublin on 9 March 1803, the second son of Somerset Corry, the second earl of Belmore (1774-1841), and his wife, Lady Juliana (died 1861), second daughter of Henry Thomas Butler, second earl of Carrick. He was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford, where he gained second-class honours in classics and graduated BA in 1823. He married, on 18 March 1830, Lady Harriet Anne (died 1868), daughter of Cropley Ashley-Cooper, the sixth earl of Shaftesbury, and sister of the famous seventh earl, a Christ Church contemporary. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Corry was elected as a Conservative for Tyrone county in June 1826, a family seat, and represented it until his death. He was comptroller of the household in Peel's 1834-5 administration and was sworn a privy councillor. He became a junior lord of the Admiralty in Peel's second ministry in 1841, and was appointed secretary to the Admiralty on the reconstruction of the government in December 1845. In the 1847 parliament he sat as a Peelite. When Derby was trying to form an administration in February 1851 Disraeli recommended Corry as someone with the reputation of a good administrator, who had addressed the house with fluency, clearness, and knowledge of his subject. He was offered a cabinet post, the Colonial Office, even though Derby felt this to be above his claims and his abilities. He refused and was left out when Derby formed a ministry a year later. He returned as secretary to the Admiralty in Derby's 1858-9 administration. In July 1866 he was appointed vice-president of the council on education. He proposed a modification of the revised code of 1862 to help smaller schools. 
On the resignation of Cranborne, Carnarvon, and Peel in March 1867 Corry joined the cabinet as first lord of the Admiralty. In his first major speech on 1 April 1867 he emphasized the sole responsibility of the cabinet for naval dispositions, the reasons for which were sometimes not known even by the lords of the Admiralty. He initiated a programme of building iron-clads. His final months in office were overshadowed by ill health. He was the author of 'Naval Promotion and Retirement, a Letter to the Right Hon. S. P. Walpole' (1863) and of 'Three Speeches on the Navy, with Preface by Sir J. C. D. Hay, Bt, MP' (1872). Corry died at Hursley, Bournemouth, Hampshire, on 6 March 1873. His second son, Montagu Corry, was Disraeli's private secretary and was raised to the peerage as Lord Rowton. 


@@@@@


doc= 6356


Corry, Isaac (1753-1813), politician, was born probably in Newry on 15 May 1753, the eldest son of Edward Corry (died 1792), merchant and MP, and Catherine Bristow (1731-1818), daughter of Captain Charles Bristow of Crebilly, co. Antrim. He was educated at the Royal School, Armagh, under its celebrated headmaster, Dr Grueder, and he entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 8 July 1768, graduating BA in 1773. He was admitted to the Middle Temple on 18 October 1771 and called to the Irish bar in 1779. He was unmarried but had a long-term relationship with Jane Symms; they had six children. 
Corry succeeded his father as MP for Newry in 1776 and represented the constituency almost continuously for thirty years, first in the Irish parliament and from 1802 to 1806 in the imperial parliament. Commercial interests were a prime concern for Newry, because of its flourishing linen trade and its hopes of becoming a major port for the coal trade, both for its citizens and, given the potwalloping nature of the constituency, for its representatives. As might be expected Corry was appointed to the linen board in 1783. The principal political interests in the town were those of the Needham family, who backed Corry, and Lord Hillsborough, who described the town in 1784 as 'very little short of the factious violence of Belfast' (Malcomson, 5). During the 1776-83 parliament Newry was divided by the issues of the movement for 'free trade' and the volunteers. In August 1780, when the Newry Volunteers were reviewed, Corry was a captain and adjutant-general. 
In the early 1780s Corry supported the fifth earl of Carlisle's administration but otherwise was generally in opposition. He also supported parliamentary reform and was then a friend of Grattan. In 1783 he opposed the government for not safeguarding the country's interest over Ireland's exclusion from the Methuen treaty on Portuguese trade, the East India Company, and parts of the 1660 'Navigation Act'. On the issue of trade the government feared the capacity of Corry and Henry Flood to stir up national agitation. In March 1785 the 'Dublin Morning Post' described Corry as a 'zealous watchman' of Irish interests and in 1787, at the time of the French commercial treaty, Corry emphasized the point that the Irish parliament should exercise their undoubted right and discuss it 'lest in the eyes of the British Minister they should appear altogether ignorant or neglectful' ('Parliamentary Register', 7, 1787, 286). At the same time he admitted that the ultimate decision had to be made in the British parliament. He also pointed out that although France could provide Ireland with a market for her goods -- especially, it was hoped, linen -- nevertheless there was 'an opposition of natural interests, an opposition of political constitutions, an opposition of national views and therefore of national councils and conduct' (ibid., 287). Like almost all of the Irish opposition he was anxious to retain the British connection, writing that 'next to the preservation of our constitution and keeping the country out of debt' the great object of his heart was 'to support the honour and interests of the British empire' (291-2). 
In 1783 it was thought that after the election Corry would 'apply for office, as he lives expensively and does not pursue his profession, which is the law'. Although Henry Flood and Corry were not always in agreement, Flood's absence at Westminster gave Corry the leadership of the opposition. But although his oratorical skills were more than adequate he lacked Flood's pre-eminence. At this time it was thought that he placed his stakes too high, but in 1788 it was remarked that he 'speaks frequently, has Parliamentary talents, and [is] perhaps among the first in opposition' ('Dublin Morning Post', 26 Jan 1788). These were gifts which no administration could afford to ignore, and he became surveyor-general of the ordnance in 1788, which carried with it a salary of $1000 p.a. for doing 'virtually nothing'; Corry, however, appears to have been fairly active in putting its affairs in order, much to the chagrin of the inmates. He probably got his instructions from the marquess of Buckingham, who, in both his viceroyalties, was determined to root out any waste or misdemeanours associated with inefficiency. The following year Corry was appointed a commissioner of the revenue. According to Richard Annesley, in April 1795 he 'attacked the FitzWilliam administration as vigorously as he had strongly supported it before' (Downshire MSS, D607/C/84). 
Corry was made an Irish privy councillor on 18 August 1795. In 1798 he was elected chairman of the committee on ways and means, and finally in 1799 he was appointed chancellor of the exchequer and a lord of the Treasury in place of Sir John Parnell, who quarrelled violently with Pitt over the projected union, which he categorically refused to support. Although this decision was taken in London, Corry was blamed for Sir John's dismissal and for succeeding him. This was certainly irrational and probably very unjust as he was in fact the logical person to succeed Parnell both from abilities and experience. Furthermore, such a succession had precedents in the cases of Anthony Malone and John Foster. Under the 1793 'Place Act' Corry had to seek re-election on his appointment as chancellor and on 7 February 1799 the Catholic priest at Newry, Father Lennon, wrote to Archbishop Troy that 'Mr Corry was this day re-elected for the town of Newry' (Bolton, 136). 
The national finances were in chaos and to help balance the budget Corry introduced a window tax, similar to that in England. This added to his unpopularity. Then, during a debate on the union on 17 February 1800, he accused Henry Grattan of 'living in familiarity with rebels and being a conniver at this plan to overthrow the country' -- an opinion which was not unique to Corry ('Correspondence of... Cornwallis', 3.196). At the end of the debate Grattan challenged him to a duel which took place on the following morning. Although Corry was slightly wounded, the opposition accused him of trying to assassinate Grattan. Further unfortunate coincidences followed: the marquess of Downshire, a fervent anti-unionist, committed suicide on 7 September 1801, and the marchioness appears to have blamed Corry together with Castlereagh, and vowed vengeance on them. Next, Sir John Parnell died of apoplexy on 5 December. Meanwhile, the representation for Newry had been reduced to one seat by the 'Act of Union' and Corry was unlucky in the ballot that decided the continuing MP. At the time of the union he had agreed with Pitt and Castlereagh over the question of Catholic emancipation and this made it difficult to find him a seat, especially in view of the expressed hostility of the king, which brought him unwelcome notoriety. But as chancellor of the Irish exchequer he had to present the budget in parliament and he was returned, at Addington's instigation, for Lord Roden's borough of Dundalk. 
In 1802 Corry was returned unopposed for Newry but he still aroused enmity, fuelled by a mixture of envy at his abilities and hostility to his origins. He presented the Irish budget to the Commons on 1 April 1801 and spoke only on Irish questions -- principally on financial matters. He overcame the opposition of John Foster to the plan for Irish finance legislation by arguing that Ireland should adopt the English system. He carried the 'Irish Revenue Acts' in the 1802-3 session but Foster refused to enlist with government while Corry remained. If he was to hold on to Newry he needed ever increasing patronage and his continual demands made him unpopular with the Irish administration. Finally, in May 1804, Corry was dismissed by Pitt in favour of Foster, but he was awarded $2000 p.a. in compensation. He was not a steady Pitt supporter, and, perhaps not surprisingly, he was critical of Foster's budget. He voted for Catholic relief on 14 May 1805. Unlike many Irish members he appreciated and enjoyed the Westminster scene. 
Meanwhile the political scene in Newry altered. The Needham estate passed to the senior branch of the Needham family, the viscounts Kilmorey, and Lord Kilmorey, assisted by Lady Downshire, decided to return his brother General Francis Needham at the general election of 1806. Corry was powerless against such 'real' interest and he did not have the funds needed, in excess of $5000, to purchase a seat elsewhere. However, Lady Downshire was inclined to support the Grenville ministry and came to a formal agreement with Corry to give him $1000 towards his expenses should he be successful in Newry, and, if not, to bring him in for another borough. Corry failed against the Needham interest in Newry, but a seat at Newport, Isle of Wight, was purchased for him, with $4000 from Lady Downshire, and Corry was appointed to the Board of Trade. Six months later Grenville's ministry had fallen and there was another general election. Corry stood, again unsuccessfully, for Newry. 
Corry did not come into parliament again. His health was declining and, although he had been given a generous, if erratically paid, pension, he felt bitter at his loss of office and a seat in parliament, for which he blamed Foster. He died at his house in Merrion Square, Dublin, on 15 May 1813 and was buried in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin. He was not without personal attractions. It was said in 1789 that: 'possessing from nature, a very pleasing exterior, Mr Corry loses not that advantage, by a slovenly neglect of it... His voice is remarkably good, clear, distinct, and melodious and equally adapted to thunder in the storm of impetuous eloquence, or to insinuate in the soothing accents of captivating persuasion. (Malcomson, 6)' The story of the Corrys in the last quarter of the eighteenth century illustrates the exclusivity of the ascendancy, for whom wealth and birth counted more than talent. 


@@@@@


doc= 6357


Corry, John (fl. 1792-1836), writer, was a native of north Ireland. Nothing is known of his parentage or his education: he seems to have been self-taught. He worked as a journalist in Dublin, before establishing himself in 1792 in London, where he showed himself an author of astonishing versatility. Besides editing a periodical, he provided the letterpress for 'The History of Liverpool', published by Thomas Troughton in 1810, and in 1817 published 'The History of Macclesfield'. A more ambitious undertaking was his 'History of Lancashire' (1825), which was dedicated to George IV. This county history was a poor imitation of Matthew Gregson's 'Portfolio' of 1817, and was immediately eclipsed by Edward Baines's 'Gazetteer' (1824-5). Corry also wrote biographies of George Washington (1800), William Cowper (1803), and Joseph Priestley (1804), as well as children's books and satirical works. He was for some time an honorary member of the Philological Society in Manchester. Little is known about his life after 1825, although a letter from him dated 1836 has survived. His works have now fallen into complete obscurity. 


@@@@@


doc= 6358


Corser, Thomas (1793-1876), literary scholar and Church of England clergyman, the third son of George Corser, a banker, of Whitchurch, Shropshire, and his wife, Martha, daughter of Randall Phythian of the Higher Hall, Edge, Cheshire, was born at Whitchurch, where he was baptized on 9 July 1793. From Whitchurch School he went in 1808 to the Manchester grammar school, and in May 1812 was admitted to Balliol College, Oxford, after being awarded one of the school exhibitions. He graduated BA in 1815, and MA in 1818. It was during his residence at Oxford, and through his intimacy with Dr Henry Cotton, sub-librarian of the Bodleian, that his love of early English poetry and Elizabethan literature was formed and his bibliographical tastes encouraged. In 1816 he was ordained to the curacy of Condover, near Shrewsbury, and in the following year received priest's orders, holding also the chaplaincy of Atcham Union at Berrington. From 1819 to 1826 he served as curate of the various parishes of Stone, Staffordshire, of Monmouth, and of Prestwich, near Manchester. In 1826, while curate of Prestwich, he obtained the incumbency of All Saints' Church, Stand, Manchester, where he continued for nearly fifty years. By his care and exertions the parish was early supplied with large and flourishing schools. He married on 24 November 1828 Ellen Lyon, the eldest daughter of the Revd James Lyon, rector of Prestwich. 
Corser was one of the founders of the Chetham Society in 1843. Of the four works edited by Corser for the society -- Chester's 'Triumph' (1844), 'Iter Lancastrense' (1845), Robinson's 'Golden Mirrour', and 'Collectanea Anglo-poetica' -- the most important are the 'Iter' and the 'Collectanea'. The first is an interesting account by Richard James, in verse, of his visit to Lancashire in 1636, amplified by the editor's research and diligence. The second is an alphabetical account, with extracts from each author, and elaborate biographical and bibliographical notices, of the editor's magnificent collection of early English poetry, which he had begun to form at an early age. The first part was issued in 1860. Corser's advanced age and infirmities interfered with the progress of the undertaking on the original scale beyond the letter C, and it was concluded at the fourth part (1869). But six further parts (1873-1880) were subsequently issued on a briefer plan. Corser died after the fifth part was published in 1873, and James Crossley edited the remainder. The work was a very valuable contribution to English bibliography, and the collection of books which formed its basis was sold in London in portions at different dates, from July 1868 to 1874, realizing upwards of $20,000. Corser was also a member of the Spenser, Camden, Surtees, Percy, and Shakespeare societies, and was elected FSA in 1850. In 1867 he suffered from an attack of paralysis; his eyesight failed, and he could write only with his left hand. He died at the Stand rectory on 24 August 1876, aged eighty-three. His wife had died on 25 April 1859, but at least one son and one daughter survived them. 


@@@@@


doc= 6359


Cort, Henry (1741?-1800), ironmaster, was born in Lancaster and is usually assumed to have been the son, or another relation, of Henry Cort (died 1747), a mercer and former mayor of Kendal. His exact date of birth is not known. According to the ambiguous inscription on his tombstone he died in 'the 60th year of his age', and 1740 has traditionally been accepted as the year of his birth. However, on the occasion of his first marriage, to Elizabeth Brown of St Giles-in-the-Fields, Holborn, whom he married at Crowhurst in Surrey on 21 April 1764, Cort gave his age as twenty-two, suggesting that he was born between 21 April and 23 May 1741. Whatever the circumstances of his birth, by 1757 he was working as a clerk to a naval agent in London, was in partnership as 'Batty and Cort', naval agents, by 1761, and from 1763 practised on his own. Naval agents were responsible for the disbursement of pay, allowances, and prize money to crews in the Royal Navy. His second marriage, in 1768, to Elizabeth Haysham (died 1816), the daughter of Thomas Haysham, a steward to the duke of Portland, involved him more closely with the provision of naval supplies, and naval ironware in particular. His new wife's uncle, William Attwick of Gosport, Hampshire, owned a forge at Gosport, from where ironwares were supplied to the royal dockyard at Portsmouth. In time, Henry Cort invested in the Attwick business and by May 1776 he took over its management, hoping to aggrandize the lucrative market for naval ironware. 
At his mill at Fontley, near Fareham, Cort began to experiment with the techniques of rolling and refining iron for which he was to be renowned. His use of grooved rolls to produce hoops and bars of iron was the subject of his first patent (no. 1351) in 1783. Rolling allowed the production of malleable bar iron with a speed and uniformity of finish that was unattainable with the forge hammers that had previously been employed for the purpose. The process described in his second patent (no. 1420) in 1784 involved the use of coal as fuel in the decarburization of pig iron and its conversion thereby from a brittle material into a malleable iron. This process centred upon the stirring about and turning over of molten metal in the hearth of an air furnace so as to expose the iron evenly to an oxidizing current of air -- hence the term 'puddling'. The effect of Cort's endeavours was to bring to an end the long search for an effective and expeditious coal-based refining technique, thus freeing the iron trade from its dependence upon charcoal as a source of energy. Together, the puddling and rolling methods made for an enormous increase in forge capacity and established the global supremacy of the British iron industry in the early nineteenth century. 
Cort publicized his patent methods extensively in the mid-1780s, staging demonstrations and tests at ironworks in the midlands and Scotland and in the royal dockyards. In the late 1780s the first large-scale application of puddling and rolling was under way at the Cyfarthfa works of Richard Crawshay in Glamorgan. And when in April 1789 the Navy Board advertised its new bar-iron contracts, it stipulated that only iron manufactured according to Cort's patents would be considered. At this point, however, nemesis struck. His developmental work had been funded by an old associate, Adam Jellicoe, deputy paymaster of the navy, whose son Samuel was Cort's business partner. Jellicoe senior had advanced money from the official balances in his hands to Messrs Cort and Jellicoe. In July 1788 these questionable transfers had been discovered and in August 1789 the treasurer of the navy moved to recover $27,500 from Cort. His property and goods were seized by the crown, leaving him unable to meet the demands of his other creditors. He was gazetted bankrupt in October 1789. The intervention of his friends helped him pay his creditors and he obtained a certificate of conformity from them in April 1790, allowing him to live as though his bankruptcy was discharged. His friends also secured a pension of $200 per annum for him from the government in 1794, but he remained an undischarged bankrupt until his death at lodgings in Devonshire Street, London, on 23 May 1800. He was buried in Hampstead churchyard. His second wife, the mother of his thirteen children, survived him. 
Cort's patents were forfeit to the state at the time of his bankruptcy, though the government made little or no effort to collect the royalties due. As a result the British iron industry was able to exploit Cort's processes unhindered; in recognition of this, the leading British ironmasters were persuaded to enter into a subscription for his widow's benefit in 1811. The following year Cort's sons petitioned the House of Commons for some recompense for their father's efforts in developing puddling, which, they asserted, had proved such a vital element of national prosperity. A committee of the house investigated the matter. Several witnesses were examined, the most damaging of whom, Samuel Homfray of Merthyr, had been one of the earliest users of the puddling technique. Homfray denied the novelty and worth of Cort's contribution to metallurgy, and the petition of his sons was rejected accordingly. However, Homfray's testimony was disingenuous. Although it was true that Cort's methods had to a degree relied upon an ingenious adaptation and concatenation of techniques already in experimental use in the iron trade, most of his peers had no doubt of the genuine originality of his contribution. It was puddling and rolling, not one of the rival techniques current in the 1780s, which remained the basis of iron refining for decades afterwards, until wrought iron was superseded by mass-produced steel in the second half of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 6360


Corvus, Joannes (d. 1546), painter, is known from inscriptions formerly on the frames of two portraits, the first of Bishop Fox (Corpus Christi College, Oxford), the second of Mary Rose Tudor (1531) at Sudeley Castle, Gloucester, which read 'Joannes Corvus Flandrus faciebat'. Of his parents, nothing is known. It is generally accepted that the artist is identical with Jan Raf, who entered the Bruges Painters' Guild in 1512 and who rented a stall in the Pandt market there in 1514. He emigrated to England after this date and his name was subsequently recorded in a variety of spellings; he may be identical with the John Raff (Raufe, Rauff, Rauffe) who worked on decorations for the Greenwich revels in 1527 and for Westminster Palace in 1531. Sir Roy Strong suggested that two Elizabethan paintings of the festivities at the Field of Cloth of Gold (the Royal Collection) may reflect these designs, although this remains conjectural. Equally uncertain is Max J. Friedlander's suggestion that the artist may be responsible for a drawing (Musee du Louvre, Paris) and a panel portrait of Charles Brandon, duke of Suffolk, husband of Mary Rose Tudor, in middle age (priv. coll.). Lionel Cust suggested Corvus was the 'Master John' referred to in the privy purse expenses of Henry VIII's daughter, the future Mary I, for the year 1544. However, the only surviving portrait of Mary bearing this date (NPG) bears little stylistic relationship to Corvus's other portraits. The artist is probably identical with 'Jehan Raf, peintre de Flandres', who produced a map of England in 1532 and a 'pourtraict de la ville de Londres' in 1534 for Francis I of France as well as the 'John Raven, born in Flanders' of London who was granted denizenship on 13 May 1544. The artist's will was made on 24 May 1546 (and proved on 20 July 1546), leaving his equipment to his son, Laurens. Inadequate and uncertain documentation make it difficult to create a satisfying outline of Corvus's life while the extensive nineteenth-century retouching of his two surviving autograph paintings makes it impossible to discern the qualities of his work which attracted the attention of the royal families of England and France. Nevertheless, his career demonstrates the close artistic links between the Netherlands and England during the period while his surviving works underline the reasons why Holbein should have achieved such pre-eminence. 


@@@@@


doc= 6361


Cory, Isaac Preston (1801/2-1842), writer, was the son and heir of Robert Cory FSA, an attorney at Great Yarmouth and mayor of the town in 1815. His father's library of topographical, architectural, and miscellaneous works was sold on the latter's death in 1840. Cory was educated at the grammar schools at Saffron Walden and Norwich before matriculating at Clare College, Cambridge, in 1820. Five of his brothers were subsequently educated at Cambridge. In 1821 he migrated to Gonville and Caius College, where he was elected to a scholarship in 1822. Graduating BA in 1824 (as thirteenth wrangler) and MA in 1827, he was elected in 1824 to a fellowship of Caius, which he held until his death. He was Hebrew lecturer at Caius from 1839 to 1841. His chief academic work was a compilation of 'Ancient fragments of the Phoenician, Chaldean, Egyptian, Tyrian, Carthaginian, Indian, Persian, and other writers' (2nd edn, 1832; rev. edn, 1876). In 1832 he was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn, and subsequently published a 'Practical Treatise on Accounts' (1839), which described methods of bookkeeping and discrepancies between the law and reality of commercial practice. It was reprinted in 1980. He died, unmarried, at Blundeston, Suffolk, on 1 April 1842 aged forty. 


@@@@@


doc= 6362


Cory, William Johnson (1823-1892), poet and schoolmaster, was born William Johnson at Torrington, Devon, on 9 January 1823, the second son of Charles William Johnson, formerly an indigo planter in India, and his wife, Theresa, daughter of the Revd Peter Wellington Furse of Halsdon, Devon, and a great-niece of Sir Joshua Reynolds. His elder brother, Charles Wellington Johnson (1821-1900), assumed his mother's surname of Furse; he was well known from 1894 until his death as canon and archdeacon of Westminster. William Johnson received his education at Eton College, where he was elected king's scholar in 1832 and Newcastle scholar in 1841, and at King's College, Cambridge, where he was elected to a scholarship on 23 February 1842. In 1843 he gained the chancellor's medal, 'won by a casting vote', for an English poem on Plato. In 1844 he won the Craven scholarship, succeeded to a fellowship at King's in February 1845, graduated BA, and in September of that year was appointed an assistant master at Eton, where he remained for upwards of twenty-six years. 
Eton in 1845 still had very large forms ('divisions') taught in unsuitable rooms, and Johnson, who was extremely short-sighted and weak-voiced, did not easily keep order. The main activities in class were the testing of lessons previously prepared and the hearing of recitations ('saying lessons'). The master had the duty of talking about the set texts or the background history and geography; Johnson could fascinate responsive boys, drawing parallels from modern history and literature out of his amazingly well-stocked mind. 
The most constructive work was done in smaller groups of boys under their tutor, who might be in charge of them throughout their school career. Here Latin prose and verses were composed, and Johnson produced suitable textbooks for this purpose. The most famous, 'Lucretilis', was used at Eton for 100 years; the sapphics and alcaics were said by H. A. J. Munro to be the best since Horace and were reprinted in the 1940s. (The boys produced their own versions, working from English texts.) Also a tutor would give 'private business' to his pupils, and 'Sunday private', in which he could range off the syllabus. Johnson excelled at this, taking immense pains to encourage his pupils to think over a wide area. He also wrote perceptively about them -- his most often quoted judgement being on the future prime minister, A. P. Primrose, the fifth earl of Rosebery: 'he is one of those who likes the palm without the dust'. His tutorial letters to parents set a lasting standard for his successors. 
Johnson also contributed to educational theory. Two pamphlets, 'Eton Reform' and 'Eton Reform II', written in reply to criticisms, define his view of the purpose of school life: 'You go to a great school not so much for knowledge as for arts and habits' -- which include taste and discrimination, the art of expression, the art of entering quickly into another person's thought, and the habits of attention and accuracy, of submitting to censure and reputation, and of mental courage and mental soberness. In 1867 he contributed an essay, 'Education of the reasoning faculties', to Dean F. W. Farrar's 'Essays on a Liberal Education', in which he mentions some of the ways he tries to develop his pupils' ability to think rationally, including the analysis of argumentation found in sermons and newspapers. A pamphlet, 'Hints for Eton Masters', published only in 1898, circulated among his friends; along with much else that was wise, it encouraged the boys' freedom, a distinguishing feature of Eton. His influence was to some extent surprisingly close to the muscular Christians, then becoming important in education. For he loved action from boys, which he could not himself match. He was an imperialist, even if a liberal in the whig tradition at home. Yet he differed from the caricatural muscular Christian by his love of music and learning, and the scepticism of his Christianity. 
Johnson was considered as a possible professor of history at Cambridge, though he himself would have preferred political economy, a subject which he began to teach at Eton when the curriculum for older boys was expanded. He taught many of the ablest boys in the school and had, as the senior assistant master, progressed to teaching the second classical division. 
In April 1872 Johnson suddenly resigned at Eton, and no one can be quite sure of the exact circumstances of his resignation. There is no question, however, that he was dangerously fond of a number of boys. Although he probably did not allow his affections to take any physical form, he permitted intimacies between the boys. This conduct was brought to the notice of the headmaster, James Hornby, who demanded Johnson's resignation, and Johnson retired quietly to the family home, Halsdon, which he had leased from his brother. He also resigned the fellowship of King's; his influence there had been on the side of opening up the college from its traditional Etonian exclusiveness. Wanting a fresh start, he changed his surname to Cory. In 1878 he went to Madeira for his health, and there married, in August, a twenty-year-old Devon neighbour, Rosa Caroline Guille (1858-1906), whose father was rector of Little Torrington. The couple had a son, Andrew. While in Madeira he wrote an idiosyncratic 'Guide to Modern English History', covering the period from 1815 to 1835, without the aid of reference books. It was published, but never brought to a conclusion, on his return from Madeira in 1882. The family settled in Hampstead, London, where he taught some girls gratis, who found him still a magical teacher. He died at his home, 4 Rosslyn Villas, Pilgrim's Lane, Hampstead, on 11 June 1892, after a period of gradually declining health, and was buried at Hampstead on 16 June; his wife survived him. 
Johnson's poetry was mostly written at Eton, published privately and anonymously in two slim editions in 1858 and 1877 and then somewhat enlarged in 1891. His most famous lines, 'Heraclitus', were a translation of a Greek construe thrown off for his pupils, illustrating the excellence of his ear. Many other of the better pieces were inspired by particular boys; the words of 'The Eton Boating Song' were written in 1865 for an ephemeral published by his pupil Everard Primrose and later set to music by another old pupil, Algernon Drummond. Curiously his literary judgement was unorthodox, for example placing Tennyson above Shakespeare. 
Some of Johnson's best writing is found in his letters and journals, of which a selection was published by Francis Warre-Cornish in 1897. A certain censorship was exercised by a young Old Etonian, Reginald Brett (later second Lord Esher), who was with him at Halsdon at the crisis of his life, but even so there is still much of interest which Cornish did not like to make public. Johnson remains therefore someone probably known to few general readers. His main influence has been exerted through a large number of distinguished pupils, and through a chain of gifted teachers who knew him or were inspired by his writing. 


@@@@@


doc= 6363


Coryate, George (d. 1607), Latin poet, was born in St Thomas's parish, Salisbury, where his family appears to have been long settled; educated at Salisbury Free School and Winchester College, he proceeded to New College, Oxford, where he became a probationary fellow on 15 December 1560 (some months after Michael Maschiart, a fellow Latinist of his native parish), perpetual fellow in 1562, BA in March 1564, MA in July 1569, and BD on 12 July 1582. He was appointed vicar of Hilmarton, Wiltshire, in 1567, rector of Donington in 1570, and in June of the same year rector of Odcombe, Somerset, the place that his peripatetic son was to immortalize. While remaining at Odcombe, he obtained some further preferments, culminating in a prebend at York, 1595. According to H. Hatcher (writing in Hoare's 'Modern Wiltshire'), he married one Henrietta Cooper; he later married Gertrude Williams(?) (died 1645), and they had one child, Thomas Coryate (1577?-1617). 
Coryate was 'much commended in his time for his fine fancy in Latin poetry, and for certain matters which he had written' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.774), as quoted by several contemporary writers of unimpeachable seriousness; 'at a time when a talent for Latin poetry was an enviable accomplishment, he was celebrated for his Latin verses' (Hoare, 6.619). His son Thomas published the 'Posthuma fragmenta poematum Georgii Coryati Sarisburiensis' at the end of his celebrated 'Crudities' (1611), with a dedicatory letter to Henry, prince of Wales, explaining his motives for rescuing his father's work 'ex Cimmeriis illis tenebris' ('from outer darkness'). George himself, shortly before his death, had expressed the hope that his early writings might be printed; his friends had sought publication as a memorial. He had been honoured by the notice of James Middendorp, and the philosopher John Case had quoted his lines on Oxford and Cambridge (Case, 153), written about forty years previously, along with many others 'de descriptione Angliae, Scotiae, et Hyberniae'. At least 2000 lines, composed in his prime, 'elegantibus sane ac a viris eruditis non parum laudatis' ('elegant, applauded by the learned') had vanished, through the author's carelessness or the action of time and bookworms ('tineis edacibus corrosis'). Thus 'Thomas Coryatus Odcombiensis, peregrinans pedesterrimus' begs Henry's favour against snapping critics, 'virulentos Momorum morsus'. 
The first group of surviving verses were written at Winchester, for Queen Elizabeth's visit in August 1560; Coryate urges her to marry, in elegiacs clever and lively enough to earn a reward. At Oxford he paraphrased the 'Psalms' (a common way of combining devotion with neo-Latin virtuosity); sixteen virtuoso acrostic lines survive, dedicating that exercise to the queen. In 'Viridis draconis triumphus' Coryate laments William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, then turns to his son Henry (who made him his chaplain); he shows skill in handling about 100 hexameters, which do at least demonstrate the superior elegance of Latin, when compared with the accompanying vernacular fourteeners, 'The Pembroke dragon, greene of hue, good reader, here behold'. 
Astronomical verses by Coryate to the chancellors of the universities (Leicester and Burghley) were recited in New College hall, neatly comparing them to the two pole-stars (Coryate, 1905 edn, 2.397). Burghley received several other sets of verses, with medical advice on the power of song, and gave Coryate 40's'.; his poem of thanks refers to 'illustrissima tua uxor' (the learned Mildred, Lady Burghley), and her poem to Buchanan. Coryate complained to Burghley, in forty-two elegiacs, of 'Pseudocausidicos se injuste opprimentes' ('false advocates unjustly accusing him'; ibid., 2.399). He wrote also to Lord Keeper Puckering. Bishops Jewel and Piers of Salisbury are each mourned as his 'Maecenas optimus'. He puns wittily on Piers (later archbishop of York) and Perseus. Epitaphs include a clever multiple acrostic on Anne Clifton; another commemorates eight members of the Worsley family, two blown up by gunpowder. Archbishop Whitgift received an elaborate acrostic. Coryate's various patrons were not fools; he showed mastery of a valued accomplishment. He died at the parsonage at Odcombe on 4 March 1607; his son preserved his body until 14 April, when he was buried in the chancel at Odcombe. Thomas could no doubt thank his father for the fluency in spoken and written Latin, as well as the confident eccentricity, with which he toured Europe. 


@@@@@


doc= 6364


Coryate, Thomas (1577?-1617), traveller and writer, was the only son of George Coryate (d. 1607), rector of Odcombe, Somerset, and his wife, Gertrude (died 1645), whose maiden name may have been Williams. Doubt about his year of birth arises from Winchester College's 'Register of Oaths, 1576-1639' (fol. 73'v'), which indicates 1579; Coryate himself believed 1577 to be correct. A scholar at Winchester from July 1591, he went up to Gloucester Hall, Oxford, in 1596, matriculating on 11 June, aged nineteen. He studied there for about three years and left without taking a degree, but with a retentive memory, much learning, excellent knowledge of Greek and Latin texts, fondness for rhetoric, aptitude for histrionics, curiosity to see the world, and a thirst for personal fame. 
Coryate was acquainted with several influential families in the neighbourhood of Odcombe and refers to Sir Edward Phelips of Montacute and his son Sir Robert as his patrons. It was probably through them that he joined the household of Henry, prince of Wales. There he met many eminent people of the day, and played the role of unofficial, and probably unpaid, court jester. 
In May 1608 Coryate sailed from Dover to Calais and made his way to Paris, which he found even filthier and smellier than London. At Fontainebleau he was befriended by members of Henri IV's garde ecossaise and saw more of the royal household than would normally have been permitted to chance visitors. He journeyed on to Lyons, through Savoy to Turin, Milan, Mantua, and Padua. His description of how Italians shielded themselves from the sun resulted in apparently the first mention of 'umbrella' in English literature. Table forks, almost unknown in England, were in general use in Italy; Coryate acquired one, imitated the Italian fashion of eating and continued to do so frequently when he came home. 
It is wrongly stated that Coryate's European travels were mainly on foot. He did walk extensively, often unaccompanied, carrying no weapons but a staff and a knife; one day in May 1608 between 5 a.m. and 6 p.m. he walked 36 miles. His other modes of travel were boat, horseback, coach, and cart; over the Mont Cenis Pass he was carried in a 'chaise a porteurs'. 
Arriving in Venice on 24 June 1608 Coryate presented two letters of introduction to the English ambassador, Sir Henry Wotton, who, perhaps impressed by the letter which mentioned that Coryate was remotely related to the earl of Essex, did him many kindnesses. These included rescuing him in the ambassadorial gondola from a threatening crowd of Jews who objected to Coryate preaching Christianity to their rabbi. Later he was to risk reprisals for antipathy to Roman Catholic rites and, during his Eastern travels, for proclaiming against Islam. After six weeks of intensive quest and recording of information, he left Venice on 7 August by boat to Padua, then walked to Vicenza, Verona, and Bergamo. 
Coryate arrived in Zurich by boat and reached Basel on foot at the end of August. While in Switzerland he heard the story of William Tell. Coryate's admirable rendering appears to be the earliest in English. Arriving in Strasbourg by boat he then got lost, alone and on foot, in the Black Forest, but the sole threat of armed violence experienced in Europe was from a German peasant, who resented Coryate picking grapes from a vineyard. He was hospitably received in Heidelberg and walked to Mainz. After a detour to visit Frankfurt's fair he sailed down the Rhine, with a brief stop at Cologne, and continued by water down what was the temporary truce line between the armies of Spain and the United Provinces. After calling on the English merchants established at Middelburg he was entertained by the English garrison at Flushing. Thence he embarked on 1 October and landed in London on 3 October 1608. With the rector's permission Coryate hung his shoes in Odcombe church. 
Coryate drew on his experiences in writing 'Coryats Crudities' (1611), which was intended to encourage courtiers and gallants to enrich their minds by continental travel. It contains illustrations, historical data, architectural descriptions, local customs, prices, exchange rates, and food and drink, but is too diffuse and bulky -- there are 864 pages in the 1905 edition -- to become a vade-mecum. To solicit 'panegyric verses' Coryate circulated copies of the title-page depicting his adventures and his portrait, which had been engraved by William Hole and which he considered a good likeness. About sixty contributors include many illustrious authors, not all in verse, some insulting, some pseudonymous. Prince Henry accepted the dedication but insisted that all were published. There then appeared 'The Odcombian Banquet', a pirated version of the 'verses' with a scurrilous preface. John Taylor may have been responsible; certainly thereafter he heaped versified ridicule on Coryate. 'Coryats Crambe' (1611), presented as 'the second course to his Crudities', is a slim miscellany, including orations made to the royal family when Coryate presented copies of 'Crudities'. According to 'Thomas Coriate Traveller for the English Wits' (1616), Coryate belonged in the early 1610s to the Mermaid Club, a group of 'sireniacall gentlemen, that meet on the first Friday of everie moneth, at the Mermaide in Breadstreet' ('STC', 5812). He was its beadle, and the members provided him with a mock passport before he departed on his Eastern travels ['see 'Patrons of the Mermaid tavern]. 
On 20 October 1612 Coryate sailed for Constantinople. During a protracted voyage he visited, among other places, Alexandria Troas, then thought to be the site of Troy, where a companion dubbed him 'the first English Knight of Troy'; he responded with an oration. Arriving in Constantinople towards the end of March 1613, he presented a letter of introduction to the English ambassador, Paul Pindar, who treated him kindly and during Coryate's ten-month stay frequently included him in his suite on state occasions. He now learned Turkish and Italian, the lingua franca of the Levant, having previously relied mainly on Latin; few but his countrymen knew English. In January 1614 he sailed from Constantinople, disembarking at Iskenderun, the port of Aleppo. On 15 March he left Aleppo to walk with a caravan mainly of Christian pilgrims, guarded against Arab attack by Turkish troops. After spending four blissful days in Damascus he arrived in Jerusalem on 12 April in time for Easter. There he toured the sights and, like many pilgrims, had crosses tattooed on his wrists. After visiting Nazareth, Bethlehem, Jericho, and the River Jordan he walked back to Aleppo. 
Intending to write a great travel book, Coryate remained in Aleppo from May to September writing up his notes. He sent these home, where, drastically abbreviated, they were eventually published by Samuel Purchas in his 'Purchas his Pilgrimes' (1625). Coryate's decision then to walk to India was primarily to confirm that the Odcombian Legstretcher, as he had been termed, was the greatest walker in the world. Joining an enormous caravan, he was robbed of much of his money at Diyarbakir, spent six days inspecting the ruins of Tabriz and continued via Qazvin to Esfahan. There he spent two months and left notes accumulated since leaving Aleppo, notes which disappeared. He joined another caravan in February 1615, walked via Kandahar, Multan, Lahore, and Delhi to the official Mughal capital, Agra, only to find that the emperor Jahangir was then resident at Ajmer, a further ten days' march. Arriving there in mid-July 1615 he measured his walk from Jerusalem: 2700 miles in ten months by his reckoning. He must actually have walked at least 3300 miles, during which he spent only 50's'., seldom drinking anything but water, often living reasonably well for 1died sterling per day. 
Excepting Father Thomas Stephens, Coryate was the first Englishman to visit India with no thought of trade. At Ajmer he was warmly welcomed by the East India Company's servants and lived at their expense and that of Sir Thomas Roe, England's first ambassador to the Mughal court, with whom Coryate had become acquainted in England. In December 1615 Coryate accompanied the welcoming party which met Roe outside Ajmer, and made another oration. He earned his keep by entertaining Roe and the merchants with his tales. He explained his fourteen-month stay in Ajmer by the necessity to learn Persian and continue studying Turkish and Arabic. With these, and fluent Hindustani, he would travel, and solicit donations by flattering and amusing the rich and powerful. One of the two versions of 'Thomas Coriate Traveller for the English Wits' published in 1616 was subtitled 'greeting. From the court of the great Mogul'. About August 1616 he made an oration in Persian before Jahangir, who rewarded him with 100 silver rupees. 
In September 1616, when Roe and his immediate attendants accompanied the emperor on his progress towards Mandu, Coryate resumed his wanderings, having sent a final missive to England from Agra on 30 October, published in 1618. He reached as far north as Kangra, and besides other places visited Hardwar, where the Ganges issues from the Himalayan foothills. He was back in Agra in July 1617 and continued to the ruined city of Mandu, some 400 miles to the south. There he found Roe installed in a deserted mosque and was introduced to his chaplain, Edward Terry, with whom he shared a room, and a tent when the emperor continued his progress towards Ahmadabad. Publishing nearly forty years later ('Voyage to East India', 1655 edn, 57), Terry gives a convincing character sketch, but is unreliable about Coryate's itinerary, confusing what had been achieved with Coryate's relation of his future plans. In November Coryate decided to leave the camp and make for the East India Company's factory at Surat in Gujarat. There, in December 1617, he died of dysentery, exacerbated, according to Terry, by the merchants plying him with sack. There is conflicting evidence about where he was buried. Coryate, yearning for lasting fame, dreaded lying in an unmarked grave, but the site of his interment has been durably, if inaccurately, commemorated because a large, domed tomb in the Islamic style, a landmark for sailors near the anchorage off Surat, is shown on British admiralty charts as 'Tom Coryat's tomb'. 


@@@@@


doc= 6365


Coryton, William (1580-1651), politician, was the eldest son of Peter Coryton of Coryton and Newton Ferrars, Devon, and his wife, Joan, daughter of John Wreye of Milton, Cornwall. Nothing is known of his early years and he did not attend university. He married Elizabeth (died 1656), daughter of Sir John Chichester de Raleigh and Anne, daughter of Sir Robert Dennis; they had four sons and seven daughters. 
Coryton was a critical figure in the west-country political network of the Herbert earls of Pembroke, and was vice-warden of the stannaries, deputy lieutenant, and 'custos rotulorum' of Cornwall. He sat in all parliamentary sessions between 1624 and 1629, usually being returned for Cornwall. There he was a leading member of the Pembroke interest and linked to Sir John Eliot and the earl of Warwick. A bitter opponent of Buckingham, he opposed Arminianism in the church and favoured war with Spain. Believing in the conciliar and legislative authority of parliament, he espoused traditional concepts of purging evil counsellors but under Charles I came to put pressure upon the constitutional notion that the king could do no wrong. In parliament in 1624 he sought, while supporting war, to link supply to redress of grievances. In 1625 he addressed both financial and religious issues. In 1626 he helped assemble the Pembroke faction, attacked Buckingham, and wanted redress before supply. He was a leading opponent of the forced loan, arguing its illegality in a treatise, 'A relation of so much as passed between the lords of the council and Mr Coryton at the council table'. He respected the royal prerogative but appealed tellingly to statute and 'Magna Carta'. Having challenged the council to try him, he was the ringleader in the 'Five Knights' case' and was committed to the Fleet prison in July 1627. His stand over the loan caused the loss of his county offices and vice-wardenship, thanks to Buckingham's influence. The stannary appointment went to John, later Lord Mohun, friend of the duke's local agent and Coryton's enemy Sir James Bagg. 
In the elections of 1628 Coryton traded on local factionalism and his fame as a loan refuser. Released from prison, in the Commons he again attacked Buckingham and supported due process legislation (eventually the petition of right), becoming distrustful and confrontational towards the king. A prominent speaker in 1629, he attacked Arminianism and accused the king of protecting evil advisers. Part of the demonstration in the house on 2 March, he was arrested and interrogated with Eliot and others. In consummate fashion he pleaded a lapse of memory about events in the Commons, but offered information about the Eliot group's plans. Like the others he entered a plea of parliamentary privilege when charged in Star Chamber, but in May submitted to the king and was released, the earl of Pembroke probably interceding. Coryton was therefore not one of those, including Eliot and Selden, who fought a constitutional battle in the courts in 1629-30. Pembroke effected his reinstatement to the stannaries, where his administration was controversial. 
Arrested in 1637 on a charge of false imprisonment in a case apparently deriving from Pembroke business interests, Coryton was later released. He was elected to the Short and Long parliaments, but expelled from the latter after being found guilty of falsifying returns. He again lost the vice-wardenship and the deputy lieutenancy of Cornwall as well as the stewardship of the duchy. A gentleman of the privy chamber, Coryton was a royalist colonel in the first civil war, raising a regiment in Cornwall. By 1645-6 he was negotiating with Hugh Peter for local royalist composition, surely in the process securing his own estates. He changed sides and assisted the parliamentarian reduction of the county, eventually compounding in 1647. He died on 1 May 1651 and was buried in the church of St Mellion near Plymouth. His wife survived him by five years. His son John was a royalist colonel, created baronet after the Restoration. 
Coryton was politically sophisticated, capable of pragmatism and sharp practice as well as principled dissent -- not the stuff of which martyrs are made. His life was a microcosm of the early seventeenth-century English political world in its troubled complexity, with tensions between establishment and dissent, politics and ideology, centre and locality, loyalty to monarchy and suspicion of Charles I, and royalism and parliamentary power. 


@@@@@


doc= 6772


Cronan moccu Eile (d. 665) was the founder of Roscrea (Ros Cre), the largest monastery in the kingdom of Ele. The saint's feast day is commemorated on 28 April in 'Felire Oengusso'. According to the genealogies his father, Odran, was of Ele while his mother, Coemri, belonged to Corco Baiscinn. There are two extant recensions of his Latin life, the earlier and more complete of which, preserved in 'Codex Kilkenniensis', is unlikely to predate the twelfth century. The life brings Cronan into contact with Clonmacnoise, and Mo Choemoc. One of its major set pieces is Cronan's deliverance of Ele from the aggressive Osraige. It also celebrates the composition of the illuminated 'Book of Dimma'; this manuscript was the prized possession of Roscrea for centuries. Roscrea flourished, partly, because it was situated on the Slige Dala, one of the five royal routes of Ireland. The Celi De reformers did not find this conducive to ascetic life and set up their reformed church on the more isolated island in nearby Lough Cre. Despite the relative importance of Roscrea, Cronan does not figure prominently in the hagiography of other saints. The remains of a Romanesque church, a round tower, and a twelfth-century high cross mark the site of the monastery. The Celi De house is no longer so isolated, for Lough Cre has been drained. 


@@@@@


doc= 6890


Cummene Albus (d. 669) had visited the churches of the Ionan mission to the English, as he may well have done, he could have visited the Saxon shore fort at Ythancaestir (Bradwell-on-Sea in Essex), where Cedd (died 664) built a church, or have looked out from Cedd's other recorded church at Tilbury, across the Thames estuary to Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 6912


Alexander Cunningham, first earl of Glencairn (1426?-1488), who must have been still only a child. 
Following Sir Robert's death, the office of bailie of Cunningham, which he had been given for life under the terms of the 1425 marriage contract, reverted to Sir Alexander Montgomery. However, when in 1449 James II granted the office heritably to Montgomery's son Alexander, this gave rise to an often murderous feud which was not finally settled until 1609. But arbitration in 1454-5 led to an agreement that Alexander Cunningham of Kilmaurs would act as bailie until Lord Montgomery's grandson, now his heir, reached his majority, and since Cunningham accounted at the exchequer in 1457 and 1458, this had obviously taken effect. He was in favour with James II, having supported him against the ninth earl of Douglas in 1455 (the Montgomerys, by contrast, were very probably Douglas supporters), and became a lord of parliament between 8 February 1463 and 13 January 1464 as Lord Kilmaurs, sitting in every parliament between then and 1488. He married Margaret, daughter of Adam Hepburn, second Lord Hailes. In 1464 he had to defend himself against a -- surprising -- charge of rendering assistance to the exiled Douglases. His defence, for which he offered to undergo three alternative modes of proof (an assize, compurgation, or combat), was successful. In 1466 he was confronted with the service of Alexander Montgomery as heir to his father in the office of bailie of Cunningham; it seems clear from the fact that the service occurred before sheriffs 'in hac parte' at Linlithgow, rather than in Cunningham, that Kilmaurs was hostile to any reversion of the office to the Montgomerys. There is no evidence to show how the office was exercised between 1466 and 1470 (when Lord Montgomery died, having been predeceased by his grandson who left yet another minor heir, Hugh), or indeed in the 1470s. In 1481, however, the office was being exercised by John Ross of Montgreenan, king's advocate and a favourite of King James III; so it would seem that Kilmaurs had lost control of it. 
Nevertheless, when Prince James rose against his father in 1488 Kilmaurs took the side of the king, perhaps stimulated by the presence in the prince's forces of Hugh, second Lord Montgomery. For assistance rendered to the king at Blackness Castle, Kilmaurs was on 28 May 1488 created earl of Glencairn. However, at the battle of Sauchieburn on 11 June 1488 the new earl was killed, possibly by Lord Montgomery. In October there was passed a parliamentary act rescinding all grants of new dignities by James III since 2 February 1488. The bailie of Cunningham was granted back to the Montgomery family by James IV in 1488 and was confirmed again in 1498. On 17 October 1488 the grant of the earldom was annulled by act of parliament, making all creations since 2 February 1488 void. Glencairn's eldest son, Robert Cunningham, second Lord Kilmaurs (died 1489) held only the lordship of parliament, not the earldom, and sat in parliament in 1489 as such. He had married, some time before 19 July 1476, Christian (died 1491x6), daughter of John Lindsay, first Lord Lindsay of the Byres (d. 1482) ['see under 'Lindsay family of the Byres (per. 1367-1526)]. On his death, also at the hands of Lord Montgomery late in 1489, Robert was succeeded by his only son, 


@@@@@


doc= 7160


Dar Lugdach (d. 525/527), died one year to the day after Brigit's own death; just as Columba's successor, Baithene, died a year to the day after Columba, and thus came to have the same feast day as his predecessor, so too Dar Lugdach's feast day was 1 February. Although Baithene was also Columba's close kinsman, there is no information about Dar Lugdach's descent, and she is not included in the list of Fothairt saints. Her cult was effectively subsumed in that of Brigit -- something not entirely true of Baithene. 


@@@@@


doc= 7200


Davenport, Sir Humphrey (c.1566-1645), judge, was the third son of William Davenport of Bramhall, Cheshire, and Margaret, daughter of Richard Asheton of Middleton, Lancashire. Having entered Balliol College, Oxford, in 1581, Davenport progressed to London and the inns of court and chancery, entering Gray's Inn from Barnard's Inn in 1585. An active participant in the life of the inn, Davenport was called to the bar in 1589 and to the bench in 1611; he was Lent reader of the inn in 1613. Created serjeant-at-law in June 1623, Davenport was knighted in 1624, served as king's serjeant-at-law from 1625 to 1630, justice of the court of common pleas from 1630, and chief baron of the exchequer from 1631 until shortly before his death in February or March 1645. Davenport's career was marked by constitutional tensions which led to his parliamentary impeachment in 1641. 
Davenport belonged to a Cheshire gentry family with puritan and Catholic branches -- but in the ecclesiastical dispute known as 'Peter Smart's case' (1628) he supported the Arminians, labelling the puritan Smart 'as wicked a man as any lived in the world' ('Articles of Accusation', 30), and he served on the 1633 high commission. He married Mary, daughter of Francis Sutton, and they had three sons and two daughters. Davenport was elected MP for Brackley in 1589 through the patronage of the earl of Derby, and introduced a motion in parliament which rebuked clerical actions 'contrary... to the minds and meanings of the law-makers' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 2.21). Davenport lived at Bramhall in Cheshire until about 1597, when he moved to Manchester to become steward of the manors of Christ's College, thereafter settling at Sutton Hall near Macclesfield about 1601. He maintained a presence in the border counties while building up a successful practice in the court of exchequer, almost certainly aided by his uncle, Chief Baron Sir Lawrence Tanfield. By 1619 Davenport was serving as counsel to the earl of Derby in Chester and Flintshire. 
Chamberlain considered Davenport the principal accuser in the 'Earl of Oxford's case' (1622) and one of the 'prime men' in the great call of serjeants in 1623 ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.433, 518). As king's serjeant Davenport represented the crown in the first stages of 'Sir John Eliot's case' (1630), emphasizing 'the great respect which the law gives to the commands of the king' ('State trials', 2.251). Possessed, in Aylmer's estimation, of a neutrality which 'inclined, if at all, in the royalist direction' (Aylmer, 386), Davenport was raised to a puisne judgeship in the court of common pleas on 2 February 1630, and on 10 January 1631 became the first chief baron of the exchequer to hold his patent at the king's pleasure rather than for as long as he should discharge the office well ('durante bene placito' rather than 'quam diu se bene gesserint'); Sir William Jones suggested that Sir James Whitelocke 'in the life of Sir John Walter had promise of the place, but missed of it' (82 ER 121). 
In 1633 Davenport was removed from the northern circuit after reiterating in open court Coke's dictum that the council at York in session was not a court of record. In 'Hampden's case' (1637-8) he found, upon the basis of a legal technicality, that the king had the power to command payment of ship money, but not in this instance to receive payment -- but at the Gloucester assizes in the summer of 1636 he instructed the grand jury to return a bill against a defendant who had spoken against this imposition, and then imprisoned him without showing cause. Condemning his support of royal impositions parliamentary articles of impeachment were presented against Davenport on 6 July 1641, but were subsequently dropped. Davenport spent the final stage of his life with the king at Oxford. On 11 January 1645 he resigned office; he was buried on 4 March 1645 at Macclesfield. 


@@@@@


doc= 7201


Davenport, John (bap. 1597, d. 1670), minister in America, was born in Coventry, Warwickshire, and baptized at Holy Trinity Church there on 9 April, the son of Henry Davenport (died by 1627), a merchant and alderman of that city, and Winifred Barneby. Probably educated initially at the free school, Coventry, in 1613, shortly after having experienced a religious conversion, he matriculated at Merton College, Oxford. Two years later he transferred to Magdalen College, Oxford, which was known at that time for its puritan sympathies. Shortly thereafter, and before graduating, he left the university in order to accept a chaplaincy at Hylton Castle, co. Durham. He had married Elizabeth Wooley (died 1676), about whom little is known, in or before 1619 when he became curate at St Lawrence Jewry in the City of London. He earned a reputation there as an inspiring preacher and in 1624 was elected vicar of St Stephen, Coleman Street. Because of doubts about his orthodoxy the influence of prominent puritans was needed to persuade the bishop of London to accept his election, but at this stage of his career Davenport conformed to the liturgical practices of the church, convinced that differences over such matters must be subordinated to the need for a united Calvinist front against Catholicism and Arminianism. On 28 June 1625 he was awarded both the BD and MA degrees of Oxford. In that same year he garnered favourable notice for ministering to his flock during a severe outbreak of plague. 
The spread of anticalvinism in the church, coupled with the rise of a new ceremonialism, drove Davenport and other puritans towards nonconformity, while the failure of James I and Charles I to support the protestant cause on the continent led them to become critics as well of the government's foreign policy. In 1626 Davenport helped formally to organize the feoffees for impropriations, a corporation that sought to spread puritan influence by purchasing church livings and awarding them to zealous preachers. The same year he joined with Richard Sibbes, Thomas Taylor, and William Gouge in circulating a letter calling for contributions to aid protestant refugees from the Thirty Years' War. In a sermon preached before the London Artillery Company, 'A royal edict for military exercises' (1629), he called for English support for the international protestant cause. 
In 1633 the trustees of the feoffees for impropriations were called before high commission and the enterprise was quashed, but none the less that year Davenport joined with Thomas Goodwin, Philip Nye, William Twisse, and other conforming puritans in a meeting at Ockley, Surrey, at the home of Henry Whitfield, where they endeavoured to persuade John Cotton and Thomas Hooker of the need to make what compromises were necessary to maintain their livings in the church. The outcome, however, was that Cotton persuaded a number of his friends, including Davenport, that the demands of the church had become too great and that nonconformity was required of puritan consciences. In consequence, Davenport left England for the Netherlands in December 1633. There he was called by the congregation of the English church in Amsterdam to serve as an assistant to John Paget but the latter, who had previously clashed with Hooker over issues of church government, blocked Davenport's appointment. The dispute in the Amsterdam church anticipated the tensions that would later divide puritans into congregationalists and presbyterians. Davenport's 'Church Government and Church-Covenant Discussed' (1643) and 'The Power of the Congregational Churches Asserted and Vindicated' (1672) were based on manuscripts that he circulated in the 1630s setting forth his position in opposition to Paget. Blocked from a formal call, he ministered to unofficial congregations in Amsterdam and Rotterdam for a time; his only child, John, was born and baptized on 15 April 1635 at The Hague. 
In 1636 Davenport returned secretly to England to prepare to migrate to America. Together with other members of his former congregation of St Stephen, Coleman Street, Davenport arrived in Boston, Massachusetts, in June 1637. He participated in the Cambridge synod and the examination of Anne Hutchinson, and advised on the formation of Harvard College. In 1638 he and his followers founded the town and colony of Quinnipiac, later renamed New Haven. The new colony closely reflected Davenport's belief in congregations rigorously restricted to the elect and in civil affairs strongly controlled by the godly. 
Davenport closely followed the course of political and religious change in England. He was invited to sit in the Westminster assembly of divines, convened in 1643 to propose a reform of the national church, but chose to stay in America and offer advice from afar. He was the spokesman for the New England clergy in 'An Answer of the Elders of Severall Churches in New England' (1643) which responded to queries from England about colonial polity. He wrote other tracts on church reform in the 1640s and 1650s, defending congregationalism from both presbyterian and sectarian attacks. When the Cromwellian regime collapsed he was instrumental in providing refuge for the proscribed regicides Edward Whalley and William Goffe. His 'The Saints Anchor-Hold, in All Storms and Tempests' (1661) was a series of sermons preached to the New Haven faithful urging them to remain committed to their mission despite the Stuart Restoration. 
Davenport continued to cling to the model of reform created by his generation of founders. He unsuccessfully opposed the merger of New Haven with the more liberal Connecticut colony in 1662, and he was the foremost opponent of the liberalization of colonial church membership referred to as the half-way covenant. His career ended in controversy following his acceptance in 1667 of a call to replace the deceased John Wilson as pastor of the First Church of Boston. His claim to have been released for the new post by his New Haven church led to charges of deception, and his strong conservative stand caused a split in his new congregation, triggering a highly charged debate over the autonomy of local congregations, a debate that was further inflamed by his election sermon to the Massachusetts legislature in 1669. He died at Boston on 15 March of the following year of a paralytic stroke, and was buried in what became King's Chapel burial-ground; he was survived by his wife, who died on 15 September 1676. Less renowned as a preacher and theologian than Cotton or Hooker, Davenport's longevity and more mainstream views allowed him to have a longer and more profound role in the shaping of New England religion than his two famous contemporaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 7202


Davenport, Mary Ann (1759-1843), actress, was born at Launceston, Cornwall. Her stage debut took place at Bath on 21 December 1784, when she appeared as Lappet in Henry Fielding's 'The Miser'. After two seasons at Bath she performed in Exeter and Bristol, where in 1786 she married George Gosling Davenport (1758?-1814), a provincial actor. The pair were itinerant strollers before they were engaged at the Crow Street Theatre, Dublin, in 1792. She opened as Rosalind in 'As You Like It', and continued to specialize in juvenile heroines. In an emergency, however, she undertook the part of an old woman. The experiment was a success, and she was never able to return to her former line. 
The next season, the Davenports were engaged at Covent Garden, each earning $2 a week. On 24 September 1794 Mary Ann appeared as Mrs Hardcastle in Goldsmith's 'She Stoops to Conquer'. In the course of the season she played Lady Wronghead in Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Husband', the Nurse in 'Romeo and Juliet', and the title role in Sheridan Knowles's 'The Duenna'. She remained at Covent Garden for the next thirty-six years, though she spent some summer seasons at the Haymarket, and proved a well-respected favourite. By 1824-5 she was making $12 a week. Original parts included Deborah Dowlas in Colman's 'The Heir-at-Law', Dame Ashfield in Thomas Morton's 'Speed the Plough', Mrs Brulgruddery in Colman's 'John Bull', and Monica in William Dimond's 'The Foundling of the Forest'. 
Davenport was complimented in 'Oxberry's Dramatic Biography' (1825) for her private character as 'a hospitable, generous, kind-hearted creature' and described as 'of the common size', with a light complexion and blue eyes. Her husband also acted at Covent Garden, but was perceived as the lesser performer and was the object of some banter in the theatrical records. However, he was a useful member of the company and served as secretary to the Covent Garden Theatrical Fund until his retirement in 1812. After his death, on 13 March 1814, Mary Ann lived in seclusion with her daughter, and contemporary sources commend her continued reliability on the stage. She retired on 25 May 1830, appearing for the last time as the Nurse in 'Romeo and Juliet'. 
Davenport died at her house, 17 St Michael's Place, Brompton, on 8 May 1843, aged eighty-four, and was buried seven days later at St Paul's, Covent Garden. Her obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (July 1843) recorded that she lived alone, and that her children, a daughter, and a son with a post in India, had predeceased her. Their names are unknown: the Maria Gosling Davenport of Hammersmith, who was buried at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 1 February 1838, aged forty-seven, is presumed to have been her daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 7203


Davenport, Richard Alfred (1776/7-1852), author and publisher, was born in Lambeth, and may have been the Richard Davenport who was baptized at St Mary, Lambeth, on 23 February 1777. On 6 September 1800 he married Selina Granville Wheler (1779-1859), daughter of Captain Charles Granville Wheler. His first venture into publishing appears to have been the (notionally) annual 'Poetical Register', which first appeared in 1801. This featured often coruscating reviews of other poetical compilations, and numerous examples of his own verse which, even allowing for romantic affectation, showed a depressive streak. 'An admonitory epistle', an attack on alarmist anti-Jacobinism from 1809, betrayed political sympathies with the whiggery of moderate reform. In June of the same year he tried a begging letter to the politician William Windham, addressed from Twickenham, Middlesex, in which he pleaded his inability to provide for his family. About this time he separated from his wife, Selina, with whom he had two daughters. A son, Theodore Alfred Davenport, who according to Davenport's will became professor in the college of Boulogne, seems not to have been a result of the marriage. His wife, from whom he seems never to have been divorced, went on to open a school at Greenwich, and between 1813 and about 1835 wrote eleven novels. No further details of Davenport's personal circumstances have been discovered beyond his shifts of address; by September 1810 he was at Perry Hill, Sydenham, Surrey. The 'Poetical Register' ceased in 1814, with the belated publication of the volumes for 1810-11. By 1809 Davenport was also styling himself in correspondence as editor of the 'Annual Register' (the title published by the Rivingtons, which ceased about 1812), to which he had previously been a contributor. 
Subsequently Davenport found a niche as a prolific writer of books and articles on history, biography, and criticism: he was a contributor to 'The British Poets', published by Charles Whittingham (1822), and among his own compilations of ephemera were 'New Elegant Extracts' (1823-7) and 'The Commonplace Book of Epigrams' (1825). By May 1830 he had evidently moved to Camberwell, Surrey, where he resided from about 1841 at Brunswick Cottage, Park Street. His energy for written composition never flagged, and his works contain internal evidence of hard toil and a painstaking attention to detail: his 'Dictionary of Biography' (1831) featured 4000-5000 entries and international coverage. While in its preface he regretted that his 'History of the Bastille' (1835) was not comprehensive, he was none the less pleased to denominate it 'the only work in the English language to have the slightest pretension' to cover the subject, and was vindicated by reprints in 1838, 1876, and 1883. Among his revisions and continuations of existing works were editions of William Mitford's 'History of Greece' (1835) and two revised editions of Matthew Pilkington's 'General Dictionary of Painters' (1829 and 1851). 
In 1850 the author John Britton wrote of Davenport: 'This laborious, critical and acute writer is scarcely known to the public, nor even to the literati of the present time. A devoted student and lover of books, he has lived in the midst of these fascinating companions, and has neglected to cultivate an intimacy with the world, which owes him much. ('GM', 525)' Davenport died on 25 January 1852 at Brunswick Cottage, in circumstances that lent a savage irony to the title of his 1841 potboiler, 'Lives of Individuals who Raised themselves from Poverty to Eminence and Fortune'. A passing policeman heard moans, and inside found Davenport semi-conscious, clutching a bottle of laudanum, and surrounded by empties. He was beyond medical assistance; a coroner's jury found that he had died of an accidental overdose. At Brunswick Cottage they found all the windows broken, and the interior 'crowded with books, papers, pictures, coins and curiosities, but all covered in dust, for no one remembered that the house had been cleaned in the eleven years he had occupied it' (ibid.). This squalid yet picturesque scene of artistic poverty was lovingly dwelt upon by contemporary obituaries and memoirs. Davenport's library was sold in April. He left his house and meagre personal estate to his son, and requested burial at Nunhead cemetery, in the plot next to a Mrs Manison or Mannion, 'one of the most amiable and kind hearted of human beings' (Davenport, will). His erroneous identification as Robert Davenport on his death certificate bore further testimony, if it were needed, to his thorough estrangement from society at large. 


@@@@@


doc= 7204


Davenport, Robert (fl. 1624-1640), playwright, is one of the most obscure dramatists of the Caroline era. In 1639 he dedicated a poem to two actors, and so he may have been the Robert Davenport, gentleman of St Botolph, London, who was arrested in 1612 along with William Stratford of Prince Henry's men for wounding Henry Saunders at Hoxton. 
The first certain record of Davenport comes on 10 April 1624, when 'The Historye of Henry the First, Written by Damport' was licensed for the King's Men by the master of the revels. This play is lost but it was entered in the Stationers' register in 1653 along with another lost play, 'Henry the 2nd', as a work of 'Shakespeare, & Davenport' and it also appears in William Warburton's eighteenth-century list of play manuscripts burnt by his cook. The attribution to Shakespeare has been generally dismissed by scholars. On 14 October 1624 another play of Davenport's, 'The City Night-Cap', was licensed for Lady Elizabeth's men at the Cockpit, and this work was eventually printed in 1661. This moral comedy contains contrasting plots of a virtuous wife and a jealous husband (taken from Robert Greene's 'Philomela'), and a faithless but witty wife and a foolish husband (taken from Boccaccio's 'Decameron'). 
Davenport's next known play, 'King John and Matilda', is a reworking of Chettle and Munday's 'Death of Robert Earl of Huntington' (1598); although it was first mentioned in 1639 and not printed until 1655 it can be dated 1628-34 from the cast list provided in the quarto. In 1630 'A Comedy called The Pedler by R: Davenport' was entered in the Stationers' register, which may be either a lost play or a misattribution of Thomas Randolph's 'Conceited Pedlar'. About 1634 Davenport wrote a manuscript, 'Dialogue between Policy and Piety', dedicated to John Bramhall, bishop of Derry, and containing veiled commentary on Irish affairs. Since Davenport signed the dedication 'a servant and poore neighboure' (Folger Shakespeare Library, Washington, Folger MS V.a.313) he may have been living in Ireland at the time. Another manuscript of the 'Dialogue', dedicated to Sir John Kaye, was noted by Hunter in 'Chorus vatum Anglicanorum' as belonging to John Wittern of Broomhead. Davenport's manuscript poem 'A Survey of the Sciences' (now at Cambridge) was probably written about the same time; it is dedicated in similar terms to Dr John Oldesworth, contains a nearly identical exhortation 'To the Booke', and has the same closing line. A third manuscript by Davenport, datable to 1629-43 and dedicated to William Cavendish, earl of Newcastle, contains a prose character and four poems expressing conventional moral sentiments. 
In 1639 Davenport published a volume containing two religious poems in dialogue form, 'A Crowne for a Conqueror and Too Late to Call Back Yesterday'. It was dedicated to two actors of the King's Men, Richard Robinson and Michael Bowyer, and in the dedication Davenport calls the poems 'some expence of my time at Sea' (Bullen, 311). The same year saw the publication of a moral comedy attributed to Davenport, 'A New Trick to Cheat the Devil', in which the Devil appears dressed as a gentleman. However, Lake has cast doubt on Davenport's authorship on stylistic grounds; furthermore, the address from the publisher calls the play 'an Orphant, and wanting the Father which first begot it' (Bentley, 235), even though the following year Davenport prefixed commendatory verses to Nathaniel Richards's 'Tragedy of Messalina' and to Thomas Rawlins's 'The Rebellion'. 
In 1651 Samuel Shepard addressed an epigram 'To Mr. Davenport on his Play called the Pirate' (Monie, vii) and the address to the reader in the 1655 quarto of 'King John and Matilda' is signed R. D., both further suggesting that Davenport was still alive. In 1653 'The Woman's Mistake' (now lost) was attributed to Davenport and Drew in the Stationers' register, and in 1660 'The Fatal Brothers' and 'The Politic Queen' (also lost) were attributed to Davenport alone. Several extant anonymous plays have been attributed to him on dubious grounds. 


@@@@@


doc= 7205


Davenport, Samuel (1783-1867), engraver, was born in the parish of St John, Bedford, on 10 December 1783, and was baptized on 14 May 1784 at St Paul's Church, Bedford, the son of Samuel and Jemima Davenport. His sister Maria was baptized on 22 August 1788 at St Mary's, Bedford. His father was a land surveyor and architect, and the family moved early in Samuel's life to London. From about 1797 to 1804 he was apprenticed to the engraver Charles Warren, following him in the illustration of books. He later specialized in outline portrait work, much of which appeared in contemporary publications: Redgrave records that 700 were done for a single work, possibly one of the serials then popular. 
On 31 May 1819 at St Pancras Old Church London, Davenport married Sarah Castle with whom he had a son, Samuel Thomas Davenport, who worked for the Royal Society of Arts from 1843 to 1875. In 1839 Pigot's 'Directory of London' gave his address as 38 Myddleton Street, Clerkenwell, London (Pigot, 111). Owing doubtless to Charles Warren's influence, Davenport was an early exponent of steel-engraving, which he used for his major series of engravings for the British annual 'Forget-me-Not' in the volumes published between 1828 and 1842 after artists such as Henry Corbould and H. C. Shenton, who was Warren's pupil and eventually son-in-law. Davenport contributed four plates to a new edition of William Hogarth's 'Works', published in 1833. A departure from his previous work came with the production of forty-eight views to accompany the four volumes of the Revd G. N. Wright's 'New and Comprehensive Gazetteer' (1834-8). He contributed the ten illustrations on steel to George Cruikshank's 'Eighty-Two Illustrations on Steel, Stone and Wood' ('c'.1870), finely engraved and remarkably preserving the artist's sense of caricature, formerly achieved through etching. Most of his plates were in line on copper or steel and signed Davenport, but S. Davenport and S. Devonport are also known. He was almost certainly the author or part-author of an article on book illustration in the 'Journal of the Society of Arts' (January 1865), and was also the author of 'Engraving', a pamphlet published in the series 'British Manufacturing Industries' by Edward Stanford, edited by G. Phillips Beavan, some parts of which were issued in the 1870s. Davenport died on 14 or 15 July 1867 at his home, 38 Myddleton Street, Clerkenwell, London, of senile decay, leaving a widow, his second wife, Frances. His death certificate described him as a historical line engraver. 


@@@@@


doc= 7206


David (d. 589/601), patron saint of Wales and founder of St David's, is known from written sources dating from no earlier than the eighth century and an inscription which may be of the seventh. 
By the ninth century David's cult was sufficiently well established for him to be one of three Welsh saints included in the early ninth-century Irish martyrology of Tallaght, in which he is placed under 1 March; the same feast day is given in the later Welsh calendars. Even earlier he is named in two lives of Irish saints which probably belong to the eighth century, those of Ailbe of Emly and Mo Lua of Clonfertmulloe in the 'Codex Salmanticensis'. A ninth-century manuscript, probably relying proximately on a Breton source, contains 'certain excerpts from a book of David'. These belong to a group of texts purporting to be of early British origin; the early date of the group is confirmed by their use in early Irish penitentials; but whatever the ultimate origin of the text, its preservation in this collection under the name of David suggests that the saint may have been of considerable repute in ninth-century Brittany as well as Ireland. This is confirmed by Wrmonoc's ninth-century life of St Paul de Leon, in which St David is described as Aquaticus ('Waterman'), a title given him on account of his ascetic practice of standing in cold water up to his neck. The written texts prior to the late-ninth century life of King Alfred by Asser reveal, therefore, the wide extent of his reputation rather than details of his life or his churches. 
The inscription commemorates a man slain when plunder was taken from one of St David's churches, presumably Llanddewibrefi in Ceredigion, where the inscription is situated. The forms of the letters are consistent with a date in the early seventh century rather than with the early ninth-century date which has also been proposed. It belongs to a group of inscriptions whose principal letter forms are Roman capitals, but which have one or two letter shapes taken over from book scripts (usually half-uncial); these are attributed to the years around 600. The epigraphic evidence for dating probably outweighs the contrary testimony of a single late feature in the form of a name. The significance of this inscription lies in its confirming that the naming of the church after St David has a background going back to the pre-viking period, and that the cult had this important centre in Ceredigion, whereas St David's lay in Dyfed. The earliest direct evidence that St David's (in Welsh Tyddewi, 'The house of David', or Mynyw; in Latin Menevia or Vallis Rosina) was the outstanding church associated with the saint is Asser's life of King Alfred. Asser says that he himself belonged to the church, explicitly situated on the western extremity of Britain; he also writes of 'the monastery and 'parochia' of St David' and of his kinsman, Nobis, also of St David's, as archbishop. The other reference of pre-Norman date to a Welsh archbishopric is in the 'Annales Cambriae', in which Elfoddw is termed 'archbishop of the land of Gwynedd' in his obit, under the year 809. The archiepiscopal claims mentioned by Asser may be to pre-eminence among the bishops of Dyfed (as opposed to Gwynedd), or, more widely, to pre-eminence among the bishops of south Wales (so that Wales would be divided between two archbishoprics, north and south, on the model of England). 
The earliest evidence that David might have been regarded, not merely as a leading, but as the outstanding, Welsh saint is in a tenth-century poem, 'Armes Prydein vawr' ('The great prophecy of Britain'). This was composed when either AEthelstan or his brother Edmund was threatened by a viking-led alliance; the purpose of the poem was to encourage the Welsh to benefit by the opportunity offered by this attack on West Saxon hegemony and to take up arms against their English overlord. One argument deployed in the poem is that the English had violated the rights of the Welsh saints and that the Welsh would be victorious under the patronage of St David. The saint was thus made into a patron in war as well as in peace, and furthermore a patron of the Welsh cause against English overlordship. St David was receiving the treatment given, at the same period, to such Irish saints as Brigit (made into a patron of Leinster against the Ui Neill). 
Written evidence only becomes reasonably plentiful from the late eleventh century, when Rhigyfarch ap Sulien wrote the first surviving life. Rhigyfarch (died 1099) belonged to a family established in the church of Llanbadarn Fawr, close to Aberystwyth, and thus in the north of Ceredigion. His father, Sulien, however, had been bishop of St David's (at the western extremity of Dyfed) for two periods (1071-8 and 1080-85). Rhigyfarch claimed to have written sources for his life 'in the oldest manuscripts of our country, and chiefly from his own monastery. These, though eaten away along the edges and the backs by the continuous gnawings of worms and the ravages of the passing years, and written in the manner of the elders, have survived till now. ('Rhigyfarch's Life', 48)' It has been claimed that the 'Life' was written to defend the reputation of the saint and the rights of St David's in the aftermath of the Norman invasion of Dyfed in 1093. This followed shortly after the destruction of St David's by a Hebridean fleet in 1091, which in turn was only two years after the shrine of St David was stolen from the church and its gold and silver covering removed. The supposition that Rhigyfarch wrote the life to defend the reputation of the saint in the face of the Norman invasion of Ceredigion and Dyfed is plausible but by no means necessary. 
Not only may Rhigyfarch's life of David have been a reaction to one or other of the earlier disasters, it was also a reaction to more long-term problems. The eleventh and twelfth centuries were a period in which the number of churches in Wales that could claim episcopal status was reduced to four: St David's, Llandaff, Bangor, and St Asaph. In the ninth century, however, there had been a bishop based at Llandeilo Fawr (in Ystrad Tywi, a semi-detached portion of the old 'civitas' of the Demetae). In the early tenth century there had been another, Cyfeilliog, who appears in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' as bishop in Ergyng (Archenfield, now in south-west Herefordshire). In 1005 AEthelred II granted land at Over in Gloucestershire to the bishopric at Dewstow; although it has been thought that Dewstow was simply an English name for St David's, it has more plausibly been identified with Dewstow near Chepstow. In the middle years of the eleventh century an old bishopric attached to the community of Cynidr (in the valleys of the Usk and Wye) came to an end, when the last of the sequence of bishops became attached to Hereford. It is unlikely that, at any point in the period 600-1000, there was only one bishop in Dyfed, let alone in the whole of south Wales: Aldhelm (died 710), in his letter to Geraint, king of Dumnonia, refers to the bishops of Dyfed as well as to the bishops of Dumnonia. One difference between Britain and Gaul seems to have been that, in Britain, the old rule of one bishop to each 'civitas' did not apply. Much later than Aldhelm, a probably eleventh-century text, embedded in the twelfth- and thirteenth-century Welsh laws, names seven 'bishop-houses' in Dyfed, chief of which was St David's (Mynyw), to which it ascribes a supremacy over all the churches of Wales. The text does not imply that all seven were currently the sees of bishops, and they are likely to have been churches in which bishops were known to have resided and to have been buried. 
One crucial issue for the community of St David's in the late eleventh century was to ensure that their church became the single episcopal see for as much of south Wales as possible. Their ability to attract Sulien from Llanbadarn to be their bishop is one sign that they were succeeding; the attempt by Rhys ap Tewdwr and Gruffudd ap Cynan to associate their causes with St David's is another; a third is the pilgrimage of William the Conqueror to St David's in 1081. This may have been the occasion on which William reduced Rhys ap Tewdwr to that condition of acknowledged tributary clientship in which he appears in 'Domesday Book'; but it was still worthwhile for the much feared conqueror to make the pilgrimage to Dyfed's leading saint, when he brought the kingdom under his overlordship. In the event, St David's would embrace Dyfed, Ceredigion, Brycheiniog, Gower and Cydweli, Elfael, Maelienydd, and the neighbouring lands between the Severn and the Wye, effectively everything outside Glamorgan and Gwent. One of the principal purposes of the Rhigyfarch life was, therefore, to assert David's claim to be the leading bishop of Wales. Asser's reference to Archbishop Nobis indicates that Rhigyfarch may well, as he himself implied, have found useful ammunition in the remnants of the church's archive. 
Yet even the particular issue of the primacy of St David's is far from exhausting the significance of Rhigyfarch's life of David. Quite as important was the necessity of setting out the position of St David within a body of traditions about the early saints of Ireland and Wales. Incidents from the life can be paralleled in the contemporary life of St Cadog of Llancarfan in Glamorgan, written by Lifris, and also in the lives of Maedoc of Ferns, Ailbe of Emly, Cainnech of Aghaboe, and Finnian of Clonard. Of these, the lives of Cainnech and Ailbe are likely to belong to the eighth century. A particular incident can be attributed in one life to St David's, in another to Llancarfan. Even if the location of a story were undisputed, its significance could vary: in the lives of Ailbe and David, the Munster saint is agreed to have baptized St David, but Rhigyfarch's text has no place for the further claims made in the life of St Ailbe to some kind of superiority over St David's. The hagiographical tradition was, therefore, contentious and fluid. In such circumstances, a well-written life was likely to be essential for the continuing strength of the cult. This was what Rhigyfarch supplied, and his success is illustrated by the way his original text (best preserved, contrary to some modern views, in BL, Cotton MS Vespasian A. xiv) spawned daughter versions in the course of the twelfth century. 
The life of St David ('Vita sancti Davidis') is a carefully constructed text, with a much clearer structure than most of the earlier lives with which Rhigyfarch is likely to have been familiar. Although some sections, such as the account of the saint's death, are in close accord with standard Irish hagiographic practice, others, notably that describing the manner of life, 'conversatio', of the monastery, stand out as exceptional. But even those passages which follow a pre-existing norm have important variations on standard themes. The plan of the 'Life' may be conveniently summarized as follows: prophecy, conception, birth, infancy, and education (chapters 1-11); pastoral work and the foundation of churches (12-14); the foundation of St David's and the conflict with Baia or Boia (15-19); the manner of life ('conversatio') at St David's in the time of the founder (20-32); miracles connected with wells (33-4) and with three Irish saints (35-43); the pilgrimage to Jerusalem (44-8); synods and the archbishopric of Britain (49-58); death; concluding remarks on sources, ending with a request for readers' prayers. In the Vespasian version, the life proper is followed by the saint's genealogy (on his father's side only) and the proper for his feast day. 
Rhigyfarch's narrative begins thirty years before David's conception with the prophecy of his birth by an angel to his father, Sant, king of Ceredigion ('fl'. 6th cent.), and to St Patrick. The angel warned Patrick against settling at St David's (here given the Latin name Vallis Rosina), while Sant received a dream in which symbols of David's virtues appeared. Thirty years later he was sent by divine power to Dyfed, where he raped a beautiful nun, 
The plan of the life balances chronology with other considerations. Thus the manner of life at St David's follows the account of its foundation; once the asceticism of David's rule of life has been set out, his miracles follow; and, when his sanctity has been demonstrated by his miracles, it is recognized, even as far as Jerusalem, where the patriarch elevates David to the dignity of an archbishop. This recognition of David's primacy in the East foreshadows his effective elevation at the Synod of Llanddewibrefi. Sections are linked where possible: the second part of David's miracles concerns three Irish saints, Maedoc, Barre, and Mo Domnoc; the ensuing pilgrimage to Jerusalem sees David as the leader of a group of three south Welsh saints: himself, Teilo, and Padarn. 
The life's opening prophecy has a dual function: on the one hand it serves to make it clear that, while St Patrick was British and belonged to an older generation than St David, God had already allocated Britain to David and Ireland to Patrick. Since Patrick was already long-established by the eleventh century as the patron saint of the Irish, David is here presented as his counterpart -- as patron saint of Britain and the Britons. A further prophecy from St Gildas -- likewise an older British saint, who had been unable to preach in the presence of St Non, then carrying David in her womb -- confirms this picture. David, therefore, was predestined to be an even greater preacher than the notoriously eloquent Gildas. 
The beginning of the life is concerned with the primacy of St David among all the saints of Britain; and this theme resurfaces at intervals until the end of the work. Yet the declaration that David was predestined to sanctity was also designed to confirm the Augustinian orthodoxy of the hagiographer, Rhigyfarch, and to foreshadow the culmination of David's career at the Synod of Llanddewibrefi (section 7), when he preached against the Pelagian heresy. These two themes, David's primacy and his orthodoxy, were intimately linked: it was as an immediate consequence of his triumph in preaching the orthodox faith at the synod that all agreed that he should immediately be made archbishop and that St David's should be recognized as the metropolis of Britain. Similarly, in the section on his education, Rhigyfarch expressly notes that Paulens was a disciple of St Germanus of Auxerre, who had earlier preached against Pelagianism before a British audience. 
The narrative of the saint's conception and birth had much more local, south Welsh preoccupations. There might be nothing very surprising in it: as the letters of St Boniface illustrate, illicit sexual intercourse with nuns was far from being a rare activity among early medieval kings in Britain. What is more surprising is that all this occurs in the text after Sant has been introduced as 'Sant by name and merits', 'sant' being the Welsh form of 'sanctus' ('holy'). True, it is emphasized, once Sant has been brought into the narrative, that he subsequently resigned his earthly kingdom in order to gain a heavenly one. Sant, however, having been king of Ceredigion, had been the ruler of Henfynyw (Old Mynyw), where David was first educated, while the outraged nun is said in the saints' genealogies to have been the daughter of Cynyr of Caer Gawch in Mynyw; and from Rhigyfarch's text it is clear that Non did indeed belong to Dyfed, in which the new Mynyw was situated. Father and mother seem to represent two kingdoms, each with a site called Mynyw, and, moreover, each with a special connection with Rhigyfarch and his family: they themselves were attached to Llanbadarn, while Rhigyfarch's father, Sulien, had been bishop of St David's. 
There are further oddities about the relationships of Sant and Non. Sant was a king to whom an angel revealed the birth and the character of his son some thirty years before David was born; yet Non was the daughter of a local noble. The kings of Dyfed are mentioned only in passing, when the narrative relates that Non entered a church in which Gildas was accustomed to preach 'in the time of King Triphunus and his sons' ('Brut: Peniarth MS 20', xxxvi). When David was born, and also when he founded Mynyw, he had to deal with secular powers, but these were presented by Rhigyfarch as local strong men in the neighbourhood of Mynyw, quite separate from the royal dynasty. The effect is that the kings of Dyfed are not given any credit whatsoever for the foundation of Mynyw. The result is all the odder, because the first local strong man, at least, is quasi-royal even though unnamed. He is a tyrant (and ever since Gildas British writers had called evil kings tyrants); also he attempts to kill the child when his magi tell him that a boy would be born 'whose power would expand over the whole country' (ibid., 31). This tyrant, then, was Herod to a Christ-like David. Many years later, when David came to found his chief monastery, Mynyw, another wicked chieftain, Boia or Baia, whom Rhigyfarch calls a 'satrap' and identifies as a magus and an Irishman, attempted to repel the holy man. Boia, however, Ahab to his wife's Jezebel, was upstaged by someone even more implacable in hatred than he was. Not merely did she send her slave-girls to seduce the monks, but she went on to decapitate her stepdaughter, Dunod. The site of the decapitation was marked by the appearance of a spring, enjoying miraculous powers of healing, and by the construction of a chapel called Merthyr Dunod. 
Merthyr Dunod illustrates another central theme of this part of the life. As the monks took possession of the site of Mynyw, so incidents associated with David attached themselves to the surrounding landscape. Ailbe of Emly, the leading saint of Munster, who baptized David, was commemorated at Llaneilfyw (St Elvis), 4 miles to the east-south-east of Mynyw. Within the parish of St David's itself, by the end of the middle ages several chapels commemorated other persons associated with the saint: apart from Merthyr Dunod, already mentioned, there were Capel Non, Capel Padrig, Ffynnon Faiddog (his principal Irish disciple, Maedoc of Ferns), and Capel Stinan (a disciple, St Justinian). An element in the cult, therefore, was the provision of sites, with explanatory narratives attached, that a pilgrim might visit. The topographical grip of the cult was more than matched by the extension of the bishop's local authority. The whole cantref of Pebidiog was, by the twelfth century, in the lordship of the bishop; in the later middle ages it would be the hundred of Dewisland, 'the land of St David'. 
From Rhigyfarch's time onwards it becomes evident that there was a difference between those areas within Wales in which there are churches dedicated to St David and a more general acknowledgement of his status as the premier saint of the Britons. The latter emerges from support given by the rulers of Gwynedd to the campaign to have St David's recognized by the papacy as an archiepiscopal see. About 1140 Owain Gwynedd and Cadwaladr his brother wrote to Bishop Bernard of St David's to acknowledge his authority as metropolitan of Wales. At the end of the century Gerald of Wales again attracted support from Gwynedd when he renewed the campaign begun by Bernard. On the other hand, dedications to St David are from south, not north Wales; even in Ceredigion they are confined to the south of the River Aeron, while none is to be found in most of Glamorgan. If church dedications were to be taken as the principal evidence for the extension of the cult, it would have to be said that St David was far from being a saint for the Welsh as a whole. The most likely answer to this question is that church dedications sometimes had more to do with belonging to the 'familia' of the saint -- the body of churches and individuals formally attached to the principal church of that saint -- rather than with the extent of the popular cult. This is attested by the fact, demonstrated by the careers of Rhigyfarch and his father, Sulien, that there was a cult of St David at Llanbadarn Fawr, in the north of Ceredigion, outside the area in which there are old dedications to the saint. On the other hand, not all dedications signified a formal attachment to St David's. Those in Cornwall (Davidstow) and in Brittany, centred on Dirinon to the east of Brest, were independent of any Welsh church. Yet the vigour of the late medieval cult in Brittany is attested by the miracle play entitled 'Buez Santes Nonn hac he map Deuy' ('The life of St Non and her son David'). This situates Non's death at Dirinon and presents highlights of her son's career in a version influenced by Geoffrey of Monmouth's reconstruction of early British ecclesiastical history. Dedications therefore attest the existence, at some period or other, of a cult, sometimes associated with a formal attachment to St David's, sometimes sustained by a story linking the saint to the place; but the absence of dedications does not prove that there was no cult. 
On the far south-eastern border of Wales there were dedications to David in Ergyng, now part of Herefordshire and of the diocese of Hereford (such as Much Dewchurch and Little Dewchurch), and these survived. Llanddewibrefi, on the other hand, became the premier church of St David still usually within territory ruled by Welsh princes. Here the cult can be traced from the twelfth century through into the later middle ages. Gwynfardd Brycheiniog composed a poem in honour of St David ('c'.1175) in which Llanddewibrefi was the focus; the earliest copy of the Welsh vernacular life of St David was written in 1346 by the anchorite of Llanddewibrefi, who was also one of the scribes who wrote the 'White Book of Rhydderch', which belonged to Rhydderch ab Ieuan of Parc Rhydderch a few miles to the north-west of Llanddewibrefi. Rhydderch's son, the poet Ieuan ap Rhydderch, composed a poem in praise of the saint, which demonstrates knowledge of the life, probably in its vernacular version. 
David's cult survived the Anglo-Norman conquest of much of Dyfed, the settlement of Flemings in what is now southern Pembrokeshire by Henry I, and also the imposition, also by Henry I, of his chaplain Bernard as the first Norman bishop. How well the new arrivals took to the old cult is demonstrated by the 'Song of Dermot and the Earl', a Norman-French 'geste' about the conquest of Ireland: the war-cry used by the invaders was 'St Dewi!' Bishop Bernard (bishop from 1115 to 1147) became a fervent convert to the cult of St David. It was he who, so it was said, gained a privilege for St David's from Pope Calixtus II and thus secured its future as a successful pilgrimage centre. In the same interest, Bernard also spent years looking for the corporeal relics of the saint. As a result of his expedition to Ireland, Henry II twice visited St David's, at Michaelmas 1171 and on Easter Monday 1172, on the second occasion dressed as a pilgrim. No mention is made by Gerald of Wales, the 'Annales Cambriae' or the 'Brut' of any shrine, but the king made an offering to God and St David of two choral copes and 10's'. of silver. 
A shrine was built in 1275, following a dream by John de Gamages, prior of Ewenni. Its stone base may still be seen between two pillars on the north side of the presbytery of the cathedral. John's vision revealed that digging on a spot a certain number of steps outside the south door of the cathedral would uncover the bones of the patron saint. The bones thus disinterred were unhesitatingly identified as those of St David and enshrined. It was this shrine which was visited by Edward I and Queen Eleanor in 1284, while by the time of his death Edward appears to have possessed an arm claimed to be that of St David; as with William the Conqueror in 1081, a king of the English who wished to subdue the Welsh wisely paid attention to their patron saint. The bones themselves appear to have been placed inside a portable shrine or feretory, since the 'Black Book of St David's', a rental of the bishop's lands dating from 1326, demands that the bishop's tenants follow the relics on a day's march when the bishop, as lord marcher, went to war. Towards the end of the fifteenth century William Worcester, who observed that St Justinian (David's disciple) was buried near the tomb of St David, recounted a number of miracles dating from his time and from the previous centuries. A life of Justinian was incorporated into John Tynemouth's legendary in the fourteenth century. 
The shrine of St David, decorated by three mural paintings, of the saint himself, of St Patrick, and of St Denis of France, and surmounted by a painted wooden coving, was destroyed in 1538. It was despoiled of its gold and jewels by the canons of the cathedral, but its destruction took place not only as a result of state policy, but also of the protestant inclinations of William Barlow, bishop of St David's (1536-47). In a letter to Thomas Cromwell, of March 1538, he reveals that, having forbidden the canons 'to set forth fayned reliques for to allure people to supersticion... on saint Davids daye, the people wilfully solemnysinge the feest, certain reliques were set forth which I caused to be sequestred and taken awaye, detayninge them in my custody untill I may be advertised of your lordships pleasour, the parcels of the reliques are these: two heedes of sylver plate enclosing two rotten skulles stuffed with putrified clowtes; Item, two arme bones, and a worm eaten boke covered with sylver plate. (Wright, 184)' This first glimpse of what was in the shrine -- and the second skull may well have been that of St Justinian -- was also the last, since the likelihood is that these, as with so many other Welsh relics, perished in the fires of Smithfield. The presence of the book is intriguing: perhaps it was the incomplete gospel book mentioned by Gerald of Wales. 
Although one of the very first steps in the protestant reformation of Wales was the destruction of the shrine and relics of its patron saint, the seeds of a revival in St David's reputation lay in one of the intellectual arguments for reform. It was crucial to maintain that the early British church was the forerunner of the reformed sixteenth-century church: that it was independent of Rome and undefiled by popish superstitions and accretions. While the shrine was unhesitatingly identified as part of those superstitions, the historical figure of the saint was important for the protestant case. This situation produced a somewhat paradoxical stance: popular devotion for St David was suspect and needed to be discouraged; the great figures of the early British church, however, needed to be recruited to the protestant cause. This was the stance adopted by Richard Davies, bishop of St David's (1561-81), in the 'Address to the Welsh nation' prefixed to the translation of the 'New Testament' by William Salesbury and Davies himself, for whom St David was 'Archbishop David', and his countrymen only adopted the papistical 'faith of the English' at the point of the sword. It was expounded with most learning by Archbishop Ussher in his 'Britannicarum ecclesiarum antiquitates' (Dublin, 1639); like Davies before him, Ussher was concerned (probably also with one eye on the Arminian question) to invoke the Augustinian orthodoxy of St David and the Synod of Llanddewibrefi. 
By the nineteenth century the situation had been further complicated. In 1811 the Welsh Calvinistic Methodists seceded from the established church, which was soon in the position of being a minority denomination in Wales. One argument deployed by Anglicans against the nonconformists was that the Church of England represented the lineal and faithful successors of the great figures of 'the age of the saints'. St David's College, Lampeter, was founded in 1827 to train a parochial clergy capable of withstanding the nonconformist onslaught. In 1853 the lives of the saints, that by Rhigyfarch included, were printed for the first time since the seventeenth-century Bollandists, by William Jenkins Rees, a clergyman of the diocese of St David's in a volume dedicated to its then bishop, after his nephew Rice Rees, a fellow of Jesus College, Oxford, had written a scholarly account of the Welsh saints as an eisteddfod essay (published in 1836). Members of the Anglican clergy continued to be active in the study of the sources for St David and the propagation of the notion of 'an ancient British Celtic church' right up to the time of Welsh disestablishment (passed in 1914 but suspended until the end of the war). In 1923 the Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge published an annotated translation of the life by Rhigyfarch by Arthur Wade-Evans, who associated the composition of the life with 'the end of an epoch in Welsh history, that of the 'Ancient British Church of Wales'' (Wade-Evans, 'Life of Saint David', xvi). This, in turn, was identified as the moment when the Welsh church fell under the sway of Canterbury. St David could now have a new future, as the patron of a disestablished yet independent Welsh church; the enemy without was now not so much Rome as Canterbury, perceived not as the leading church of the Anglican communion but as a symbol of English hostility towards Welsh liberties. 
It was in the 1920s that interest in the corporeal relics of St David resurfaced. During Gilbert Scott's restoration of the cathedral from 1865 onwards, a niche was discovered in the wall of Holy Trinity chapel. It was opened out revealing an open-armed cross facing out into the presbytery behind the high altar, and surrounded by four other crosses. It seemed to belong to the cathedral of 1181 and was located on what was once the outer west wall of the building. Those who cleared the niche noticed that the lower part had been edged by a line of ashlar blocks behind which there were bones. In the nineteenth-century accounts no especial interest was displayed in the bones; they were simply buried beneath the floor of Holy Trinity chapel. At the beginning of the twentieth century, however, it began to be felt, on no good evidence, that the bones might have been those of St David and St Justinian, rescued at the destruction of the shrine in 1538 and hidden to prevent desecration. They were disinterred from the floor of the chapel and placed in an oak casket within the niche as part of the restoration of Holy Trinity chapel in 1923. In 1996 these bones were carbon dated resulting in dates ranging from the mid-twelfth to the fourteenth century. 
In the modern period, therefore, St David has been a figure invoked in controversy rather than the unquestioned symbol of a nation. The Welsh national anthem, composed in 1856, in the heyday of nonconformist Wales, presented an image of a glorious Welsh past in which the bard, the language, and even the warrior received due acclamation, but not the saint. In the twentieth century the decline of Welsh nonconformity has left the church in Wales in a relatively stronger position. Yet the nonconformists were never much concerned to lay claim to the inheritance of St David, and it is the cultural shift represented by secularization that constitutes the greatest threat to the reputation of the patron saint of Wales, one more potent even than the iconoclasm of Bishop Barlow. It is a small but telling sign of the times that the name of St David no longer graces his college at Lampeter. 


@@@@@


doc= 7207


David (d. 1137x9), bishop of Bangor, is usually identified with David the Scot, the celebrated scholar who wrote an account of the emperor Henry V's Italian expedition of 1111. If this is right, then David was the scholar described in the anonymous 'Kaiserchronik' later used by Ekkehard of Aura, according to which David Scotigena had become a master at the cathedral school of Wurzburg, at the shrine of St Kilian, the Irish apostle of Franconia, some time before 1110. The Irish connections of Wurzburg remained strong in these years, and Abbot Tritheim of Wurzburg, writing at the end of the fifteenth century in part on the basis of sources now lost, describes David as a kinsman of the Irish-born Macarius. Much earlier Orderic Vitalis seems explicit in calling him Irish, and at the beginning of the twelfth century, in German sources at least, 'Scot' most usually meant Irish too. 
In 1110 David came to the attention of Henry V, who foresaw the need for learning as well as arms in his forthcoming expedition into Italy, and made him his chaplain. He joined other scholars with the imperial army in its march on Rome, which ended in 1111 with the dramatic surrender of Pope Paschal II over investitures and Henry's imperial coronation. At the emperor's command David wrote an account of the expedition in three books, composed in a style so easy that it differed little from common speech, adapted to the use of laymen or other less learned readers. The work is lost, but some extracts from the text and the documents it included were used by William of Malmesbury in his 'Gesta regum', and it is also said to be a source by the 'Kaiserchronik', and, much later, by Johannes Aventinus (working in the years 1519-21). Orderic too seems to have known the work, of which he speaks only generally, though favourably. Malmesbury disapproved sharply of its partisan character, rebuking David for his defence of lay investiture and for his comparison of the emperor's capture of the pope to Jacob's forcible extortion of a blessing from the angel, yet he excused the fault of a good man by his purpose in writing a panegyric, not a history. 
Nothing more is heard of David until the beginning of 1120, when Gruffudd ap Cynan, prince of Gwynedd, and 'all the clergy and people of Wales' elected one David as bishop of Bangor. Bangor had long been vacant, formally since the Breton Bishop Hervey, installed there with Norman support in 1092, had been translated to the new see of Ely in 1109. In fact, however, Hervey had fled his impoverished and unruly diocese after the murder of his brother and several of his men many years earlier. The Welsh sent their bishop-elect to Archbishop Ralph of Canterbury for consecration; the letter he brought was respectful, though it included a threat to seek a bishop from Ireland, or some other barbarous region, if the archbishop refused to act. Ralph entertained David for a time while he instructed him in some matters of divine learning, before consecrating him bishop at Westminster on 4 April 1120 with the consent of King Henry and the assistance of bishops Roger of Salisbury, Richard of London, and Robert of Lincoln, all leading royal servants, and Urban of Llandaff. The new bishop dutifully professed his obedience to Canterbury. Only the strictly contemporary testimony of William of Malmesbury identifies the new bishop as the scholar of Wurzburg. The European sources say nothing of David's Welsh bishopric and the other English sources know nothing of his earlier career (and the late derivative annals of Worcester call him a Welshman), but on such a point William's authority cannot be lightly set aside. Although Bangor was a surprising destination for a celebrated scholar, the event is not inexplicable; Prince Gruffudd himself had a Norse Irish mother and had spent much of his youth in Ireland, while the emperor was already moving towards a settlement of his dispute with the papacy. In the world of papal-imperial relations which developed after 1112 so relentless an imperial partisan may have become an embarrassment. 
Little is known of David's career as bishop. He appears to have taken up his duties at once, for his consent is asserted for the translation of the body of St Dyfrig and the teeth of St Elgar from Bardsey to the new cathedral at Llandaff on 7 May 1120. After that he can be seen from time to time in England: he was at Lambeth twice in 1121 and at Lambeth and Canterbury in 1125. Later that year the king and Giovanni da Crema, the papal legate, drew up an abortive scheme to settle the primacy dispute between Canterbury and York by ceding the dioceses of Bangor, St Asaph, and Chester to York in exchange for a profession of obedience; David's view of the matter is unknown. In May 1127 he attended Archbishop William of Canterbury's legatine council at Westminster with his brother bishops of St David's and Llandaff, but after that he is not recorded in England again. He is last heard of in Wales with his archdeacon at the deathbed of Prince Gruffudd in 1137. His successor, Maurice (or Meurig), had been elected before 3 December 1139, so David may have died a little earlier. It is striking that Maurice at first refused to swear fealty to King Stephen, on the grounds that his predecessor's archdeacon had forbidden him to do so. Perhaps, particularly after the great Welsh rising of 1136, David too had come to support a greater measure of Welsh independence. However, Tritheim asserts that he became a monk of St James of Wurzburg (the 'Schottenkloster' or Irish monastery) where his kinsman Macarius became first abbot in 1138. If the two Davids are indeed one, and Tritheim rightly understood his source, then David retired to Wurzburg shortly after the death of his prince and the date of his death is unknown. 
Besides his book on Henry V's Italian expedition, the earlier English bibliographers claimed that he wrote some further works, and Tritheim listed a quite different set. None of these survives, and none of the attributions suggested by more recent scholars has been widely accepted. At almost every point David's career is uncertain or disputable, and only his history seems to have enjoyed any substantial renown. 


@@@@@


doc= 7208


David I (c.1085-1153), king of Scots, was the sixth and youngest son of Malcolm III (d. 1093) and his second wife, Margaret (d. 1093). 
Despite the violent reaction which followed Malcolm III's death in 1093, when the succession of his eldest son, Duncan II, was opposed by the conservative Scottish nobles who wished to make Malcolm's brother, Donald III, king in accordance with older custom, there was strong support, perhaps mainly in southern Scotland, for the novel practice of linear father-to-son succession. The direct heirs of Malcolm III were supported by William the Conqueror's sons William Rufus and Henry I. Although one of David's elder brothers, Edmund, allied himself to their uncle Donald, the other brothers, Edgar and Alexander I, along with David himself, fled for safety to England. While Edgar, with Rufus's backing, strove to make himself king of Scots (successfully from 1097), David was attached to the household of the future Henry I and may have been granted a small estate in western Normandy where Henry had lands and a sizeable following of lords and knights. It must have been known that Edgar would have no children, but his heir was the next brother, Alexander, married to a bastard daughter of Henry I. David's prospects might have lain in England or on the continent, although his descent would entitle him to some share of royal lordships after Alexander I's accession in 1107. From 1100 his elder sister Edith, her name altered to Matilda or Maud, had been the wife of Henry I. His association with the English court doubtless gave added force to the appeal which David was later said to have had to make to the baronage of northern England, for assistance in compelling Alexander I to hand over the appanage in Scottish Cumbria and eastern Scotland south of Lammermuir which had apparently been bequeathed to David by King Edgar. Precisely when this transfer of regional authority was made is not known, but it may have been a little before David's conspicuous promotion south of the border. 
At the end of 1113 David, who had hitherto enjoyed only the style of 'the queen's brother', was given by King Henry the prize of a rich, highly born heiress, Maud de Senlis. 
(or St Liz; died 1111x13)
, a knight who had served the Conqueror and Rufus, under whom he gained the rank of earl. With Simon, Maud had two sons, and she would have been nearly forty when she married David of Scotland, her junior by almost ten years. The lands acquired by David on his marriage, stretching from south Yorkshire to Middlesex but chiefly concentrated in the shires of Northampton, Huntingdon, Cambridge, and Bedford, formed what came to be known as the 'honour of Huntingdon'. Its possession made David an important figure in Anglo-Norman court circles. As late as 1130, after he had become king, he is recorded as presiding over the treason trial of Henry I's chamberlain, Geoffrey Clinton. Acquisition of this great lordship was marked by King Henry's grant of an earldom, but to assign the names Huntingdon or Northampton to this estate before the mid-twelfth century is anachronistic. When in Stephen's reign the Senlis family and the Scottish royal house vied for control of the honour, which was never partitioned, the former preferred the title earl of Northampton (given by Stephen), while the Scots simply spoke of the honour of Huntingdon without using any territorial style. 
In southern Scotland, David quickly showed what was to prove the overriding passion of his life, reform of ecclesiastical institutions and revival of religion. Between 1110 and 1118 he restored the ancient see of Glasgow, of which he made his chaplain John bishop, consecrated by Pope Paschal II ('r'. 1099-1118) at David's request. In the early 1120s an inquest was held to ascertain the ancient landed endowments of the see, many of which had been sequestrated. Fresh endowments were provided and a new cathedral was begun, dedicated in 1136. David brought to Selkirk a community of monks from Tiron, north of Chartres. In 1128 the convent migrated to Kelso, beside the flourishing centre of Roxburgh, where their abbey grew into the richest in Scotland. The Tironensians, outstandingly successful in Scotland, were the earliest of the congregations of reformed Benedictines (which were the dominant feature of monastic life in north-west Europe in this period) to establish themselves north of the channel. 
David's sister Queen Maud died in 1118, by which date it may have seemed probable that their brother Alexander I would die childless. Soon after Alexander's death on 23 April 1124, David was inaugurated king of Scots at Scone. It is reported by Ailred of Rievaulx (died 1167) that the attendant bishops had difficulty persuading the new king to undergo the essentially pagan ceremony of inauguration, at which the earl of Fife, as head of a junior segment of the royal lineage, placed the king on the famous stone of Scone (or stone of destiny), while the royal bard bestowed the rod or wand of kingship. 
David I's achievements as king are most easily understood if the secular and ecclesiastical spheres are treated separately. It must, however, be emphasized that the division is modern and artificial. There is no evidence, and it seems improbable, that David himself drew any sharp distinction between his roles as guardian of the realm and protector of holy church. 
Given the king's upbringing and marriage and his lengthy experience of the Anglo-Norman court it was inevitable that he perceived lordship in feudal terms. Probably already while ruler of southern Scotland, during his brother's reign, he established followers from Normandy and England, such as Robert (I) de Brus (died 1142), Hugh de Morville and Ranulf de Soulles, as lords of substantial portions of the princely demesne of Cumbria. Such men were trained in cavalry warfare and the use of motte-and-bailey castles. By the 1140s the greater part of southern Scotland, with the exception of Galloway and Nithsdale, had been allotted to incoming followers of the king. In the west they were given extensive lordships (for example, Annandale, Kyle Stewart), while in the east smaller, discrete, estates were the norm for newly created fiefs. Many (probably all) of these fiefs were held for military service, including the duty of garrisoning the king's castles. 
Although David I was willing to repeat this pattern of fief-creation in Scotia, north of the Forth-Clyde line, the outstanding fact of his reign in secular affairs was the continued and peaceful coexistence of a newly established military feudalism with the older arrangement of provinces ruled by hereditary dynasties of mormaers (literally 'great officers', 'chief stewards'). These were territorial in character, probably a legacy of the pre-ninth century Pictish kingdom. An exception to the rule of peaceful coexistence was the revolt in 1130 by Angus, mormaer of Moray. Angus was the son of a daughter of Lulach Mac Gillachomgan, who had been briefly king of Scots in 1057-8. Taking advantage of the king's absence in the south of England, Angus led an army south by the east coast route. Just south of the crossing of the River North Esk near Stracathro, the men of Moray were met by a force under the command of King David's constable Edward and suffered a decisive defeat, Angus himself being killed. Had the battle gone the other way, the course of Scottish history might well have been significantly different. As it was, David annexed the province of Moray to the crown and established followers of continental origin, notably Flemings, in estates which had presumably belonged to the mormaers. In all the provincial earldoms or mormaerdoms the king possessed rights, for example, military service, justice, and certain types of revenue, while in some, especially Fife, Gowrie, and Angus, as well as in Moray after 1130, he had extensive lands in demesne. These were exploited to create and support the castles and trading towns ('burghs') which in David I's time were established at Perth, Forfar, Montrose, Aberdeen, Elgin, Forres, and Inverness. A mixture of the old and the new, in which the crown held the initiative, characterized the political entity coming to be known as the kingdom of the Scots in the earlier twelfth century. 
However powerfully he had left his mark on Scottish secular government, David I was to be remembered, not without reason, as the king who almost single-handedly transformed the church within his realm, with a generosity which is said to have prompted King James I ('r'. 1406-37) to observe ruefully that David's grants to the religious had made him 'a sair sanct to the croun' (Ritchie, 337). He was personally responsible for founding monasteries of the Tironensian, Cistercian, and Augustinian orders, while he enlarged the Benedictine priory of Dunfermline to form the second richest abbey in Scotland, and established Benedictines of the Cluniac observance on the Isle of May. He was largely responsible for founding an Augustinian cathedral priory at St Andrews, and he welcomed the military orders of the Hospital and the Temple. Such a rich infusion of monastic life, closely tied as it was to forms of regular observance universal throughout western Christendom, would have altered the Scottish church almost beyond recognition. But David went much further, imposing a territorially defined system upon the Scottish bishoprics. This involved strengthening the authority of the two largest dioceses of St Andrews (which he strove unsuccessfully to have recognized as metropolitan) and Glasgow. Almost certainly David created the dioceses of Caithness and Moray, while he re-established the see of the bishop of north-east Scotland at Old Aberdeen, close to the royal castle and burgh of Aberdeen. Within the dioceses, whose boundaries were now relatively well defined, the king encouraged the formation of parish churches with fixed territories, served by priests supported by tithes (Scottish, 'teinds'), payment of which was enforced by the secular power. 
Scotland's relations with England remained peaceful and even friendly as long as Henry I was alive. Not only was there a close personal tie between the two kings, but it is clear also that Henry's plan to have his daughter, the Empress Matilda (died 1167), recognized as his heir -- even though a woman and married to the count of Anjou -- was fully accepted by the king of Scots, who in 1127 was first among the lay magnates to swear an oath of fealty to Matilda as prospective successor to her father. David enjoyed a special position within the English kingdom, being entrusted by Henry with important administrative roles and judicial decisions. The Anglo-Scottish peace was shattered by Stephen of Blois's bid for the crown at the end of 1135, when David took possession of Carlisle and Cumberland, as his father had held them, enforcing a Scottish restoration which he had never attempted as long as Henry I was king of England. The Scots were compelled to recognize Stephen's authority, at least 'de facto', and by David's first treaty with Stephen (February 1136) he retained Cumbria, relinquished Northumberland, and had his son and heir Henry recognized as lord of the honour of Huntingdon. Relations with Stephen broke down in 1137, however, and by 1138 the Scots were invading Northumberland and pushing even further south, towards Yorkshire, probably with the aim of establishing Scottish authority over the whole of England north of Lancashire and the Tees. But David's strategy received a setback on 22 August 1138, when a well-disciplined force of English barons and knights met a large but unruly Scottish host on Cowton Moor near Northallerton, and in the battle of the Standard inflicted a severe defeat. 
Stephen's difficulties in southern England prevented him from exploiting this English victory, and by his second treaty with the Scots (Durham, 9 April 1139) he was forced in effect to cede to David control over England between Tees and Tweed, as well as continued enjoyment of the honour of Huntingdon. After Stephen was captured by his enemies in 1141, David and his son joined forces with the empress when she made her unsuccessful bid for the English throne. Even though the rout of the empress's forces at Winchester, on 14 September 1141, sent David and Henry northward again in undignified flight, their discomfiture did not affect their position north of Tees, where they remained in control until David's death. The honour of Huntingdon, however, was now lost. Indeed, at this period the Scottish king even exercised lordship over the honour of Lancaster, while in 1149 he entertained the young Henry of Anjou, son of the empress, at a splendid ceremony at Carlisle, where David conferred knighthood upon the future king of England and extracted a solemn promise, soon to be broken, that after Henry's accession the Scots would be left in undisturbed enjoyment of the English northern counties. Contemporary English writers reproached David for allowing his followers to commit many atrocities during the invasions of 1137-8, but at least one of them, William of Newburgh, gives the Scottish king credit for enforcing a twelve-year peace throughout northern England when it was conspicuously absent in the south. 
David I was driven by a clear and consistent vision, pious and authoritarian, of what his kingdom should be: Catholic, in the sense of conforming to the doctrines and observances of the western church; feudal, in the sense that a lord-vassal relationship, involving knight-service, should form the basis of government; and open, in the sense that external (especially continental) influences of all kinds, religious, military, and economic, were encouraged and exploited to strengthen the Scottish kingdom. Alongside his eclecticism, David's strong sense of the autonomy of his realm and of his own position within it must be acknowledged. The surviving numbers of his charters, compared with those of his predecessors, surely point to an increase in the sophistication, and probably also in the activity, of government. During David's reign the administration of royal justice became more firmly established and was organized more effectively. Those who enjoyed their own courts were told that the king would intervene if they failed to provide justice. The addresses of royal charters and writs (Scottish 'brieves') show that from 'c'.1140 justiciars were appointed. Although none is known by name, these officers were clearly the predecessors of the named justiciars of succeeding reigns. 
David prevented his bishops (save only Galloway) recognizing any claims by York or Canterbury to ecclesiastical authority over the Scottish church, and he refused homage to Stephen, only allowing his son to do homage for Northumberland and Huntingdon. He restored the southern border of his kingdom west of the Pennines to Westmorland, where it had run before 1092. He was the first king of Scots to have a coinage struck in his name, in the form of silver sterlings minted at Carlisle, Berwick, Edinburgh, and elsewhere, from 'c'.1139 onwards. His greatest failure, for which he cannot be blamed, lay in the succession. From 'c'.1136, when his son Henry (understandably, in view of Maud's probable age at her second marriage, the only son to survive to adulthood) would have been about twenty, David had begun to associate his heir with himself in royal government. From 1139 onwards, indeed, it is not misleading to speak of joint kingship in Scotland. But Henry died tragically young in 1152. David himself died a year later, on 24 May 1153 at Carlisle Castle; he was buried in early June before the high altar of the church of Dunfermline Abbey. His heir, Henry's eldest son, Malcolm IV, was only twelve and no match for the vigorous Henry of Anjou who succeeded to the English throne at the end of 1154. Yet Malcolm succeeded comparatively peacefully and the greater part of his grandfather's legacy remained to the Scottish kingdom as it was to develop, on foundations which David had largely laid, during the remaining medieval centuries. 


