@@@@@


doc= 59536


Reginald of Cornhill (c.1140-1209/10), royal official, was a younger son of Gervase, and on Henry's downfall he and his brother Ralph paid 100 marks to hold Henry's offices until the king's return to England; in 1192 he succeeded Ralph as sheriff of Kent and held the office for the rest of his life. Until his death he continued as a purchaser of goods -- luxury items rather than basic commodities -- for the king's household. He was responsible for assessing or collecting scutage (1199) and tallage (1200) in several counties, and, jointly, for the duty of one-fifteenth on imports and exports in 1203-4, the recoinage of 1205, and the organization of the king's ships from 1205 to 1208, in which he worked with William of Wrotham (died 1217). From 1201 onwards he served as a justice in many counties. He built up a substantial estate, especially in Kent, mostly by purchase. His wife is named in 1200 as Matilda; after his death, between Michaelmas 1209 and Michaelmas 1210, his son Reginald paid 10,000 marks to succeed as sheriff of Kent, and for his own and his father's debts. 


@@@@@


doc= 59587


Pierre Cesar Labouchere (1772-1839). This son of a Huguenot cloth merchant was born at The Hague in 1772 and, after service in his uncle's merchant house at Nantes, joined Hopes as a clerk in 1790; he received procuration three years later although he was not made a partner until 1802. 
Throughout the stormy 1780s, when the Netherlands suffered the destructive forces of opposing political factions, more than ever Henry fell back upon his Anglo-American origins. 'For not being obliged either by status or duty to take sides', he reckoned, 'I have observed a strict neutrality' (Buist, 42); he thereby retained his freedom of action. His bond-issuing business prospered. Russia was now the major client; between 1787 and 1793 eighteen bond issues, raising the immense sum of over 50 million guilders, were arranged. A thankful Empress Catherine offered Henry a barony, which he refused. Of his great wealth he made little secret. Much of it was ploughed into his great neo-classical palace of Welgeleegen, Haarlem, built between 1785 and 1790 and based upon the work of Palladio. Henry filled it with great pictures and sculpture; in 1802 he made it over to John Williams Hope. 
No protective neutrality was possible following the invasion of the Netherlands by the armies of revolutionary France in 1794. To preserve life and limb from a new terror, the Hopes fled abroad with Henry, Williams Hope, and P. C. Labouchere settling in London in 1794. Henry, anticipating a long stay, took a residence in Harley Street, adding a wing to accommodate his 372 pictures, acquired a country seat at East Sheen, and entered into an alliance with the merchant bank of Sir Francis Baring. 
The two houses had done business since the 1760s but now grew closer, with Barings benefiting from use of Hopes' evacuated capital. Their remarkable similarity of outlook was further strengthened when P. C. Labouchere married Francis Baring's daughter, Dorothy ('b'. 1771), in 1796. The couple had two sons, the eldest of whom, Henry Labouchere (1798-1869), became a Liberal politician and was ennobled as the first Baron Taunton. Together the houses ploughed $100,000 into land purchases in New England in 1796, arranged a loan for the court of Lisbon in 1802 -- the proceeds of which were paid as a war levy to Napoleon -- and, more importantly, arranged $11.25 million finance for the United States' purchase of Louisiana from France in 1803-4. 
Henry Hope, Williams Hope, and Labouchere returned to Amsterdam in 1802 to resuscitate Hope & Co., although much of their capital remained in London in the house of Henry Hope & Co. Quickly it recovered its former pre-eminence by continuing the work, begun in London, of funding war levies imposed by France on its enemies and allies alike, in particular Spain and Prussia. Notwithstanding their strong London links, Henry Hope and Labouchere did this with the tacit support of Napoleon and his lieutenants such as G. J. Ouvrard; they must be regarded as major financiers of the French wars. 
But it was their Indian summer; by 1808 Hopes was a spent force. In that year, spurred on by his unhappy marriage and increasingly at odds with his partners, Williams Hope left to live in England; Henry was now over seventy; Labouchere sought early retirement, and died in January 1839; and no Hope children showed interest in succeeding their fathers despite John Hope's heirs' owning much of the capital. Crisis point was reached when Henry died in 1811 and Williams Hope, known simply as John Hope since Henry's death, died two years later, on 12 February 1813 at his home in Harley Street, London. He was buried at St Ewe, Cornwall. The insistence of John Hope's widow on the immediate withdrawal of her husband's capital resulted in Hopes' acquisition by Sir Francis Baring's son, Alexander Baring, in 1813. It was the end of a dynasty. 
The Hope family had been lured from their business by prospects of prestige and enjoyment to be found elsewhere. The eldest son of John Hope (1737-1784), Thomas Hope (1769-1831), an influential figure in English connoisseurship, provides the most telling yet distinguished example. Born at Amsterdam on 30 August 1769, he was the eldest of three brothers who together inherited their father's substantial interest in Hopes but was never active in its management. Instead he turned to the study of classical architecture and civilization and from 1787 spent eight years travelling and studying in Mediterranean countries. In 1795 he settled in London, living in Duchess Street from 1799, and won recognition as an informed scholar, writer, collector, enlightened patron, proponent of neo-classicism, and influencer of taste. He was 'entirely devoted to the arts' (Watkin, 13). 
The Hopes, of Scottish descent and with enduring business and cultural links with Britain, were one of Europe's greatest banking dynasties. Their rise during the Seven Years' War and the immense financial power they exercised from then until almost the end of the Napoleonic era were based upon their command of the Amsterdam capital market and their expertise as merchant traders. Their clients included numerous European kings and governments for whom they made bond issues; the finance they provided at vital moments, not least during the Napoleonic wars, influenced international relations. Their accumulation of great wealth enabled their acquisition of estates and works of art as well as their distinguished connoisseurship and patronage; but ultimately this distracted them from their business and undermined its strength. 


@@@@@


doc= 59588


Thomas [ii] Hope (1704-1779), joined him about 1724, followed soon after by another brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 59594


AEthelwold Moll (fl. 759-765), was of unknown ancestry. If he was the same person as the Moll in whose favour, according to a letter of Pope Paul I, King Eadberht had alienated the monasteries of Coxwold and Stonegrave, in what is now Yorkshire, and the unidentified 'Donamuthe', he was presumably a leading official of that king, since the letter refers to him as a 'patrician' ('patricius'). Little is known of his reign. In 761 he defeated and killed a certain Oswin, perhaps a claimant to the throne, at Eildon, in modern Northumberland, and on 1 November 762 he married AEthelthryth at Catterick. In 765 he is recorded as having 'lost the kingdom of the Northumbrians' on 30 October at an unidentified place called 'Pincanheale' (Symeon of Durham, 'Opera', 2.43). Since this is elsewhere referred to as a meeting-place of Northumbrian councils, it is possible that AEthelwold Moll was deposed in such a body. 


@@@@@


doc= 59595


AEthelred I (d. 796), son of the former king AEthelwold Moll. In view of the fact that his father's marriage had taken place only in 762, he may have been a child at his accession. Little is known of his 'first' reign, and only one coin has been assigned to it. In 778 he ordered the killing of three ealdormen ('duces') and in 779 he was driven into exile, to be replaced by a member of the line of Eadberht, 


@@@@@


doc= 59596


AElfwald I (d. 788), son of the former king Oswulf. In 786 AElfwald received in his kingdom George, bishop of Ostia and legate of the pope, who held an important council, attended by AElfwald and the secular and ecclesiastical magnates of Northumbria. This promulgated a series of decrees, including one requiring that kings be of legitimate birth and anathematizing any who conspired to kill a king. Ironically, AElfwald himself was murdered. The killing occurred at a place called 'Scythlescester', near Hadrian's Wall, on 23 September 788 as a result of a conspiracy formed by his patrician Sicga, whose name had come at the head of the lay representatives at the 786 council. The king was buried at Hexham and apparently regarded as a martyr, for according to the annals a heavenly light was seen at the place of his death and a church constructed there. The reign had not been an altogether settled one, for the annals report the killing at Christmas 780 of AElfwald's patrician Bearn at the hands of two ealdormen. Alcuin indeed regarded the reign as inaugurating a period of moral decline: 'From the days of King AElfwald fornications, adulteries, and incest have flooded the land, so that these sins have been committed without any shame and even with the handmaids of God' (Dummler, no. 16; 'English Historical Documents', 1, no. 193). 


@@@@@


doc= 59635


Wintringham, Thomas Henry (1898-1949), socialist activist and military theorist, was born on 15 May 1898 in Grimsby, Lincolnshire, the third child of John Fildes Wintringham (1866-1940), a solicitor, and his wife, Eliza Mapson Workman (1868-1937). Both his parents' families were nonconformist in religion and in politics, and Gladstonian Liberalism was to prove a lasting influence. Educated at Gresham's School, Holt, from 1910 to 1916, he postponed taking up a history scholarship at Balliol College, Oxford, in order to serve as a motorcycle dispatch rider in the Royal Flying Corps. Experience of the western front left him with a keen insight into the strengths, as well as the limitations, of military technology. Deeply sceptical of a hierarchical, authoritarian organization's capacity to wage war with any degree of competence, and appalled by the treatment of his fellow rankers, Wintringham proved a willing 'mutineer' in the summer of 1918. Early in 1919 he went up to Balliol College to read for a shortened course in modern history, which he completed in 1920. 
While at Oxford, Wintringham found time to man picket lines and read Marx, and in 1920 he joined the Communist Party, making an extended visit to Russia. In the following year he graduated and began studying for the bar. A stuttering legal career ended in late 1925 when he was sentenced to six months' imprisonment for sedition, the consequence of articles published in 'Workers' Weekly', the communist newspaper which he helped Palme Dutt to edit. 
After his release from Wandsworth prison in April 1926, Wintringham assumed the editorship of 'Workers' Weekly' now renamed 'Workers' Life', and then in January 1930 he transferred to the newly launched 'Daily Worker'. In succeeding years Wintringham established his reputation as an essayist, pamphleteer, and poet, writing for 'Labour Monthly' and from October 1934 for 'Left Review', which he co-edited in his capacity as secretary of the British section of the Writers' International. Publication of Wintringham's first book, 'The Coming World War', in April 1935 confirmed his credentials as that rare phenomenon, an informed socialist commentator on military affairs. 
Despite Wintringham's key role in the Communist Party during the 1926 general strike, and his subsequent success as a propagandist and polemicist, the 'bourgeois' Wintringham was viewed critically by those members of the party's central committee who were eager to demonstrate their proletarian credentials. Furthermore, throughout the years 1927-35, despite Moscow's indiscriminate labelling of all left-of-centre parties as 'social-fascist', Wintringham remained close to the Labour left and the Independent Labour Party. He urged an early end to exclusivity, and the party's approval of his involvement with 'Left Review' was an encouraging sign. The Comintern's adoption in 1935 of a popular front strategy vindicated Wintringham's insistence that British Marxists could not remain indifferent to an indigenous radical tradition. 
Wintringham's ambitions within the Communist Party were further undermined by a succession of extramarital affairs, rumours of which scandalized a puritanical leadership. In August 1923 he married a fellow party member and future doctor, Elizabeth Emma Arkwright (1894-1973). While still a medical student Elizabeth had been rusticated by her Oxford college after joining her future husband on his visit to Russia in 1920. One of their children died in infancy but responsibility for a surviving son failed to check Wintringham's interest in other women. The couple also had a daughter, born in 1931. The marriage staggered on until their separation in 1937 and divorce in 1941. 
During the 1930s Wintringham established a reputation as the left's leading commentator on military strategy, which the Spanish Civil War offered an opportunity to put into practice. He went to Spain in August 1936, and in February 1937 led his novice troops up the hill at Jarama, a bloody baptism of fire for the volunteers of the British battalion fighting with the International Brigades in defence of the Spanish republic. Wintringham himself was wounded, though he recovered sufficiently to take part in the Aragon offensive in August 1937, when he was seriously wounded and invalided home. Over the next few months he wrote 'English Captain', a reflective account of his experiences in Spain which received considerable praise when first published in 1939. 
While in Spain, Tom Wintringham met a New England journalist, Katharine Wise (Kitty) Bowler (1908-1966). Whereas Elizabeth Wintringham remained a card-carrying communist until her death, Kitty Bowler subscribed to a highly individual brand of revolutionary socialism which flew in the face of party dogma. The party disapproved of the attachment, and in July 1938, rather than break off the relationship, Wintringham reluctantly accepted expulsion, a breach rendered easier by the murderous machinations of the Comintern which he had observed behind the lines in Spain. The couple married in 1941, Kitty sacrificing her inheritance from her Boston family to do so. Wintringham's second marriage was more stable than his first, and produced a son. The family lived in genteel poverty, surviving largely on Tom's income as a freelance writer and political campaigner. In the first half of the 1940s this was quite considerable, ensuring a lifestyle of Surrey villas and fast cars, but after 1946 he earned little. 
Wintringham's dissenting roots proved a powerful counterweight to Marxist-Leninism throughout his eighteen years in the Communist Party. Never having succumbed to the party's narrow sectarianism of the late 1920s and 1930s, he enthusiastically promoted a succession of progressive alliances from the era of the popular front to the onset of the cold war. He remained a highly regarded figure on the British left, enjoying the respect of former colleagues long after he had ceased to be a communist. The party remained remarkably mute whenever he attacked it for denouncing war with Germany as an 'anti-imperialist struggle' during the period from September 1939 to June 1941. 
During the 'phoney war' Wintringham seemed an isolated figure, shunned by loyal communists and ignored by a Labour leadership sensing a share of power. War Office wariness of anyone who had fought in Spain, however expert in military matters, was subverted by Wintringham's swift response to the fall of France. Financed by Edward Hulton, proprietor of 'Picture Post', the magazine to which he contributed regularly throughout the 1940s, Wintringham set up the 'Home Guard Training School' in Osterley Park, west London. Inspired by the militias that held Madrid in the autumn of 1936, Wintringham saw the newly formed Local Defence Volunteers as the vanguard of a genuine citizen army. His instructors drew upon their experience in Spain to give two-day intensive courses in enemy tactics and guerrilla warfare. By September 1940 a reluctant War Office was obliged to recognize the 'Osterley reds'. Endorsed by those regular officers who had actually experienced combat, the course became the template for Home Guard training nationwide, with Wintringham regularly expounding the principles of a 'people's war' in 'Picture Post', the 'Daily Mirror', and a succession of books in the series 'Penguin Specials'. With invasion seemingly imminent, Allen Lane in July 1940 rushed out 'New Ways of War': a short, practical guide to guerrilla fighting. It later became required reading for many African and Asian nationalists. Like George Orwell and J. B. Priestley, Wintringham insisted that radical politics and a deep love of one's country were not incompatible, and that the nation's united defiance in the face of imminent invasion signalled an early end to the old, now much discredited, order. 
By June 1941 the military had established full control over the Home Guard, but Wintringham had already departed to complete 'The Politics of Victory', a detailed critique of communist opposition to the war. A hastily drafted preface acknowledged the German invasion of the Soviet Union as a fresh opportunity to build a progressive, anti-fascist alliance. In 'People's War', a 'Penguin Special' published in August 1942, Wintringham urged Churchill's government to recognize the resistance movements' key role in opening up a second front. Later in the war he wrote two further books: 'Weapons and Tactics' (1943), a best-selling history of warfare, and, under the pseudonym Gracchus, 'Your M.P.' (1944), a controversial expose of Conservative MPs' voting records. 
Despite the party's volte-face in the summer of 1941, Wintringham remained at odds with his old comrades. The communist leadership saw political advantage in respecting the coalition's electoral truce. In July 1942, however, Wintringham helped to found Common Wealth, the independent socialist party led by Sir Richard Acland which fought wartime by-elections and won three seats. In February 1943 he was narrowly defeated in the Midlothian North by-election, attracting 48 per cent of votes cast. He was only marginally less successful in the general election of 1945, contesting Aldershot in the absence of a Labour candidate. By then Wintringham was urging Acland to abandon the party's more strident criticism of Labour in the interest of left unity. Not surprisingly, therefore, he supported the entry of Common Wealth into the Labour Party after the election, but played only a modest role in urging the Attlee administration to 'keep left'. After his move to Scotland in 1947, his direct involvement in post-war politics was constrained as much by distance as by inclination. 
Although Wintringham continued to write, the late 1940s were for him something of an anticlimax. He never regained the high profile he had enjoyed during the war, when in addition to his newspaper and magazine articles he had broadcast occasionally on the BBC. Suspicious of Anglo-American intentions towards the Soviet Union, yet disenchanted with Stalin, Wintringham looked to the United Nations as a future guarantor of global stability, and Beijing or Belgrade as alternative role models for those west European communist parties still loyal to Moscow. He sensed that the left in Britain was biding its time, waiting to coalesce around a dramatic new crusade. The Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament might have provided Tom Wintringham with a fresh cause to champion, had he still been alive and politically active in the mid-1950s. He died on 16 August 1949 after suffering a massive heart attack while holidaying at his sister's Lincolnshire farm, Owmby Farm, near Owmby; he was cremated at Leeds crematorium. The loss of this uniquely English revolutionary was mourned by close comrades, but was scarcely acknowledged by the wider public. Over half a century later Tom Wintringham's eventful life and innovative thinking is attracting renewed interest, a belated acknowledgement of the high esteem in which he was held on the left in Britain throughout the 1930s and 1940s. 


@@@@@


doc= 59637


James, Cyril Lionel Robert (1901-1989), historian and writer, was born on 4 January 1901 in the village of Caroni, Trinidad, the eldest of three children of Robert Alexander James and his wife, Ida Elizabeth (Bessie) Rudder. His paternal grandfather and both maternal grandparents had been migrants from Barbados. His father was a schoolmaster and later headmaster; his mother's love of English literature was a crucial formative influence on James: Shakespeare, Dickens, and the possibly more surprising figure of Thackeray remained aesthetic touchstones throughout his life. Known to friends as Nello, in print, when not using pseudonyms, he was always C. L. R. 
The family moved during James's childhood to the larger settlement of Tunapuna -- home also to his friend Malcolm Nurse (1902-1959), subsequently a noted writer and politician under the name George Padmore -- and his early education was in his father's own schoolrooms. His was by local standards a comparatively prosperous -- indeed, under the influence of the sternly aspiring Robert James, a rigidly conventional -- upbringing. But it was also a childhood in a colonial society where slavery remained a living memory, and where people of the James family's colour could achieve even their modestly middle-class status only by exceptional ability and hard work. James certainly had ability, but his application to schoolwork was more questionable: to his father's distress, he increasingly preferred reading and writing fiction, or watching and playing cricket, to his studies. In 1910 he won a scholarship to Queen's Royal College, the island's most prestigious school; but early top grades were not sustained as the teenage James carved his own idiosyncratic path. He knew he did not want to be a teacher or civil servant, or to apply to Oxford or Cambridge, as his father intended, but to be a writer. On graduating from Queen's Royal College, although he found employment as a schoolmaster and private tutor, this was merely a means of paying the rent while he pursued his real interests. 
James entered the literary circles centred on pioneer Trinidadian authors Albert Gomes and Alfred Mendes, and first achieved public notice with a short story, 'La divina pastora', published in 1927. Other short stories, essays, and then a novel, 'Minty Alley' (written in the summer of 1928, but not published until 1936) followed. His fiction reflected fascination with the world his family spurned, that of the Trinidadian poor and their 'barrack-yard' homes. This was linked, too, with a slowly awakening political consciousness. James became sympathetic to the Trinidad Workingmen's Association and its charismatic leader, Captain A. A. Cipriani: a biography of Cipriani was to be his first published book (1932). From 1927 he was briefly, and unhappily, married to Juanita Samuel Young. 
Despite his modest literary success James found colonial Trinidad an increasingly restricting environment. In 1932 came his chance to break from it. He had become friendly with local cricketing hero Learie Constantine, who had moved to England to play professionally in the Lancashire league. Constantine, needing a collaborator for his autobiography 'Cricket and I' (1933), invited James to join him there. The solidly working-class Lancashire mill town of Nelson, where the Constantine family lived, seemed an improbable new location for the aspiring Caribbean intellectual. Yet it prompted the next great turn in James's career. Through Constantine, whose broad interests included left-wing politics, James made the acquaintance of local socialist and trade union activists. And from this there rapidly grew an enthusiasm for Marxist, then specifically for Trotskyist, political theory and activity. 
James moved to London at the start of 1934 and, while scraping a living as a cricket correspondent for the 'Manchester Guardian' and other papers, plunged into political action. He joined both the Independent Labour Party (and, soon, the Trotskyist faction that operated within it) and the small group of West Indian and African emigres who were agitating from London for colonial independence. To his surprise he discovered that a key member of the latter circle, the pseudonymous George Padmore, was in fact his cousin Malcolm. James also began research in London and Paris for what was to be his most famous book, 'The Black Jacobins', a study of the Haitian revolution, published in 1938. It was not only a major history of those events, but in effect a political manifesto for forthcoming anti-colonial revolt and for Pan-Africanism. This was only the highest peak in James's substantial range of literary activity during the later 1930s: he also published his novel 'Minty Alley' (1936), a polemical history of the Communist International, 'World Revolution' (1937), a short but pioneering 'History of Negro Revolt' (1938), a translation of Boris Souvarine's 'Stalin' (1939), numerous political articles, and of course cricket journalism, while his Haitian work additionally produced a play, 'Toussaint l'Ouverture', performed at the Westminster Theatre in 1936, with Paul Robeson in the title role. 
In 1938 James was a delegate to the founding conference of Trotsky's Fourth International in Paris, and then travelled to the United States: partly, it seems, on Trotsky's urging, partly driven by his own restlessness and curiosity. He intended to return to England in time for the 1939 cricket season; but the outbreak of war in Europe extended an American sojourn that was eventually to last fifteen years. For much of that period, he was a full-time political activist: first, for the main US Trotskyist group, the Socialist Workers' Party; then, after seceding from it, working with an even smaller group of like-minded friends in what was labelled the 'Johnson-Forest tendency', 'Johnson' was James's own 'party name', 'Freddie Forest' that of Russian emigre Raya Dunayevskaya. James wrote a mass of political material during these years, both alone and in collaboration with Dunayevskaya and their colleague Grace Lee. Little of this writing has retained lasting interest except among devotees of the minutiae of ultra-left politics; but it included James's 'Notes on Dialectics' (1948), an innovative work of Marxist philosophy. Still, James's capacious interests could not be confined in a single political mould: his American years also produced 'Mariners, Renegades and Castaways' (1953), a study of Herman Melville, and the remarkable 'American Civilization'. The latter, mainly drafted in 1949-50 but never fully completed and published only posthumously in 1992, was far ahead of its time in many ways; not least in its close analysis of 'popular culture' -- cinema, comic-books, radio serials, mass-market fiction -- as a key to understanding a society. 
These were also crucial but turbulent years in James's personal life. In 1939 in Los Angeles he met and fell in love with the eighteen-year-old Constance Webb. It seemed a hopeless infatuation: not only did Constance initially not return his love, she was twenty years his junior, already married, and (still a significant, even dangerous, fact in the USA of the 1940s) she was white, he black. Gradually his affections came to be reciprocated, and he and Constance were married in May 1946. Their son, also C. L. R. James, known as Nobbie, was born in April 1949. Yet theirs remained a stormy relationship, which finally broke down in 1950-51, to James's lasting regret. Although in later life he was married a third time, to Selma Weinstein, there is no doubt that the relationship with Constance was the most important of his life. His many and long letters to her, posthumously published as 'Special Delivery' (1996), are deeply poignant documents, as well as providing the most intimate available insight into the workings of James's mind. 
In 1952, at the height of the USA's early cold war 'red scare', James was arrested for supposed passport violations, and interned on Ellis Island. The final draft of 'Mariners, Renegades and Castaways' was written there, in prison, and included a desperate plea against the injustice of his position. Feeling squeezed between US authorities who called him a communist and communists who thought him a heretic, finally despairing of being able to regularize his resident status in the United States, he headed back to England in the autumn of 1953. 
London was to remain James's usual home for the last thirty years of his life, although until the 1980s he travelled more widely than ever before. He was able to revisit the USA many times, lecturing and holding visiting professorships at various American universities. He was a welcome guest in Ghana, whose first post-independence leader Kwame Nkrumah had been a protege of his -- until he expressed publicly his growing disillusion with Nkrumah's authoritarianism. His 'Nkrumah and the Ghana Revolution' (1977) traces the enthusiasm, the doubts, the disenchantment, and eventual denunciation -- though even at the last James insisted on the political horizons that Nkrumah's project 'could' have opened up. In 1958 he relocated to Trinidad, on the invitation of Prime Minister Eric Williams, who had been James's school pupil thirty years before. Williams made him editor of his party's newspaper, 'The Nation', but strains grew between James's radicalism and Williams's more conservative direction. The crisis came over Williams's decision to allow the US Navy to retain a base at Chaguaramas on the island; something James bitterly opposed. He resigned from 'The Nation' in March 1960 and was expelled from the party in October, but remained in Trinidad for some time, writing and lecturing. From this period date his books 'Modern Politics' (1960), 'Party Politics in the West Indies' (1962), and perhaps the most important of his later works, 'Beyond a Boundary' (1963), a meditation on the cultural and social meanings of cricket which also included substantial autobiographical elements. 
James returned again to England in 1962 but continued to range widely from there, lecturing in Nigeria, Ghana, Tanzania, Uganda, Cuba, and Canada as well as the USA, covering the 1965 England cricket tour of the West Indies for the London 'Observer' and 'Times' (arriving in Trinidad to watch the test match there, he was promptly placed under house arrest by Eric Williams), and helping initiate the Sixth Pan-African Congress in 1974. He also continued to write extensively on politics, history, literature, and sport, but no substantial new books appeared after the mid-1960s. The major publications of his last years, notably three volumes of essays, 'The Future in the Present' (1977), 'Spheres of Existence' (1980), and 'At the Rendezvous of Victory' (1984), mostly collected earlier work. 
In 1981 James finally settled back in London, living in a tiny book-filled apartment at 165 Railton Road, Brixton, above the offices of the magazine 'Race Today', which was run by friends and admirers of his. They cooked and cared for an increasingly frail but still mentally vigorous man who, unable now to travel, instead received a stream of visitors from throughout the world in his bedroom. He continued to watch that world with a keen eye, welcoming with equal enthusiasm the Polish workers' 1980s uprising against communism, the emergence of a new generation of black women writers, and the West Indies' cricketing successes. He died at home of a chest infection, after a short illness, on 31 May 1989. His remains were returned to Trinidad and buried there, in his childhood hometown of Tunapuna. 
Very few figures in twentieth-century Caribbean, or British, life and letters have matched the sheer range of James's interests and activities. Revolutionary and aesthete, novelist, historian, literary critic, philosopher, political analyst, and in many eyes the foremost of all writers on cricket, he seemed somehow to bring a unified, intensely personal sensibility to all these spheres. Even if many of his numerous projects never came to full fruition -- the unfinished book 'American Civilization', and the autobiography he long planned but never really began, would surely have been his twin masterpieces -- he still left a literary and political legacy of remarkable power and continuing influence. 


@@@@@


doc= 59641


Pearse, Margaret Mary (1878-1968), teacher and politician, was born at 27 Great Brunswick Street (later Pearse Street), Dublin, on 4 August 1878, the eldest child of the two daughters and two sons of James Pearse (1839-1900), stone carver and sometime pamphleteer, and his second wife, Margaret Brady (1857-1932), the daughter of a Dublin coal factor. James Pearse had emigrated to Ireland from England and by the early 1870s had established his own firm in Dublin. Brought up by a free-thinking father and a Unitarian mother, his only formal education was at Sunday school, but he read widely and became interested in political issues. His first marriage was short-lived and unhappy, though it did produce two children and the conversion of the entire family to Roman Catholicism. Pearse married Margaret Brady within a year of his first wife's death in 1876. She was a devout Catholic who boasted something of a nationalist pedigree as two of her ancestors had died in the 1798 rising and her grandfather was an Irish-speaker who had moved from co. Meath to Dublin during the great famine of the 1840s. 
The couple's four children were born 'over the shop' in Great Brunswick Street within the first six years of their marriage. Much of the house was sublet, but as the family's fortunes improved they let less of the house to tenants and they eventually moved away from the business. The family home received few visitors and the children appeared to have little contact with other children of their own age. Their relationship with their mother was strong and close, but their father remained distant. Margaret Pearse, known as Maggie or Wow Wow within the family, and her siblings were devout: she and her brother Patrick Henry Pearse were very fond of the ceremonies of Holy Week and both attended church frequently. Described by her brother's biographer as 'plain and squat', Margaret Pearse was considered to be bossy, and did not fawn over her brother as much as the rest of the family appeared to. 
Margaret Pearse was educated at the Holy Faith convent in Glasnevin and it is possible that she received some teacher training. She did not enter into paid employment, but she was interested in education, travelling with her brother to Brussels in 1905 to examine the workings of the bilingual education system and improving her French. Her own attempt to establish an infants' school in 1907 failed, but she was supportive of and involved in her brother Patrick's attempts to set up an innovative Irish language school. 
Established initially at Cullenswood House, Patrick Pearse's school, St Enda's, moved in 1910 to a 50 acre site near Dublin as its student numbers continued to grow. A bilingual school, it was persistently in debt and under-staffed as a consequence. Despite not speaking Irish herself, Margaret Pearse became increasingly dedicated to the Irish language, insisting on signing her name in Irish and encouraging the teaching of the language in the school. She acted as school matron and housekeeper along with her mother and a female cousin. She also ran the preparatory school, taught junior French, and corresponded with the students when they went on holiday. As the school grew in fame and its numbers increased, the workload became more onerous, but a regular flow of prominent speakers, interesting students, and lively visitors ensured an exciting and dynamic atmosphere. 
The school remained open largely owing to money raised during fund-raising trips to the United States, and it slipped into further financial difficulties after the execution in May 1916 of Patrick and Willie Pearse for their involvement in the Easter rising. Deeply distressed by their deaths, Margaret Pearse devoted most of the rest of her life to preserving her brothers' memory and acting -- with her mother -- as custodian of their legacy. They attempted to have the brothers' bodies released to the family for burial, but their request was refused as the corpses had been buried after execution in lime and the authorities feared in any case that their graves would became martyrs' shrines. Margaret Pearse and her mother channelled their grief into attempting to keep St Enda's running, a difficult task as Patrick Pearse had died intestate and the school was in serious debt. Some relief arrived in the form of bequests and donations, but constant quarrels over how the money should be spent plagued his sister and mother. The American St Enda's committee raised enough money to buy the school grounds and further funds were accumulated during Margaret Pearse's tour of America in 1926, but the women resented the involvement of various committees in the school's finances and general ethos. The school's standards slipped and both women were stretched beyond their abilities as staff shortages necessitated their increasing involvement in teaching and administration. It became clear to most observers that the school could simply not function without the involvement and guidance of Patrick Pearse. 
Family dynamics became strained as Margaret Pearse became increasingly estranged from her younger sister, Mary, who had opposed her brothers' militarism and was in any case prone to anxiety and hypochondria. There were also disputes about the royalties from their brother's writings. Margaret Pearse and her mother became increasingly religious, pouring their energies into piety, prayer, and the glorification of their relatives' political actions. Some critics believed that the Pearse women had adopted a proprietarial attitude to the Easter rising, and that their family's part in the rebellion had been glorified at the expense of other insurgents. Certainly, both women did not hesitate to condemn anyone who questioned the reputation of the Pearse brothers. Their steadfast loyalty to their own version of Easter week and its legacy was reflected in their political careers. Mrs Pearse was elected to the Dail in 1919 and following her death Margaret Pearse was elected for the same co. Dublin seat in 1933. She also took her mother's place on the executive of Fianna Fail, a party to which she remained intensely loyal. Both were staunch supporters of Eamon De Valera, believing that he had attempted to sustain Patrick Pearse's political vision. It would be difficult to describe either woman as anything more than a figurehead for the party. In common with a number of other female relatives of the nationalist dead, their presence in the Irish parliament was little more than symbolic. 
Margaret Pearse was elected to the senate in 1938, and served until her death. She had inherited St Enda's on her mother's death, but was finally forced to close the school in 1935, besieged to the end by financial worries. She nevertheless lived virtually alone in the main school house, though it had been vandalized by Black and Tans in the 1920s, and had continued to slide into further disrepair. She died, unmarried, at the Linden Convalescent Home, Blackrock, co. Dublin, on 7 November 1968 and was accorded a state funeral. The house was bequeathed finally and characteristically to the Irish nation as a monument to the memory of her brothers. 


@@@@@


doc= 59644


Annesley, Lady Mabel Marguerite (1881-1959), wood-engraver and watercolour painter, was born on 25 February 1881, at Annesley Lodge, Regent's Park, London, the daughter of Hugh Annesley, fifth Earl Annesley (1831-1908), lieutenant-colonel in the Scots Fusilier Guards and landowner, and his wife, Mabel Wilhelmina Frances Markham, Countess Annesley (1858-1891), granddaughter of Sir Francis Grant, eminent Victorian portrait painter and president of the Royal Academy. Educated at home, in 1895 she studied at the Frank Calderon school of animal painting in London. In 1899 she was elected a member of the Belfast Art Society where she exhibited until 1926. On 14 January 1904 she married Gerald Sowerby (1878-1913), flag lieutenant to Admiral Prince Louis of Battenberg and flag commander to the commander-in-chief, Portsmouth. They had one son, Gerald Francis Annesley (1904-1992). On the death of her father and brother she inherited Castlewellan Castle, where she returned to live in 1914 when her husband died, having resumed her maiden name. In her unfinished autobiography, 'As the Sight is Bent' (published posthumously in 1964), Annesley described her six-year struggle to manage the estate as 'a real achievement' (Annesley, 26). 
Annesley was about forty when she learnt to wood-engrave from Noel Rooke (1881-1953) at the Central School of Arts and Crafts, London, where she studied from 1920 to 1921. Between 1922 and 1939 she exhibited twenty-seven prints with the Society of Wood Engravers to which she was elected a member in 1925. In the same year she exhibited at her studio at 12 Lombard Street, Belfast, where she also lectured on wood-engraving. Campbell Dodgson drew attention to her work in his seminal 'Contemporary English Woodcuts' (1922). She produced wood-engraved illustration for the Golden Cockerel Press, including 'Songs from Robert Burns' (1925), and for Duckworths 'County Down Songs' (1924) and 'Apollo in Mourne' (1926) by the Ulsterman Richard Rowley. Despite developing arthritis in her hand Annesley continued to engrave, turning from boxwood to softer lino in her later years. In Dublin she exhibited with the Watercolour Society of Ireland (1926) and with the Dublin Painters (1938), and her work was included in an exhibition of Irish art held in Brussels in 1930. Costumes for the 1500th anniversary of the landing of St Patrick at Saul, co. Down, were designed by William Conor and Mabel Annesley for a pageant written by Richard Rowley held at Castle Ward, Strangford, in 1932. An exhibition of her watercolours, wood-engravings, and silverpoints was held in the Batsford Gallery, London ('c'.1933). She exhibited in the Ulster Unit exhibition (1934) and was appointed an honorary member of the Royal Ulster Academy. In 1939 she presented the Belfast Museum and Art Gallery with her fine collection of contemporary wood-engravings together with twenty of her own works. She lived for a time in Connemara and in Rathfriland, co. Down. When bombed out of her Belfast residence in 1942, she emigrated to New Zealand where she lived in Nelson and Takaka. For a number of years she was a trustee of the Bishop Suter Art Gallery, Nelson, and purchased work for the board while visiting England. She exhibited in the Festival of Britain in 1952 and the following year returned to England where she retired to Long Melford, Suffolk. 
Much of Annesley's work is redolent of the countryside she loved, particularly the Mourne Mountains of co. Down. She was always interested in the shapes and patterns of the landscape; her expressive two-dimensional style owes much to Paul Nash whose work, as well as that of Frances Hodgkins and David Jones, she admired in her autobiography. She initialled her work 'M. A.'. A superb horsewoman and exemplary landowner she had: 'an incorruptible sense of duty and tradition, most strikingly combined with a passionate grasp of all that was most vital in the world of modern art... The fundamental inspiration of her inner life sprang from an intense and profound feeling for beauty in nature and in art. ('The Times', 26 June 1959)' Throughout her life Annesley was hampered with ill health and family troubles which she overcame with characteristic courage. She died of myelomatosis on 19 June 1959 in Clare, Suffolk. She was buried in Long Melford, Suffolk. A joint memorial exhibition with Robert Gibbings and Gwen Raverat was held at the Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester, in 1960, and a touring exhibition commemorating the centenary of her birth was organized by the Bishop Suter Art Gallery in 1981. Annesley's work is represented in the British Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum, and Central St Martin's College of Art and Design, London; the Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester; the Ulster Museum, Belfast; the National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa; and the National Gallery of New Zealand, Wellington, and Sargeant Gallery, Wanganui, New Zealand. 


@@@@@


doc= 59653


Brett, Rosa (1829-1882), painter, was born on 7 December 1829 and baptized at St George's, Camberwell, Surrey, on 26 March 1830, the eldest of the five children of Captain Charles Curtis Brett (1789-1865), veterinary surgeon in the 12th lancers, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Pilbean ('b'. 1808/9), of Tonbridge, Kent. The artist John Brett (1831-1902) was her brother. 
Rosa Brett's childhood was peripatetic. Between 1833 and 1840 her father was stationed at various locations between Manchester and the south coast of England, from 1841 to 1843 in Ireland (Dublin and Dundalk), and it was not until 1846 -- after further postings in Manchester, Nottingham, and Coventry -- that the family finally settled in the Maidstone area of Kent (Mrs Brett's birthplace), where Charles Brett remained permanently based in the cavalry depot. During the 1850s they occupied various addresses on the north-eastern outskirts of Maidstone -- at Penenden Heath, then on the Boxley Road, and from 1858 to 1860 at Lynchfield House, Detling. 
It is not known whether Brett received art instruction but by December 1850 she was sufficiently proficient to sell a drawing. She was very close to her brother, John Brett, and frequently worked with him, even after his entry into the Royal Academy Schools in 1853. The influence on her brother of the landscape painter J. D. Harding (they met in January 1851), who encouraged working outdoors directly from nature and the scientific study of natural subject matter, and the inspiration of John Ruskin (first read by John Brett in 1852) undoubtedly filtered through to Rosa also. Both sketched in the Vale of Boxley and on the chalk hills of the north downs, trees being a favourite subject: 'Birch Tree in our Lawn' (1852; exh. Maas Gallery, London, 1991) is typical of her meticulous approach. Rosa Brett suffered from recurrent illness in the 1850s and her visits to Folkestone in 1852 and to Belgium for four months in 1855 (both of which produced outdoor sketches) may well have been undertaken for health reasons. In 1858, the year in which John Brett's 'The Stonebreaker' appeared at the Royal Academy, Rosa exhibited 'The Hayloft' (photograph Courtauld Inst., Witt Library), an indoor scene of a cat on hay, at both the Royal Academy -- where it received praise from the Pre-Raphaelites -- and the Liverpool Academy. The picture was submitted from a Dublin address under the pseudonym Rosarius, a name she retained for exhibiting purposes until 1862. 
In 1860 the Brett family moved to Barming Heath, a village on the western side of Maidstone, and from 1861 until 'c'.1870 occupied 45 Tonbridge Road in Maidstone itself. Throughout the 1860s and 1870s -- they moved again, to Fant in the early 1870s and further afield, to Rochester, about 1875 -- Brett continued to produce landscapes, in oil and watercolour: 'In the Artist's Garden' ('c'.1859-60; exh. 'Pre-Raphaelite Women Artists', Manchester City Art Gallery, 1997), 'Heathland' (1879; ex Sothebys, 12 November 1992), 'They Toil not neither do they Spin' (1879; ex Sothebys, 12 November 1992), and 'Study of a Turnip Field' (exh. 'Landscape in Britain', Tate Gallery, 1973) were all executed in oil. She also painted buildings, with a Ruskinian attention to detail, examples being 'Detling Church' (1858; ex Sothebys, Belgravia, 18 April 1978) and 'The Old House at Farleigh' (1862; exh. 'Pre-Raphaelite Women Artists', Manchester City Art Gallery, 1997), a few portraits (chiefly of her family), and, increasingly, natural still lifes of plants and small animals, such as 'A Thrush in a Horse Chestnut Tree' (exh. Liverpool Academy, 1860), 'Thistles' (exh. RA, 1861), 'The Field-Mice at Home' (exh. RA, 1867), and 'Starling and Bluetit' (exh. RA, 1876). Occasional figure subjects include a richly coloured oil of two ladies in a garden (1864; ex Sothebys, 19 June 1984), one of them holding a lily, which recalls early work by Millais. Brett's paintings were not often shown: she exhibited nine at the Royal Academy (1858-81), four in Liverpool (1858-72), one in Manchester (1867), and two with the Society of Lady Artists (1880, 1881). Her sketchbooks, however (two of which are in the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich), and works in private collections testify to considerable industry. She remained close to her brother, John, with whom she spent occasional holidays in Wales and in 1867 visited the notorious Georgina Weldon in Beaumaris on the Isle of Anglesey; her last exhibits, in 1880 and 1881, were submitted from his studio at 38 Harley Street in London. In his diary, John described Rosa affectionately as 'ardent, impulsive and unbendable' (entry dated 25 Dec 1858; Cordingly, 5). Brett died, unmarried, at Caterham, Surrey, on 31 January 1882. 


@@@@@


doc= 59669


Johnston, Henrietta (c.1674-1729), pastellist, was born in France, the daughter of Francis de Beaulieu (died in or before 1694) and his wife, Susannah. She arrived with her family in England on 16 December 1687 and in March 1694 married Robert Dering, son of Sir Edward Dering, after receiving her mother's permission as she was only 'about 20'. Afterwards they lived in Dublin, where Dering died before 1700. He had cousins and brothers there, one of whom, Daniel, was married to Helena Perceval, a daughter of Sir John Perceval, later first earl of Egmont. Robert Dering's sister, Elizabeth, was married to Sir Edward Southwell, a relation of the Percevals. The earliest pastels drawn by Henrietta Dering are of these Irish connections and their friends. Details of her training are unknown. In 1704 she drew Sir Emmanuel Moore and Sir John Perceval, resplendent in red coats, and the fourth earl of Barrymore, whose portrait shows her fresh colouring, notably in the face and wig. Henrietta Dering signed and dated her work on the wooden backings of her pastels, which survive as most are in their original frames. Her pastels of General Earle and Sir John Perceval of 1705 are stiff in pose; a third dated 1705, of a member of the Southwell family, is signed 'Henrietta Johnson Fecit', indicating that it was painted after she married the Revd Gideon Johnston (1668-1716) on 11 April 1705, as his second wife. He had two young sons and she two daughters by their respective first marriages. 
At some time in 1705 Gideon Johnston was recommended to the bishop of London as bishop's commissary in South Carolina. After a long delay the couple arrived there in spring 1708. They encountered many difficulties, including financial ones, and in 1709 Gideon Johnston wrote home saying, 'were it not for the Assistance my wife gives me by drawing of Pictures (which can last but a little time in a place so ill peopled) I shou'd not have been able to live' (papers of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel). Other problems arose: on 5 July 1710 Johnston wrote again, 'My wife who greatly helped me, drawing pictures, has long ago made an end of her materials' (ibid.). In his reply to this letter, John Chamberlayne of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel said, 'I have clubb'd wth Mr Shute in sending a small present of Crayons to Mrs Johnston in acknowledgement of the Rice etc which was lost wth poor Capt Cole' (American papers of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel) -- a fascinating sidelight on an artist's problems in a new colony. 
There is a distinct difference between Henrietta Johnston's Irish pastels and most of those done in Charles Town which may partly be attributed to her shortage of materials. The Irish work is strong and colourful, while, with exceptions, her colonial work is much paler and sometimes lacks detail. Her Charles Town sitters are shown bust length, not waist length, the usual format for her portraits drawn in Ireland. Some forty of her works are known, of which many drawn in America were of Huguenots. In its brilliant lively colour, her pastel of Henriette Charlotte de Chastaigner (Gibbes Museum of Art, Charleston), dated 1711, may be the result of the gift of crayons sent the previous year. It remains in perfect condition. 
Henrietta Johnston was in London in 1711 with documents, letters, and other items for the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel before returning to America in mid-1712. The lack of portraits from 1712 to 1714 is probably due to two hurricanes and a war between British colonists and local mainly Yamasee Indians. The subsequent portraits of Colonel and Mrs Samuel Prioleau of 1715 (Museum of Early Southern Decorative Arts, North Carolina) are among her best American works. 
In April 1716 Gideon Johnston was accidentally drowned. With her four children and other family members, Henrietta lived on in Charles Town. On 19 September 1719 she charged 2 pistoles for a portrait of Mr Clapp, but he paid $10 (Mrs Elizabeth Sindrey's estate account book, 1705-21, South Carolina Historical Society). This was more than she would have got in Ireland. In 1725 she was in New York drawing the Moore family, but she returned in 1726 to Charles Town, where she lived until her death on 9 March 1729. She was buried in St Philip's churchyard, Charles Town. Most of her pictures are in private collections. 


@@@@@


doc= 59673


Drury, Susanna (b. 1698?, d. in or after 1770), landscape painter, was, on her father's side, from a family of East Anglian origin which had been established in Ireland since Elizabethan times, a branch having settled in Dublin by 1675. Susanna was one of five children of Lieutenant Thomas Drury (who was baptized at St Peter and St Kevin, Aungier Street, Dublin, on 11 November 1683), the son of John Drury and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Leeson, who married there in 1675; Susanna's mother was Rebeckah, 'nee' Franklin (buried at St Ann's, Dawson Street, Dublin, on 27 September 1732). Susanna's date of birth is not certain, but her parents were probably the Thomas Drury and Rebecca Franklin who were married on 28 August 1695 at North Elmham, Norfolk, where their two eldest children, Thomas and Rebecca, were also baptized. Their other children were Mary Drury (baptized at St Catherine's, Dublin, on 23 September 1714); the Revd John Drury (1716-1791), vicar of Powerscourt, co. Wicklow; Franklin Drury, miniature painter, who died at Powerscourt, in 1771; and Elizabeth Drury, who married John Dudley at St Anne's, Dublin, on 6 November 1750 and by 1770 was a widow. Neither is it certain where Susanna was trained, but it may have been London, as her only dated work is 'View of London from One-Tree Hill, Greenwich Park' (1733; sold in Dublin 1905; in Frank Sabin collection, London, in 1954). 
A pair of landscapes or perspectives, 'The Giant's Causeway', won the $25 premium of the Dublin Society in 1740, and Susanna Drury's identity was disclosed to the society by Gabriel Maturin, a Huguenot, then dean of Kildare and later Jonathan Swift's successor at St Patrick's, Dublin. Her views of the Giant's Causeway were engraved in London in 1743-4 by Francois Vivares, another Huguenot. These engravings, the first-ever accurate views of the site, were circulated throughout Europe and provided the French geologist Nicolas Demarest with evidence to support his 'Vulcanist' theory of the origin of basalt, against the current 'Neptunist' theory held by Abraham Gottlob Werner. Mary Delany, Swift's friend, wrote to her sister on 8 October 1758: 'Mrs Drury, who took the draughts (of which you have the prints) lived three months near the place, and went almost every day. I can do nothing so exact and finished' ('Autobiography... Mrs Delany', 3.519). Two pairs of Susanna Drury's gouache paintings on vellum of the Giant's Causeway are known, one pair in the Ulster Museum, Belfast, and the other in the collection of the knight of Glin at Glin Castle, co. Limerick. Apart from her view of London, the only identified works by Susanna Drury are the views of the Giant's Causeway, which remain landmarks both in Irish topography and in European scientific illustration. Her married name was probably Warter, as a 'Susanna Warter... she a painter of landscape' appears in her brother Franklin Drury's will of 1770. 


@@@@@


doc= 59680


Geddes, Wilhelmina Margaret (1887-1955), artist, was born on 25 May 1887 on her maternal grandparents' farm at Drumreilly, co. Leitrim, Ireland, the eldest of four children of William Geddis ('c'.1852-1916), a site engineer with the Sligo/Leitrim and North Counties Railway, and Eliza Jane (1863-1955), daughter of John Stafford, farmer, and his wife, Mary Anne Bleakley, both British. In 1888 her father moved to Belfast where he set up a thriving business as a building contractor. Her earliest (mostly life) drawings date from 'c'.1891, executed when on a family summer outing to Ayrshire, where her lifelong love of Scottish border ballads was kindled. From an early age her (mostly unpublished) black and white book illustrations reflected her love of reading, while her literary skills included writing verse and stories. After attending the Methodist college, Belfast, between 1898 and 1902, she entered the Municipal Technical Institute of Belfast at the age of fifteen, spending eight years drawing from the antique and from life, while participating in Greek drama and suffragist meetings at Queen's University, Belfast, and winning a number of prizes for her assured graphic work, book illustrations, poster designs, and draughtsmanship. As early as 1906 her designs were declared 'too modern' (W. M. Geddes, MS diary, 18 May 1906; priv. coll.), a criticism sometimes levelled against her subsequent stained glass. 
In 1910 Geddes's watercolour 'Cinderella Dressing the Ugly Sister' (Hugh Lane Gallery, Dublin) was exhibited at the Arts and Crafts Society of Ireland and attracted the attention of Sarah Purser (1848-1943), the Irish painter and founder of An Tur Gloine, the Dublin stained-glass co-operative. Purser, recognizing a strong, expressive line, rich colour, and original imagery, bought it and invited Geddes to join her workshop. 
Back in Belfast, Geddes made an initial conventional stained-glass panel ('Sir Walter Raleigh') before embarking in 1911 on a travelling scholarship to London and subsequently life classes with Sir William Orpen at the Metropolitan School of Art, Dublin. Her first, entirely original, work in stained glass, 'Episodes from the Life of St. Colman Macduagh' (Hugh Lane Gallery, Dublin), a triptych of three small panels, revealed her lifelong vocation. By the end of 1912 she had become a member of An Tur Gloine, receiving tuition from its manager, Alfred Child, trained in the London studio of the English arts and crafts stained-glass master Christopher Whall, and designed and made her first, remarkably mature, full-scale church window, 'The Angel of Resurrection' (Inishmacsaint, co. Fermanagh). 
Geddes's small frame and spirited expression belied the solemn, monumental drama with which she imbued the fluidly modelled, introspective, and increasingly commanding figures that filled the thirty or so windows, swathed in colours of unimaginable depth and intensity, that she made throughout her life. Her love of archaic, Romanesque, and Assyrian sculpture informed the treatment of her always figurative designs, while her innate feeling for the lead calmes as an integral part of the orchestration of glass, light, colour, and painting revealed her understanding of medieval glass even more than her arts and crafts training. 
In 1925 Geddes moved to London, to a studio in the Glass House in Fulham, which remained her working base for the rest of her life. Her best-known windows are the duke of Connaught's war memorial to his Canadian officers in the governor general's church of St Bartholomew, Ottawa ('The Welcoming of a Slain Warrior by Soldier-Saints, Champions and Angels', 1919), 'The Crucifixion with the Virgin Mary and St. John, Moses, Joseph of Arimathea, and the Deposition' (1922; St Luke's, Wallsend upon Tyne), and the Royal Air Force memorial rose window to King Albert of the Belgians in the rebuilt cathedral of St Martin, Ypres ('Te Deum', 1938). In 1955 she collapsed in the street, and died at University College Hospital, St Pancras, London, on 10 August. She was unmarried. She was buried at Carnmoney, co. Antrim. 


@@@@@


doc= 59681


Gifford, Grace Evelyn Mary Vandeleur (1888-1955), artist and Irish nationalist, was born at 8 Temple Villas, Palmerston Road, Rathmines, Dublin, on 4 March 1888, one of the twelve children of Frederick Gifford (died 1917), a solicitor, and his wife, Isabella Julia Burton (died 1932). Like her sisters, Grace was raised in her mother's protestant faith, while her brothers followed their father's Catholicism. She was educated at Alexandra School and College, Dublin, and at the Metropolitan School of Art, Dublin, where her talent as a caricaturist was fostered by William Orpen. In 1907 she studied at the Slade School of Art, London, returning to Dublin in 1908 to begin a precarious artistic career. 
In Dublin, Grace Gifford lived with her staunchly unionist parents, yet this did not prevent her from engaging in social, cultural, and political activities which invited their disapproval. Together with her sisters Muriel and Sidney ['see 'Czira, Sidney], she attended meetings of the Gaelic League, the Irish Women's Franchise League, and Inghinidhe na hEireann (Daughters of Ireland). Her political sympathies were evident in the affectionate caricatures she contributed to nationalist journals. In 1912 Muriel Gifford married Thomas MacDonagh, one of the future leaders of the Easter rising, and it was through her brother-in-law that Grace met her future husband in late 1914. Joseph Mary Plunkett (1887-1916) was a poet and editor of the 'Irish Review', and his devout Catholicism was attractive to Gifford, who was questioning her own protestant faith. Their courtship flourished as Grace prepared to convert, although it was disrupted by Plunkett's tuberculosis and his trip to Germany in 1915 to seek military aid for a planned insurgency. In December 1915 Plunkett and Gifford announced their engagement, and on 7 April 1916, Gifford was received into the Catholic church. Their marriage was planned for the following Easter Sunday, 23 April 1916. 
Gifford spent the next weeks unaware of the military plans her fiance was making, but she helped him to decode a leaked document which apparently revealed imminent British plans to disarm the Irish Volunteers. This discovery helped to precipitate the rising, which broke out on Easter Monday. Plunkett, convalescent from throat surgery, helped to occupy the General Post Office, while Gifford waited anxiously with her sister Muriel MacDonagh for the insurrection's inevitable surrender. Plunkett was taken to Kilmainham gaol, where he was court martialled and sentenced to death. At 11.30 p.m. on 3 May 1916 Plunkett and Gifford were married in Kilmainham prison chapel. Gifford was allowed ten minutes to speak to her husband before his execution at 3.30 the following morning. She later said 'We who had never had enough time to say what we wanted to each other found that in the last ten minutes we couldn't talk at all' (Fox, 89). The marriage was widely reported, igniting worldwide public sympathy for the rising. 
Gifford moved to the Plunkett family home, where she suffered a miscarriage. In August 1917 Muriel MacDonagh drowned, further traumatizing Gifford. She attempted to support herself by illustrating advertisements, but in 1917 a legacy of $500 allowed her to focus on political work. She drew a portrait of her husband for a collection of his poetry, and during the Anglo-Irish war of independence promoted Sinn Fein policies through her caricatures, collected as 'To Hold as 'Twere by Mrs Joseph Plunkett' (1919). The collection was warmly reviewed, with the 'Irish Times' praising its strength and daring. 
Gifford withdrew her support for Sinn Fein in 1921, when its leader Arthur Griffith signed the treaty granting Ireland dominion status within the British empire. To Gifford and other opponents the treaty was a betrayal of the rising martyrs, and in the ensuing civil war Gifford became a prominent republican spokeswoman. On 6 February 1923 she was interned in Kilmainham gaol, spending three months there as a political prisoner, writing a short biography of Plunkett, painting her cell with a celebrated madonna and child, and participating in a ceremony marking the seventh anniversary of the rising. She was released in May 1923, after pro-treaty forces won the civil war, yet she found it hard to resume her life in Dublin. With no home of her own and very little money, her status as a republican icon meant she could expect no help from the new Irish Free State. During the 1920s she led a nomadic life, moving from one small apartment to another, and struggling to support herself with commercial work. 
By the end of the 1920s Gifford's reputation as a caricaturist was firmly established through her work for popular periodicals. In 1929, her collection 'Twelve Nights at the Abbey Theatre' came out, introduced by Lady Augusta Gregory and running to a second edition in 1930. In 1932 her old republican ally Eamon De Valera came to power and granted Gifford a civil-list pension. Two years later, Gifford addressed a longstanding personal resentment by initiating a lawsuit against her late husband's parents for a share of his estate, winning $700 and her legal costs in an out-of-court settlement. 
Gifford spent the late 1930s and 1940s continuing her commercial and theatrical work and forging close relationships with nephews and nieces. Her later years were troubled by heart disease, and on 13 December 1955 she died suddenly at her home, 52 South Richmond Street, Dublin. She was buried at Glasnevin cemetery with full military honours. Obituaries paid tribute to her artistic work, religious faith, and staunch republicanism, but dwelt particularly on the tragic circumstances of her marriage in 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 59682


Armstrong, Lucie (1851-1907), musician and writer on etiquette, was the daughter of Major Charles Henry Cobbe and granddaughter of General George Cobbe ('b'. 1782), who was descended on the paternal side from Charles Cobbe (1687-1765), archbishop of Dublin (1742-3). She was the second cousin of Frances Power Cobbe (1822-1904). As a young woman she was a gifted pianist; she studied at the Royal Conservatory of Music and composed the hymn 'Oh, for the wings of a dove', which was performed at Westminster Abbey and placed on the regular list of hymns approved for performance. An injury to her hands, from over-practising, turned her talents to writing. On 21 November 1885 she married John Childe Heaton Armstrong but was widowed, childless, within the year. 
Circumstances dictated that Lucie Armstrong earn her living, so she turned to journalism. For many years she wrote the etiquette column for the 'Lady's Pictorial' and the 'Turnovers' column for 'The Globe', and did interviews for 'The Sketch' and the 'Pall Mall Budget'. Using the pseudonym Zingara (Italian for Gypsy), she wrote a 'Lady's Letter', which appeared weekly in a number of provincial journals, and did a series of letters on etiquette for 'Hearth and Home'. She also published in 'Womanhood' and was the etiquette columnist for the 'Woman's Signal' from 1895 to 1899. 
Mrs Armstrong's first book was a group of stories for children, 'Doll Stories' (n.d.), followed by a series of etiquette books: 'Good Form' (1889); 'The Etiquette of Party-Giving' (1893); 'Letters to a Bride' (1896); 'Etiquette in Entertaining' (1903), followed by a second, posthumous edition (1908); and 'Etiquette-Up-To-Date', published posthumously (1908). She was known to be gay in spirits, yet earnest in thought; it was said that 'Politeness in her is not insincerity, graciousness is not weakness, etiquette is not formality' ('Woman's Signal'). She died on 2 May 1907 at Camberwell House Asylum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 59684


Campbell, Beatrice Moss, Lady Glenavy (1883-1970), artist, was born in the suburbs of Dublin, the second of the seven children of (John) William Elvery, merchant, and Mary Teresa Moss (died 1925), sculptor and music teacher. Her mother was the youngest of seven surviving children, out of fourteen, of Dr William Moss of Kilternan, co. Dublin, and Teresa, 'nee' Richardson, of Kilgobbin, in the same county. Beatrice was the niece of Phoebe Traquair (1852-1936), a versatile artist of the Edinburgh arts and crafts movement. Clever, enquiring, strong-willed, and dramatically attractive, with a mane of red hair that inspired her fellow artists, she inherited the artistic talents of her mother's family from an early age. Music, literature, and nature study also featured prominently in a happy, companionable, and imaginative childhood. Early examples of her precocious talent for modelling can be seen in romantically illustrative pokerwork panels (1902-3), small clay figures, and plaster-relief panels of mothers with children or babies and other allegorical subjects. Those few cast in bronze included a lectern angel (1904), with carved wooden embellishments by her mother, in their local church, Tullow, Carrickmines, and sporting trophies cast by the Dublin silversmiths West & Co. Her talents were soon recognized at the Dublin Metropolitan School of Art (at which she later tutored), where she studied from the age of thirteen, between 1896 and 1905, and won the first studentship for modelling, under the distinguished sculptor John Hughes, as well as scholarships and prizes that took her to the National Art Training School, South Kensington (Edouard Lanteri's classes), and to the Academie Colarossi, Paris. Her sculpture, which won the annual Taylor competition at the Royal Dublin Society between 1900 and 1908, was singled out at the 1904 Arts and Crafts Society of Ireland exhibition in Dublin. With that society she also exhibited graphic illustrations printed by Elizabeth Yeats's Cuala Press, and stained-glass panels made at Sarah Purser's co-operative workshop, An Tur Gloine (The Tower of Glass), in Dublin. Between 1904 and 1911, as a member of this studio, she designed and made twenty-six remarkably fine, original windows in a fundamentally English arts and crafts idiom for churches all over Ireland, primarily to support her modest income from painting, drawing, illustrating, and teaching. 
Despite her instinctive skill in working imaginatively in this medium and her central role in Dublin's lively artistic, musical, and literary circles during the peak of the cultural renaissance, by 1910 Beatrice Elvery wanted to pursue her success as a painter with, for example, the Young Irish Artists. She left for London to study with Henry Tonks at the Slade School of Fine Art, and two years later, in August 1912, married Gordon Campbell (1885-1963), a barrister actively involved in politics, theatre, and literature, and the son of the Irish lord chancellor. In London their many literary and artistic friends included Mark Gertler, D. H. Lawrence, Katherine Mansfield, and George Bernard Shaw. Beatrice returned to Ireland as often as possible throughout the First World War and continued to draw book illustrations for Irish publications. In 1918, despite her husband's brilliant career at the London bar, they returned to Dublin with two small children at a politically explosive, seminal period in Irish politics. Because of his official position in the free state government they lived under siege in the Dublin outskirts during the civil war, during which most of Beatrice's work was destroyed. Exhilarated by having to start again from scratch, although also out of financial necessity, she began painting furniture, and portraits in a pointillist idiom, as well as continuing to design Cuala Press hand-coloured prints and cards and exhibiting with the Society of Dublin Painters and the Royal Hibernian Academy. She had first shown at the academy in 1902 and continued to do so more or less annually until 1969, being elected a Royal Hibernian academician in 1934. Once her youngest child, born in 1924, was old enough not to need her constant attention she resumed painting in oil and tempera on canvas, bringing her love of the theatre to her fanciful stage-set fantasies of departing sailors and their lasses languishing beneath trees at the water's edge, and Staffordshire china ornaments offset by beribboned flowers and memorabilia in sylvan settings. 
Her husband became second Baron Glenavy in 1931. He predeceased her in 1963 and Lady Glenavy died on 21 May 1970 at her home in co. Dublin -- Rockall, Ballygihen Avenue, Sandycove -- and was buried in Dublin's Mount Jerome cemetery. Paintings by Beatrice, Lady Glenavy, are in the Hugh Lane Gallery, Dublin; the Ulster Museum, Belfast; and public galleries in Drogheda, Cork, and Limerick. 


@@@@@


doc= 59702


Hunter, Robert (d. after 1803), portrait painter, was described as from Ulster and taught by Justin Pope Stevens (Pasquin, 13). The establishment portrait painter in Dublin for the second half of the eighteenth century, he was much admired by his contemporaries and slightly later critics, including William Carey, who saw him as 'a walking chronicle of everything relative to the Irish artists and arts' (Carey, 226), and W. B. Sarsfield Taylor, who said he took 'excellent likenesses' and that his practice was extensive (Taylor, 284). He was sufficiently well known to be commissioned to paint a whole-length of Sir Charles Burton, lord mayor of Dublin, in 1753 (now known from a mezzotint by James McArdell). The group of six portraits of the King family (priv. coll.), long attributed to Hunter, were painted about 1748 and are lively and strong in colour. His three-quarter-length (his favourite size) of the illustrious philanthropist and writer Samuel Madden (Trinity College, Dublin) is a portrait worthy of the sitter and was engraved with some alterations by Richard Purcell in 1756. Hunter was much influenced by English painters such as Thomas Hudson, Reynolds, and Arthur Devis, whose work he knew through engravings and frequently used as a source for his own compositions. It is uncertain whether he ever visited England. He exhibited between 1765 and 1777 at the Society of Artists in Ireland many portraits, a few subject pictures (all now lost), and many small whole-lengths, often of sitters in fancy dress such as Thomas Conolly of Castletown (1771) in Van Dyck costume. In some cases the small whole-lengths may have been made as copies for the sitter's family, as there are several which are duplicates of larger portraits, for example that of Henry de Burgh, first marquess of Clanricarde (1783); the larger version is at Harewood House, Yorkshire, and the smaller was sold at Sothebys (9 March 1988), when it was incorrectly identified as the marquess of Buckingham ('c'.1783) whose whole-length portrait by Hunter (the deanery, St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin) also has a small version (National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin). 
From his early, somewhat baroque, manner Hunter moved to a simpler style in which his sitters are often set in a well-observed and painted landscape, as, for example, in the whole-length, probably of Peter La Touche, where the figure is resting while out shooting with his dog (1775, National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin). His masterpiece is his three-quarter-length portrait of Lord Newbottle, later fifth marquess of Lothian, painted in uniform (1762, priv. coll.). His half-lengths include several versions of Lord Harcourt, lord lieutenant from 1772 to 1777, engraved by Edward Fisher in 1775 (versions Ulster Museum, Belfast; National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin; and elsewhere), and Henry Haughton, Hunter's last known dated work (1790, ex Christies, 1 March 1985, lot 113). A few double portraits can be attributed to him. Although it is not known how much he charged for a portrait, he was paid $7 7's'. 10died in 1788 for repairing a portrait of Charles II for Dublin corporation. 
Although Ireland was visited by the portraitists Robert Home (1779-89) and Gilbert Stuart (1789-93) who had great success with commissions, it was probably age and not competition (as has been suggested) which reduced Hunter's output in the late 1780s. No work by him is known after 1790. According to Strickland, Hunter held an exhibition of his work in 1792, though no evidence for this has been traced. If such an exhibition did take place it would have been the first one-man show to have been held in Dublin. Hunter exhibited pictures for the last time at the Society of Artists in 1800, and continued to leave his name in the Dublin directory until 1803, soon after which date he must have died. He had lived in Dublin all his working life. 
Hunter married about 1750 and his only child, Mary Anne Hunter [Mary Anne Trotter (b. 1752, d. before 1792)], painter, exhibited at the Society of Artists in Ireland between 1765, when she was thirteen, and 1777. She married the portrait painter John Trotter (died 1792) in 1774, after which time she exhibited under the name Mary Anne Trotter. She predeceased her husband, whose second wife, Elizabeth, survived him. Mary Anne was probably the mother of Eliza H. Trotter (fl. 1800-1815), portrait painter, who was the daughter of John Trotter. Eliza Trotter exhibited in Dublin between 1800 and 1809, trained at the Royal Academy Schools in London from 1809 to 1812, and exhibited between 1811 and 1815 at the Royal Academy and British Institution from addresses in Westminster and Hammersmith. Her portrait of Lady Caroline Lamb (exh. 1811) is in the National Portrait Gallery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 59704


Jellett, Mary Harriett (1897-1944), painter and writer on art, was born on 20 April 1897 at 36 Fitzwilliam Square, Dublin, and baptized at St Anne's Church, Dawson Street, the eldest of the four daughters of William Morgan Jellett (1857-1936) and Janet McKensie Stokes ('b'. 1874). Her father was a successful barrister from a Huguenot family that had settled in Ireland in the seventeenth century. Her paternal grandfather, John Hewitt Jellett (1817-1888), was provost of Trinity College, Dublin. Her mother's family migrated from Wiltshire in the seventeenth century and had made a distinguished contribution to public life in Ireland in engineering and medicine; her maternal grandfather, William Stokes (1804-1878), was a renowned chest physician. Mainie Jellett (as she was known) was educated, as were all the daughters, at home by tutors or governesses, and it was not until she entered art school that she experienced outside education. Musically gifted, she played the piano well from an early age, performing with her mother and other members of the family at musical soirees. She studied at the Leinster School of Music under Mabel Lander, and regularly won prizes at 'feis ceoil' competitions. She also studied painting as a child. Though this eclectic system of education inspired her, and provided a secure and comfortable childhood, she was surrounded by the tensions of Ireland's political circumstances as well as the cultural ferment occasioned by a literary and artistic revival led by William Butler Yeats and Lady Augusta Gregory. This political activity was represented in practical ways in the family by Mainie's father. He was energetically active in the southern unionist tradition and was directly involved in the party's organization and affairs; he served as an MP at Westminster, holding the Dublin University seat. 
At the age of twelve Mainie began to study art under May Manning, a serious project which lasted five years and led directly to her enrolment in the Metropolitan School of Art, where briefly she was a pupil of Sir William Orpen. A career in music was considered, but preferring a creative rather than an interpretative involvement in art, she chose to go on with artistic studies. In 1917 she moved to the Westminster School of Art in London, where she studied under Walter Sickert and Walter Bayes. Under Sickert's direction, she later wrote, 'drawing and composition came alive to me and I began to understand the work of the Old Masters' (MacCarvill, 47). 
Mainie Jellett produced an outstanding body of student drawings, watercolours, and paintings. In 1919 she won the Taylor prize in the annual Royal Dublin Society competition with a painting entitled 'Peace' (priv. coll.), celebrating the end of the First World War. She held an exhibition in company with Lillian Davidson in Dublin in 1920 that was favourably noticed in the 'Irish Times': 'There is a joyful note in Miss Jellett's pictures that appeal to the eye. The artist revels in the seashore and conveys her impression in lucid style' (Arnold, 43). There is some evidence that both artists came increasingly under the influence of Jack Yeats. 
Although she felt drawn to a professional career as an artist, which inevitably would have meant teaching as well as painting and exhibiting work, Jellett was not entirely satisfied with what she had achieved. She decided to study with the cubist painter Andre Lhote in Paris, and spent part of 1920 and 1921 in his atelier. From there, in December 1921, she moved to study with Albert Gleizes and spent a fruitful year embracing the principles of abstract cubism, which the French cubist painter was then working out. She was accompanied by her friend Evie Hone (1894-1955) during these studies. Hone was a lifelong companion of Jellett's; a sufferer from infantile paralysis, and permanently disabled, she became both friend and working companion in the spread of Irish modernism. 
In 1923 Jellett, having completed almost ten years studying art, returned to a very changed Dublin, capital of an independent Ireland. She was full of the intellectual and creative turmoil of new ideas and new directions. Together with Hone, she made an immediate and profound impact on the city (likened to the Athens of Pericles) and its cultural life by exhibiting a joint show entirely of abstract works. With Jellett's 'Decoration' (NG Ire.) -- the crucial work of the exhibition -- modernism in Ireland began. Ten years before the arrival of abstraction in England, Dublin saw the full-blooded fruits of French studies in the works of these two young painters. The city took it badly. A serious controversy developed, splitting critics and collectors into two opposed groups. 
Through the 1920s and into the 1930s Mainie Jellett, working a good deal in the company of Evie Hone, continued painting works of abstraction in a city unreconciled to this kind of art. Jellett in particular applied her fine analytical mind to the philosophy behind abstraction, and her abilities reflected and shaped the serious and often confrontational situations which her work invoked. She was a powerful campaigner for the art in which she believed, while at the same time respecting all painters and supporting their right to public interest and support. The pattern of work and study pursued during these years by Jellett and Hone, who usually travelled together, was to return to France and spend time each summer with Albert Gleizes. They were consciously part of a small international movement with concerns embracing philosophical and religious beliefs and ideas as well as the principles of abstraction, then very new. As Jellett explained, in a lecture on 3 February 1926, they endeavoured: 'to penetrate beneath the exterior forms of nature, and to discover her natural laws and to construct accordingly. A picture should be a miniature universe, with all its forms interdependent, as the organization of the universe itself... A picture should be as complete as the human body so that the removal of any of its members would upset the equilibrium of the whole... You will not find blue sea and white clouds and waves, which make you feel you want to bathe and remind you of hot summer days; but instead, if you can look at these pictures with an open mind and without prejudice, they will give you a sensation of their own, resulting from the abstract qualities of the good or bad harmony of form and colour, balance and movement. They will affect you through your eyes and thence to your brain, the same way music affects you through your ear and thence to your brain. (Arnold, 94)' The possibility of a career as a painter in Paris was always there, but Mainie Jellett felt a moral obligation to her own country, newly forging ideas and artistic activity under the governments of first W. T. Cosgrave and then Eamon de Valera. The family had at first felt isolated. Southern unionists were deserted by the unionists of the separated six counties in the north-east of Ireland and rapidly became a political anachronism. This affected Mainie's father most of all; the rest of the family soon acclimatized to the predominantly Roman Catholic state. Mainie Jellett took on adult pupils, taught children, lectured widely, and contributed to broadcast debates on the subject of modern art. She led a movement of Irish modernism that was vigorous and combative. Her art, which had gone through markedly varied stages of development -- from the fluid representational work of the Sickert period, through the angular representational cubism of Lhote, to abstraction -- now developed further. The strict rules of the 1920s gave way to flowing and brilliant colours, and to a combination of softness and strength which characterized her mature output -- as in, for example, 'Abstract Composition' ('c'.1931; Crawford Municipal Gallery of Modern Art, Cork) and 'Abstract Composition' ('c'.1931; priv. coll. reproduced in Arnold, 127, pl. 187). In 1931 she was a founder figure of the international movement Abstraction-Creation, an exhibiting society based in Paris, and she became the associate of other friends of Albert Gleizes, including Robert and Sonia Delaunay. By the early 1930s two of her sisters had married and moved away from home, where family ties were exceptionally close and supportive. Then in 1936 her father died. The two had enjoyed a close and loving relationship: at Christmas 1932 he had written to her in Paris, 'No present that I could give you would convey what I feel. The unspoken word is sometimes more elegant than volumes of talk. You are the very best' (Arnold, 77). Throughout this period she exhibited regularly every two years. 
Jellett believed in 'the necessity of a highly developed sense of craftsmanship; every artist should be capable of executing adequately whatever job he is entrusted with' (MacCarvill, 98). She designed cubist rugs which were woven by family members and also by the Dun Emer Guild, established by the Yeats sisters, Elizabeth (Lollie) and Susan (Lily). As the arts and crafts movement in Ireland took inspiration from Celtic art, Jellett responded to the similar capacity of Chinese art to transcend various media. She wrote to Gleizes in 1936: 'I was staying with a friend on the rocks [of Achill Island in the west of Ireland] near the sea, the peace and aloofness from the confusion and scrambling of the world of the moment was wonderful -- one had the same feeling in the Chinese exhibition [at the Royal Academy, London, 1935]... there was a natural rhythm running through the works as a whole, which caught you up and led you quickly on. (Arnold, 152)' This invigorating experience led Jellett to reintroduce into her work landscape and figure studies that derive much of their economy and fluidity from the Chinese tradition in painting. Gratified that the Second World War, far from exercising a dispiriting effect on art, led to a burgeoning round of artistic events and exhibitions, Jellett supported a new venture, the White Stag Group of modernist painters and sculptors, who had a great impact in the city. She also worked towards the setting up of an alternative annual show of paintings in rivalry with the rather staid classicism of the Royal Hibernian Academy. Known as the Irish Exhibition of Living Art, the first exhibition was held in 1943 and was a huge success. Unfortunately, Mainie became ill at the end of that year, and was misdiagnosed as suffering from tuberculosis, then widespread. Though it would not have made a great deal of difference, treatment being so difficult, she was, in fact, suffering from cancer. She died at 96 Lower Lesson Street, Dublin, on 16 February 1944 at the age of forty-six, and was buried at St Fintan's, Howth, co. Dublin. Apart from the short periods when she studied art in London and Paris, she spent the whole of her life living in the same house. The writer Elizabeth Bowen recalled that Jellett's 'dynamicism ['sic']... was at first found unfriendly, destructive, even repellent. She had gone so far as to go, it seemed, out of view. A mystique without the familiar softness, expressing itself in the ice of abstract terms, and the apparent subjugation of the soul to the intellect, took some accepting. (Arnold, 203)' Her painting 'I have Trodden the Wine Press Alone' (1943; NG Ire.), whose title is a quotation from 'Isaiah', is a fitting emblem of Jellett's life. 


@@@@@


doc= 59705


Whitehead, David (1790-1865), cotton manufacturer, was born on 11 December 1790 at Meadowhead in the Forest of Rossendale, Lancashire, the fourth of the eight children of John Whitehead ('c'.1732-1802), a yeoman, and his second wife, Ann (1760-1849), the daughter of Lionel Blakey of Marsden and his second wife, Mary. Whitehead's father, a widower, had six surviving children from his first marriage; seven survived from his second. Both parents converted to Methodism after hearing John Wesley preach in Burnley. On the death of her husband, Ann and her seven children moved to a cottage at Brockclough, where she took up hand-loom weaving. 
Whitehead's childhood interest in constructing such devices as miniature water-wheels led him to consider becoming a joiner or a mechanic. His formative years, however, encompassed many different jobs, for, as he admitted, he quickly became bored with a task once he had mastered it. Yet as most jobs were textile oriented, he gained valuable insights into diverse aspects of that industry. During this time he also devoted much attention to improving his education. He was largely self-taught, and his keenness to study often caused his work to suffer; however, he considered education a springboard for later advancement. 
Whitehead exercised shrewd calculation in his approach to life, even volunteering for the part-time local militia ('c'.1808) rather than risking the ballot for full-time service in the regular militia, which could take him anywhere in Britain. His decision minimized time away from home and work, and helped to augment his income. He usually balanced the cost and benefit of any action that he contemplated. With this foresight, coupled with strength of will, firmness of decision, and a certain charm, he courted, and often won, people's generosity. 
Although the beginnings of his textile manufacturing business were marked by several false starts, Whitehead learned the value of informal social contacts with potential investors. About 1811 he entered into partnership with his brothers Thomas and Peter to commence cotton manufacturing, while at the same time working as a warper for another employer. There he invented a more efficient method of warping, boosting his production to the envy of fellow workers. In 1817 the brothers invested in an established spinning mill on Balladen Brook, near Rawtenstall, in partnership with William Clegg, whom they later bought out. 
About this time Whitehead converted to Wesleyan Methodism. Following a formal though not unromantic courtship, on 7 July 1818 he married Elizabeth, the daughter of Jonathan Wood, a farmer of Dovesyke, West Bradford. Wood, not convinced of the long-term viability of Lancashire's industrial acceleration, insisted that, before marrying Elizabeth, Whitehead should buy a farm as a financial safeguard, which he did. The marriage produced eleven children, nine of whom survived to maturity. 
Whitehead's cotton enterprise continued to expand, and in 1822 he purchased land in Rawtenstall to construct Higher Mill. However, the 1826 hand-loom weavers' protest against power-looms saw the Whiteheads' equipment smashed, along with those of other local manufacturers. East Lancashire came under military control, and many mills were supplied with arms and ammunition. Soldiers disguised as civilian workers were posted in Whitehead's mill after the military learned from spies of a plan to burn it down and assassinate him. Although the plot was abandoned, Whitehead stayed silent on possible reasons for his proposed demise. This is curious, as his brothers were not likewise threatened. Grievances generated in the community, along with envy at his success, may have played a part. Perhaps too a certain annoying smug self-righteousness may be attributed to him, though, while strong in his faith, he was no zealot. A letter reveals the ease with which he dovetailed religion and business: 'Trade and commerce I still pursue with delight... I am quite convinced I am in the way providence designed for me' (Whitehead, Memoir, 139-40). 
Whitehead's largest project, the construction of two new cotton mills at Holly Mount, Rawtenstall, began in 1833. He and his brother Peter surveyed the site and designed the buildings. 800 power-looms were envisaged. Houses for the workforce, and a school to educate them and their children, were also constructed. In 1836 Whitehead founded a savings bank for employees and encouraged the Temperance Society (he himself became teetotal). Ever the paternalist, he was 'anxious to give the best possible education to the working class, and particularly to our own workpeople' (Whitehead, Memoir, 150). While young scholars paid for their education, the revenue was placed in a provident trust, deposited in Whitehead's bank, and returned with interest once the child reached the age of twenty-one. William Cooke Taylor commented on such benevolence in 1842. However, while Whitehead highlighted benefits provided for his workforce, he played down advantages to himself. For instance, he saw technological advance as an opportunity for workers to earn more, while simultaneously reducing piece-rates. 
A staunch believer in free trade, Whitehead was a vociferous member of the Manchester Anti-Corn Law Association (later the Anti-Corn Law League) with his friend Richard Cobden. While campaigning for the repeal of the laws he even inflicted lectures upon fellow rail travellers. Keen to help the working class 'understand their political rights' (Whitehead, Memoir, 183), he advocated saving to become 40 's'. freeholders, thereby qualifying to send representatives to parliament. In 1846 he bluffed his way into the House of Lords to witness the repeal of the corn laws. He established the Rawtenstall branch of the Peace Society (1848), and as a delegate attended the Brussels and Paris peace congresses. In 1851 he was appointed a county magistrate. A commentator of his times, Whitehead was often closely involved in the activities he observed. At once a paternalist yet a radical, he was a humanitarian and advocate of working-class political involvement. By 1855 the Whitehead brothers' business had become unwieldy and was divided between them. At the time of his death, on 28 January 1865, at his home, Holly Mount, Rawtenstall, Whitehead and his sons had built a thriving manufacturing concern in their own right. Whitehead, who was survived by his wife, was buried at Longholme Wesleyan Chapel, Rawtenstall. 


@@@@@


doc= 59707


Haig, Edward (1858-1939), rugby player, was born at Pleasants in the Scottish borders town of Jedburgh on 7 December 1858, the fifth son of Edward Haig ('b'. 1812/13), labourer, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Waugh ('b'. 1814/15). He attended Jedburgh grammar school (1870-75) before going to find work in the neighbouring town of Melrose, where he was taken on by the local butcher Davie Sanderson. Sanderson was a keen rugby player and through him Haig took up the game, making his debut for the Melrose club in 1880. He went on to become a regular member of the Melrose first fifteen and made several representative appearances for the South of Scotland. In addition, he was a member of the local cricket, curling, and golf clubs. When his playing career ended he became an active committee man. 
Ned Haig is remembered as the originator of seven-a-side rugby. His suggestion of a football tournament was made in 1883, when Melrose Football Club were trying to find a way to raise money to help club finances. He later recalled that 'as it was hopeless to think of having several games in one afternoon with fifteen players on each side, the teams were reduced to seven men' (Allan, 20). The first final, held on 28 April 1883, was contested between Melrose and Galashiels, with Haig in the Melrose starting line-up. This ended in a highly controversial manner when the game ended with neither team having scored. It was agreed by the captains that a further fifteen minutes would be played to decide the tie. Melrose were first to score, with a try by Haig's employer, Sanderson, and left the field claiming the silver cup presented by 'the ladies of Melrose'. The tournament was an immediate commercial success and has been held ever since, with interruptions during the world wars, though the nature of the competition and the prizes awarded were regarded with some suspicion in the early years by rugby's governing body in Scotland, the Scottish Football Union. Sevens rugby has spread round the world, with competitions held at Buenos Aires since 1921, Twickenham (the Middlesex sevens) since 1927, and Hong Kong since 1968. 
Haig, who was unmarried, spent his last years in Dingleton Hospital, Melrose, suffering from mental illness, and died there on 29 March 1939. The border rugby clubs erected a tombstone to commemorate the most famous Scot, with the exception of Robert the Bruce, to be buried in Melrose. At the Greenyards, home of Melrose Rugby Football Club, stands the impressive Ned Haig bar behind the grandstand, where supporters from all over the world gather annually on the second Saturday of April to watch the game of seven-a-side rugby. 


@@@@@


doc= 59708


Chisholm, Archibald Macra (1824-1897), army officer and shinty player, was born on 5 July 1824 at Taewig on the banks of the River Glass, in Strathglass, in the parish of Kilmorack, Inverness-shire, the eldest son of Dr Stewart Chisholm (died 1862), deputy inspector-general of army hospitals, and his wife, Mary Macra of Ardintoul, Kintail, sister of Sir John Macra, colonel of the Cameron Highlanders. His parents were Roman Catholics, and he was educated at the College St Sulpice, Montreal. In 1841 he was ensigned into 'Scotia's darling corps' -- the Royal Highlanders, the famous Black Watch -- and standing 6 feet 2 inches he was the tallest officer in the regiment, as well as the only Roman Catholic among the officers. His first posting was to Malta and he was made a lieutenant by the age of twenty-one. During army leave he travelled widely to Greece and Sicily and later saw service in Bermuda (1848) and Nova Scotia. Indeed, Chisholm claimed that he had played shinty there 'with our cousins and relations in Canada, during the winter, on skates, with a splendid field of ice, 300 miles long, 200 miles wide, and the ice at least 10 feet thick' ('Inverness Courier', 19 Feb 1880). 
The Black Watch regiment returned home from overseas in 1852. A year later, on 14 October 1853, in St Andrew's Catholic Cathedral, Glasgow, Captain Chisholm married Maria Frances ('b'. 1830), only daughter of William Dominic Lynch and his wife, Margaret Farquharson. On war being declared in 1854, he went with the Black Watch to the Crimea. He returned home on promotion in 1855, and retired from the service, then acted for a time as factor for the duchess of Leeds at Applecross. Captain Chisholm and his wife first rented Balblair House in Kirkhill parish, Inverness-shire, but after a few years they moved to Glassburn House (Allt na Glaislig), Cannich, Inverness-shire where they 'passed a quiet Highland life, interested themselves in all their dependents, and in the farmers and people generally throughout the Strath' (Stirton, 19). A white cross was painted on the hillside opposite Glassburn House, so that Captain Chisholm, a devout Catholic, could see it when he woke up. Accompanied by his wife he also led a party of volunteers to Rome in 1868 to protect the pope against the threatened attack of Garibaldi. 
Chisholm excelled in all sports, and loved all aspects of the Gaelic language -- its song and music, sports, and pastimes. He was an enthusiastic supporter of the game of shinty, and its development in the highlands owed much to his encouragement. In 1879 the famous Strathglass shinty club was formed, with Glassburn, as Chisholm became known, as chief. Chisholm published the first formed set of written rules, regulations, and diagrams for the sport in 1880, and issued a revised edition in 1888. He was elected the first chief of the ruling body of shinty, the Camanachd Association, which was constituted in October 1893; he held the position for four years. He also acted as club-bearer for the Highland Camanachd Club of London. Chisholm was of splendid appearance, a courteous gentleman of humour and great integrity, and he was considered to be the best amateur piper of his time. He was an active and influential member of the Gaelic Society of Inverness: he was involved in its earliest years and played at its annual assembly on several occasions. For thirty years he also judged piping at the Northern Meetings (established 1788). Chisholm died on 19 October 1897 at home at Glassburn House, having suffered a lengthy illness, and was buried four days later in the New Catholic cemetery near the Old Priory of Beauly, Inverness-shire. He was survived by his wife. Chisholm was the subject of a number of poems in Gaelic and English. 


@@@@@


doc= 59709


Cumberland, George (1754-1848), writer on art and watercolour painter, was born in London on 27 November 1754, the younger son of the four children of George Cumberland (died 1771) and his wife, Elizabeth Balchen. In 1769 he became a clerk in the Royal Exchange Assurance Company in London, a post he grudgingly endured until the beginning of 1785. He attended the Royal Academy Schools as an honorary student in 1772 and he was an honorary exhibitor at the Royal Academy in 1782 and 1783. In exhibition reviews for the 'Morning Chronicle' from 1780 to 1784 he became a passionate advocate of radical neo-classicism, the art of ancient Greece, and especially of the sculptor Thomas Banks (1735-1805). In 1784 he applied for associate membership of the Royal Academy and was unsuccessful -- perhaps because he had been highly critical of the institution. In the same year he received a modest inheritance of $300 per year and by March 1785 he was in Paris. In 1785 and 1786 Cumberland visited Italy, staying in Florence and Rome. He was in Switzerland with Charles Long in August 1786. In 1787 Cumberland eloped with Mrs Elizabeth Cooper, 'nee' Price (1758/9-1837), the wife of his London landlord, and until 1790 they lived in Italy, chiefly in Rome. Elizabeth was known as Mrs Cumberland until her death in Bristol on 2 February 1837 at the age of seventy-nine; it is possible that she and Cumberland never married. 
Between 1793 and 1798 while living at Bishopsgate, Egham, Cumberland published seven works, including earlier works of poetry, 'A Plan for the Improvement of the Arts in England' (1793), which included proposals for a national gallery of sculpture in Green Park; 'An Attempt to Describe Hafod... an Ancient Seat Belonging to Thomas Johnes Esq.' (1796), of which the map was engraved by the artist and poet William Blake; a fable of utopia, 'The Captive of the Castle of Senaar' (1798); and the neo-classical treatise 'Thoughts on Outline' (1796), eight of whose twenty-four plates were engraved by Blake. Cumberland had been a friend of Blake's since 1784. Blake's last engraved work was to be Cumberland's book-plate. Cumberland bought many of Blake's publications, pressed booksellers to take them, and found work for the artist. They shared an interest in experimental painting techniques, and Cumberland may well have influenced Blake's illuminated printing processes. 
In 1803 Cumberland moved to Weston-super-Mare, Somerset, before settling at 1 Culver Street, Bristol, in 1807, where he lived until his death. He was elected an honorary member of the Geological Society in 1810, formed a substantial collection of fossils, contributed to the society's journal, and in 1826 published 'Reliquiae conservatae... Descriptions... of some Remarkable Fossil Encrinites'. In Bristol he soon became close friends with the Revd John Eagles (1783-1855), Dr John King (1766-1846), and Francis Gold (1779-1832), all amateur artists with a wide range of sophisticated interests, knowledge, and contacts which were vital to the emergence of the Bristol school of artists and, in particular, to the success of Francis Danby. Patronage by purchase was largely beyond Cumberland's means, but he took much trouble helping Bristol artists with introductions to friends in London, particularly Sir Thomas Lawrence, president of the Royal Academy, the artist Thomas Stothard, and Sir Charles Long, later Lord Farnborough. 
Cumberland's own watercolours are almost all small landscape studies which, in their direct and determinedly unpicturesque observations of nature, come impressively close to John Linnell's small sketchbook studies of 'c'.1814. It is significant that it was to be Cumberland who, from Bristol, engineered the crucial introduction of John Linnell to William Blake in 1818, through his son George Cumberland junior. Much of the correspondence in the sixteen volumes of Cumberland's letters, now in the British Library, was with his elder brother -- Richard Dennison Cumberland (1752-1825), vicar of Driffield, Gloucestershire -- and with his own two sons, George and Sydney. The letters have already been a vital source of information for students of William Blake. They remain a rich source for the study of neo-classicism in the 1780s and 1790s and for the understanding of the evolution of the Bristol school of artists in the second and third decades of the nineteenth century. 
Cumberland died at his home, 1 Culver Street, Bristol, on 8 August 1848 and was buried at St Augustine-the-Less, Bristol, on 14 August. His tombstone is now in the churchyard of St George's Chapel, Brandon Hill, Bristol. Some of Cumberland's watercolours are in Bristol Museum and Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 59710


Andrews, Michael James (1928-1995), artist, was born on 30 October 1928 at 142 Glebe Road, Norwich, the second child of Thomas Victor Andrews, an insurance clerk, and his wife, Gertrude Emma, 'nee' Green. Reared a Methodist and readied by his parents for a job for life in the Norwich Union Insurance Society, he veered into art while a sixth-former at the City of Norwich School, when he attended Saturday morning classes at the Norwich School of Art. His two years' national service with the Royal Army Ordnance Corps included nineteen months spent in Egypt, mainly confined to the army base at Tell al-Kebir. Having secured a place at the Slade School of Fine Art he began there in 1949 immediately after his discharge, studying under William Coldstream. His contemporaries included Craigie Aitchison, Euan Uglow, and Victor Willing, and his tutors included Lucian Freud and Lawrence Gowing. Freud was impressed by his courteous dismissal of suggested improvements to his painting 'The Rocking Horse'. It was already apparent by 1952, when he completed his diploma picture, 'A Man who Suddenly Fell Over' (Tate collection), that, as Gowing wrote in 1980, 'a good painter's course was predestined' ('Michael Andrews', introduction). Gowing remembered wondering if 'this lanky, diffident young man could possibly explore the oddness of these perceptions of his'. 
Andrews's perceptions remained phenomenally idiosyncratic. The 'Man who Suddenly Fell Over' -- a stout grown-up in a dark suit (an insurance agent perhaps) making a spectacle of himself, his expression puzzled rather than pained in the split second before he hits the ground -- introduced a preoccupation with states of mind and reaction to circumstances. Themes to do with instinct (domestic instinct, herd instinct), themes of glamour, anxiety, alienation, and exhilaration, themes rich in implication -- all were developed into telling images. 
'An image gets weight as it goes along,' Andrews remarked; 'It snowballs' ('X: a Quarterly Review', 1/2, March 1960, 141). Ostensibly straightforward -- a family group or a student-party scene -- each painting was an enquiry into motives and an examination of repercussions; 'Once one is launched on a subject, everything you pick up seems to apply' (ibid.). Cumulatively his art demonstrated the unique capacity of painting to embody ideas, absorb manners, and illustrate attitudes. In this Francis Bacon was a vital stimulus, and a number of works, notably 'Digswell Man' (1959; priv. coll.) and 'All Night Long' (1964; National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne), are clearly Bacon-inspired. Yet Andrews, with his thorough Slade training, was more fastidious than impulsive. Unlike Bacon he deliberated exhaustively. He produced remarkably little, considering his application, and he rarely exhibited. His first one-man show was at Helen Lessore's Beaux Arts Gallery in 1958; his second was at the Anthony d'Offay Gallery in 1974. His first retrospective was organized by the Arts Council at the Hayward Gallery in 1980; his second was at Tate Britain in 2001, six years after his death. 
In 1954 Andrews and the sculptor Eduardo Paolozzi played the parts of deaf mute labourers in 'Together', a film directed by Lorenza Mazetti and shown at the 1956 Cannes Film Festival. In it he and Paolozzi are adrift in decrepit dockland locations, alienated by handicap and susceptible to pathos. Andrews's character accidentally drowns in the Thames. In real life Andrews was stimulated by Soho life, centred on the Colony Room, a drinking club run by Muriel Belcher and frequented by Francis Bacon, both of whom, together with Lucian Freud and John Deakin, the photographer, feature in Andrews's 'The Colony Room' (1962; Tate collection). 
Film and photography constantly informed Andrews's work, as did poetry and fiction, indeed anything that could feed his concern with 'the apparent reality and the apparently real' (private information) -- not, he insisted, 'exactness of representation' but heightened illusion. Party pictures such as 'The Deer Park' (1962; Tate collection) led on to 'Lights', a sequence from the 1970s sparked by Rimbaud's 'Illuminations', involving balloon flight and views from on high of possible ideal landing sites (a pier, a beach); to 'School', a series from the late 1970s in which swimming fish replaced floating balloons as vehicles of Andrews's imagination; and 'Holidays', paintings of deerstalking in the Scottish highlands, an activity to which he, the scrupulous lapsed Methodist, came hesitantly but eventually with exhilaration, in that it became another powerful and unanticipated field of imagery for him. 
Working on an expanding scale, using acrylic paint and a spray-gun for flawless effect, Andrews adopted Ayers Rock as a motif. He went to Australia to draw and photograph it in 1983 and worked on a series of big paintings, the first five of which were exhibited under the title 'Rock of Ages Cleft for me' at the d'Offay Gallery in 1986. Mistaken for travel posters by some critics, the Ayers Rock series was Andrews's most ambitious venture into identification with a particular place. He regarded the rock as a spiritual lodestone of immense proportions. Landscapes of Norfolk (where he and his wife, June Keeley, and daughter, Melanie, born in 1970, lived from 1981 to 1992), the deer forest of Glenartney, in Perthshire, and a painting of Edinburgh Castle from the Grassmarket, grim in substance and tone, marked his growing concern with the layerings of associations in landscapes historic, fictional, pictorial. Finally, having moved to London in 1992 he embarked on a series of paintings of the Thames, two of which ('The Thames at Low Tide' and 'Thames Painting: the Estuary', both priv. coll.) he completed. A third, 'Source of the Thames', remained unfinished when on 19 July 1995, a year after an initial operation for cancer, he died at his home, 107 Albert Bridge Road. His ashes were interred at Glenartney on 18 August. 
Though associated journalistically with the 'school of London', which notionally included Frank Auerbach, Francis Bacon, Lucian Freud, and Leon Kossoff, Michael Andrews was a painter of strong loyalties and allegiances who none the less went his own way. He was a brilliant synthesizer, absorbing influences, defining and securing with what he termed 'mysterious conventionality' ('X', 1/2, March 1960, 141) images of poetic acuity and depth. 'Mike is so economical', Frank Auerbach once remarked. 'He only paints masterpieces' (Feaver, 'Andrews: Lights', 35). 


@@@@@


doc= 59713


Baverstock, Donald Leighton (1924-1995), television producer and executive, was born on 18 January 1924 at the maternity home in Glossop Terrace, Cardiff, the only son in the family of three children of Thomas Baverstock (1896-1979), colliery clerk and later grocer, and his wife, Sarahann, 'nee' Thomas (1898-1979), teacher. He attended Canton high school, Cardiff, from 1935 to 1941, and in 1942 went to Christ Church, Oxford, as an undergraduate cadet. Commissioned in the RAF between 1943 and 1946, he flew numerous operations with Bomber Command as a navigator. He returned to Oxford in 1946, graduating with a second-class degree in modern history in 1948. Of medium height, stocky, with dark wavy hair, his intensity, directness, and preoccupation with current matters characterized him as 'ebullient, pugnacious and unpredictable' (Briggs, 387). He smoked heavily and, later, drank. 
In 1949, following spells teaching and with a shipping agent, Baverstock joined the BBC's general overseas service as a producer, making political and current affairs radio programmes. His ambition, though, lay in television, achieved in 1954 by appointment as a talks producer. His successes included an acclaimed eightieth birthday tribute to Sir Winston Churchill in the same year. The start of ITV in 1955 gave BBC television its first competition -- and additional permitted broadcasting hours. To exploit the extra time and aided by production assistant Alasdair Milne (a future BBC director-general), Baverstock produced an innovative topical interview programme, 'Highlight' (1955-7). On 17 August 1957 he married Gillian Mary Darrell Waters (1931-2007), then working as a publishing assistant. She was the daughter of Major Hugh Alexander Pollock, army officer and book editor, and his second wife, Enid Blyton, children's writer; she had adopted the surname Darrell Waters on her mother's second marriage. They had two sons and two daughters. 
In 1957 the government allowed the BBC and ITV flexibility in allocating their hours. This ended the 'toddlers' truce', the 6 p.m. to 7 p.m. period when screens were blank, supposedly so that mothers could put children to bed without the distraction of television. Baverstock and Milne filled the gap by developing 'Highlight' into a weeknightly magazine, 'Tonight' (1957-65). The programme established a new style. '[It] had a scepticism towards authority and received opinion that was very refreshing... It was helping to shape the mood and attitude of the country, while... the mood and attitude of the country were helping to shape 'Tonight'' (Bernard Levin, on '25 Years Ago -- Tonight'). Presented by the avuncular Cliff Michelmore, it made household names of its reporters (including Fyfe Robertson and Alan Whicker) and a trademark of its specially written topical songs. 'Tonight''s success depended also on the diversity of its stories. They ranged, for example, from a film about life on rubbish tips in Lima, to an interview with the teenage spokesman for the society for the prevention of cruelty to long-haired men. 'We were people questioning what was going on in the world... We didn't really have anything to say to the audience; we had questions to ask... Every so often we had a laugh' (Baverstock, on '25 Years Ago -- Tonight'). But he was tough. 'He would... dissect each item... with merciless criticism. His team respected his creative vision despite what was often intolerably rude behaviour' ('The Independent'). 
In April 1961 Baverstock became assistant controller of programmes. 'I... decided to remove all kinds of programmes which... were losing audiences... There were endless pictures of birds... and the audience was showing its ennui'. He recognized, too, the need, 'to force... BBC television to realise they had to schedule programmes after the [mid-evening] news as well as before' (Baverstock). He also led the search for original Saturday-night entertainment. The result -- 'That Was The Week That Was' (1962-3) -- set new standards for television satire. His masterly handling of the programme's coverage of President Kennedy's assassination in November 1963 captured the national mood. His managerial style, though, led to his BBC decline. 'His ill-considered over-promotion damaged both the television service and his own career' (Miall, 167). '[He] had little talent for man-management, but plenty for interference and within a few months all four departmental heads had left' (ibid., 39-40). In 1964 BBC2 opened with Baverstock and Michael Peacock, former editor of television news, respectively chiefs of programmes, BBC1 and BBC2. Their boss, Huw Wheldon, a future managing director, wanted them to switch jobs. Baverstock resisted and in 1965 he, Milne, and another 'Tonight' producer, Tony Jay, resigned becoming, briefly, independent producers. 
In 1967 the new ITV franchise holder Yorkshire Television appointed Baverstock its director of programmes, thus beginning another period of significant achievement. He founded the soap opera 'Emmerdale Farm' and secured considerable space for Yorkshire Television programmes on national television. A former Yorkshire Television managing director John Fairley said, 'He was the nearest thing to a genius I ever came across in television... He built from scratch the best documentary department in British TV at that time and it lasted to the... mid 90s' (private information). 
Baverstock's drinking led to his leaving Yorkshire in 1973 to head Granada Video Ltd (1974-5). He rejoined the BBC (1975-7) as a programme editor, but by then his creativity was ebbing. Retirement followed. In 1994 he and his wife, Gillian, were divorced. He died on 17 March 1995 at Airedale General Hospital, Steeton, Keighley, Yorkshire. He was buried on 24 March at Ilkley cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 59715


Begg, Sir Varyl Cargill (1908-1995), naval officer, was born in Kensington, London, on 1 October 1908, the son of Francis Cargill Begg, of Henley-on-Thames, and his wife, Muriel Clare, 'nee' Robinson. He was educated at St Andrews School, Eastbourne, and Malvern College, before joining the navy as a special entry cadet in September 1926. After service in 'Delhi', 'Durban', 'Marlborough', and 'Shropshire', he went to HMS 'Excellent', the gunnery school at Whale Island, and in 1934 qualified as a gunnery specialist. He was second gunnery officer of the battleship 'Nelson', flagship of the Home Fleet, before returning to Whale Island on the experimental staff in 1936. He was appointed flotilla gunnery officer in the destroyer 'Cossack' in 1937, and two years later was gunnery officer of the 6-inch-gun cruiser 'Glasgow', which participated in north Atlantic convoys, the Norwegian campaign, and the occupation of Iceland, before being badly damaged in a torpedo attack by Italian aircraft in Suda Bay, Crete. 
In 1940 Begg was appointed gunnery officer of the battleship 'Warspite' in the Mediterranean when it was flagship of the commander-in-chief, Admiral Sir Andrew Cunningham. Begg was in charge of 'Warspite''s main 15 inch armament off Cape Matapan on the night of 28 March 1941, when 'Warspite', 'Barham', and 'Valiant' caught the Italian heavy cruisers 'Fiume' and 'Zara' by surprise, with their guns still trained fore and aft, and sank them both in a brutally short action of less than two minutes. A third heavy cruiser, 'Pola', and two Italian destroyers were also sunk that night. Begg was awarded the DSC for his part in the action. He was promoted commander in December 1942 and then went to the gunnery division in the Admiralty, where he was involved in the development of gun design and tactics for the post-war period. On 7 August 1943 he married Rosemary Cowan, daughter of Francis Edward Patrick Porter Cowan, of Craigavad, co. Down. They had two sons, Timothy ('b'. 1944) and Peter ('b'. 1948). 
After tactical and staff courses Begg was promoted captain in 1947 and was staff officer (operations) to the rear-admiral (destroyers) in the Mediterranean. From 1948 to 1950 he was captain in charge of the gunnery school at Chatham. In the latter year he joined the destroyer 'Cossack' again, this time in command and as captain (D) of the 8th destroyer flotilla. The 'Cossack' served in the first two years of the Korean War, and with other Commonwealth ships carried out blockading patrols of the west coast of Korea as far north as the Yalu River; it was also in the bombarding force of cruisers and destroyers for the crucial Inchon landings in September 1950, which turned the tide of the war in the United Nations' favour, and went on to make many bombardments in support of UN forces ashore. Like all the destroyers, the 'Cossack' was worked hard, and it was not unusual for it to steam 8000 miles in a month. For his service in Korea, Begg was mentioned in dispatches in 1951 and appointed DSO the next year. From 1952 to 1955 he was captain of HMS 'Excellent'. He commanded the light fleet carrier 'Triumph' from 1954 to 1956, when it was a cadet training ship. Promoted rear-admiral in 1957, he was chief of staff to the commander-in-chief, Portsmouth, from 1957 to 1958, and then flag officer, second in command, Far East Fleet, from 1958 to 1960. He was appointed CB in 1959. 
Begg was promoted vice-admiral in 1960 and went to the Admiralty in 1961 as a lord commissioner of the Admiralty and vice-chief of naval staff. The first sea lord was Caspar John, the first naval aviator to hold the office. The two men liked and respected each other. It was a time of great financial and political turmoil for the navy, and John soon came to value Begg's experience and good sense, as well as the influential contacts he had through the gunnery world. Begg and John reluctantly decided that the navy could no longer afford three fleets. Together they implemented the difficult -- and, in some quarters, bitterly resented -- decision to disband the fleet in the Mediterranean, a historic station where the navy had won so many battle honours. In 1963 Begg went out to the Far East again as a full admiral, commander-in-chief of British forces in the Far East, and British military adviser to the South-East Asia Treaty Organization, at a time of undeclared war between Malaysia, a newly independent state, and Indonesia. As the overall commander on the spot Begg had to wage a maritime war of convoy, blockade, and air strike, and support the army over distances of thousands of miles. The war was played down in the media by both sides, and very few of those who did not take part were aware of its extent or duration. Begg was promoted KCB in 1962 and GCB in 1965, and in 1966 was appointed to the Panglima Mangku Negara, a Malaysian order. 
Begg returned to Britain in 1965 as commander-in-chief, Portsmouth, and became first sea lord and chief of the naval staff the next year, the first special entry officer to do so. He had the difficult task of restoring the navy's morale after the Labour government's rejection in the defence review of February 1966 of the giant aircraft-carrier CVA01. A whole generation of naval officers, many of them with service in the Second World War, had taken it as an article of faith that the Royal Navy would always have its own air power. The sudden cancellation of the CVA01 project led to the resignations of Begg's predecessor as first sea lord, Admiral Sir David Luce, and the minister of defence (Royal Navy), Christopher Mayhew. Begg had to do his best to repair the situation against a background of sustained lobbying by the Royal Air Force personnel to take over all aircraft movements at sea. For some years it seemed that the Fleet Air Arm might become not much more than a helicopter search-and-rescue service, with some anti-submarine capabilities. Begg wasted no time repining over the loss of the CVA01 but at once set up a future fleet working party, which was specifically forbidden to consider the resurrection of aircraft-carriers. When the working party's chairman included in the final report a project for a large helicopter and vertical take-off aircraft-carrier, Begg ended that officer's career. Ironically, just such a ship, in the form of the Invincible class, eventually arrived in the fleet. 
Begg was promoted admiral of the fleet in 1968, only the second special entry officer, after the duke of Edinburgh, to achieve that rank. The following year he went to Gibraltar, as governor and commander-in-chief, thus breaking a 250-year tradition of military governors. A tense political situation, when Spain was making life as difficult as possible for the Gibraltarians, was exacerbated when the Spanish government protested at the presence in Gibraltar of the prince of Wales, who had arrived to join his ship 'Norfolk'. Begg dealt with that and subsequent potential embarrassments with such skill and tact that when he retired in 1973, Julian Amery, minister of state at the Foreign Office, compared him to General Sir George Eliott, who successfully held off the Spaniards during the great siege of 1779-83, saying that Begg had 'conducted the present siege with as much skill as Elliott ['sic'] and far fewer casualties' ('The Independent', 15 July 1995). 
With his craggy features and aquiline nose Begg was a man of striking appearance, who looked the part of a distinguished admiral and sailor. David Owen, who became minister for the navy in 1968, recalled Begg as 'an Admiral with salt both in his ears and his tongue', who 'did not suffer fools gladly' ('The Independent', 15 July 1995). A keen sportsman Begg was president of the Combined Services Winter Sports Association and of Royal Navy Cricket. In retirement he took an active interest in village life at Chilbolton, near Andover, Hampshire; he fished and gardened, and was a keen shot. In his last years he suffered from Alzheimer's disease. He died at the Dower House Nursing Home, Headbourne Worthy, Hampshire, on 13 July 1995. He was survived by his wife and two sons. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 18 October 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 59716


Beverton, Raymond John Heaphy (1922-1995), biologist and scientific administrator, was born Raymond John Heaphy Bareham on 29 August 1922 at 5 Forest Glade, Leytonstone, east London, the only child of Edgar John Bareham (1882-1968), commercial artist, and his wife, Dorothy Sybil Mary Heaphy (1891-1982), secretary and cookery demonstrator. His ancestors included Thomas Heaphy, official artist in the Peninsular War, and Charles Heaphy, also an artist, awarded the VC in the New Zealand wars. His father changed his surname by deed poll first to Bartram, in August 1935, then to Beverton in October 1935. As a boy Raymond developed enthusiasms for music, fishing, and football; later he was a keen sailor. He was educated at Forest School, Snaresbrook (1930-39), and Downing College, Cambridge (1940-42 and 1946-7), reading physics, chemistry, and mathematics for part one of the tripos and gaining a first-class degree in zoology in part two, as well as a blue for association football. Between 1942 and 1945 he worked with the Operational Research Group, developing insulation for radar cables. In 1945 he worked at the government fisheries laboratory at Lowestoft under Michael Graham, director of fisheries research, on the exploitation of cod in the North Sea, and was sent to the Arctic on a commercial trawler. Although susceptible to seasickness he returned to the laboratory at Lowestoft in 1947. In the same year, on 10 June, he married Kathleen Edith Marner ('b'. 1922), scientific laboratory assistant; they had three daughters. 
Beverton soon made valuable contributions to understanding the factors determining the survival of young plaice and, in collaboration with Sydney Holt, to theoretical fish population dynamics. Their paper 'On the dynamics of exploited fish populations' (1957) was one of the most important ever published in this field, providing the basis for much subsequent research. Beverton became deputy director of the fisheries laboratory in 1959. He also chaired committees for the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) and the International Commission for North West Atlantic Fisheries. In 1965 he became the first secretary (chief permanent officer) of the newly formed Natural Environment Research Council, which initially had the object of promoting the work of diverse, virtually self-governing, research organizations dealing with oceanography, geology, hydrology, marine and freshwater biology, nature conservation, and, in the course of time, the British Antarctic Survey. Together with the chairman, Sir Graham Sutton, Beverton produced at short notice a forward look which was a valuable summary of the state of, and prospects for, environmental science. The first years employed his administrative skills constructively but politics and finance soon became dominant. 
Adoption of the Rothschild report of 1972 on government research and development disrupted the organization which Beverton had built up, leading to differences of view concerning his role, particularly as accounting officer, and eventually to his resignation in 1980. In his term of office he had set a high standard of scientific excellence and care for the welfare of the council's staff. Beverton had maintained his interest in fisheries science during this administrative period and after leaving the Natural Environment Research Council continued it in academic work. After a year as a senior research fellow in the University of Bristol he was invited in 1982 to join the department of applied biology of the University of Wales Institute of Science and Technology (UWIST), Cardiff, as honorary professorial fellow, and then in 1984 to become professor of fisheries ecology. He taught at both undergraduate and MSc levels and participated with zest in field courses, where his wife assisted with the commissariat. 
In 1988 Beverton became head of the school of pure and applied biology, responsible for the integration of four separate departments on a single site, the organization of new degree courses, and the establishment of several research groups, following the merger of UWIST and the University College of Cardiff. He continued research, providing one of the first convincing demonstrations of density-dependent mortality in commercial fish species. He also continued with the ICES as editor of its journal, and served on the councils of the Fisheries Society of the British Isles (president, 1983-8), the Freshwater Biological Association (vice-president, 1980-95), and the World Wildlife Fund UK (trustee, 1983-5). He carried a heavy workload after his official retirement in 1989 but resolutely made time to be with his family. He played the piano until deafness intervened. He died in the Royal Gwent Hospital, Newport, Monmouthshire, on 23 July 1995 after a stroke, and after cremation at Christchurch, Newport, on 31 July his ashes were scattered in the North Sea, near where his researches began; his wife survived him. His distinctions included being made CBE (1968) and a fellow of the Royal Society (1975), and an honorary DSc degree of the University of Wales. He also received the silver medal (later renamed the Beverton medal) of the Fisheries Society of the British Isles (1995), the award of excellence of the American Fisheries Society (1993), and the award for outstanding achievement of the American Institute of Fisheries Biologists (1995). A reading room at the headquarters of the ICES, a meeting room in the Southampton Oceanography Centre, and a lecture theatre in the University of Wales, Cardiff, are dedicated to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 59729


Cooper, Susan Vera (1902-1995), potter, was born at Stansfield, near Burslem, Staffordshire, on 29 October 1902, the youngest of the seven children of John Cooper (died 1914), JP, and his wife, Mary-Ann, 'nee' Adams. The year of her birth was that in which Arnold Bennett's 'Anna of the Five Towns' was published; Susie Cooper, too, was to become a Potteries heroine -- one of the very few women to own, manage, and design for her own potworks. Comfortably off, her parents ran a farm and retail business. As a child, Susie Cooper could always be 'kept good' with a drawing book. She attended a local school, then Mollart School, Hanley, a private establishment, which she left in 1917, to help with the family business. She also enrolled for evening classes in drawing at Burslem School of Art, and in 1919 won a scholarship for full-time training at the school, when she came under the influence of Gordon Forsyth, formerly an art director of leading pottery firms and from 1920 superintendent of art education in the district. 
Through Forsyth Susie Cooper was taken on by Gray's Pottery, a decorating firm. Originally she had had ambitions to go to the Royal College of Art in London, but decided instead to make her career in the Potteries. In 1923, as a piece-worker, she helped decorate Forsyth's range of 'Gloria Lustre' wares, which were exhibited on Gray's stand at the British Industries' Fair. Promoted to resident designer, she was given her own backstamp for use on wares -- Gray's miniature image of an ocean liner with the words 'Designed by Susie Cooper'. Her patterns were shown at an industrial art exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, in 1923; at the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley in 1924; and on Gray's stand in the British pavilion at the Paris 'Exposition... des Arts Decoratifs' of 1925 which was to give its name to art deco. 
By the late 1920s Cooper was designing brilliantly enamelled cubist patterns not unlike those of her near-contemporary, the ceramics designer Clarice Cliff. But, dissatisfied with the way large areas of paint tended to flake, Cooper designed the 'banded' wares which were to be among her specialities. As a sideline she designed screen curtains for the neo-baroque Odeon, Marble Arch, London -- a falling leaf pattern in gold, commissioned by the London interior design company Skelhorn and Edwards. 
On her twenty-seventh birthday, Cooper left Gray's Pottery to set up on her own, with $4000 raised from her family. It was an unpropitious time to be starting any new business. The first premises she rented in Tunstall closed down after three months when the landlord went bankrupt after the Wall Street crash. Cooper next rented a Burslem works from Doulton & Co. and gathered a workforce of ten paintresses. In April 1930 she took her first advertisement in the 'Pottery Gazette', offering 'Elegance with Utility'. Her first independent pattern was 'Bronze chrysanthemums'. Her stand at the 1931 British Industries' Fair was very successful. By then she was decorating blank wares from Harry Wood; she moved into his Crown Works in Burslem which were to be her headquarters for almost half a century. 
In 1932 Cooper's most familiar backstamp of a leaping deer was introduced -- a quintessential art deco motif which remained in use until the mid-1960s. The streamlined 'Kestrel' shape was shown at the British Industries' Fair, where Queen Mary bought a breakfast-in-bed set from her and the princess royal purchased a triangular lamp decorated with clowns. By March 1933 Cooper had become prominent enough to be interviewed by the 'Manchester Evening News'. The article noted that she was already exporting to Norway and South Africa: exports were always an important aspect of the firm's output. What also emerged clearly from the interview was Cooper's concern to train and look after the girls on the shop floor. That month she also patented a 'Kestrel' tureen with a lid that doubled as a serving plate. Just before the 1933 British Industries' Fair opened, the John Lewis store in London placed a substantial order for wares from her, the beginning of a happy relationship. 
In 1934 Cooper began using the technique of tube lining: slip (liquid clay) was squeezed out of a bag on to the ware in the manner of icing. She also designed wall masks, including one of Greta Garbo and one of herself, though the latter was never put on sale. 
Contemporary photographs record Cooper's striking, almost film-star looks. In 1934 she also introduced her popular polka-dot pattern and crayon designs. In 1935 she was invited to exhibit at the Royal Academy's 'Art in Industry' show. She introduced lithographic patterns, admired by the art historian Nikolaus Pevsner in an article of 1936. Cooper was never a purist, and always had a feeling for popular taste. About 1935 she had designed her very popular, if somewhat schmaltzy, 'Dresden spray' pattern, which lasted until the late 1950s. Distinct from this canny commercialism was a terracotta figure she made called 'Lummox' -- a suffering woman with bowed head, inspired by a book by the American writer Fanny Hurst. Also in 1937 the Burslem Pottery, of which she had become a director in 1933, was renamed the Susie Cooper Pottery Ltd. She introduced her streamlined 'Falcon' shapes, with aerographing (spraying on colour) and 'sgraffito' (scratching designs through the glaze). On 28 April 1938 she married the architect Cecil Barker (1908/9-1972), with whom she had a son, Timothy, in 1943. He became a boat-builder, incorporating a Susie Cooper ceramic plaque in one boat. 'We both make vessels', she remarked. 
By the late 1930s Susie Cooper's firm was one of the success stories of British industry. Imperial Airways were using her wares on their London-Paris flights. She was commissioned to make services for the experimental Peckham health centre and for Peter Jones's restaurant in Chelsea, both in dramatically modern buildings. In 1939 she was made a royal designer for industry. In spite of wartime restrictions, new patterns were introduced, including 'Black leaves' and 'Tigerlily'. But in 1942 a serious fire caused a close-down at her pottery until the end of the war. 
Cooper was on the selection committee for the 'Britain can make it' exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, in 1946 and exhibited wares herself. In the 1950s she expanded into porcelain, buying the Jason China Company, Longton. A 'Quail' shape was designed for the royal pavilion at the 1951 Festival of Britain. By 1952 her workforce had risen to 250. In the 'New Statesman' of 27 March 1954, an American buyer was quoted as saying that: 'Britain is losing the design battle. Except for Susie Cooper you haven't a designer who can keep up with modern American styles.' In that year she designed a plaque to mark the bicentenary of the founding of the Royal Society of Arts. From 1956, responding as usual to changes in taste, Cooper introduced neo-classical patterns and a fluted shape. In 1957 a second bad fire caused a hiatus in production. Her husband resigned from his architectural firm and worked for her business full-time. In 1958 she designed the ultra-simple 'can' shape, a harbinger of the less whimsical styles of the 1960s. She bought the Crown Works in 1959. Gradually earthenware was phased out and the switch to bone china was complete by 1964. 
In 1966 Cooper's firm was taken over by Wedgwood but she continued as a designer in the division of Susie Cooper Ltd, responding to the 'swinging sixties' with such vibrant patterns as 'Carnaby Daisy' and 'Harlequinade'. But she found that Wedgwood 'wouldn't take risks'. In her view too much attention was paid to the salesmen's view of what would sell and what wouldn't. She felt keenly the loss of control and the cramping of her freedom to design whatever she chose. Her husband died in 1972 aged sixty-three, and she resigned as director of Susie Cooper Ltd. 
However, Cooper was asked to design lustre ware to celebrate the queen's silver jubilee in 1977; and in 1978 Wedgwood held a Susie Cooper retrospective exhibition at Sanderson's Exhibition Gallery, London, entitled 'Elegance and utility'. In 1978 she was appointed OBE for services to British industry. In 1980 Wedgwood, to her distress, closed the Crown Works, whereupon she moved to William Adams of Tunstall, part of the Wedgwood group. In 1982 her eightieth birthday was marked by a celebratory show at the Stoke-on-Trent Museum and Art Gallery. With the growing interest in art deco, she had become a cult figure among collectors, and a Susie Cooper collectors' group with its own newsletter was formed. Because she had made so much, in so many styles, and all of it marked, her work was an ideal collector's quarry. 
In 1985 Cooper was saluted, with Clarice Cliff and the slightly earlier potter Charlotte Rhead, in a Channel 4 television series, 'Pottery Ladies'. The following year she and her son left the Potteries to live on the Isle of Man. Interest in her work was unabated. In 1987 the Victoria and Albert Museum organized a travelling exhibition of 'Susie Cooper productions' and, to accompany it, Wedgwood revived three of her 1930s patterns. She received an honorary doctorate from the Royal College of Art. 
Cooper began a new and eccentric art form, 'seed paintings', a sort of recycling of nature into art. An exhibition of her work in this curious medium was held at the Stoke-on-Trent museum in 1990. To celebrate her ninetieth birthday in 1992, Wedgwood staged a show at their visitors' centre, Barlaston, and she produced a limited edition of ninety of a porcelain model of a leaping deer. She died at Douglas, Isle of Man, on 28 July 1995. Her work, covering seven decades, mirrored and to some extent influenced the changing styles of twentieth-century decorative art. A key figure in both art deco and the 1950s 'contemporary' style, she designed some 4500 patterns and 500 new shapes. Examples of her work can be seen at the Wedgwood Museum, Barlaston, Staffordshire, in the Victoria and Albert Museum, and at the Design Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 59732


Briscoe, John Potter (1848-1926), librarian, was born at Lever Bridge, Tonge with Haulgh, near Bolton, Lancashire, on 20 July 1848, the eldest son of John Daly Briscoe, a schoolmaster, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth Scowcroft. He was educated at his father's school and was a teacher there from 1862 until 1866, when he was appointed assistant librarian in Bolton Public Library. Three years later, at twenty-one, he became chief librarian of Nottingham Public Library, a post he held for forty-seven years. He was twice married, first to Elizabeth Baxter of Bolton, then to Sophia Wallis of Nottingham. 
Briscoe was an original member of the Library Association of the United Kingdom (established in 1877), a member of its council from 1881 to 1891, and a vice-president from 1891 to 1920. He further served the association as a summer school lecturer and enthusiastically supported its annual conferences, which he addressed frequently. In 1890 he helped to form the North Midlands Library Association, serving as its first president. 
As a leading figure in the early development of professional librarianship, Briscoe wrote extensively on a variety of issues, especially those associated with promoting library services and extending them into society, to people who, because of their social or personal circumstances, made little use of them. His philosophy was that libraries should serve all, irrespective of class distinction or an individual's intellectual or physical limitations. He thus decried, for example, the lack of books for blind people in public libraries. He believed librarians had part of the missionary spirit in them and should not spare themselves in working for the common good. Public libraries, in particular, he held, had an important role to play in furthering education and assisting personal progress, enabling people to become good workers and worthy citizens. 
Briscoe's contribution to the development of the library service in Nottingham was notable. After 1869, under his energetic leadership, the book stock of the central library expanded rapidly, a reference department was opened, and a system of branch reading rooms was put in place. In 1881 the central library moved into new premises. The town had been late in adopting the 'Public Library Acts', and at first lagged far behind industrial towns of comparable size; by the turn of the century, however, he had transformed Nottingham's library service into one of the country's leading library authorities. 
One of the most striking features of this transformation was Briscoe's pioneering work in providing library services to children. He initiated the first separate children's service (for seven- to fourteen-year-olds) in the country. The Nottingham Library for Boys and Girls, comprising a stock of 3000 volumes and staffed by a dedicated female assistant, was opened in 1882 with the help of a $500 donation from Samuel Morley, the hosiery manufacturer. Briscoe hoped to encourage reading among children by offering books that were well written, professionally printed, and attractively illustrated. Although he insisted that the material made available to children should be morally correct, it was not his intention to indoctrinate his younger readers according to a narrow moral code. Rather, his aim was to excite the imaginations of the young, so school textbooks were excluded from the children's library. 
In 1890 Briscoe pioneered a series of half-hour talks to the public about books and writers, designed to assist people in their selection of books and encourage reading. For similar reasons he supported the idea of the reading circle (as operated by the National Home Reading Union, often in collaboration with public libraries), in which the public actively participated by reading and discussing selected works. His enthusiasm for talks and circles was derived from his belief that the increasingly hurried pace of life was resulting in too much light and scrappy reading, and that it was the duty of the librarian to counter the effects of a bustling age by guiding people to more advanced and contemplative, but equally pleasurable, literature. 
Briscoe praised the work that public libraries began to undertake towards the end of the nineteenth century in acting as agents for the government's emigrants' information service, which aimed to advise those -- especially the poor and ignorant -- on matters that would protect them from the fraud, exploitation, and hardship that often accompanied the search for a new life in the colonies. 
Briscoe was said to be a bookman born. He founded a local literary society, the Nottingham Sette of Odde Volumes, and was a member of the council of the Thoroton Society. His literary and scholarly interests were first and foremost in the field of local history. For many years he edited the local history column in the 'Nottingham Weekly Guardian'. His extensive writings on Nottinghamshire history included 'Bypaths of Nottinghamshire History' (1905), 'A Concise History of Nottingham Castle' (1899), 'Old Nottinghamshire' (2 vols., 1881-4), 'Chapters of Nottinghamshire History' (1908), 'Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire at the Opening of the Twentieth Century' (1901), 'Nottinghamshire Facts and Fancies' (1876), 'A Popular History of Nottingham' (1893), 'Contributions to a Bibliography of Hosiery and Lace' (1896), and 'Stories about the Midlands' (1883). From 1892 he edited six volumes of 'Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Notes and Queries'. 
Beyond antiquarianism, Briscoe's literary interests were eclectic. He designed and edited 'The Bibelots' (1899-1907), a series of twenty-nine midget reprints of English classics. His 'Gleanings from God's Acre' (1883) included a collection of epitaphs and Samuel Johnson's essay on the subject. He also published 'Tudor and Stuart Love Songs' (1902). Aside from his literary endeavours, his recreations included gardening and photography. 
At first glance, Briscoe's scholarly pursuits confirm the stereotype that emerged in the twentieth century of the librarian as a genteel, socially detached, literary recluse. However, in Briscoe's case this image is undermined by his active engagement in civil society, and the social and civic life of Nottingham in particular. His work and interests were furthered by intimate and dutiful associations with local citizens, bodies, and organizations. He was a staunch supporter of the temperance movement and for a number of years edited the 'Midland Temperance Record'. Like many librarians of his time he was involved in freemasonry, his enthusiasm for the practice illustrated by his writings on the subject, which included 'Notes on Early Freemasonry in Nottingham' (1924) and, for private circulation, 'Notes on some masonic degrees' (1924). 
Briscoe was forced to retire as librarian at Nottingham, owing to ill health, in 1916. On his retirement he was honoured with the position of consulting city librarian. He was succeeded as librarian by his only son, Walter Alwyn Briscoe (1878-1934), like his father a leading advocate of library publicity and promotion. Hampered in later life by hardening of the arteries, Briscoe eventually suffered a serious cerebral haemorrhage and died at his home, 38 Addison Street, Nottingham, on 7 January 1926, having given over sixty years of service and support to libraries, local government, and a variety of reforming issues. 


@@@@@


doc= 59733


Brown, James Duff (1862-1914), librarian and compiler of music reference books, was born on 6 November 1862 at 3 Reid Terrace, Stockbridge, Edinburgh, the second of seven children of James Brown of St Fergus, Aberdeenshire, a bookkeeper, and his wife, Margaret Douglas of Aberdeen (both 'fl'. 1840-1880). Family legend maintained that his grandmother, Elizabeth Smith, was descended from Rob Roy Macgregor, following a son's judicious change of name. Brown attended the Church of Scotland normal school in Edinburgh from 1871 until 1875, when he was apprenticed to a bookseller and publisher. His family moved to Glasgow in 1876, where he joined the bookselling business of W. R. McPhun. Finding his position uncongenial and the manager frequently drunk, he successfully applied for the post of library assistant at the new Mitchell Library. 
Brown took up his appointment on Christmas day 1876 and was surprised to find the library closed (because the librarian, F. T. Barrett, was English, he reasoned). Working in a rapidly expanding library was an exciting experience, despite long hours, and Brown did not waste the opportunity for self-education. He rose early to pursue musical interests. In 1884 he became Glasgow correspondent to the 'Musical Standard' and in 1886 published his important 'Biographical Dictionary of Musicians', later praised by George Grove. He edited George Chalmers's 'Caledonia' (8 vols., 1887-1902). On 1 September 1887 he married his cousin, Annie Watt of Waterbeck; three daughters survived. 
In 1888 the Library Association of the United Kingdom met in Glasgow, when Brown spoke on dictionary catalogues, his first, timely, contact with members of his profession. The post of librarian at the newly established public library in Clerkenwell had been advertised, and Brown was appointed with a salary of $150 per annum. Public libraries in London were the responsibility of vestries, and Brown was fortunate to influence from the start the planning of the service, including the design of a building. He employed female library assistants, a controversial rarity, but was always supported by his library committee, and especially by Henry W. Fincham, local antiquary and close friend. 
Brown produced in 1889 a dictionary catalogue with an innovatory classified arrangement following the model of Edward Edwards at Manchester Public Library in the 1850s. From 1890 Brown was encouraged by John MacAlister, editor of the Library Association's journal 'The Library', to contribute regular columns on administration. He was the first public librarian since Edwards in his 'Memoirs of Libraries' (1859) to concern himself with the minutiae of organization. He contributed to Thomas Greenwood's influential 'Public Libraries' (3rd and 4th edns, 1890-91), published 'A Handbook of Library Appliances' (1892), and produced a stream of booklists, including one for J. F. Rowbotham's 'Private Lives of the Great Composers' (1892). He published 'Guide to the Formation of a Music Library' (1893), 'British Musical Biography' (1897), and 'Characteristic Songs and Dances of All Nations' (1901). 
The most controversial innovation was sparked by visiting the American Library Association's conference in Chicago in 1893. Many American public libraries allowed access to the shelves; in Britain, borrowers ordered books from a catalogue after checking an indicator. On 1 May 1894 Clerkenwell became the first library in the country to adopt 'safe-guarded open-access'. For several years a bitter, occasionally humorous, war raged in journals and pamphlets. Virulent opposition came from Alfred Cotgreave (1849-1911), fellow librarian and patentee and manufacturer of the best-known library indicator. Brown ultimately won the day, and Clerkenwell became a mecca for librarians visiting London. 
Brown issued a regular bulletin listing new accessions, another first, and supported classified lists of books over dictionary catalogues. He devised a classification scheme, after Edwards's example, which became the 'adjustable' classification, described in his 'Manual of Library Classification and Shelf Arrangement' (1898). Such was Brown's enthusiasm for librarianship as a science that in 1898 he founded the 'Library World' (which became the 'New Library World' in 1969). Brown could indulge his humour and opinions with like-minded contributors, such as L. S. Jast, and reported, with considerable licence, the doings of a librarians' social club, The Pseudonyms; he was Rob Roy. 
In 1900 Clerkenwell was absorbed into the metropolitan borough of Finsbury; Brown became borough librarian. The year 1903 saw the publication of 'Manual of Library Economy', the first textbook of public library practice since Edwards's 'Memoirs' (the final, seventh, edition, appeared in 1961). In 1904 Islington established a public library, using Brown's 'Manual' as a model, and in 1905 he was appointed its first borough librarian, moving his family to 15 Canonbury Park South. Brown developed his classification scheme, published as the 'Subject Classification' (1906), adopted by many libraries in preference to the Dewey system. 
Work was an uphill struggle, for in 1906, despite a Liberal national government, most councils in London passed from Liberal to Conservative hands. The new council's support for public libraries was unenthusiastic, but they grudgingly admired Islington's new open-access central library, opened in 1907. In the same year Brown published 'The Small Library', a practical guide for domestic, church, or workplace libraries. Though Brown's book-buying budgets were severely cut, the classified catalogue of 1910 proved another model for other libraries. 
Brown had been a stalwart of the Library Association, but resigned in 1911 because he disagreed with their policies. He advocated structural reform, but particularly opposed a professional register, believing that librarianship should be open to all. By now unwell, he handed the editorship of 'Library World' to his nephew, James D. Stewart (1885-1965), then working at Islington Library. In 1912 Brown, described as small, frail, and unobtrusive (Jast, 248), suffered heart attacks, probably attributable to Bright's disease. He did little work but published a guidebook, 'A British Library Itinerary' (1913). He died at home in Canonbury Park on 26 February 1914 and was buried at the Great Northern London cemetery, Southgate. His 'Manual' and 'Subject Classification' were continued by his nephew, Stewart. 


@@@@@


doc= 59734


Harrison, George Henry (1816-1846), painter, was born in Liverpool, the second son in the family of twelve children of William Harrison (died 1861), businessman, and his wife, Mary Harrison (1788-1875), a flower painter, daughter of William Rossiter of Stockport. He was baptized at St Peter's Church, Liverpool, on 23 January 1823, as too was his brother Robert ['see below']. Another brother, William Frederick Harrison (1815-1880), was also a painter. In 1830 he moved with his mother to London, where he studied anatomy at the Hunterian School in Windmill Street, while earning a living making anatomical drawings. Encouraged by John Constable, Harrison began to paint watercolour landscapes, and was one of many artists who went to the Farne Islands in 1838 to paint Grace Darling and the wreck of the 'Forfarshire'; an engraving of his painting is in the British Museum. He exhibited fourteen paintings at the Royal Academy from 1840, and was elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1845. Harrison gave weekly outdoor sketching classes during the summer months, and when the family moved to Paris for the sake of his health he gave similar classes there. Many of his later paintings are of the palaces and gardens of Fontainebleau and St Cloud, in the style of Watteau and Boucher, including 'Fontainebleau, in the Days of Henri quatre' (exh. Society of Painters in Water Colours, 1846). He also painted a number of scenes of Gypsies, such as 'Gypsy Children' (exh. Suffolk Street, 1836). Two of his watercolours are in the Victoria and Albert Museum. His sketch of Hinchinbrook House, Huntingdonshire, was engraved for S. C. Hall's 'The Baronial Halls and Picturesque Edifices of England' (1848). Harrison died in Paris on 20 October 1846, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 
Harrison's younger brother Robert Harrison (1820-1897), librarian, was born on 26 November 1820 in Liverpool. He worked for a bookseller in High Holborn, London, before moving to Paris, and from there to St Petersburg in 1844, where he spent nine years as tutor to the family of Prince Demidov, and as a lecturer at St Anne's School. He married in Russia, but brought his family back to England before the outbreak of the Crimean War, and later published 'Notes of a Nine Years' Residence in Russia, 1844-1853' (1855). 
Robert Harrison was librarian of the Leeds Library from 1854 to 1857, before his appointment as librarian of the London Library. He remained there until his retirement in 1893, and was responsible for the fifth edition of the catalogue (1888), with a preface on the history of the library. One of the founders of the Library Association in 1877, he served as treasurer until 1889, sat on several committees, and contributed papers to its 'Transactions', including 'On the elimination of useless books from libraries' (1881). He was elected president for 1891-2. 
Harrison wrote ninety articles for the 'Dictionary of National Biography' between 1885 and 1891 for the editor, Leslie Stephen, who was to succeed Tennyson as president of the London Library in 1892. He also helped Sir Henry Montague Hozier with 'The Franco-Prussian War' (1870-72), wrote, with Joseph Gostwick, 'Outlines of German Literature' (1873), and translated Alfred von Reumont's 'Lorenzo de Medici the Magnificent' in 1876. Robert Harrison died on 4 January 1897 at his home in Christchurch Avenue, Brondesbury, Middlesex, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 8 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 59735


James, Minnie Stewart Rhodes (1865-1903), librarian and author, was born on 7 July 1865 in Aldeburgh, Suffolk, the daughter of Henry Haughton James, late commander in the Indian navy, and his wife, Sophia Helen Courthope. Minnie James was one of the first women in Great Britain to become head of a major library, and was an outspoken proponent of librarianship as a profession for women and of the training of library assistants. 
Little is known of James's education and early life until 1887, when she was appointed assistant librarian at the People's Palace, London. She became head librarian in 1889. The People's Palace, located on the Mile End Road, was founded in 1886 to provide technical training and recreation for the people of the East End of London. As she explained in a paper read at the World's Congress of Librarians in Chicago in July 1893, later published in the 'Library Journal' in the October of that year, James played an important role in building the collections of the People's Palace Library. Her writings display respect and sympathy for the library's working-class clientele, whom she tried to accommodate by Sunday opening (between 3 p.m. and 10 p.m.) and by the acquisition of novels and other light reading. James left the library, however, in 1894, discouraged by the under-funding of the recreational side of the People's Palace (of which the library was part) in comparison to its technical instruction side. In fact, the library was closed for some years from 1901, although it eventually became the library of Queen Mary College, University of London. 
Minnie James next served for a short time as the curator of the Library Association museum, a permanent exhibit of library equipment kept at the Library Bureau in Bloomsbury. The Library Bureau was a branch of the Library Bureau, Boston, Massachusetts, a manufacturer of library equipment founded in 1876 by Melvil Dewey. Known for developing the vertical file system, two-colour typewriter ribbon, and other products, the Library Bureau eventually became a subdivision of the Rand Kardex Bureau. In 1897 James was appointed librarian of the Library Bureau in Boston, Massachusetts, where she remained until her death. 
Throughout her career James was active in the Library Association, which she joined in 1889. She was instrumental in getting the Library Association involved in the training of library assistants: she was a founder of the Library Association summer school in library science, first held in 1893, and an active member of the association's education committee and of the Library Assistants Association. She was also active in the American Library Association and in the Massachusetts Library Club. 
Well read, liberal-minded, and articulate, James was the author of over twenty-five articles about her work at the People's Palace Library, the need for training of library assistants, and the employment of women in libraries, among other subjects. Her 'The progress of the modern card catalog principle', in 'Public Libraries' of May 1902, was reprinted many times. She was particularly concerned with the reluctance of British libraries to hire women, especially in comparison to the United States, where library education was available and women were employed in libraries in much greater numbers: 'Women are peculiarly fitted for such work' she wrote, 'and it is a source of great wonderment to everyone who has considered the subject that so few such women have been employed in British libraries in really responsible positions' (M. James, 'Women librarians and their future prospects', 'Library Association Record', June 1900, 292-3). 
About 1900 Minnie James's health began to fail. She spent the spring of 1901 in the Bahamas, producing a paper on the public library system there (it appeared in the 'Library Association Record' in 1901). On 5 June 1903 she died of typhoid fever in St Botolph Hospital in Boston. Minnie James was a valued colleague and friend, as evidenced by the many tributes written after her death. The obituary in 'Library Journal' (June 1903) noted that, as a woman 'of a most winning vivacity and charm, all who knew her will remember her with affection and will feel her death as a personal loss'. 


@@@@@


doc= 59736


Lyster, Thomas William (1855-1922), librarian and literary scholar, was born on 17 December 1855 in Kilkenny, the elder son of Thomas Lyster of Rathdowney and Jane Smith of Roscrea. Lyster's father died early, leaving him as the main support of the family. Friends and colleagues were later to ascribe his strength of character and determination to this single event. He was educated at Wesleyan School, Dublin, and later at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated with MA senior moderatorship in English and German. He married Jane Robinson Campbell, daughter of James Campbell of Galway. 
Early in his career Lyster acquired a reputation for scholarship, publishing books and articles on German and English literature. He translated Heinrich Duntzer's life of Goethe (1883) and contributed many publications to the English Goethe Society. He also published many critical editions of Milton, wrote articles on Shakespeare and Jane Austen, and edited Hall's 'History of English Literature'. He was elected a member of the Royal Irish Academy in 1913. 
Lyster was appointed assistant librarian at the National Library of Ireland in 1878 at the relatively young age of twenty-three, and served there until his retirement some forty-two years later. He succeeded William Archer as librarian in 1895, remaining in that post for twenty-five years. In 1880 he was appointed as examiner in English under the intermediate education board, and in subsequent years he produced several textbooks which were adopted by the board, which ran to many editions. 
It was as librarian of the National Library that Lyster truly left his mark. He embraced librarianship enthusiastically, and became an advocate of the radical modern movement, actively encouraging the application of the Dewey decimal classification system, supporting the formation of Cumann na Leabharlann (the Library Association of Ireland), emphasizing the importance of local newspapers and ephemera, and suggesting a subject index to periodicals. He was a tireless lecturer on library topics, promoting the development of the public library system in Ireland, defending the rights of ordinary citizens of access to books and information. He was elected vice-president of the Library Association (UK) in 1899, and in a paper to the annual conference of that association in 1902 entitled 'The idea of a great public library: an essay in the philosophy of libraries' showed himself to be both a follower of Panizzi and an admirer of Newman. In the concluding pages of this paper, he argued against censorship: 'in a great library all things, good and evil, fall into their places, are seen in the just light, and proportion, and the 'totality' of the record of human thought and feeling is a witness for what is wholesome, true and good.' Despite this liberal and even-handed approach, Lyster found himself under attack on more than one occasion, and by different divides -- the nationalist newspaper 'The Leader' attacking him, a non-Catholic, for daring to lecture to a Catholic body, while the 'Irish Protestant' complained that the National Library failed to acquire some notable anti-Catholic polemic. His greatest legacy is having suggested a British index of periodicals in a paper to the Library Association in 1913. The first subject lists appeared in 'The Athenaeum' two years later, and signalled the way for the 'Subject Index to Periodicals' which in turn was a forerunner of the 'British Humanities Index'. 
In his relations with the public and the staff of the library, Lyster was always fair and genial. More than any other librarian he generated a corpus of affectionate folklore. His sheer physical bulk and kindliness towards young students and readers made him a larger-than-life figure. Among the recorded lore is one memory from a long-serving staff member of Lyster walking around the bookstacks, keys in hand, calling 'I'm coming, I'm coming', to avoid surprising the unwary at something they should not have been doing. He is immortalized in Joyce's 'Ulysses' in the famous library scene where, unnamed, he is referred to as the Quaker librarian. 
Lyster retired in 1920. Two years later, on 12 December 1922, he died at his home, 10 Harcourt Terrace, Dublin. His wife survived him. Such was his impact that in 1926, four years after his death, a memorial plaque was erected in his memory -- the only such tribute to a librarian of the National Library of Ireland since its establishment in 1877. The list of subscribers who contributed to and organized the bronze and silver table reads like a who's who of Irish society of the day. The poet W. B. Yeats, a lifelong friend, who also delivered the oration, conducted the unveiling ceremony. 


@@@@@


doc= 59737


MacAlister, Sir John Young Walker (1856-1925), librarian, was born on 10 May 1856 in Perth, the second of the surviving three sons and three daughters of Donald MacAlister (1825-1881), publisher's agent, and his wife, Euphemia Kennedy ('fl'. 1826-1905). Educated at Liverpool high school, MacAlister gave up his medical studies at Edinburgh University because of pulmonary tuberculosis, or phthisis, which dogged his life and work. However, though plans for a medical career were abandoned, this time was productive. MacAlister's medical knowledge became useful in his career as a librarian and it was at Edinburgh that he met and, on 7 January 1875, married Elizabeth ('b'. 1854/5), daughter of George Batley, an architect; they had two sons, Donald and Ian. According to the marriage certificate, MacAlister was then employed as a commercial traveller. 
MacAlister's professional career began in 1877 with his appointment as sub-librarian at Liverpool Library. He became librarian of Leeds Library in 1880. A move to London in 1887 was significant for his career, for librarianship, and for medicine. He applied successfully for the new post of librarian at the Gladstone Library of the National Liberal Club. On arrival in London he found he had also been successful in another application for a much better-paid post: librarian to the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society. The Gladstone Library released him to accept the latter position, but MacAlister nevertheless worked for six months on a voluntary basis to organize its library. 
Once established at the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, MacAlister began to make an impression on the wider library community. At the Library Association's conference in 1887 he gave a much discussed paper on the nature of librarianship. Tapping into fears about the status of the emerging profession and the tendency of committees to award senior posts to those without experience of librarianship, the paper caused him to be proclaimed 'a leader' (Godbolt and Munford, 28), a voice for the profession when one was sorely needed. The same conference elected him its joint honorary secretary, and between 1890 and 1898 he occupied the post alone. As honorary secretary he was involved in many consequential projects. In 1889 MacAlister edited (he later also published) the new Library Association journal 'The Library', which debated practical library management as well as literary issues and made its editor well-known among librarians. The journal discussed the contentious subject of public libraries and open access, and in 1895 this led to MacAlister's being a co-defendant in a libel case brought successfully by the indicator-advocate Charles Goss. The determination to develop librarianship demonstrated in his role as editor also prompted MacAlister to offer prizes to librarianship students and to support the establishment of the first library school at University College, London, in 1919. 
The early 1890s saw MacAlister's involvement with library legislation which culminated in the 1892 'Public Libraries Act'. The act regularized aspects of public library provision and provided a clear definition of the term 'library authority'. MacAlister performed one further outstanding service to librarianship by initiating plans for chartered status for the Library Association in 1895. After some difficulties the royal charter was granted in 1898, thus establishing a legal identity for the association. Rather belatedly MacAlister's work was acknowledged by the association with his election as vice-president, in 1905; he was also wartime president between 1915 and 1919. 
MacAlister's powers of persuasion were also exercised on behalf of the medical community. His employer, the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, was one of many medical societies and MacAlister had long advocated amalgamation. These hopes were revived in 1905, with a plan backed first by Sir William Osler, regius professor of medicine at Oxford, and later by Sir William Church. A meeting at the Royal College of Physicians supported the idea of a single medical society, and MacAlister was instrumental in eventually establishing the Royal Society of Medicine in 1907 as a result of the amalgamation of fifteen societies. 
Despite periodic ill health MacAlister injected a dose of elan into the library profession and the medical societies. He initiated and invigorated projects in both arenas and yet has attracted little historical attention. Occasionally his extensive social acquaintances, cultivated through membership of the Savage and other London men's clubs, were drawn upon to augment his professional activities, such as during the second international library conference in London in 1897. Although 'Who's Who' cites 'sleeping' as his recreation, his other activities included establishing the University of London Press Ltd in 1910. During the First World War he was organizer for the Emergency Surgical Aid Corps for the Admiralty, the War Office, and the Metropolitan Police, and was honorary secretary of the surgical advisory committee to the War Office. He was knighted in 1919. MacAlister died from heart failure on 1 December 1925 at his home, 33 Finchley Road, London, a few months after resigning from the Royal Society of Medicine. His ashes were interred at Tarbert, Loch Fyne, Argyll, on 5 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 59746


Lavery, Sir John (1856-1941), painter, was born in Belfast, the second son of Henry Lavery (died 1859), a publican, and his wife, Mary Donnelly (died 1859). His exact date of birth is unknown, but he was baptized in St Patrick's Roman Catholic Church, Donegal Street, Belfast, on 26 March 1856. His father died in the sinking of the 'Pomona', 'en route' for New York, on 29 April 1859; three months later his mother died, apparently of grief. Lavery then lived with his father's brother and his wife, aunt Rose, on their farm until, at the age of ten, he was sent to live in Saltcoats, Ayrshire, with a cousin of Rose, a pawnbroker. When he was seventeen he was apprenticed to a photographer in Glasgow and resolved to become a painter. He was a successful and diligent employee and saved enough from his salary to pay his fees at the Haldane Academy of Art in Glasgow, a predecessor of the Glasgow School of Art, which followed the South Kensington curriculum. 
In his earliest paintings Lavery was influenced by the work of various minor but financially successful Glasgow artists, usually historical genre painters, whose pictures were derided by the group of painters with whom Lavery was later associated, the Glasgow Boys. This admiration of an ability to earn a substantial living by painting popular but aesthetically inferior work is indicative of an ambitious and calculating streak in Lavery's character which perhaps prevented him from making the best intellectual and artistic use of his undoubted facility as a painter. Two incidents give evidence of his ruthlessness. His sister, who lived in his Glasgow flat as his housekeeper, became pregnant, and Lavery encouraged her to follow her lover to America, thus concealing her plight from his social circle. She soon returned, however, pregnant again, and Lavery refused to take her in. Two days later she committed suicide, drowning in the River Clyde. When, in his eighties, he wrote his autobiography, secure in his knighthood and social position, Lavery was able to express his remorse, but in 1876 she was a social embarrassment to an aspiring young painter. From the late 1870s he began to exhibit his genre paintings in and around Glasgow and with the proceeds bought and insured a studio in the city. Very shortly afterwards it succumbed to a mysterious fire, and with the $300 insurance money Lavery financed his departure in 1880 for the Heatherley School of Fine Art in London and then Paris. 
Lavery enrolled at the Atelier Julian in Paris in 1881 and began to associate with the young British and American artists who followed the 'plein-air' creed of Jules Bastien-Lepage. The latter's impact on these young artists, including James Guthrie and Stanhope Forbes, was crucial in the development of British painting in the 1880s. Lavery sought him out and eventually followed his example of painting contemporary life by settling in Grez-sur-Loing, where he painted the life of the village and its inhabitants 'en plein air'. He was joined at Grez by two other Glasgow artists, William Kennedy and Thomas Millie Dow, and together they formed one of the three distinct factions of the group that was to become known as the Glasgow Boys. Throughout the early 1880s Lavery often returned to Glasgow and was a frequent exhibitor at the Royal Glasgow Institute of the Fine Arts, where he would have seen the works of James Guthrie, E. A. Walton, George Henry, and William York Macgregor. They were also responding to the naturalism of Bastien-Lepage, and from 1885 they joined with Lavery and other Glasgow artists of similar interests in forming a loose association of painters who were to exhibit together in Glasgow, London, and across Europe and North America. Despite Lavery's adherence to Bastien-Lepage's teaching and example, his paintings of this period retain an anecdotal or narrative element, as he realized that this was vital in ensuring sales to an unsophisticated Scottish clientele. Even in his masterpiece of this period, 'On the Loing, an Afternoon Chat' (1884; Ulster Museum, Belfast), there is a strong element of genre that is missing in the work of James Guthrie and E. A. Walton, his main Glasgow rivals. Further, on his return to Scotland in 1885, Lavery realized that to sell to the middle classes he needed to change his subject matter from the rural poor to something more socially acceptable. This resulted in 'The Tennis Party' (1885; Aberdeen Art Gallery), a key work in the development of British painting, both in its artistic complexity and subject matter and in its translation of naturalistic painting from rural subjects to a more sophisticated urban setting. 
In addition this picture owed much to photography, in which Lavery was a skilled practitioner, although he concealed its use as it was not considered a valid artistic tool. It was also of vital assistance to him in the completion of the work which was a foundation of his career as one of the leading portrait painters of his age. In 1888 Glasgow staged a major international exhibition in Kelvingrove Park. Its aim was to raise funds for a new municipal art gallery, and the Glasgow Boys played a considerable part in the organization of its artistic events. Lavery painted a series of small pictures, sometimes little more than vignettes, of the events, buildings, and colourful figures which characterized the success of the exhibition. The exhibition was visited by Queen Victoria, and Glasgow corporation offered a commission of $600 for an artist to record the formal ceremony of her visit. The fee did not attract many artists, as the successful artist would be expected to record all of the 253 persons present. Lavery realized that the commission would be a milestone in his career and accepted the enormous task, not without some trepidation. He had surreptitiously photographed the ceremony from a vantage point above the queen's dais, and this photograph became the basis for his composition. He had some difficulty persuading the various participants to sit for him but eventually settled for a formula of making a quick sketch and taking a portrait photograph in his studio. Many of these sketches, like the exhibition pictures themselves, confirm his gifts as reporter, and once the queen had been persuaded to give him a twenty-minute sitting he found that the other participants in the event were unable to refuse his requests for sittings. The result, 'The State Visit of Queen Victoria to the International Exhibition, Glasgow, 1888' (1888; Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries), although somewhat stiff and unnatural compared to Lavery's contemporary work, formed the basis of his subsequent career. 
In 1889 Lavery met Kathleen McDermott 
('nee' Annie Evans; 'c'.1872-1891)
, whom he married in 1890 and who died a year later after giving birth to their daughter, Eileen. He painted many of the leading industrialists and society figures of the period, including Miss Mary Burrell (1895; Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries), the daughter of the shipowner and art collector Sir William Burrell; and also, in 1893, R. B. Cunninghame Graham (Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries), who became a close friend and introduced him to Morocco, where a number of the Glasgow Boys, among them Joseph Crawhall, Arthur Melville, William Kennedy, and Thomas Millie Dow, were also to live and paint. He was elected a member of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1896 and began to exhibit at the Royal Academy in London. Lavery's career was by this time well established, and as the Glasgow Boys achieved national and international renown he moved to London in 1896. In 1897 he helped establish the International Society of Painters, Gravers, and Sculptors in London, with J. A. M. Whistler as president and himself as vice-president. Whistler became a close friend and inspiration for many of his finest later portraits, but his reputation was made by his success as a more prosaic portrait painter than Whistler had ever been. 
Although Lavery continued to paint a wide variety of subjects, often drawn from his life in Morocco, where he had a house in Tangier, he was best-known for formal portraits of the royal family ('The King, the Queen, the Prince of Wales, the Princess Mary', 1911; NPG) and those of major social and political figures of his day, notably 'La dame aux perles (Baroness von Holriggl)' (1901) and 'Winston S. Churchill, MP' (1915) (both Hugh Lane Municipal Art Gallery, Dublin). He was also accomplished in the rendering of complex interior studies, which reflected his interest, among other things, in contemporary politics and racing -- such as the trial of Roger Casement in 'The Court of Criminal Appeal' (1916; Hugh Lane Municipal Art Gallery, Dublin) and 'The Jockey's Dressing Room at Ascot' (1923; Tate collection). As a war artist he produced the memorable 'First Wounded at London Hospital' (1914; Dundee Museums and Galleries) and 'A Convoy, North Sea, 1918, from NS7' (IWM). 
Lavery's own family life, particularly after his marriage to Hazel Martyn Trudeau [Hazel Jenner Lavery, Lady Lavery (1880-1935)], provided material for many of his finest later works (such as 'The Studio Window, 7 July 1917'; Hugh Lane Municipal Art Gallery, Dublin). Lavery met Hazel, who was born in Chicago on 14 March 1880, the daughter of the industrialist Edward Jenner Martyn, in Brittany in 1903, shortly before her marriage, on 28 December 1903, to Dr Edward Livingstone Trudeau junior (1863?-1904), with whom she had a daughter, Alice, born after Trudeau's death in May 1904. Lavery married her, with Cunninghame Graham as best man, on 22 July 1909. Hazel Lavery became one of the great society hostesses of her day -- the friend, confidante, and occasionally lover to many powerful social and political figures. Her close friendship with Michael Collins was crucial in his negotiations with the British government over the future of the Irish Free State in 1920-21. 
Lavery and his wife were supporters of Irish home rule, and after the establishment of the Irish Free State they spent much time in Dublin, although Lavery never denied or neglected his roots in Belfast; he presented large groups of his paintings to both cities. Such was his involvement with Irish politics and politicians of the 1920s and 1930s -- he painted Eamon de Valera and a posthumous portrait of Michael Collins -- that his portrait of Hazel as the personification of Ireland, Cathleen ni Houlihann ('Killarney'; Central Bank, Dublin), was incorporated on the free state banknotes, in use from 1928 to 1975. Hazel died on 1 January 1935, and Lavery's daughter, Eileen, also died in the same year. A grieving Lavery moved to the USA and established another career as a portrait painter of America's aristocracy, the stars of Hollywood, painting, among others, Maureen O'Sullivan, Loretta Young, and Shirley Temple. 
Lavery was honoured by academies and institutes around the world. He was knighted in 1918, and was a member of the orders of the Crown of Italy and of Leopold of Belgium. In 1906 he became a member of the Royal Hibernian Academy and in 1921 of the Royal Academy; he was also a member of the academies of Rome, Antwerp, Milan, Brussels, and Stockholm. He was a freeman of both Belfast and Dublin and received honorary doctorates from the Queen's University of Belfast and Trinity College, Dublin. 
Lavery died on 10 January 1941 at Rossenarra House, Kilkenny, Ireland, and was buried at Putney Vale cemetery, London. After his death his reputation began to wane, as social and financial ambition had set him apart from the other Glasgow Boys, who similarly aimed for recognition and security as painters but who did not compromise their work as frequently as Lavery did. By the end of the twentieth century, however, with the critical reassessment of the advances made both by the Glasgow Boys and by other naturalist painters of the period, his early paintings were recognized by a steep rise in their price. The few guineas achieved by Christies for major late works at the end of the 1940s have been eclipsed by the hundreds of thousands of pounds regularly paid for his early works some fifty years after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 59753


McGuinness, Norah Allison (1901-1980), painter and theatre designer, was born on 7 November 1901 at Lawrence Street, Londonderry, the daughter of Joseph Allison McGuinness, a coal merchant and shipowner, and his wife, Jessie, 'nee' McCleery. She studied graphic design and painting at the Metropolitan School of Art, Dublin, from 1921 to 1924. In her final year there, when she first exhibited at the Royal Hibernian Academy in Dublin, she decided to concentrate on painting rather than on book illustration, although the latter remained a source of income throughout her career. Having moved to London, she spent some months during 1924 studying art at the Chelsea Polytechnic. She also received her first important graphic design commission, to produce the illustrations for an edition of Laurence Sterne's 'A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy' which was published in 1925. In the same year she married Geoffrey Phibbs, a librarian from Wicklow, who wrote poetry under the name Geoffrey Taylor. Their marriage broke up in 1929 and they were divorced in 1931. 
In 1926 McGuinness began her long involvement with the theatre, designing the sets and costumes for W. B. Yeats's play 'Deirdre', first performed at the Abbey Theatre, Dublin, that year. In 1927 she designed sets and costumes for the Peacock Theatre in Dublin. The success of these projects led to many more set designs and costumes for the Abbey Theatre, as well as portraits of leading actors. On the advice of a fellow Irish painter, Mainie Jellett, McGuinness went to Paris in 1929 to study privately with the painter Andre Lhote; this stay of two years greatly affected her painting style, and she introduced some elements from fauvism and cubism. Her subject matter remained constant -- mostly still lifes, seascapes, and landscapes, with a few portraits. As her career progressed, she found her own mature style, employing loose brushwork and a spontaneous approach to her subject. She kept her forms simple and strong, and her colours mostly subdued in range. After ending her studies with Lhote in 1931, she spent a short time travelling in France and then returned to London; she lived and worked in Hammersmith until 1937, and sent paintings to mixed exhibitions at Lucy Wertheim's Gallery, and also showed with the Seven & Five Society and the London Group. She had solo exhibitions at Lucy Wertheim's Gallery in 1933, the Zwemmer Gallery in 1934, and the Dublin Painters' Gallery in Dublin in March 1936, shortly after joining the Dublin Painters' Society. McGuinness had two further shows at this venue in 1938 and 1941 and remained a member of the society until about 1950. In her Hammersmith years she resumed her book illustration and produced fashion drawings for the magazines 'Bystander' and 'Vogue'. 
In 1937 McGuinness returned home to Ireland, where she remained for the rest of her life. She did, however, travel to New York in 1937 and again in 1939, when she had a solo exhibition at the Paul Reinhardt Gallery, and also managed to produce some fashion illustrations for 'Harper's Bazaar' and window displays for Fifth Avenue department stores, such as Bonwit Tellers. In 1943 she was one of the founder members of the Irish Exhibition of Living Art, an annual exhibition held in Dublin devoted to showing avant-garde work; its first exhibition was held in September 1943. This organization was set up in opposition to the somewhat old-fashioned outlook of the Royal Hibernian Academy in Dublin. In September 1944 McGuinness was elected chairman of the committee of the Irish Exhibition of Living Art and in March 1948 became president, a post she held until 1972. She probably gained more praise for her diplomatic role in running this organization than she did for her paintings, and is fondly remembered for her energetic role in seeking out opportunities for living Irish artists. However, McGuinness was elected an honorary member of the Royal Hibernian Academy in 1957, the rival organization that first showed her work in the early 1920s. 
In 1950 McGuinness was one of two painters, the other being Nano Reid, chosen to represent Ireland at the Venice Biennale. In the 1950s and early 1960s she showed work at the Dawson Gallery in Dublin, the leading gallery in the city for contemporary art. 'Garden Green', a major still life of 1952, is in the collection of the Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery of Modern Art, and 'Shore Pools', a moody landscape from 1965, can be seen at the Irish Museum of Modern Art, Dublin. McGuinness had a major retrospective exhibition at Trinity College, Dublin, in October 1968, and her last exhibition was at the Taylor Galleries, Dublin, in 1979. Her work is in the collection of the Ulster Museum, Belfast, the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, Sligo Museum and Art Gallery, the Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery of Modern Art in Dublin, and the Hirschhorn Museum, Washington, DC. She died at Monkstown Hospital, Dun Laoghaire, on 22 November 1980. 


@@@@@


doc= 59778


Craig, Robert (1917-1995), Church of Scotland minister and theologian, was born in Markinch, Fife, on 22 March 1917, the son of John Craig (1886-1972), master mason, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Peggie ('c'.1886- 'c'.1926), a linen weaver. He was educated at the Bell-Baxter high school in Cupar and then at St Andrews University, where he graduated MA in 1938 and BD with distinction in systematic theology in 1941. After an assistantship at St John's Kirk, Perth, he was commissioned as chaplain to the forces. He was mentioned in dispatches for bravery during the Normandy landings. In 1945 he was posted with the 1st King's Own Scottish Borderers to Palestine and Egypt. In 1947 he took up the scholarship that had been waiting for him, to Union Theological Seminary, New York, where he studied under Reinhold Niebuhr and Paul Tillich, and graduated STM 'magna cum laude' in 1948. His St Andrews PhD (1950) was the basis of his book 'Social Concern in the Thought of William Temple' (1963). The Christian concern for social justice was to be his lasting theme. 
From 1948 to 1950, while he was finishing his PhD, Craig was deputy leader of the Iona community under Dr George McLeod. They were two contrasting personalities whose friendship lasted until death. On 26 June 1950 Craig married Olga Wanda ('b'. 1920), daughter of Michael and Helena Strzelec. They had met in Palestine when she was serving as a staff sergeant with the Polish Auxiliary Women's Service; there was one son and one daughter. Later in 1950 they went to South Africa, where Craig became professor of divinity at Natal University. In 1957 he was appointed professor of religion at Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts. In 1963 Craig returned to Africa, to Southern Rhodesia, as professor of theology in the University of Rhodesia. In 1980 he retired, having from 1969 been also principal and vice-chancellor of the university. In 1965 the party of Ian Smith had unilaterally declared independence, and intended to maintain white supremacy in Rhodesia. Liberal opinion across the world was against it, and even the Association of Commonwealth Universities threatened to boycott the University of Rhodesia. Friends advised Craig that he should not be there, but he felt that he was there for a purpose. The university was a multiracial institution (the only one in Rhodesia) and he intended to keep it that way. His sheer determination in defiance of the government succeeded, and in 1980 he was able to hand the multiracial University of Zimbabwe over to an African principal. He returned to Scotland having perforce left all his assets in Zimbabwe. An appointment to be minister of St Andrew's Memorial Church in Jerusalem took him back to familiar scenes and different political tensions. His gritty integrity and belief in the strength of ecumenical Christian fellowship made his leadership greatly valued, and he formed a close friendship with the mayor of Jerusalem, Teddy Kollek. 
In 1985 Craig retired to the family home in Falkland, Fife, and to his surprise was called to be moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. He had never been to the general assembly before he took the chair in May 1986. His year as moderator showed the courage that characterized his whole life. He wore everywhere the eighteenth-century court-dress, lace, and tricorn hat of the moderator, but the message delivered in his gravelly Fife voice always addressed the contemporary world. On one occasion he alighted from a Lothian Region bus in full moderatorial dress at the front door of a social project he was due to visit, to be received by a slightly embarrassed civic delegation that had preceded him by limousine. His St Andrew's day sermon to the Scots MPs in Westminster did not endear him to the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher: 'We are in serious danger of becoming again two nations -- a few rich and many poor. We mobilized the best in human nature for justice and peace during the war. We are challenged to do the same for justice and peace today. (quoted in 'The Independent', 8 Feb 1995)' A similar furore arose when as moderator he paid an unscheduled visit to the peace camp at Faslane. He was no pacifist: indeed, as honorary chaplain to the forces he once conducted three Remembrance day services at different military cemeteries in Jerusalem. However, he respected the pacifist witness, and he could not see why those making that witness at the Trident base should be deemed unworthy of a moderatorial visit. 
Those who met Craig in Falkland during his retirement may well have imagined that he had never left the place. His Fife accent, his innate courtesy, his stocky figure (with a cigarette never far from his lips), and his unpretentiousness betrayed nothing of a life of distinguished service overseas, or of the distinctions he had gained -- a CBE (in 1981) and honorary degrees from St Andrews, Witwatersrand, Birmingham, Natal, and Zimbabwe. He was unawed by rank or labels, but treated everyone with the same courtesy and the same respect. As a father he encouraged and took pride in the achievements of his son and daughter, and in his final years enjoyed greatly the company and infant wisdom of his grandchildren. He died of a heart attack at his home, West Port, Falkland, Fife, on 30 January 1995 and was buried in Falkland. He was survived by his wife, children, and grandchildren. 


@@@@@


doc= 59780


Tytler, Christian Helen Fraser- (1897-1995), army officer, was born in Elie, Fife, on 23 August 1897, the only daughter and youngest of three children of John Campbell Shairp (1858-1913), advocate and sheriff, of Houston, Uphall, Linlithgow, and his wife, Harriet Caroline (died 1949), the third daughter in a family of five daughters and two sons of Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Thomas Erskine, second baronet, army officer, of Cambo, Fife. Her two older brothers, Norman ('b'. 1891) and John ('b'. 1894), both served with the Ayrshire yeomanry during the First World War; Norman died on active service on 13 October 1918. She was educated at home by a governess, and then joined the Foreign Office, in which she worked as a clerical officer from 1917 to 1919. In the latter year she attended the peace conference at Versailles. There she met, and on 19 June 1919 married, Neil Fraser-Tytler (1889-1937), a colonel in the Inverness-shire Royal Horse Artillery. He was the second and only surviving son in a family of two sons and one daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Edward Grant Fraser-Tytler, army officer, of Aldourie and Balnain, Inverness-shire, and his first wife, Edith Adriana, daughter of Sir Charles Selwyn, lord justice of appeal. They had two daughters. 
Between the wars Christian lived at her husband's home, Aldourie Castle, Loch Ness (and believed in the existence of the Loch Ness monster). After her husband's death she joined the ATS, which had been formed in 1938 to replace the women's army corps, which had done sterling work in the First World War but had subsequently been disbanded. 
Fraser-Tytler served at the War Office from 1939 to 1943 as a member of the staff of the adjutant-general, Sir Ronald Adam; she became a controller in 1940. With Dame Helen Gwynne-Vaughan she reorganized the service and was appointed director of organization, ATS. She established and ran AG16, the department responsible for recruiting and organizing the rapidly expanding ATS. A major problem in those early days was deciding which tasks could be managed successfully by women, and, once decisions had been taken, ensuring that suitable appointments and postings were arranged. This was an area in which there was considerable divergence of opinion in the army but where Fraser-Tytler's tact and insight proved invaluable. Her achievements were recognized by her appointment as CBE (military) in 1941. Hers was one of the first honours conferred on a woman during the war. 
By 1943 the need for, and soon the indispensability of, women on anti-aircraft sites was unmistakable. ATS staff were serving in anti-aircraft command in a variety of tasks from clerical to transport and cooking, but were regarded as particularly valuable in the mixed anti-aircraft batteries of 200 men and 200 women. With the arrival of flying bombs (V1s) and rockets (V2s) many of these anti-aircraft units had to be hastily deployed on coastal sites where conditions were far from satisfactory, a fact noted by the press, among other critics. At least one MP, Tom Driberg, encouraged ATS women to express their complaints. In 1943 Fraser-Tytler was appointed deputy director ATS in anti-aircraft command, and in the next two years she had to deal with this and similar problems, which involved endless travelling to gun sites, mostly in remote areas. Her duties also included escorting the queen (later Queen Elizabeth, the queen mother) and the princess royal to anti-aircraft units where ATS people were serving, and to bomb-damaged areas. 
After demobilization Fraser-Tytler returned to Aldourie Castle, where she indulged her passion for fishing. She became a JP and ran the ATS in Ross and Cromarty and Inverness-shire, as well as serving on the Scottish council of the Young Women's Christian Association, and representing Scotland on the national council. She also founded the local branch of the women's rural institute (the Scottish Women's Institute). 
Although a strong woman, with powerful organizational abilities, Christian Fraser-Tytler was far from the conventional idea of a female brigadier, and always remained charming and elegant. She died at St Andrews on 30 June 1995 and was survived by her two daughters, Ann ('b'. 1920), who married Sir David Erskine, fifth baronet, and Mary Hermione ('b'. 1922), who married Rear-Admiral Sir Patrick Morgan. 


@@@@@


doc= 59781


Brimelow, Thomas, Baron Brimelow (1915-1995), diplomatist, was born on 25 October 1915 at 94 Sale Road, Tyldesley, Lancashire, the second of three sons of William Brimelow ('b'. 1885), a cotton yarn salesman and later cotton mill director, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Smith ('b'. 1890), a teacher. Early on he showed that combination of hard work and high intellect which was to mark his whole career: the elementary school in New Mills led to the county secondary school, a state scholarship to Oriel College, Oxford, and a first in modern languages in 1936. Brimelow's father had travelled widely for his firm and Brimelow, an ambitious lad who had won fellowships which gave him a year in Paris and a year studying Russian in Riga, decided on the consular service. He took first place in the 1938 examination. So, in October 1938, an apple-cheeked young man with an engaging smile who needed 'a bit of polish and slightly wider knowledge of the world to become very useful' (private information), he went as a probationary vice-consul to Danzig, deciphering telegrams, helping with the accounts, and serving at the counter. Here, as Europe moved to war, he acquired first-hand experience of totalitarian bullying which must have served him well when, as the Germans moved into Danzig, he went as vice-consul to Riga, in November 1939. A year later, as the USSR moved into Latvia, Brimelow, still only twenty-four, earned praise for his work in closing down the legation. 
After a spell in New York, Brimelow was posted in June 1942 as third secretary and vice-consul in Moscow, where he spent the remainder of the war and began to acquire that personal experience of the workings of the Soviet state which was to make him, throughout most of the cold war, the acknowledged authority on the interpretation of Soviet policy and the formulation of the British response. He returned to Britain in the early summer of 1945, and, on 19 May 1945, married Jean Ethel (Jeanie) Cull (1917-1993), a clerical officer in the Home Office, and daughter of John William Underwood Cull, a coach trimmer, of Glasgow. They had two daughters. 
Brimelow served in the Foreign Office from June 1945, and was officially appointed there in September 1945. He was promoted first secretary in November 1946. He served as first secretary (commercial) and consul at Havana from April 1948 to October 1951, when he returned to Moscow as first secretary until September 1954. He was made an OBE in the same year. There then followed two years in Ankara as counsellor (commercial) before Brimelow returned to the Foreign Office as head of the northern department, in August 1956. He was made a CMG in 1959. From 1960 to 1963 he served as counsellor in Washington, before again returning to Moscow as minister, until 1966. He was ambassador to Poland from August 1966 to March 1969, deputy under-secretary of state at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office until November 1973, and permanent under-secretary of state and head of the diplomatic service until November 1975, when he retired. He was promoted KCMG in 1968 and GCMG in 1975, and made a life peer, as Baron Brimelow of Tyldesley, in 1976. He took the Labour whip. 
Brimelow's command of the Russian language and his understanding both of the Russian character and of the Soviet system were legendary. Some saw him as the toughest of the cold warriors. Tough he was and having, as he said, 'been brought up under Stalin' ('The Independent', 4 Aug 1995), he had no illusions. But his policy was essentially that of George Kennan: 'Stand up to them, but not aggressively and let the hand of time do its work' (G. F. Kennan, 'Memoirs, 1925-50', 1967). In 1964, when it was hoped that, in its own interest, the USSR might move away from confrontation, Brimelow argued that the ideology of class conflict was pulling the cartload of Soviet interests in the wrong direction. One day the cart would wear out the horse. British policy should look towards that day, but the horse was not yet dead and the leadership was neither willing nor able to cut the harness. Unyielding in his hatred of the Soviet system, he still worked for better relations and opposed any policy designed to promote instability within the Soviet empire. He was content to wait another two decades until the horse fell terminally sick and Russia cut itself free. 
In 1971, as deputy under-secretary of state, Brimelow advised on the mass expulsion of Soviet intelligence agents, but there was no truth to the suggestion that he was himself a member of the intelligence service. As deputy and later as permanent under-secretary his responsibility was much wider than the Soviet area. He was in a key position for the run-up to British membership of the EC and the first two years of membership. As head of the service he never forgot the well-being of its most junior members. 
On retirement, while adding modern and ancient Greek to his linguistic repertoire, Brimelow took on the chairmanship of the Occupational Pensions Board (1978-82) and served for two years as a member of the European parliament (1977-8). Having mastered the complexities of agricultural finance, he used this knowledge to good effect in the House of Lords. A major retirement project was to research the repatriation of Soviet citizens at the end of the war. He had dealt with this as a junior in the northern department and, angered by unfair and inaccurate public comment, he worked with Brigadier Anthony Cowgill and Christopher Booker on a detailed study of the forced repatriation of Cossacks and Yugoslavs from Austria. This was published as 'The Repatriations from Austria in 1945', in 1980. Brimelow's separate history of the whole affair was, sadly, never published. 
Brimelow's life was marked by an untiring devotion to the task in hand, a care for his fellows, and modesty in success. Never one for public display, his kindness was never superficial. Mild, inscrutable, and gentle in manner, he was logical and precise in analysis and exposition, ruthless in his demolition of muddled argument, and wide in his range of interests. From first to last he remained a rather private man, deeply devoted to his wife Jean and to their two daughters. His wife's death in 1993, after months of distressing illness, affected him deeply. He died at his home, 12 West Hill Court, Millfield Lane, Highgate, Camden, London, on 2 August 1995, of bronchopneumonia and myeloid leukaemia; his body was cremated. He was survived by his two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 59783


Brinson, Peter Neilson (1920-1995), writer and lecturer on dance, was born on 6 March 1920 at Sea View Villa, North Parade, Llandudno, the son of Harold Neilson Brinson, a major in the King's Liverpool regiment and cotton broker, and his wife, Vera Mabel Mathison. He was educated at Denstone College, Staffordshire, before going up to Keble College, Oxford, in 1938. During the Second World War, which interrupted his studies, he joined the Royal Artillery and achieved the rank of captain. He served as tank commander with General Montgomery at El Alamein. After the war Brinson went back to Oxford and took a first in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1948. In that year he joined the London Film Centre as scriptwriter and research director. During this time he became actively involved with classical ballet. In 1952 he wrote and produced 'The Black Swan', featuring the Covent Garden stars Beryl Gray and John Field, the first ballet film to use the new techniques of stereoscope. In the same year he began as a freelance writer on dance for 'The Times' and for specialist dance magazines. In 1954 he was appointed as the first editor of the magazine 'Films and Filming'. He wrote widely on the arts and was also invited to give a series of extramural lectures on dance for the universities of Oxford, Cambridge, and London. 
In 1963 Brinson published 'The Choreographic Art' with Peggy van Praag, who later became director of the Australian Ballet. In 1964 he established Ballet for All, a touring programme of the Royal Ballet. Working with a small group of dancers and then actors, he criss-crossed the British Isles presenting penetrating introductions to some of the most popular works. As deviser, writer, and presenter he gave thousands of adults and children their first experience of the power and appeal of ballet. Though rooted in ballet, he quickly recognized and embraced the importance of contemporary dance, particularly in the work of Martha Graham. Brinson developed a strong association with the work of the London School of Contemporary Dance and its founder, Robin Howard. His driving vision was always of a unified, national dance culture in which all forms of dance were valued and provided for. 
In 1968 Brinson was appointed director of the Royal Academy of Dancing in London and in 1972 director of the UK and Commonwealth branch of the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation. During the next ten years he took a leading role in promoting national and international initiatives in the arts, education, and community development. Through strategic funding of people and projects, initiating national commissions, and related research and publications he was at the epicentre of innovation in each of these areas. 
Brinson had great powers of synthesis and overview and was in constant demand to chair commissions, to give keynote addresses, to lead inquiries, and to moderate conferences and symposia. Through the Gulbenkian Foundation he wrote or contributed to seminal works on the arts and public policy. These included 'Dance Education and Training' (1980) and 'The Arts Britain Ignores' (1980), as well as 'The Economic Situation of the Visual Artist' and 'The Arts in Schools: Principles, Practice and Provision'. He chaired the dance board of the Council for National Academic Awards, prepared reports for Commonwealth governments, and accepted academic appointments at York University, Toronto, as adjunct professor of dance, and at Goldsmiths' College, London. 
Through his work Brinson helped gain respectability for dance in education, both as a practical discipline and as a subject of serious study. He was instrumental in establishing a chair of dance studies at the University of Surrey, the first of its type in the United Kingdom. He was uniquely qualified to fill this position but his role in creating it effectively disqualified him. In 1982 he left the Gulbenkian Foundation to become head of postgraduate studies at the Laban Centre at Goldsmiths' College, University of London, to advise and influence new generations of dance scholars. 
Brinson travelled ceaselessly throughout the world, promoting and supporting the development of dance and dance education. He developed particularly close ties with Australia, Canada, Ireland, and Hong Kong. In 1992 he was awarded the Digital Dance award for services to dance education and training. With typical grace he donated the prize money to a pilot scheme for a national dancers' injury and health scheme. 
Brinson was a tall, slim man with an elegant bearing who was often taken to be fifteen or twenty years younger than he was. He shared much of his adult life with his devoted partner Werdon Douglas Anglin. They lived and worked together for twenty years, residing for much of that time in their welcoming, book-lined home in Stockwell, south London. Always charming and engaging, Brinson listened intently and spoke with a calm authority, his conversation often interrupted by a gentle, self-conscious laugh. He was a man of fine sensibilities and taste, not least in wine. His favoured aperitif was a cocktail of dry sherry and dry white wine, known to many in his circle as a Brinson. 
In 1988 Peter Brinson was diagnosed as suffering from myelofibrosis. He faced the disease with strength and persistence, outliving considerably the early forecasts of his doctors. The illness required regular and lengthy blood transfusions. Typically, he came to value these as positive times when he could work and write without the interruption of meetings or telephone calls. He died at Trinity Hospice, Clapham, London, on 7 April 1995, and was cremated. During his lifetime he was in turn a film-maker, journalist, academic, and social entrepreneur. Brinson excelled in all these roles and brought to them a consistent passion for the arts, for social justice, and for equality. In particular, he played a leading role in transforming the nature and status of dance education in Britain and in many other parts of the world. 


@@@@@


doc= 59784


Brophy, Brigid Antonia (1929-1995), writer and campaigner, was born at 79 Uxbridge Road, Ealing, London, on 12 June 1929, the second child of John Brophy (1899-1965), a Liverpool-born writer and editor of Irish descent, and his wife, Charis Weare Grundy (1895/6-1975), teacher and novelist. Her mother had been born in Chicago, the daughter of James Grundy, a Scottish archangel (bishop) of the Catholic Apostolic church, but was brought up in Liverpool, and Brigid was baptized into the Anglican church. Because an elder sibling died in infancy before Brigid was born, she was in effect an only child. Her father recognized that she was precocious and encouraged her to read and write from an early age. 'Any ability I have as an adult to write English prose,' she said, 'I learned from him and from reading the masters he directed me to, Bernard Shaw and Evelyn Waugh' ('King of a Rainy Country', afterword, 276). She was educated at numerous schools, both state and private, including a preparatory school for boys where her mother was head teacher, the Abbey School, Reading, and St Paul's School for Girls, which she left at fifteen. After a spell at Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts and secretarial college, in 1947 she gained a scholarship to St Hugh's College, Oxford, where she read classics but was sent down for unspecified sexual misdemeanours at the end of her fourth term. She began earning her living as a shorthand-typist. 
Brophy claimed that she was writing verse dramas at the age of fifteen, but the first book that she published was a volume of short stories, 'The Crown Princess', which appeared in 1953 to highly laudatory notices. She nevertheless expunged the book from her bibliography because, as she put it, 'I can recognize no connection between it and me' ('My first book', 97). In the same year she also published her first novel, 'Hackenfeller's Ape', inspired by hearing the lions roaring when she lived opposite Regent's Park Zoo. It started out as a 'narrative poem on the (alas, still visionary) theme of the liberation of animals' (ibid.), a subject that she was to write about frequently, but it evolved into a short novel, written in two weeks, and won the Cheltenham Literary Festival prize for a first novel. (Iris Murdoch was the runner-up, and subsequently became a close friend.) One result of writing the book, in which someone attempts to prevent an ape from being sent into space, was that Brophy became a vegetarian. 
On her twenty-fifth birthday, 12 June 1954, Brophy married Michael Vincent Levey (1927-2008), assistant keeper at the National Gallery, son of Otto Lemuel Herbert Levey, assistant director at the Ministry of Supply. The couple lived at 23 Earls Court Square, London, and had one daughter. Though both Brophy and Levey came to regard marriage as 'an immoral social institution we ought never to have subscribed to' ('My first book', 98) their own was something that Brophy said she rejoiced in every day. It nevertheless remained distinctly unconventional, accommodating a long period when Brophy was in love with the novelist Maureen Duffy. 
Brophy's second novel, 'The King of a Rainy Country' (1956), in which a young woman given the author's baptismal name of Susan goes in search of a girl with whom she had been in love at school, is the most straightforwardly autobiographical of her books, although every one of them is steeped in the author's personality and beliefs. Brophy was determinedly experimental as a writer, and each of her novels was different in style and form from its predecessors, but together with her many works of non-fiction these books constitute a highly coherent and distinctive 'oeuvre'. Her first work of non-fiction was 'Black Ship to Hell' (1962), which started out as an attempt to 'psycho-analyse the Greek myth of the Underworld' (p. 19), but ended up as a wide-ranging and characteristically allusive study of 'man as a destructive and, more particularly, self-destructive animal' (p. 13) who can only be saved by a Freudian examination of these impulses. It endeavoured to formulate a morality based on reason rather than religion -- Brophy described herself as 'a natural, logical and happy atheist' ('King of a Rainy Country', afterword, 276). The influence of Freud is discernible in her third novel, 'Flesh' (1962), just as her critical study 'Mozart the Dramatist' (1964) informs her operatic novel 'The Snow Ball', published in the same year. 'The Finishing Touch' (1963), set in the romantic hothouse of a girls' finishing school (the headmistress of which was based on her husband's art-historian colleague Anthony Blunt), is a pastiche of Ronald Firbank, a writer whom she championed in her vast critical work 'Prancing Novelist' (1973). The latter book is a dazzlingly speculative and passionately argued investigation of an inventive and neglected writer with whom Brophy clearly identified. (She wrote the book in the same violet ink that Firbank customarily used.) It is subtitled 'A defence of fiction in the form of a critical biography of Ronald Firbank', and in it Brophy argued that 'works of art have and need no justification but themselves' (p. 70) and that 'good fiction is positively and absolutely good' (p. xiii). Fiction -- and other writing -- that was not good came under attack in 'Fifty Works of English and American Literature we could Do Without' (1967), a squib written in collaboration with her husband and their friend Charles Osborne. 
Whether or not what writers did was 'useful' Brophy believed that they should be properly paid, and was a driving force behind the campaign to introduce public lending right (PLR), a scheme by which authors were annually paid a kind of royalty, out of government funds, when their books were borrowed from public libraries. The idea had first been posited by her father in 1951, but it was the Writers Action Group, founded by Brophy, Maureen Duffy, Michael Levey, Francis King, and Lettice Cooper in 1972, that overcame the opposition of librarians and through persistent lobbying ensured that PLR came into force by an act of parliament in 1979. (Brophy's 'A Guide to Public Lending Right' was published in 1983.) This and other campaigns resulted in Brophy becoming well known as a controversialist during the 1960s, both in print and in broadcasting, and one of her favourite tactics was to pronounce the most heterodox opinions as if they were universal truths. She usefully filled a role similar to that of Gore Vidal in the United States, wittily challenging national complacency and goading her fellow citizens until they were roused from their habitual torpor. She often appeared on the satirical television show 'That Was The Week That Was', and a talk commissioned by BBC radio at the time of the Profumo affair was so scathing about sexual hypocrisy in Britain that the corporation declined to broadcast it. She was a fervent anti-vivisectionist and a campaigner against blood sports (including angling), who allowed her beloved Persian cat, Darius, meat only because felines require a carnivorous diet; she was an outspoken opponent of the campaign against pornography, and wrote a booklet for the Secular Society, 'Lord Longford's Threat to Freedom' (1972); and she was an early and articulate supporter of homosexual rights. Her forthright views, and the vigour with which she expressed them, were (she complained) sometimes mistaken for pugnacity. She conceded that her 'Irishly rational tone of voice is infuriating to some readers -- or, rather, to some reviewers' ('Prancing Novelist', 48), but Edward Blishen captured the particular quality of her writing when he observed: 'She has always the gift of a most stirring sort of firmness. It is not the tone of a know-all, it is not remotely bossy; it is, I suppose, basically, the sound that logic makes' ('Reads', cover). 
Brophy's other works of non-fiction include 'Don't Never Forget' (1966), a collection of 'views and reviews', two characteristically enthusiastic and idiosyncratic books on Aubrey Beardsley, and 'The Prince and the Wild Geese' (1983), in which a series of watercolours by a young Irish woman is used as the basis for an imaginative recreation of the artist's romance with a Russian prince. Brophy's most challenging novel is 'In Transit' (1969), a Joycean 'trans-sexual adventure' (cover of 1971 reprint) in which gender, identity, and syntax blur and meld, and which is set, appropriately, in the no-man's-land of an airport. 'Palace without Chairs' (1978), subtitled 'a baroque novel', is a subversive, Ruritanian romance, once again influenced by Firbank. Brophy also wrote two plays, one of which, an unorthodox bedroom farce entitled 'The Burglar', was produced unsuccessfully in the West End in 1967; in the following year she published the text with a long and discursive preface in which many of her ideas about drama, writing, and her public reputation are rehearsed. Her one excursion into writing for juveniles, 'Pussy Owl' (1976), was read by James Cossins on the popular BBC children's programme 'Jackanory' and was subsequently published, with illustrations by Hilary Hayton. 
Brophy was quite tall, 'soncy' (as she would put it), with striking blue eyes emphasized by fair hair and very fair skin. She was a stylish dresser, fond of jewellery. In 1983 she was diagnosed as suffering from multiple sclerosis, and gradually became incapacitated. She nevertheless remained resolutely opposed to any medical research involving the use of animals. She continued to write as long as she was physically able, producing two collections of essays and journalism: 'Baroque- 'n'-Roll' (1987), which includes an account of her illness, and 'Reads' (1989). She wrote new introductions and afterwords to reissues of her novels, but none remained in print very long and they even became hard to find in libraries. She remained philosophical about this neglect, remarking of Firbank, but also thinking of herself: 'People are a bit debased about what they expect in fiction. When it isn't there and so much is wittily left out, I think they get confused' ('The Guardian'). Firbank's estimation of his own work -- that it was 'aggressive, witty, & unrelenting' ('Prancing Novelist', 69) -- might equally be applied to Brophy. 
Brophy eventually became confined to a wheelchair, and Michael Levey, who had become keeper of the National Gallery (and had been knighted in 1981), left his job in order to look after her. In 1991 the Leveys left the flat in the Old Brompton Road where they had lived for twenty-six years and moved to Louth, in Lincolnshire. When she needed full-time professional care Brophy entered the Fir Close Nursing Home, Westgate, Louth, where she died, of pneumonia and multiple sclerosis, on 7 August 1995. She was cremated at Grimsby. 


@@@@@


doc= 59785


Brown, (Arthur) Godfrey Kilner (1915-1995), athlete and schoolmaster, was born on 21 February 1915 in Bankura, Bengal, India, the fourth child and third son of the Revd Arthur E. Brown, principal of Bankura College, Bengal, and his wife, Gertrude Parsons. His parents met at Cambridge, where his father took a first in mathematics before embarking on missionary work in India and passing on his enthusiasm for athletics to his children, of whom Godfrey was the best of a very talented family. Godfrey Brown was an exceptionally versatile runner from his days at Warwick School, and ran all distances from 100 to 880 yards. He went to Peterhouse, Cambridge, to read history in 1935 and won a blue in his first year. He made his first international appearance against Germany the same year at Munich, then returned to Berlin the following year in the British Olympic team. Like most of the athletes, he was too preoccupied with his event to take much interest in the wider political and racial aspects of the 1936 games. 'Keeping politics out of sport' was at the core of the amateur credo of which he was a prime exponent. 
Not doing much in the way of training was another tenet of the English amateur. Brown, however, did rather more than most, and worked out his own routine of 'miles and miles of slow jogging' for an hour and a half a day, relying on the Olympic heats to bring him to top form for the 400 metres final. Despite drawing the difficult outside lane, he ran a marvellous race: he almost beat Archie Williams of the United States to the gold medal, set a new European record, and knocked a full second off his best previous time. In fact, his time was even better than he knew, since he lost by only 0.02 of a second and not 0.2, as officially reported, 'so as not to injure the vanity of the hand time-keepers', as Norris McWhirter discovered much later. 
Brown was a shy, reserved figure, 'never an aggressively competitive person but he had a quiet determination', as his sister recalled. 'Although he never spoke of it', she continued, 'I always felt he was very disappointed with himself for not winning the Gold Medal' (private information). His greatest moment, however, followed hard upon his greatest disappointment. Brown was chosen to run the final leg of the 4 x 400 metres relay against strong American and German teams. Alongside Brown the British team consisted of Freddie Wolff ['see under 'Roberts, William], Bill Roberts, a powerful quarter-miler who had just missed a bronze in the 400 metres individual event, and Godfrey Rampling, an army officer and relay silver medallist from the 1932 Olympics. Preparation for the race was wonderfully unscientific. Duncanson and Collins recall Rampling saying, 'Look here chaps, we really ought to practise some baton-changing', but adding 'we soon got bored and packed it in' (Duncanson and Collins, 33). Brown, however, was less casual. He had watched the Americans and was convinced the British team had the talent to win. Wolff ran an indifferent first leg but Rampling ran a great second lap, making up the deficit and giving Roberts a slight lead which he extended, leaving Brown to bring home the title in style by a margin of about 15 metres. 
It was Britain's only track gold medal of the games and brought Brown to the attention of the general public. He was still only twenty-one and ran successfully in 1937 and in 1938, clocking a personal best for the 880 yards in America in 1937 and remaining unbeaten in 1938. By then he had left Cambridge and started a career as a schoolmaster. Lack of time for training told in his relatively poor form in 1939. Extreme short-sightedness -- he always ran with glasses -- meant he spent the war as a schoolmaster and he never recovered his pre-war form. On 15 April 1939 he married Mary Denholm Armstrong (1915/16-1993), the daughter of a railway manager, with whom he had four children, three daughters and a son. He kept up his links with athletics through summer coaching schemes, acted as an official at meetings, and even built a cinder running track with the help of a few volunteers at Cheltenham College, where he taught from 1943 to 1950. From 1950 until 1978 he was headmaster of Worcester Royal Grammar School, where he taught sixth-form history and set up a development fund which enabled a major building programme to be completed, including a new science wing. Despite poor sight he was a good rugby player and cricketer and was active within the local community, prominent in getting the Swan Theatre built in Worcester, and playing the French horn in the local orchestra. 
Brown always set great store by his family's remarkable athletic achievements. His sister Audrey Brown ['see 'Court, Audrey Kathleen (1913-2005)] won a silver medal in the 100 metres relay in the 1936 Olympics, while his elder brother Ralph, later Sir Ralph Kilner Brown (1909-2003) was an Amateur Athletic Association champion hurdler (and a future High Court judge). But for injury, Ralph would have joined his brother and sister at Berlin in 1936 in a unique triumph for 'muscular Christianity' and for the Achilles club, of which the brothers were both members. 
Brown retired to Clifton upon Teme, Worcestershire, and then to Sussex. His wife died in 1993 and he died two years later, on 4 February 1995, shortly before his eightieth birthday, in Crawley Hospital, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 59788


Brock, (Arthur) Guy Clutton- (1906-1995), agriculturist and political activist, was born on 5 April 1906 at Lake View, Green Lane, Ruislip, Middlesex, the son of Henry Alan Clutton-Brock, stockbroker, and his wife, Rosa Gertrude Eleanor, 'nee' Bowles. He was educated at Rugby School and, from 1924 to 1927, at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he read history. At one point he contemplated ordination and went briefly to Ripon Hall, Oxford, but he took up boys' club work instead, first at Cambridge House and then at Rugby House. He entered the borstal service in 1933, and in 1936 became principal probation officer for the Metropolitan Police court district. Meanwhile, on 14 April 1934 he married Francys Mary (Molly) Allen (1912-2013), daughter of John Nelson Allen, merchant. They had one daughter, Sarah (Sally). 
A convinced pacifist, Clutton-Brock worked during the Second World War as head of the Oxford House settlement in Bethnal Green, establishing a training community centre. In 1944 he was appointed by the Allied Control Commission for Germany to direct relief for starving and homeless young people, and in 1946 he continued this work with Christian Reconstruction in Europe. He became convinced that the young needed direct contact with the land. He returned to England in 1947 to work as an agricultural labourer and market gardener. 
In 1949 Clutton-Brock was invited to go to St Faith's Mission, near Rusape, Southern Rhodesia, where the Anglican mission farm was run down and threatened with a government take-over. His experience of agriculture had been as a labourer rather than as a manager. He did not run St Faith's farm as an agri-business. Instead he set up a non-racial co-operative farm. He summoned the men back from migrant labour in the towns. One of them, John Mutasa, became the farm manager. Much to the horror of the district commissioner and local white people, Clutton-Brock and his wife became part of a vibrant non-racial community. She set up a clinic for disabled children. He organized a debating society and invited politicians, chiefs, bishops, and professors to address weekend conferences. Ideas bubbled at St Faith's, and the young leaders of the emerging African nationalist movement came to the conferences and stayed on to talk with Clutton-Brock. He helped draft the constitution of the Southern Rhodesian African National Congress (ANC) and joined it when it was established in September 1957. 
Clutton-Brock's personality was very attractive to young nationalists such as George Nyandoro, Robert Chikerema, and Robert Mugabe. He was wise rather than clever; humble but sure of what he believed; supportive without ever wanting to take a lead. He was absolutely trusted, respected, and revered. The Rhodesian regime, however, could not understand the motives of anyone who worked with Africans on terms of equality. In March 1959 the ANC was banned and 500 of its leaders and members were detained, Guy Clutton-Brock among them. He spent a month in prison, and on release became chairman of the Southern Rhodesia Detainees Legal Aid and Welfare Committee. Also in 1959 he published 'Dawn in Nyasaland' and 'Facing 1960 in Central Africa', in both of which he set out his belief in multi-racialism. 
In 1960, supported by the African Development Trust, Clutton-Brock went to Botswana and began a co-operative there. He also helped in the establishment of the Bamangwato Development Association. But Southern Rhodesia had become his home and he returned in 1964. By this time the nationalist parties had been banned and leaders like Robert Mugabe and Joshua Nkomo were in prison or restriction. Clutton-Brock kept the spirit of collaborative nationalism alive by inspiring another co-operative at Cold Comfort Farm, in a designated 'European' area only 8 miles from the Rhodesian capital, Salisbury. Young nationalists like Didymus Mutasa -- later speaker of the Zimbabwe parliament -- gained leadership experience at Cold Comfort. The daughter co-operative farm at Nyafaru on the north-eastern border with Mozambique brought Clutton-Brock into contact with Chief Rekayi Tangwena and his people, who were resisting eviction from their land. He became a major supporter and publicist for the Tangwena, publishing 'Rekayi Tangwena: Let Tangwena be' in 1969. (Later, in 1975, Robert Mugabe escaped into Mozambique to join the guerrilla war by way of the Nyafaru co-operative.) 
These activities became intolerable to the Smith regime and in January 1971 the Cold Comfort Society was declared illegal. Didymus Mutasa was imprisoned, and spent two years in detention without trial. Clutton-Brock was declared a prohibited immigrant. He and his wife were deported to Britain, where they settled in a farm labourer's cottage in north Wales. They led a simple life there but Clutton-Brock maintained a vast correspondence with Rhodesians both inside the country and in Mozambique. The leaders of all Rhodesia's many nationalist parties trusted him. He lobbied the British government and raised funds for relief in Mozambique. After Rhodesia's independence in 1980 as Zimbabwe the Clutton-Brocks decided not to return, other than for a brief visit, believing that they were now too old to be able to contribute. But Clutton-Brock continued to command respect from Zimbabwe's new leaders, and he became president of the Britain-Zimbabwe Society. He died on 29 January 1995 at Wynne's Parc Nursing Home, Brookhouse Road, Denbigh, of bronchopneumonia, and was survived by his wife and daughter. He was rapidly declared a Zimbabwean national hero and after cremation his ashes were taken to Harare and scattered at Heroes Acre (making him the only white man so honoured). The Zimbabwean government also honoured him by instituting the Guy Clutton-Brock scholarship, for a Zimbabwean student studying at Magdalene College, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 59790


Bell, Sir Gawain Westray (1909-1995), colonial administrator and diplomatist, was born on 21 January 1909 in Cape Town, the only son of William Westray Bell (died 1946), shipping executive and later a stockbroker, and his wife, Emily Helen, 'nee' Kisch (1880-1971), daughter of an Anglo-Austrian mining engineer in South Africa. His family originally came from Latterhead in the Cumbrian sheep-farming uplands. Bell spent his childhood in South Africa, where his father was employed by the New Zealand Shipping Company (founded by his grandmother's family, the Westrays of Whitehaven), first in Basrah and then from 1901 in Cape Town. After preparatory school at Wynburg he went to Britain in 1919, entering the Dragon School, Oxford, and then Winchester College in 1922 and Hertford College, Oxford, in 1927. At Oxford he read medieval and modern history (graduating with a second-class degree in 1930), followed the Magdalen and New College beagles, was a member of the Officers' Training Corps, and captained the Oxford shooting eight. Putting aside the thought of the army but seeking a career abroad, Bell applied for both the colonial administrative and the Sudan political service. Accepted for the elite latter, he was at twenty-two too young to be sent to Africa, so he spent an extra year at Oxford attending the tropical African services course for colonial probationers. Part of his training was to witness surgery at the Radcliffe Hospital, 'to accustom ourselves to the sight of blood and severed limbs' (Bell, 'An Imperial Twilight', 16). He promptly fainted. 
Bell arrived in Khartoum in 1931. Although he was to spend over twenty years in Sudan, unusually in the political service he was given a number of outside assignments. In 1938 he was seconded to the colonial service administration of the Palestine mandate, serving as deputy district commissioner in Gaza and Beersheba. An accomplished horseman, he reconstituted the camel gendarmerie. He had a colourful war in the Middle East, joining the Cruze cavalry and rising to colonel in the Arab Legion under General Sir John Glubb. He returned to Sudan in 1945 as district commissioner of al- 'Ubayd, and again served outside when he became deputy Sudan agent in Cairo in 1949. Back in Khartoum in 1951, he was promoted deputy civil secretary and then permanent secretary to the new ministry of the interior. He was the last member of the administration to leave Sudan, in December 1954. 
At forty-five Bell was too young and his Arabic too fluent for him to wait long among colleagues testing the job market in Britain. Ironically, in view of what was to come, he was offered the job of managing a soda water factory in Northern Nigeria. The Colonial Office had him in mind for the chief secretaryship of Aden, but the Foreign Office got in first and Bell went as political agent to Kuwait. An attempt was made on his life in Kuwait in 1956, as in Palestine in 1938. In 1957 the Colonial Office's turn came, when Bell accepted the patently final governorship of Northern Nigeria. One of the attractions was that he would once again be working with his longtime Sudan colleague Sir James Robertson, now governor-general of the federation of Nigeria. It was a post which called for all Bell's previous experience of the transfer of power and all his skill as a diplomat. Not only was there the challenge of being a colonial governor yet with an elected premier and cabinet, there was also the legendary sensitivity of the premier, Alhaji Ahmadu Bello, to handle. The extremes in gubernatorial style between Bell and his predecessor Sir Bryan Sharwood Smith were widely perceived. 
Having retired for the second time in 1962 (the Northern Nigerian cabinet paid him the compliment of asking him to stay on as governor for two years beyond independence), Bell had a short spell as secretary-general of the Council for Middle East Trade before again being approached for government service. With Sir Ralph Hone he helped to devise a new constitution for the federation of south Arabia in 1965. Other Arabian missions followed, to Oman in 1966 (and again in 1974), and to the Trucial States. From 1966 to 1970 he was secretary-general of the South Pacific Commission, based in New Caledonia. 
In retirement the Bells occupied the National Trust property at Hidcote Bartrim Manor, Chipping Campden, where they had resided since 1959. On 19 January 1945 he had married Silvia Cornwell-Clyne, a photographic technician, whom he had known since 1937. She was the daughter of Adrian Cornwell-Clyne, a photographic expert, of Esher, Surrey, and the cousin of a colleague in Sudan, Martin Parr, who in turn was the brother of Bell's teacher at Winchester, Jack. She shared her husband's lifelong love of riding, and her wedding present to him was a superb grey, Cloud (a whole chapter in his memoirs was given over to horses). For five years Bell sat as part-time chairman of the civil service commission (1972-7). He became vice-president of the charity Lepra, was on the governing body of the School of Oriental and African Studies, and was active in the Anglo-Jordanian Society. He turned to writing his memoirs, publishing 'Shadows on the Sand' (1983) and 'An Imperial Twilight' (1989). The critic Marghanita Laski praised them for their 'knack of immensely attractive and inviting story-telling' (Kirk-Greene). In 1990 the Bells moved to a smaller house in East Ilsley, Berkshire, anticipating the ill health that was to accompany their later years. Bell continued to research into local Eberington history as well as to co-compile a register of his Sudan colleagues' post-retirement employment. He organized a major conference on Sudan at Durham University, resulting in a valuable expansion of the Sudan archive there. 
Of Bell it was said that 'spiritually he never left Winchester, with its legacy of those myriad meaningful ways in which Manners truly maketh Man' (Kirk-Greene). Forty years' experience as an overseas administrator and consummate diplomat, combined with a reputation throughout the Arab world for courtesy and cultural empathy, contributed to Bell's image as a model latter-day proconsul. Intimately involved in overseeing the process of the transfer of power in Sudan, Nigeria, and the south Pacific, he was on each occasion the last British holder of the post. He was appointed MBE (military) in 1942, CBE in 1955, KCMG in 1957, and a knight of St John in 1958. He died of pneumonia at Battle Hospital, Reading, on 26 July 1995. His body was donated for medical research, and his ashes were deposited at Winchester College by the Bell gate (named after his uncle Gawain Murdoch Bell, a housemaster who was killed at Ypres in 1917). He was survived by his wife, who died in 1996, and by three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 59793


Pearson, Weetman John Churchill, third Viscount Cowdray (1910-1995), businessman and landowner, was born on 27 February 1910 at Midhurst, Sussex, the only son and third of six children of Weetman Harold Miller Pearson, second Viscount Cowdray (1882-1933), Liberal MP for Eye from 1906 to 1918, and his wife, Agnes Beryl (1881-1948), third and youngest daughter of Lord Edward Spencer Churchill (fifth son of George Spencer Churchill, sixth duke of Marlborough). Pearson was educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford, and became third Viscount Cowdray on his father's death on 5 October 1933. He married, on 19 July 1939, Lady Anne Pamela Bridgeman ('b'. 1913), third of the four daughters of Orlando Bridgeman, fifth earl of Bradford. There were three children of the marriage, Mary Teresa ('b'. 1940), Liza Jane ('b'. 1942), and Michael Orlando Weetman ('b'. 1944). The marriage ended in divorce in 1950, and on 4 March 1953 Cowdray married Elizabeth Georgiana Mather Mather-Jackson, second of the three daughters of Sir Anthony Henry Mather Mather-Jackson, sixth baronet. There were a further three children by this second marriage, Lucy ('b'. 1954), Charles Anthony ('b'. 1956), and Rosanna ('b'. 1959). 
When succeeding to the title in 1933 Cowdray had taken over responsibility for two large estates -- at Cowdray Park in west Sussex and Dunecht in Aberdeenshire -- as well as a controlling interest in S. Pearson & Son, a diversified business group founded by his grandfather, Weetman Dickinson Pearson, first Viscount Cowdray, in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. S. Pearson was run at that time by his uncle, Clive Pearson, and Cowdray devoted much of his time to the management of the estates; he became a considerable authority on farming and forestry. He was also an active sportsman; in addition to the traditional country pursuits of hunting, shooting, and fishing he acquired a great enthusiasm for polo, reaching a handicap of four in 1939. In that year he joined the Sussex yeomanry as a captain. He was badly wounded at Dunkirk and lost his left arm. He made light of his disability and set about working out in practical ways how to minimize the damage -- perfecting, with the help of his gunmakers, Purdey, and the Roehampton centre, an artificial arm with a safety release mechanism which would enable him to ride and play polo with great success for many years. For the rest of the war he worked in the Air Ministry, serving as under-secretary of state for air in 1941-2. 
After the war Cowdray became increasingly involved in the affairs of S. Pearson, and took over as chairman when his uncle retired in 1954. The company, still wholly owned by the Pearson family, was in a difficult situation at that time. Its main aviation activities had been nationalized, as had its coal mines and electric utilities. It had a controlling interest in Lazards, the merchant bank, and a variety of other financial and industrial investments, including Westminster Press, a chain of provincial newspapers (of which Cowdray's twin sister, Angela, was chairman). Cowdray's achievement over the next twenty-three years was to transform the company, by acquisition, into a broadly based and highly profitable industrial group. Working closely with a group of talented colleagues, of whom Oliver Brian Sanderson Poole, later Baron Poole of Aldgate ['see 'Poole, Oliver Brian Sanderson], was the most important, he looked for well-managed firms which had a strong position in niche markets and which were capable of being developed over the long term. One of his most astute purchases was that of the 'Financial Times', bought from the Eyre family in 1957; the 'Financial Times' was then in the early stages of what proved to be a highly successful transition from City news sheet to major international newspaper. 
Brendan Bracken, chairman of the 'Financial Times' at the time of the takeover, had been greatly impressed by Cowdray's 'sound stewardship' of the Pearson business (Kynaston, 254), and this was an accurate description of his management style. While not afraid to take risks, he eschewed acquisitions which might overstrain Pearson's management resources. He was concerned, above all, with the quality of the businesses he was buying and the calibre of the managers in charge of them. A group that included newspaper and book publishing, Royal Doulton china and Madame Tussaud's, might not fit the fashionable concept of 'synergy', but the formula worked well. When Cowdray retired from the chairmanship in 1977 pre-tax profits were forty times the 1953 level, and gross earnings per share had increased twenty-eight fold. Meanwhile S. Pearson had become a public company; the shares were floated on the stock exchange in 1969. 
Cowdray combined his business career with an active life as landowner and sportsman. Polo remained one of his greatest loves, and through his efforts Cowdray Park was central to the revival of the sport which took place in Britain after the war. In 1956 he introduced the Cowdray Park gold cup, which later acquired the additional title of the British open championship. Following in his father's footsteps, he also served the Hurlingham Polo Association, as steward and chairman from 1947 to 1967, and later as president. 
Like Pilkington, the glass makers, S. Pearson was one of Britain's last great family business empires, and its durability owed a great deal to Cowdray's personal qualities. An old-fashioned sense of family pride and continuity was linked to a shrewd appreciation of modern management practices. He had a remarkable memory for facts and figures, and knew how to isolate what was important. Unassuming and unpompous in demeanour, he was receptive to new ideas, and listened carefully to all points of view before reaching a decision. When the decision was made, he let others get on with it without interference; if things went wrong, he was always supportive, and ready to work with the managers concerned to put matters right. Above all, he had a rocklike sense of values, and the standards which he set infused all the businesses which he controlled, even those which he rarely visited in person. At a time when family control in large businesses was giving way to professionalization, Cowdray represented an older ethos, but it is one which had a lasting impact on the character of the Pearson group. 
Cowdray died at the King Edward VII Hospital, Easebourne, Midhurst, Sussex, on 19 January 1995, following a stroke. He was survived by his second wife and his six children; his son Michael succeeded him as fourth viscount. A memorial service was held at St Paul's, Knightsbridge, on 7 March 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 59796


Buckton, Raymond William (1922-1995), trade unionist, was born on 20 October 1922 in Rillington, near Malton, Yorkshire, the eldest of seven children of William Ernest Buckton, farm labourer, and his wife, Hannah Young. Although his father was a farm worker, Buckton was born into a railway family, and after attending Appleton Roebuck elementary school he followed his uncles onto the footplate and became an engine cleaner at York depot at the age of sixteen. While still employed as a 'third man' he helped to fire the 'Flying Scotsman'. At nineteen he became the youngest branch secretary in the Amalgamated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen (ASLEF). He also became active in local politics, becoming chairman of the constituency Labour Party and the youngest alderman on the city council. On 20 March 1954 he married Barbara Gerry ('b'. 1928/9), a chef, daughter of Robert Langfield, a locomotive driver. They enjoyed what appeared to be a perfect marriage, and had two sons. 
Buckton became a full-time employee of ASLEF as the society's Irish officer, based in Dublin, in 1962. Nevertheless, the following year he became assistant general secretary, and in 1970 general secretary, serving until his retirement in 1987. As general secretary during a prolonged period of industrial strife on the railways, he was one of Britain's most widely hated trade union leaders, whose notoriety derived from his perceived position as the militant head of a small but 'irresponsible' craft union. He arrived at his union's splendid offices in Arkwright Road, Hampstead (the birthplace of Sir Thomas Beecham), just in time for three crucial battles with the British Railways board, one and a half of which he won. 
The first reached its climax in 1974 and concerned the fourteen-year erosion of the so-called Guillebaud formula. This sought to link railway pay to rates for similar work in the private sector. After sporadic industrial action all three railway unions agreed to submit their claims to the railway's own arbitration machinery -- a commendable, if rare, example of inter-union solidarity. The result was a substantial rise in real pay for all railway grades, in exchange for promises of improved performance. 
The second battle peaked in the early 1980s and centred on the board's determination to introduce single manning of footplates and a differential payment for driving high-speed trains. ASLEF fought this struggle alone, with its traditional mixture of obduracy and perseverance. Eventually Buckton was forced to accept the first objective, but persuaded the board to postpone the second, at least for the foreseeable future. 
The third struggle was by far the most bitter and protracted. It concerned the terms demanded for what was called 'flexible rostering', that is, the freedom of management to rearrange shifts so that drivers spent more time at the controls. In 1983 Buckton demonstrated, before another hearing of the industry's own tribunal, that the board had little idea of the actual savings involved. They had also worked out few answers to his many practical objections. His difficulty was that once again he had no support among the other unions. In the end he was forced to sign an agreement of sorts, though it was by no means clear that management extracted many worthwhile concessions. 
Buckton served on the general council of the TUC from 1973 to 1986, and was its president in 1984-5. He was a conscientious committee man, representing the TUC on a number of public bodies. He tirelessly supported the policies of the left on council, and it was a much noted irony on the right that he found himself president during the disastrous year of the miners' strike. He did his best to mobilize support for the miners' cause, on the impossible terms demanded by their leaders. This time he failed completely, and regarded the result as the biggest disappointment of his life. 
At the rostrum Buckton was voluble, sonorous, and sometimes over the top. In negotiation he was perspicacious, astute, and capable of sudden concessions. Off duty he was gregarious, genial, and relaxed. He sang to his own accordion and played the mouth organ well. He always claimed that he never bothered about the things irate commuters stuck through his letter box; he said he did not mind about the death threats and abusive phone calls. He laughed off the tin of paint thrown at his windscreen while he was waiting at a red light. What the public did not know, or care about, was that his was a union run by its full-time lay executive. Buckton had no vote and few levers of influence. His job was to convince the executive to go out and persuade the members to accept the inevitable, for the best price he could squeeze out of the board. It was a strategy that defied public explanation or excuse. 
On his retirement Buckton and his wife opened a Mexican bistro in Bushey, Hertfordshire, but they sold it after a year to buy a villa in Albufeira, Portugal. There he kept busy organizing the expatriate vote for Labour, with the help of his friend Clive Dunn (Corporal Jones from the television comedy 'Dad's Army'). Ray Buckton died of stomach cancer in Albufeira on 7 May 1995; he was survived by his wife and two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 59798


Clayton, Jack Isaac (1921-1995), film director, was born on 1 March 1921 at 95 King's Road, Brighton, the only son of Beatrice Clayton, of independent means. Beatrice Clayton brought up her son and daughter Jill (1917-1993) alone, with a succession of private tutors and much-beloved nannies. Jack Clayton went to the Arnold House School in London for one term, but he was academically almost totally unschooled. At the age of fifteen he entered the film industry, working first for Alexander Korda as a runner, and rising to become production manager on Korda's 'An Ideal Husband' (1947) via such films as 'Wings of the Morning' (1937) and 'Q Planes' (1939). Only wartime service in the RAF film unit (where he made 'Naples is a Battlefield') interrupted his steadily growing reputation. On 13 December 1947 he married Mary Lydia Cole, the actress Christine Norden (1924-1988), who had appeared in 'An Ideal Husband'. 
In the early 1950s Clayton was invited to join John and James Woolf at Romulus Films as associate producer, and his films there included 'I am a Camera' (1955), 'Beat the Devil' (1953), and 'Moulin Rouge' (1952). In the last of these he formed a lasting friendship and working relationship with John Huston, who in 1984 designated Clayton his successor on 'Under the Volcano' should he die during the making of the film. Clayton was divorced from Christine Norden in 1953 and married a star of 'Moulin Rouge', Katherine Kath, in 1954. Other films made at this time included a trio of farces, 'Sailor Beware' (1956), 'Dry Rot' (1956), 'Three Men in a Boat' (1956), and the melodrama 'The Story of Esther Costello' (1957), with Joan Crawford. In 1956 he was able to persuade Romulus to finance his long-cherished dream: to direct Wolf Mankowitz's updated version of Gogol's 'The Bespoke Overcoat'. This exquisite chamber work won a prize at Venice and an Oscar for the best short subject. His directorial debut thus approved, Romulus offered him 'Room at the Top', John Braine's 1957 best-seller. Clayton was originally reluctant to accept Laurence Harvey as Joe Lampton, the male working-class lead, but eventually teamed him with the great French actress Simone Signoret as Alice Aisgill. He believed that Aisgill called for an actress of greater sensuality and sophistication than could be expected from a middle-aged English actress. 'Room at the Top' (1959) was a sensation. Given the first X-rated certificate, it broke all kinds of film taboos, and was the first of the 'kitchen-sink' style of films (successors included 'Saturday Night and Sunday Morning', 1960, and 'This Sporting Life', 1963). Clayton always disliked the 'kitchen-sink' tag, and the range of his work shows how little it meant to him. Signoret won the best actress Oscar for her performance, and Clayton was nominated as best director, but lost out to William Wyler for 'Ben Hur'. At an Oscar party, however, he found a greater prize when he met and fell in love with 'Ben Hur''s Esther, the luminous Israeli actress Haya Harareet ('nee' Neuberg). They married on 29 August 1984, after Clayton's eventual divorce from Katherine Kath. 
Always the consummate stylist and expressionist, Clayton embarked in 1961 on his next film, 'The Innocents', adapted from Henry James's novella 'The Turn of the Screw'. This was a complete change of direction for Clayton, but was again distinguished by a commanding central performance from Deborah Kerr as the governess, and by the outstanding black and white photography from his old collaborator Freddie Francis (Clayton had fought ferociously to get him accepted as director of photography on 'Room at the Top'). This was followed by 'The Pumpkin Eater' (1964), Penelope Mortimer's book on the pains and pleasures of motherhood, adapted by Harold Pinter and with a consummate leading female performance by Anne Bancroft (with an impeccable English accent), and a small role for Maggie Smith as the local gossip. Clayton's themes -- the nonconformist facing the world, the richness and pain of life, and the search for happiness in a cruel world -- are present in all his films, be it 'Our Mother's House' (1967) or 'The Great Gatsby' (1974). Neither was a great commercial success, although Tennessee Williams once said of the latter that Clayton's film was better than Fitzgerald's book, but both displayed a mastery of style, tact, and unerring taste, as well as his ability to draw superb performances from his actors. 
There followed ten lean years, much of which was spent recovering from a severe stroke. Clayton was never a fast worker, always taking great trouble to find the right subject matter; he was unencumbered by the demands of the merely fashionable or commercial, and sculpted the script painstakingly to his taste. He developed a number of subjects, including the story of Helena Rubinstein, but somehow all were aborted until he was asked by Disney to direct Ray Bradbury's 'Something Wicked this Way Comes' (1983). Full of special effects -- never Clayton's forte -- it was quietly buried by its distributor, but has since become a cult film. His penultimate film was based on Brian Moore's book 'The Lonely Passion of Judith Hearne' (1987). This compassionate study of an Irish spinster had long been a favourite subject of film-makers -- John Huston had once wanted to make it with Katharine Hepburn -- but it was probably too gloomy to reach a mass audience. Maggie Smith was superb in the central role and again it showed all Clayton's sensibilities, his mastery of camera technique, and his impeccable taste. His last film, made for the BBC, was Muriel Spark's 'Memento mori' (1992), a rich brew of black humour and broad farce. Clayton's sympathy for the underdog, his narrative skills, and his idiosyncratic humour, structured around a compelling central performance, again by Maggie Smith, gave the film an unparalleled grace. Jack Clayton died in Wexham Park Hospital, Slough, on 25 February 1995. 
Technicians and actors loved working with Clayton: he brought out the best in them, nurturing them all the way. His output was small and eclectic, and though he founded no school or genre of film-making, his craftsmanship and dedication to his material were absolute. 'Room at the Top' assures his place in film history, although 'The Bespoke Overcoat' remains his undisputed masterpiece -- but all his films show a restrained and dignified juiciness and absolute integrity. In Fred Zinnemann's words, he was 'a director's director, one of the most brilliant of his generation' ('Jack Clayton'). 


@@@@@


doc= 59802


Cook, Peter Edward (1937-1995), humorist and entertainer, was born on 17 November 1937 at Shearbridge, Middle Warberry Road, Torquay, Devon, the only son and eldest of the three children of Alexander Edward (Alec) Cook (died 1984), colonial civil servant, and his wife, (Ethel Catherine) Margaret, 'nee' Mayo (died 1994). His father had a distinguished career in the colonial service as a district officer in Nigeria, later permanent secretary of its eastern region, and as financial secretary to the crown colony of Gibraltar; despite his numerous absences abroad it was a close and sustaining family to which Cook remained devoted throughout his life. 
Cook was educated at Radley College and Pembroke College, Cambridge, at both of which institutions he gave evidence of a precocious talent for comedy, both as writer and performer, offstage and on. His characteristic style developed early: a contemporary at Radley described his ability to 'spin a whole fantastic web of absurdity from the merest thread of an idea or phrase' (Cook, 6). In particular he hit upon an 'alter ego' -- based on a Mr Boylett, the school's high-table butler -- who would deliver obsessional monologues, in a droning, strangled voice, on various mundane subjects, often the nature and activities of insects. This creation, later metamorphosing into Mr Grole and E. L. Wisty, was central to Cook's comedy for the whole of his career. 
Although Cook went up to Cambridge with the idea of joining the Foreign Office, his talents as a comedian and his charismatic personality pointed in a different direction. By the end of his second year, in summer 1959, his reputation had gone beyond the bounds of the university. His starring role performing his own material in that year's Footlights revue led to his being commissioned by the theatrical impresario Michael Codron to write the major part of a West End revue, 'Pieces of Eight', with Kenneth Williams in the cast and some additional material by the then little-known Harold Pinter, which opened at the Apollo Theatre in September. This was a more-or-less traditional revue (as was its successor, 'One Over the Eight', to which he was also the chief contributor), but that tradition was comprehensively scuppered by the project Cook became involved in the following year, immediately he left Cambridge. 

'Beyond the Fringe' was originally conceived by John Bassett as a late-night filler at the Edinburgh Festival to follow a production of 'The Seagull' at the Lyceum Theatre. It featured Cook, Jonathan Miller, Alan Bennett, and Dudley Moore, all recent Oxbridge graduates, performing their own material. There were no sets, plain costumes, no musical numbers, no dancing girls. Among its topics were capital punishment, Shakespeare, the nuclear threat, and the British nostalgia for war. Cook's principal solo pieces involved a Grole-Wisty figure lamenting his failure to become a judge, and an impersonation of the prime minister, Harold Macmillan. The show, which opened in London in May 1961, was an instant triumph, not least because it caught -- indeed partially initiated -- a new mood in the country: an impatience with outmoded convention and a rejection of the deference accorded to public figures and institutions. It was, wrote Kenneth Tynan, 'the moment when English comedy took its first decisive step into the second half of the twentieth century' ('The Observer', 14 May 1961). 
While still at Cambridge, Cook had been planning a cabaret theatre on the lines of the pre-war German satirical nightclubs 'which had done so much', as he put it, 'to prevent the rise of Adolf Hitler' ('The Independent'). Incorporated as a members-only club to avoid the stage censorship then exercised by the lord chamberlain, The Establishment opened in London in October 1961. In the summer of the following year he extended his influence in the so-called satire boom by buying a majority shareholding in 'Private Eye' magazine. In October 1962 'Beyond the Fringe' went to Broadway, where it enjoyed another huge success, and Cook lost no time in developing a New York branch of The Establishment. He followed this up in 1964 by opening a straight theatre on the same premises. Its initial production, the American premiere of Ann Jellico's 'The Knack', starred George Segal and was directed by Mike Nichols. In October 1963 he married Wendy Snowden, whom he had known since his Cambridge days; their two daughters, Lucy and Daisy, were born in 1964 and 1965 respectively. 
Owing to financial difficulties, encountered while Cook was 3000 miles away, the London Establishment collapsed, and while its New York base continued to prosper for a time, this was the end of his career as an impresario. This was a pity, because he was an imaginative and resourceful producer with a gift for bringing the best out of his collaborators. On the other hand it freed him to concentrate on the thing he did better than anyone else -- being funny. In his case the public manifestation of his comedy -- on stage or television -- was the tip of a colossal iceberg: there were innumerable recollections of him in private embarking on vertiginous spirals of invention, spectacular connections, subversions of language and logic, through which fabulous worlds of ideas were created, flourished, and vanished, like the birth and death of little universes. It could be exhausting to everybody -- except him, because these weren't comic routines, this was just Cook's mind working. 
Surprisingly enough for such an apparently solipsistic creative method, Cook's talent found its perfect expression, professionally speaking, in his partnership with Dudley Moore. In two series of 'Not Only But Also', made for the BBC between 1965 and 1967, they produced what many regarded as the finest sustained comedy ever to appear on British television. In particular, their Pete and Dud characters -- two lugubrious down-at-heels in flat caps, incessantly rambling on about the tedium of having famous female film stars invading their bedrooms and flaunting their 'busty substances' at them -- became iconic figures, their south London whine imitated by half the population. The series were immensely popular, with John Lennon, Peter Sellers, and many others pleading to make guest appearances. 
Cook, however, had ambitions beyond television, and was determined to break into feature films. He had already starred, with Moore and a big-name cast including Sellers, Tony Hancock, and Ralph Richardson, in 'The Wrong Box' (1964), but had been constrained by a poor script (not his own). So in 1967, after the first two series of 'Not Only', he took a year off to write, on his own, an original screenplay. This was 'Bedazzled' (1967), directed by Stanley Donen, a reworking of the Faust legend with Cook as the Devil and Moore as the downtrodden little failure whom he tempts with seven wishes in exchange for eternal damnation. His script was inventive and, unusually for someone whose normal approach to writing was so spontaneous, carefully crafted, but the result was muted in effect and proved commercially disappointing -- though not in continental Europe, where it was a big hit. It did, however, expose his limitations as a leading man for the movies, although he continued to harbour ambitions as a romantic lead and -- still less plausibly -- a rock singer. There followed a clutch of feature films, 'A Dandy in Aspic' (1968), 'Monte Carlo or Bust', and 'The Bed-Sitting Room' (1969), and 'The Rise and Rise of Michael Rimmer' (1970), all of which failed to enhance his reputation in that field. 
Cook's television partnership with Moore resumed in 1970, with a third series of 'Not Only' for the BBC, where his unique talents triumphantly reasserted themselves. In the autumn of the following year they took a stage show, 'Behind the Fridge', on a tour of Australia, then brought it first to London (1971) and subsequently, under the title 'Good Evening', to New York, where it ran for thirteen months, breaking the Broadway record for a two-man show. However, Cook's personal life had by then come under increasing strain: his marriage had broken up in 1970 and divorce followed the next year, Wendy Cook being given custody of their two daughters. 
Although Cook immediately got engaged to the actress Judy Huxtable (she had been cited in the divorce case; they married in February 1974) the loss, as he saw it, of his daughters caused him immense distress. He developed an addiction to drugs and, especially, drink which dominated much of the rest of his life. It began to affect his work and in particular his relationship with Dudley Moore, who resented his increasingly erratic behaviour. Cook for his part vented some of his inner despair in occasionally vituperative behaviour towards Moore, some of which was painfully evident in the series of recordings issued under the rubric of 'Derek and Clive'. The origin of these was a tape made privately in 1973 of improvised duologues, wildly if erratically funny and predominantly scatological, which became bootleg classics and were commercially released in 1976. The two succeeding albums, 'Derek and Clive Come Again' (1977) and 'Derek and Clive ad nauseam' (1979), were much blacker in tone, sometimes violently misogynist and scarcely funny at all -- though some would disagree. Cook's hatred of hypocrisy had become generalized rage, expressing itself in obscenity after obscenity. From now on the poise and elegance which had characterized his comedy emerged only fitfully, as in a piece he performed for the 1979 Amnesty International charity show 'The Secret Policeman's Ball', a devastating parody of the judge's summing up in the Jeremy Thorpe trial. 
One constant in Cook's life was 'Private Eye'. He was still sole proprietor (although he never paid himself a penny) and over the years an inspiring, if erratic, contributor. He was credited with the idea of a speech bubble attached to a photograph of a famous person, which thereafter became 'Private Eye''s trademark front cover. He also thought up the features 'Mrs Wilson's Diary', which ran throughout Harold Wilson's governments, and 'True Stories'. Whenever somebody sued the magazine for libel -- James Goldsmith and Robert Maxwell being conspicuous examples -- he relished the opportunity to take a leading part in the trials and the invariably consequent fund-raising. 
There were periods in which Cook fought his drink problem and much of his creative drive returned: 1980 saw a television special, 'Peter Cook & Co.', where he teamed up with John Cleese and Rowan Atkinson among others, and he co-wrote and starred in the movie 'Yellowbeard' (1982). The intervening year was spent in Los Angeles starring in a sitcom for CBS called 'The Two of Us'. But much of the last decade of his life, by his own testimony, was passed in watching bad television, gambling, charity golf, and drinking. There were cameo appearances on television and in some largely forgettable films, probably the best of which was 'Whoops Apocolypse!' (1985), a satire on the Falklands War, with Cook as a deranged prime minister in the Anthony Eden mould. His state of mind, to say nothing of his attempts to come off drink, were undermined by a series of personal blows. In 1984 his father died; his marriage to Judy Huxtable, passionate and turbulent as it had always been, came to an end in 1989. 
Yet astonishingly, in the face of what seemed like determined self-destruction, Cook produced work which ranked beside the best of his achievements of the 1960s and 1970s. First, he took to ringing up a late-night radio phone-in show in the guise of Sven, a Norwegian fisherman deserted by his wife Jutte, anxious and confused, constantly falling back on the only subject he felt qualified to discuss, namely fish. Unpaid and unrecognized (it took Clive Bull, the show's host, some months before he realized to whom he was talking), this was Cook creating for creation's sake. More conventionally, he drew on an old character, Sir Arthur Streeb-Greebling, for a series of twelve five-minute television interviews shown at Christmas 1990 under the title 'A Life in Pieces', reminiscing about his life in a manner which wove surreal fantasy with elements of Cook's own life. An extended version, now called 'Why Bother?', with Chris Morris as interviewer instead of Ludovic Kennedy, and with many more improvised flights of fancy, was broadcast on BBC Radio 3 in 1994. 
A few months earlier Cook had recorded a special edition of the chat show 'Clive Anderson Talks Back', in which he was interviewed in four separate guises: a football manager, a rock star, a judge, and a man abducted by aliens. This was Cook once more in full command of his material, his characters, and himself, and seemed to herald a personal renaissance. Much of the credit for this was due to his third wife, Chiew Lin Chong, property consultant and daughter of Swee Loke Chung, businessman. They had met in 1982 and were married on 18 November 1989, immediately after his second divorce; Lin devoted herself to caring for him, trying to bring some calm and order into his life. But the renaissance was short-lived. In June 1994 he was devastated by the death of his mother, and on 9 January of the following year, in the Royal Free Hospital, Camden, London, he himself died from liver failure. A memorial service held at St John's parish church, Hampstead, in May 1995 was attended by innumerable friends and colleagues; it was a testament to the affection and admiration in which the most original comic talent of his generation had been held. 


@@@@@


doc= 59804


Bolt, Robert Oxton (1924-1995), scriptwriter and playwright, was born on 15 August 1924 at Sale, Manchester, Lancashire, the second of the two children of Ralph Bolt and Leah Binyon. Ralph ran a glassware and furniture shop, and Leah, a socialist feminist, was a teacher. Theirs was a northern Methodist household, guided by a firm moral code but enlivened by the vigorous argument of nonconformist politics. 
Robert followed Sydney, his elder brother by four years, from Sale prep school to Sale high school and Manchester grammar school but not to Cambridge University: Bob, as he was known, was a disappointment at school and was caught shoplifting. He left school aged sixteen for the rigours of office life, which he found so boring that he determined to cram for university entrance. In 1943 he entered Manchester University, where he studied economics and joined the Communist Party. Academic life was foreshortened by the call-up, to the Royal Air Force. In 1944 he transferred to the army and a commission as a lieutenant. He finished his training in South Africa and was sent to the Gold Coast as part of the Royal West African Frontier Force until 1946, when he was able to return to Manchester University. He switched to history and graduated BA in 1949 with upper second-class honours. 
Bolt left the Communist Party in 1947 and dallied with various forms of mysticism. At the same time he began seeing Celia Ann Roberts ('b'. 1929), known as Jo, a student at the neighbouring Manchester School of Art who was later known as a novelist. She became pregnant and they married on 6 November 1948 in a Moss Side church. Their daughter Sally Virginia was born the following year; she was to die later in a car crash -- Bolt believed it to be suicide, though other family members disagreed. After swapping the grimy north-west for rural Devon, when Bolt took up a teaching diploma course at Exeter University (1949-50), they had a son, Benedict (Ben), born in 1952, and another daughter, Joanna (known as JoJo), born in 1958. Bolt became a primary school teacher in the village of Bishopsteignton in Devon, and, two years later, in 1952, an English teacher at the public school Millfield in Somerset, where he stayed for six years. He had written since childhood but had not tried writing plays until in his first term at the village school he was asked to write a nativity play. He then turned to radio plays and children's stories for television, and subsequently to plays that were performed on stage. 
The change in Bolt's fortune as a playwright came about when a BBC radio producer introduced him to a newly established play agent, Peggy Ramsay (1908-1991), who agreed to represent him and became his demanding mentor. She managed to sell to the Oxford Playhouse his play 'The Critic and the Heart', which he had modelled on Somerset Maugham's carefully crafted 'The Circle'. Remarkably, before it had opened, she had sold his next and more imaginative play, 'Flowering Cherry', to the distinguished director Frith Banbury, who, at her persuasion, took the play to the most powerful theatrical management of the day, H. M. Tennent Ltd. The play, which drew on Bolt's office experiences, told of an insurance salesman who dreams of owning an orchard in the west country, and was an immediate West End hit. Its success proved crucial to both the survival of Ramsay's agency and Bolt's playwriting career: he won the 1957 'Evening Standard' award for most promising playwright, and left teaching to become a full-time writer. 
In 1961 Bolt scored his greatest triumph in the theatre with 'A Man for All Seasons', which had begun life as a radio play and for which Bolt and Paul Scofield, who played Thomas More, won several prizes. Characteristically, the quarrel between Henry VIII and his chancellor More over the king's divorce not only provided meaty acting roles but, in an accommodation of certain Brechtian techniques, offered intellectual debate linking the personal to the political in accessible language that did not threaten the audience. This literate, epic style was to mark his later achievements in the cinema. On the strength of this play, Bolt was recommended to the film producer Sam Spiegel, who needed a speedy rewrite of a screenplay about T. E. Lawrence, which was being shot by David Lean. 
Bolt spent a year on the film, and developed his taste for the high life aboard the movie mogul's luxury yacht. The celebrity of 'Lawrence of Arabia', which won seven Oscars, though not one for Bolt, came at a personal cost. Unpleasant wrangling over credit for Michael Wilson, the once blacklisted original screenwriter, was not satisfactorily resolved until after Wilson's death. Furthermore, production of the film itself was threatened when Bolt was arrested, along with two-thirds of the anti-nuclear Committee of 100 of which he was a founder, in a clumsy attempt by the police to thwart an impending demonstration. Bolt, like his comrades, refused to be bound over, and was sent to an open prison in Staffordshire. He ignored Spiegel's blandishments to recant until the producer drove to the prison in his Rolls-Royce and face to face persuaded Bolt to abandon gaol in order to finish the script. Bolt never forgave himself for this compromise -- the very opposite of the steadfastness displayed by Thomas More -- and found himself for ever thereafter uncomfortably caught between the moral and the material world. 
International fame and the lifestyle that went with it also took its toll, and Jo told Bolt in 1964 that their marriage was over. In 1966 he began to live with the actress Sarah Miles ('b'. 1941), and history repeated itself. She became pregnant and they married, at Woking register office, on 25 February 1967; their one child, Thomas (after More, known as Tom), was born that October and was later, through drug addiction, another cause of unhappiness for Bolt the father. By the time Bolt and Miles separated in 1973, he had been the highest-paid screenwriter in Hollywood, with four more films to his credit and two Academy awards: the Oscar-winning 'Doctor Zhivago' (1965), directed by Lean, and 'A Man for All Seasons' (1966), directed by Fred Zinnemann, 'Ryan's Daughter' (1970), a reworking of 'Madame Bovary' for Miles and directed by Lean again, and 'Lady Caroline Lamb' (1972), which Bolt wrote for Miles but directed himself. He had kept up a presence in the theatre through his most experimental but flawed play 'Gentle Jack' (1963), a children's play 'The Thwarting of Baron Bolligrew' (1965), 'Brother and Sister' (1967; revised 1968), and 'Vivat! Vivat regina!' (1970), another script written for Miles, this time playing Mary, queen of Scots. His last play to be staged was 'State of Revolution' (1977, National Theatre). 
Life as a tax exile took Bolt to Tahiti to work on a script about HMS 'Bounty' for Lean, but in 1979 he suffered a heart attack, followed shortly by a triple bypass operation, a stroke, which left him paralysed down one side of his body, and yet another heart attack. Following a brief marriage on 31 May 1980 to an old friend, the actress Ann Zane ('b'. 1928/9), known also as Lady Queensberry, he eventually remarried Sarah Miles, on 27 February 1988. She looked after him as he learned to use new technology to overcome his disabilities, and he regained powers of speech, even if conversation was slow, tiring, and punctuated by expletives of exasperation that shook his sturdy frame. Earlier scripts, 'The Bounty' (1984) and 'The Mission' (1986), were filmed during this period, as well as a new television film, 'Thumbs up: the James Brady Story' (1991), about Ronald Reagan's press secretary who was shot and had a stroke. In all Bolt wrote eighteen broadcast radio plays, nine performed stage plays, seven film scripts that were made, two uncredited screenplays, two television films, and numerous unrealized screen- and teleplays. He was made a CBE in 1972. He died at his home, Chithurst Manor, Chithurst, Trotton, Sussex, on 20 February 1995, and was buried in the grounds of the house three days later. Sarah Miles survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 59805


Radisson, Pierre-Esprit (1639/40?-1710), explorer and trader, was probably born in Paris -- as documents in New France testify that his sisters were -- to Avignonese parents, Pierre-Esprit Radisson ('b'. 'c'.1590) and Madeleine Henaut. In affidavits of 1697 and 1698 Radisson swore he was sixty-one and sixty-two (so born in 1636), but the census of New France in 1681 reports him as forty-one (thus born in 1639 or 1640); he describes himself as almost beardless in 1659, so the latter is possible. Some Hudson's Bay Company records, perhaps confused by his Avignonese connection, call him an Italian; Radisson states he had visited Italy, but not when. Nothing is known of his childhood, but his handwriting, a confident, casual italic, hints that his parents may have intended him for a career in professional life or lesser court service. His narratives exhibit few literary or historical allusions. He arrived in New France (modern Quebec) in 1651 to join his half-sister Marguerite Hayet Veron. In 1653 she married, as his second wife, 
Radisson arrived in New France amid Iroquois attempts to eradicate Huron middlemen and dominate Native trade with Europeans; Iroquois raids had left the sparse settlers between Quebec and Montreal in daily fear for their lives. The youth was shortly captured by Mohawks while duck-hunting with foolhardy friends. As he recounts in his 'Voyages' (begun about 1668), after an attempt to escape, he survived the ordeal of ritual torture ('Voyage I'), and was adopted by a Mohawk family, living for eighteen months as a Native before reluctantly escaping to the Dutch at Fort Orange (Albany). (His name as a Mohawk was Oninga.) Groseilliers, after serving in the mid-1640s with the Jesuits to the west in Huronia (southern Ontario), settled at Trois Rivieres and began laying plans, possibly on the basis of information from his first wife's relatives, to explore the resources of the interior. In 1654-6, with an unknown French companion, Groseilliers travelled beyond Huronia and possibly as far as the headwaters of the Mississippi. Radisson's controversial 'Voyage III' is a suspiciously sketchy account of this journey, in which he claims to have taken part, but a document attests he was in Quebec in 1655. In 1657-8 Radisson accompanied Father Paul Rageneau and other Jesuits to a new mission among the Onondaga, who played an important role in the complex diplomatic life of the then Five Nations. 'Voyage II' describes the violence-plagued journey and the ruses the Jesuits eventually used to evacuate their mission. 
In August 1659 Radisson and Groseilliers left on the great journey chronicled in Radisson's superb 'Voyage IV', which led directly to the founding of the Hudson's Bay Company. A French edict forbade independent trading for furs, so they left Trois Rivieres stealthily with their Saulteaux companions, escaping marauding Iroquois whom they fought and, Radisson relates, whose flesh they consumed. Their journey took them past Sault St Marie, along Lake Superior's south shore, the beauty of which delighted Radisson, and beyond Chequamegon in Wisconsin. They met with Hurons dispersed by the war, spent a winter of famine, and participated in a great Feast of the Dead. This important Huron-Ojibwa ritual was also an opportunity for diplomacy; the explorers treated for peace, essential for a profitable fur trade, with 'eighten severall nations' ('Voyages', 209), including the Lakota (Sioux). Later they visited the Sioux on the edge of the prairie in Minnesota. They travelled to the north shore of Lake Superior and even, according to Radisson, reached James Bay; however, his report is vague and Groseilliers may have travelled alone. Earlier scholars doubted such a journey, but expert canoeists now testify that it would have been possible using established Native river routes and portages. The two explorers returned to New France in August 1660 with a rich bounty of furs, only to be treated as outlaws by Governor D'Argenson. 
Groseilliers approached a French merchant at La Rochelle to exploit northern beaver, but the resulting expedition failed. Between 1662 and 1665 he and Radisson made other attempts to reach the Bay, seeking support in New England and New Holland. Two contemporaries claimed that the wily Groseilliers aided the English in their capture of Manhattan in 1664. In 1665 the British envoy in New England, Colonel George Cartwright, believing they had discovered a north-west passage, sent them to Charles II in London. News of the arrival of the explorers 'and of a great trade in beaver in that passage' (Rich, 1.24) circulated rapidly, as a letter to Robert Boyle shows. They arrived during the plague of 1665, and may have witnessed the great fire of London, though Radisson does not mention it. The king, then at Oxford, was deeply interested in their news of riches in beaver (in great demand), their obvious experience, and their concept of a trade operating out of Hudson Bay independent of the heavily taxed overland route employed by the French at Quebec. He gave them an allowance, put them in contact with possible investors, and encouraged them to remain at court. 
War with the Dutch frustrated quick action, but two ships attempted an experimental expedition to the Bay in 1668. Beaten by storm, Radisson's had to turn back, and he spent the winter alone in London, where internal evidence suggests he composed his four 'Voyages', possibly at the king's command, or in the circle of Prince Rupert, an early supporter of the Hudson's Bay Company. The manuscript dedication is 'A la plus grande gloire de Dieu', but it is Radisson who is the centre of events. A lively narrator, at once self-aggrandizing and unashamed of his own fears, he concentrates on the shrewd observation of human action rather than the description of landscape. Writing in a vivacious Francophone English (the four 'Voyages' are not translations as once was thought), he planned the narratives with care, as textual cross-references show. Preserved in a scribal copy of about 1686-7 once owned by Samuel Pepys, they were discovered in the Bodleian Library in 1885. 
On 2 May 1670 the Governor and Company of Adventurers of England Trading into Hudson's Bay received their royal charter, making the eighteen investors 'the True and absolute Lordes and Proprietors' (Rich, 1.53) of nearly 40 per cent of today's Canada. Radisson and Groseilliers spent 1670-74 advising the company and travelling to the Bay. During this time, in 1672 or 1674, Radisson married a daughter of Sir John Kirke, probably named Mary, from a family influential in the early history of Newfoundland; they had two children: a son, Matthew and a daughter, Hannah. 
However, in 1675 the partners, finding their advice rejected and persuaded by a captive Jesuit in London, returned to France with the assurance that Colbert would support their trading plans. Colbert, however, wanted Radisson to bring his wife to France as a testimony of good faith. Kirke and his brothers had many claims against France and he refused to let his daughter leave, possibly because the brothers, born in Dieppe, were regarded as French themselves. Further frustrated by inaction in New France, Radisson became a soldier of fortune, participating in Admiral Jean d'Estree's 1677-8 naval expedition against the Dutch in Africa and the Caribbean and sending a vivid, closely written four-page report to his then patron, the geographically inclined Abbe Claude Bernou. Recently discovered documents indicate that the so-called 'Petitions', in which Radisson described North America, were chiefly records of his debriefing by Bernou. 
In 1682, supported by entrepreneurs in New France, Radisson and Groseilliers returned to the Bay, establishing a post on the Nelson River at Hudson Bay where the company had been trading. A three-way stalemate ensued when the Quebec party, a company ship, and traders from New England arrived almost simultaneously. 'I thought it better to surprise them than that they should me', Radisson wrote, and in a series of cunning manoeuvres swiftly gained control of the situation. But when he and Groseilliers, returning to Quebec, attempted to avoid tax on their booty they were packed off to France. There they found Colbert dead and the regime opposed to trading by colonists and increasingly sensitive to the claims of England in the north being urged by the English ambassador-extraordinary, Richard Graham, Viscount Preston. Possibly with the connivance of the French and certainly encouraged by Sir James Hayes, secretary of the Hudson's Bay Company, Radisson was persuaded to defect to English allegiance. Groseilliers sailed for New France, where he died about 1695; the two may never have met again. Radisson reached London in May 1684. Within weeks he took ship for the Bay, where the party from Quebec he had left behind under the leadership of Groseilliers's son was astounded by his return as an agent of the English. They submitted to his persuasions, and departed for England with a considerable cargo of furs. 
Returning to London Radisson -- presumably now a widower -- married, on 3 March 1685 in St Martin-in-the-Fields, Charlotte, the daughter of Gedeon Godet, Preston's go-between in his earlier negotiations; they had three sons, Peter-Espritt, John, and William. He defended his stratagems of 1682-4 in the two Port Nelson 'Relations', written in French; these, along with later depositions, became important testimony in the lengthy negotiations between France and England over territorial rights in Hudson Bay, eventually confirmed as England's by the treaty of Utrecht (1713). As a symbol of his fealty to England and the new regime, Radisson dedicated to James II two fine manuscripts of the 'Relations', now at Windsor Castle. For a time there was a price on his head in New France, but Radisson served the Hudson's Bay Company as superintendent of trade at Port Nelson in 1685-7 and then retired to London. When James II fled, the ageing explorer was left to the protection of Marlborough, but had to struggle for his company pension and stock dividends throughout the 1690s; between 1692 and 1697 he was pursuing a suit in chancery against the London committee of the company, whose deputy governor Sir Edward Dering seems to have opposed his just claims. Probably in or before 1692 he married for a third time; his new wife's name was Elizabeth (died 1732) but her surname and parentage are unknown. They had at least one daughter, Elizabeth Sophia. Despite earlier prosperity Radisson left his family in poverty when he died. He made his will on 17 June 1710, still insisting on his right to profits on the furs he had brought to the company in 1684. He was buried at St Clement Danes on 21 June 1710, described by parish records as a decayed gentleman. 
Radisson, a man of 'versatility and exuberance' (Nute, 'DCB', 2.539), lived precariously at the intersection of courtly, mercantile, and Native worlds. Regarded by English contemporaries as a rascal and by the French as a traitor, he was nevertheless a distinguished explorer and a significant figure in England's vexed relationship with France. Radisson acquired Native languages quickly, and few documents give such an authentic ethnographical account of Iroquois domestic and military life as his first two narratives. Whether he was present or not, his third 'Voyage' reports on possibly the first European sighting of the Mississippi headwaters; and his fourth 'Voyage' provides the first written account of the area around Lake Superior and west to the beginning of the prairie in Minnesota. The Port Nelson 'Relations' document a critical episode in the seventeenth-century struggle over Hudson Bay. In maintaining England's ability to sustain its claim in the area, Radisson's actions of 1684 were decisive, confirming the Hudson's Bay Company -- one of the smaller London trading companies -- as an imperial actor in North America and in the formation of what was to become present-day Canada. 
Radisson's modern reputation is fraught with ironies; little known after his death, he was much studied in the decades after the 1885 rediscovery of his first four 'Voyages', but chiefly by Americans who, because of his 1660 sojourn on the south shore of Lake Superior, honour him as a founder of the state of Wisconsin. Quebec historiography until recently has treated him with deep suspicion because of his defection to the English. To English-Canadian schoolchildren he and his companion traditionally were known as 'Radishes and Gooseberries', and Radisson was the hero of a popular young people's television series in the 1960s. Early in the twentieth century a contest for the name of a new hotel in St Paul, Minnesota was won by a schoolgirl who proposed the name Radisson; from this the worldwide hotel chain evolved. His name has also been attached to La Radissonie, a remote area of northern Quebec which he never visited. Perhaps more fittingly, the London street where this gifted exploiter of international trading politics expired lies today beneath the Clare Court building of the London School of Economics. 


@@@@@


doc= 59810


Reid, (Anne Margaret) Nano (1900-1981), landscape and figure painter, was born on 1 March 1900 at 17 Magdalene Street, Drogheda, co. Louth, Ireland, the second of four children of Thomas Reid (1862-1933), publican and grocer, and his wife, Anne Downey (died 1924). She was educated by the Dominican nuns at the Siena convent in Drogheda, and while still at school took art lessons from a Miss Sutton at the local technical school. She became a student nurse at the Mater Hospital in Dublin in November 1920 but left in January 1921 to undertake a more formal study of art. She enrolled as a student at the Dublin Metropolitan School of Art in Kildare Street, travelling from Drogheda each day. A fellow student described her as a 'fierce red-head, [staring] with keen green eyes behind spectacles. She was uncompromising, blunt and desperately looking for the truth' (Snoddy, 420). About 1927 Reid went to Paris to study at the Academie de la Grande Chaumiere, and she returned to Drogheda about July 1928. In the autumn of 1929 she attended the Central School of Arts and Crafts and the Chelsea Polytechnic, remaining in London, which she loathed, for a year. She admired the work of the Argentinian artist Antonio Berni, whom she had met in Paris, and that of the Belgian painter Marie Howet, though later insisting that external influences on her work were personal, and that she had not been much influenced by her tutors. 
Reid first exhibited at the Royal Hibernian Academy in Dublin in 1925 and continued to exhibit there regularly until 1968. Her first solo exhibition was held at The Gallery, St Stephen's Green, Dublin, in 1934. Between 1941 and 1947 she held five solo shows. In 1942 a critic from the 'Irish Times' ended a review of an exhibition of her work: 'There seems to be no help for it. This young artist from Drogheda has to be saluted as a genius' (27 Nov 1942). She also exhibited at the first Living Art exhibition in 1943 when the 'Dublin Magazine' described her as a 'bold and original painter but inclined to be rather too energetic in her approach and too afraid of colour' (Snoddy, 421). 
Reid's early style was reminiscent of the work of Paul Henry. In the 1940s her work became more expressionistic and, as one critic noted, 'much more lyrical [with] the adoption of a bird's eye view of things [which] characterised her work from the 1940s' (Kennedy, 43). In many of her paintings her brushwork is uninhibited and vigorous. There is apparently little attention to composition or perspective. She was fascinated by water and it appears in her work in a variety of forms. Pubs are also a common theme, as are animals, especially cats. She painted landscapes of the Boyne valley which were imbued 'with a strong sense of mysticism' (ibid.). She was not a prolific painter and she supported herself by painting portraits and giving private lessons. In 1962 Reid returned from Dublin to Drogheda to live with her two sisters at the family pub. With the artist Norah McGuinness she represented Ireland at the 1950 Venice Biennale. She also exhibited at the Mostra Internazionale de Bianco e Nero at Lugano, Switzerland, in 1956; at the Guggenheim International Award Exhibition at New York in 1960; and at 'Twelve Irish painters', an exhibition organized by An Comhairle Ealaion (Arts Council of Ireland) and held at New York in 1963. In 1972 she won the Douglas Hyde gold medal at the Oireachtas. In 1974-5 the arts councils in Belfast and Dublin organized a major retrospective exhibition of 108 works dating from 1931, held first at the Municipal Gallery of Modern Art, Dublin, and afterwards at the Ulster Museum, Belfast. Nano Reid died, unmarried, on 17 November 1981 at Drogheda Cottage Hospital. Examples of her work are in the Ulster Museum, Belfast; the City Library and Crawford Municipal Art Gallery, Cork; and the National Gallery of Ireland and Trinity College, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 59811


Peterson, Alexander Duncan Campbell (1908-1988), educational reformer, was born in Edinburgh on 13 September 1908, the third of five sons, but the second to survive childhood (there were no daughters), of John Carlos Kennedy Peterson (1876-1955), of the Indian Civil Service, under-secretary in the finance department, government of Bengal, and his wife, Flora Campbell (died 1953). One of his brothers was Sir Arthur William Peterson. He and his brothers were brought up largely by aunts and uncles. His parents had no home leave between 1915 and 1919, and when his mother eventually arrived at his preparatory school he failed to recognize her. He won scholarships to Radley College and to Balliol College, Oxford, liking the second as much as he had disliked the first. At Oxford he showed the breadth of interest and taste for experiment which marked him throughout life. His activities as an undergraduate were multifarious, and in 1930 he missed a first in 'literae humaniores', apparently by a very narrow margin. He had received a second class in classical honour moderations in 1928. 
Peterson's flair for communication did not stay hidden for long. His ascent up the teacher's ladder (as assistant master, Shrewsbury School, 1932-40; and as headmaster of Adams' Grammar School, Newport, 1946-52, and of Dover College, 1954-7) was punctuated by two periods of psychological warfare in the Far East. The first (1943-5), under Lord Louis Mountbatten, earned him an OBE (1946); during the second (1952-4), under Sir Gerald Templer in Malaya, his formidable chief judged him 'absolutely first class'. 
The directorship of Oxford University's department of education, which Peterson held from 1958 until his retirement in 1973, left him time for writing on educational problems and for outside activities. As the chairman of the Farmington Trust's council from 1964 to 1971 he helped to found the 'Journal of Moral Education'. He acted for a time as the Liberal Party's spokesman on education, and stood without any chance of success for Oxford in the 1966 election. He served from 1959 to 1966 as chairman of the Army Education Advisory Board. It was, however, as the advocate of broader sixth form studies that he became well known. He opened the campaign with a broadcast early in 1956 ('Listener', 16 February), continued it in his Estlin Carpenter lectures at Oxford in 1957 (published as 'Educating our Rulers', 1957), and brought it to a remarkable climax with the Oxford department's report, 'Arts and science sides in the sixth form', in 1960. This established beyond reasonable doubt that the early specialization characterizing English secondary schools not merely precluded sixth form courses appropriate to a scientific age, but reduced the flow of science graduates. About 40 per cent of the English sixteen-year-olds questioned for the report would have liked to combine arts with mathematics or science: under 6 per cent were actually doing so. When more than 700 pupils in French 'lycees' and German 'Gymnasia' were asked what subjects they would have chosen for the 'baccalaureat' or 'Abitur' had there been no restrictions on choice, only five chose entirely from mathematics or science. Peterson had won the argument; but, like many others in the decades which followed, he found that this did not open the road to the needed reforms. 
Frustrated in England, Peterson turned abroad. The international sixth form which he had started at Dover brought him into contact with Kurt Hahn, and in 1962, when Atlantic College was founded, he helped to plan its curriculum. No single syllabus could be made to conform to university entrance requirements, which varied from country to country; and in the same year plans for an international baccalaureate were being discussed in Geneva. The Oxford department, which was then embarking on an investigation for the Council of Europe, was soon involved in the planning for this; and Peterson was the director of the International Baccalaureate Office during the crucial phase of growth, from 1966 to 1977. In the year of his death an international baccalaureate, based on a balanced curriculum of six subjects, was in use in fifty-six countries and 2643 diplomas were awarded. Eleven years later this figure had grown to 13,089, and the system had been extended to include younger pupils, the total entry for the diplomas and certificates being 38,129. The United World Colleges, headed by Atlantic College, needed the international baccalaureate and nourished it. Peterson, who was chairman of the United World Colleges (1978-80), helped with both organizations until he died. In 'Schools across Frontiers' (1987) he recorded the struggle to establish them. He was made an honorary doctor of the University of Trieste (1985). 
Peterson was tall and good looking. In December 1939 he married Ruth Pauline, daughter of William Anderson Armstrong, solicitor. This marriage ended in divorce in 1946, and in the same year he married Corinna May, daughter of Sir Arthur William Steuart Cochrane, Clarenceux king of arms. There were two sons and a daughter of the second marriage. Peterson, who lived latterly at 107A Hamilton Terrace, London, died of a heart attack in St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, London, on 17 October 1988. He was survived by his wife. 
Michael Brock', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 59821


Shackleton, Lydia (1828-1914), botanical artist, was born on 22 November 1828 at Grisemount, Ballitore, co. Kildare, Ireland, the third of the thirteen children of George Shackleton (1785-1871), a flour miller, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Fisher (1803-1873). The family were staunch Quakers. Lydia was probably taught at home by a governess, and subsequently studied in the Royal Dublin Society School of Art and Design. In her diary she recalled that 'When at the School of Design I copied a wild violet which was considered by myself and others a chef d'oeuvre. I painted it with excited happy feelings' (Nelson and Sayers). The earliest of her known works date from this period, the late 1840s; two drawings in pencil, of Grisemount and Ballitore, dated 15 November 1848, were reproduced in a privately printed booklet 'Lydia Shackleton (1828-1914)' (1947). Being one of the eldest children, Shackleton became responsible for educating her younger brothers and sisters. In the early 1850s she taught her sisters to draw while practising drawing and painting herself. Later, when she lived in Lucan, co. Dublin, she taught her infant nephews and nieces. Shackleton enjoyed teaching, but her preferred occupations were reading, painting, and gardening. She also wrote poetry. In April 1853 Shackleton moved to the family's newly acquired mill at Lyons, co. Kildare, where she was housekeeper for her elder brother Joseph. About 1860, when the Anna Liffey Mills at Lucan, co. Dublin, were purchased by the family, she moved there and lived at 7 The Mall, Lucan, for the rest of her life, except for two lengthy periods (1873-6 and 1888-9) when she was in the United States visiting cousins. While in America she painted; a few naive sketches and landscapes, and numerous botanical watercolours survive (National Botanic Gardens, Glasnevin, Dublin). 
Shackleton's principal work was undertaken for the Royal (now National) Botanic Gardens, Glasnevin, Dublin. She began painting plants growing at Glasnevin about September 1884. Her association continued for twenty-three years, until December 1907, when her deteriorating eyesight forced her to give up painting. In that period she completed about 1500 botanical studies. The majority portray orchids, the particular interest of Frederick Moore (1853-1949), director of the gardens. More than 1000 orchid paintings, each signed L.S., survive in the Glasnevin Gardens, as well as portraits of other miscellaneous garden plants including 'Paeonia', 'Sarracenia', 'Helleborus', and 'Lachenalia'. She also painted about one hundred Irish native wild species for the Science and Art Museum, Dublin; these paintings are now in the National Botanic Gardens. 
None of Shackleton's paintings was reproduced during her lifetime. However, a plate showing the orchid 'Moorea irrorata' ('Neomoorea wallisii'), published under Matilda Smith's name in 'Curtis's Botanical Magazine' (1891), and another, published in 'The Garden' (16 October 1886), showing two pitcher-plant ('Sarracenia') hybrids raised at Glasnevin, may have derived from two of her paintings. Shackleton generally used watercolour, and painted on coloured papers which allowed her to employ gouache for white flowers. As a rule she painted a single blossom face on; rarely did she depict whole plants, and very rarely were dissections of the flowers or lateral views included. Thus much of her work cannot be considered truly scientific. Her early botanical portraits are of a consistently high quality but as her eyesight deteriorated in the early 1900s, so too did the precision of her work. 
Shackleton is said to have had views, religious and otherwise, ahead of her time which estranged her from her mother who was a 'Quaker of the old school' (Shackleton, [i]). She never married. She died of heart failure at her home, 11 Garville Road, Rathgar, Dublin, on 10 November 1914, and was buried in the Quaker burial-ground, Temple Hill, Blackrock, co. Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 59823


Solomons, Estella Frances (1882-1968), landscape and portrait painter, was born on 2 April 1882 at 32 Waterloo Road, Dublin, the elder daughter of Maurice E. Solomons, optician, and his wife, Rosa Jane Jacobs. As a girl she attended the Misses Wades' school in Morehampton Road, Dublin. She then went to a school in Hanover, Germany, and on her return spent some time at Alexandra College, Dublin. She studied under William Orpen at the Dublin Metropolitan School of Art and at the Royal Hibernian Schools under Walter Osborne. She first exhibited with the Young Irish Artists in 1903 and at the Royal Hibernian Academy in 1905. Her visit to Amsterdam in 1906 to see the Rembrandt tercentenary exhibition was deeply influential. It has been claimed that the exhibition turned her from 'the subdued impressionist manner of her early landscapes to 'chiaroscuro' in portraits, and a quality of introspection which she retained even after her portrait style lightened to become colourful and expressive' ('Irish Women Artists', 187). She returned to Holland in 1911, and sketched at Volendam. In Ireland Solomons painted in Dublin, in the Dublin hills, and in Donegal and co. Kerry. In her landscape paintings her manner 'is rapid and expressionist, using wedges of gleaming colour, with brilliant highlights' (ibid., 118). 
Solomons joined the nationalist organization Cumann na mBan ('Council of Women') in 1915. It was through this organization that she met Kathleen Goodfellow (1891-1980), whom she painted several times, and who became a lifelong friend. Goodfellow was to provide funding for the 'Dublin Magazine', founded by the poet James Sullivan Starkey (pseudonym Seumas O'Sullivan) (1879-1958), Solomons's companion and later husband. The couple did not marry until 1926, after the deaths of Solomons's parents, who would not have accepted her marrying outside the Jewish faith. Both Solomons and Starkey were at the centre of Irish cultural and artistic life until the 1950s. After the 1916 rising various men 'on the run' were sheltered in her family home, and she painted some of them. She became widely known as a portraitist. She painted the writers James Stephens, George Russell, and Alice Milligan. Of her portrait painting it has been observed that she was 'never interested in background, only in the personality she painted, and often attempted a peremptory thrust of the figure so as to create a moment of immediacy' ('Irish Women Artists', 118). 
Solomons taught etching at the Dublin municipal technical schools, and in 1922, refusing to take the obligatory oath of allegiance to the British crown, she resigned from her post. Etchings by her illustrated J. S. Starkey's 'Mud and People' (2nd edn, 1918); Padraic Colum's 'The Road Round Ireland' (1926); and the third edition of D. L. Kelleher's 'The Glamour of Dublin' (1928). In 1925 she was appointed an associate of the Royal Hibernian Academy. She exhibited there at the annual members' exhibition for sixty years. Solomons ceased painting in the mid-1950s. She was bedridden for some time before her death at her home, 2 Morehampton Road, Dublin, on 2 November 1968. An exhibition of her work entitled ''Works from an artist's studio': Estella Solomons, 1882-1968' was held at the Crawford Municipal Art Gallery, Cork, in 1986. Her life was the subject of a film, 'Estella', directed by Steve Woods and screened at the Galway Film Fleadh in 2000. Her works can be found in many public collections including the Ulster Museum, Belfast, the Crawford Municipal Art Gallery, Cork, the Sligo County Museum and Library, the Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery of Modern Art, the Irish Jewish Museum, and the National Gallery in Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 59831


Hunter, Robert (d. after 1803), portrait painter, was described as from Ulster and taught by Justin Pope Stevens (Pasquin, 13). The establishment portrait painter in Dublin for the second half of the eighteenth century, he was much admired by his contemporaries and slightly later critics, including William Carey, who saw him as 'a walking chronicle of everything relative to the Irish artists and arts' (Carey, 226), and W. B. Sarsfield Taylor, who said he took 'excellent likenesses' and that his practice was extensive (Taylor, 284). He was sufficiently well known to be commissioned to paint a whole-length of Sir Charles Burton, lord mayor of Dublin, in 1753 (now known from a mezzotint by James McArdell). The group of six portraits of the King family (priv. coll.), long attributed to Hunter, were painted about 1748 and are lively and strong in colour. His three-quarter-length (his favourite size) of the illustrious philanthropist and writer Samuel Madden (Trinity College, Dublin) is a portrait worthy of the sitter and was engraved with some alterations by Richard Purcell in 1756. Hunter was much influenced by English painters such as Thomas Hudson, Reynolds, and Arthur Devis, whose work he knew through engravings and frequently used as a source for his own compositions. It is uncertain whether he ever visited England. He exhibited between 1765 and 1777 at the Society of Artists in Ireland many portraits, a few subject pictures (all now lost), and many small whole-lengths, often of sitters in fancy dress such as Thomas Conolly of Castletown (1771) in Van Dyck costume. In some cases the small whole-lengths may have been made as copies for the sitter's family, as there are several which are duplicates of larger portraits, for example that of Henry de Burgh, first marquess of Clanricarde (1783); the larger version is at Harewood House, Yorkshire, and the smaller was sold at Sothebys (9 March 1988), when it was incorrectly identified as the marquess of Buckingham ('c'.1783) whose whole-length portrait by Hunter (the deanery, St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin) also has a small version (National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin). 
From his early, somewhat baroque, manner Hunter moved to a simpler style in which his sitters are often set in a well-observed and painted landscape, as, for example, in the whole-length, probably of Peter La Touche, where the figure is resting while out shooting with his dog (1775, National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin). His masterpiece is his three-quarter-length portrait of Lord Newbottle, later fifth marquess of Lothian, painted in uniform (1762, priv. coll.). His half-lengths include several versions of Lord Harcourt, lord lieutenant from 1772 to 1777, engraved by Edward Fisher in 1775 (versions Ulster Museum, Belfast; National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin; and elsewhere), and Henry Haughton, Hunter's last known dated work (1790, ex Christies, 1 March 1985, lot 113). A few double portraits can be attributed to him. Although it is not known how much he charged for a portrait, he was paid $7 7's'. 10died in 1788 for repairing a portrait of Charles II for Dublin corporation. 
Although Ireland was visited by the portraitists Robert Home (1779-89) and Gilbert Stuart (1789-93) who had great success with commissions, it was probably age and not competition (as has been suggested) which reduced Hunter's output in the late 1780s. No work by him is known after 1790. According to Strickland, Hunter held an exhibition of his work in 1792, though no evidence for this has been traced. If such an exhibition did take place it would have been the first one-man show to have been held in Dublin. Hunter exhibited pictures for the last time at the Society of Artists in 1800, and continued to leave his name in the Dublin directory until 1803, soon after which date he must have died. He had lived in Dublin all his working life. 
Hunter married about 1750 and his only child, Mary Anne Hunter [Mary Anne Trotter (b. 1752, d. before 1792)], painter, exhibited at the Society of Artists in Ireland between 1765, when she was thirteen, and 1777. She married the portrait painter John Trotter (died 1792) in 1774, after which time she exhibited under the name Mary Anne Trotter. She predeceased her husband, whose second wife, Elizabeth, survived him. Mary Anne was probably the mother of Eliza H. Trotter (fl. 1800-1815), portrait painter, who was the daughter of John Trotter. Eliza Trotter exhibited in Dublin between 1800 and 1809, trained at the Royal Academy Schools in London from 1809 to 1812, and exhibited between 1811 and 1815 at the Royal Academy and British Institution from addresses in Westminster and Hammersmith. Her portrait of Lady Caroline Lamb (exh. 1811) is in the National Portrait Gallery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 59839


Yeats, Susan Mary (1866-1949), embroiderer, was born on 25 August 1866 at Enniscrone, co. Sligo, the second eldest of the four surviving children of John Butler Yeats (1839-1922), barrister, painter, and writer, and Susan Mary (1841-1900), eldest daughter of William Pollexfen, a merchant in Sligo, of an ancient Cornish family settled in Devon, and his wife, Elizabeth Middleton, an Irish middle-class protestant. Known as Lily, she shared the dark, good looks of her siblings, particularly the eldest, William Butler Yeats (the poet), to whom she was particularly close, and the strong-minded, affectionate nature of her eccentric father, to whom she was both devoted and stern. Because of their father's financial problems and their mother's nervous ill health, the children led an unconventional, precocious, insecure childhood, staying with relatives in Sligo and Devon, and in a succession of rented houses in London and Dublin. What Lily and her sister, Elizabeth Corbet Yeats (1868-1940), printer, who was born on 11 March 1868 in Fitzroy Road, London, lacked in formal education or good health, they learned through perseverance. Eventually, through the rich artistic contacts provided by their father and brothers, W. B. Yeats and the painter and graphic illustrator Jack Butler Yeats, and self-imposed apprenticeships in needlework and printing skills, the two women were able to provide an outlet (if not an income) for their siblings' talents from 1902 onwards. 
In 1888, when the family had gone to live in a house in London's Bedford Park, Lily Yeats worked in the embroidery workshop run from nearby Kelmscott House by William Morris's daughter, May. In order to provide her family with a much-needed weekly income, she spent six years making cushion covers, firescreens, and mantelpiece covers, teaching new recruits, and sometimes running the workshop in a tedious but invaluable apprenticeship. A four-poster bed hanging she had embroidered for Kelmscott Manor ('in situ') from May Morris's design was exhibited with the English Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society in 1893; in 1895, the year after she resigned from May Morris's workshop, an embroidered mantle border represented her work in the Arts and Crafts Society of Ireland's first exhibition. 
In 1902, when Yeats and her sister, Elizabeth, were invited by Evelyn Gleeson (1855-1944), Gaelic leaguer and suffragist, to help set up a craft enterprise along the lines of Morris's utopian socialist ideals, they moved back to Dublin with their father. They took a cottage, Gurteen Dhas ('pretty little meadow'), in Churchtown, Dundrum, near the house, Dun Emer, in which Gleeson set up a printing press, carpet and needlework rooms, and other artistic ventures. While Elizabeth Yeats used her experience as a teacher, watercolourist, designer, and author of four successful books on her freehand brushwork technique, and took a short printing course in order to set up the Dun Emer Press, Lily Yeats drew on her Kelmscott experience to set up an embroidery workshop. Their brother Jack's strongly graphic designs of Irish figurative subjects, worked by local girls as banners for St Brendan's Cathedral, Loughrea, co. Galway, were among early designs adapted from the work of artists seminal to the Irish arts and crafts movement. By 1904 Lily was supervising the execution by seven girls of designs by various artists, including her sister, Elizabeth. 
In 1908 disagreements with Evelyn Gleeson led to the Yeats sisters setting up their own Cuala Industries, a printing press and embroidery workshop in a nearby cottage. However successful and productive, they were continually beset with financial, emotional, and health problems. The First World War affected the luxury end of the embroidery workshop badly and in 1923 the end of the lease on Cuala forced the sisters to seek new premises. Using silk and woollen threads on linen or a distinctive blue silk poplin, their stylized floral and landscape designs were often by Elizabeth or Jack Yeats, or adapted from images by other contemporaries, even though signed 'Lily Yeats'. By 1925, when the Cuala Industries moved into Dublin, the embroidery workshop was mostly reproducing old designs, partly because of Lily Yeats's increasing ill health. The last sale of embroidery made under her direction was held in 1931, although she continued to make 'little needle pictures' from home until her death. 
Elizabeth Yeats, initially guided by Emery Walker, the arts and crafts printer who had inspired William Morris, continued to handprint books, bookplates, calendars, hand-coloured prints, Christmas cards, and pamphlets featuring texts by the outstanding writers and illustrators of the Irish revival. The final catalogue of prints issued in her lifetime, 'c'.1939, from Baggot Street, Dublin, offered ninety-seven different prints for sale. In total she published seventy-seven volumes, eleven of which were produced at Dun Emer, each corresponding to their earliest ideal of 14 point Caslon old style font, light ivory-toned rag, mould-made paper manufactured near Dublin, bound in a small quarto format between blue- or grey-covered boards with a linen spine. Her clearly legible, slender volumes with their distinctive paper labels may be seen as the sole survivors of the handcrafted ideal established in 1900 by Walker and T. J. Cobden-Sanderson's Doves Press. As well as exhibiting her printed and designed work throughout Britain and America, Elizabeth Yeats painted fans and furniture, and worked for the Women's National Health Association of Ireland. She died, unmarried, on 16 January 1940 in a nursing home in Dublin, and was buried on 18 January in St Nahi's Church, Dundrum, co. Dublin. Lily Yeats died, unmarried, on 5 January 1949 at her home in Churchtown following a stroke and was buried three days later at St Nahi's Church, Dundrum. A number of Yeats embroideries have been bequeathed to the National Gallery of Ireland, though many remain in private collections. 


@@@@@


doc= 59841


Vachell, Ada Marian (1866-1923), worker for disabled people, was born on 27 December 1866, at 14 Charles Street, Cardiff, daughter of William Vachell (1827-1910), iron merchant and three times mayor of Cardiff, and his wife, Marian or Mary Anne, daughter of William Fedden of Clifton. Scarlet fever claimed the lives of two of Ada's brothers and left her frail and partially deaf, and shortly afterwards, about 1875, she, her parents, and a surviving younger son, Arthur, moved to her mother's home city of Bristol. After a patchy education Ada began charitable work in Bristol, but it was not until 1895 that she began the work with disabled people which was to dominate her life. Physical disability then condemned sufferers to a life of economic dependence and social isolation, and chronic pain compounded by boredom often led to drunkenness. In 1895 Miss Vachell visited Grace Thyrza Kimmins's Guild of the Brave Poor Things, which was inspired by Mrs (Juliana Horatia) Ewing's 'Story of a Short Life' (1885). Her 'cripples' were emboldened with flags and banners to fight the misery and dependence which their conditions brought and to be 'Laetus sorte mea' ('happy in my lot'). 
Vachell took the idea to Bristol and founded the Guild of the Poor Things there on 13 February 1896. Sister Ada, as she became known, began social meetings for disabled people to combat boredom and isolation, and went on to place many of them (boys more easily than girls) in apprenticeships, the guild paying the premium, and to take on summer country holidays as many as she could (82 in 1899, and 147 by 1904). With medals and mottoes, flags and banners, 'cripples' were encouraged to 'face about manfully and bear cheerfully what inevitable hardness life holds. But though we feel this, it can never lessen our deep pity, our lovingest sympathy. Life is not easy to any Poor Thing. They are all men and women -- even little children of sorrows. They are all acquainted with grief' (Unwin, 123). She had a band of voluntary helpers, but she always remained at the heart of the guild, doing everything from raising money to visiting disabled people in the workhouse. 
With help from guild members who had found work, and from factory girls of the Hand-in-Hand social club which Miss Vachell had earlier helped to run, the guild grew steadily, reaching 200 members in 1906. From its first premises in Stratton Street, it moved to Broad Plain by March 1896. In May 1906 it opened a purpose-built holiday home at Churchill, Somerset, and on 27 June 1913 opened purpose-built premises at the Guild Heritage, Braggs Lane, Bristol. In 1899 Miss Vachell helped to found the Bristol Invalid Children's School, which was modelled on Mrs Humphry Ward's work at the Passmore Edwards Settlement in Tavistock Place, London. 
Sister Ada seems to have been a quite remarkable person -- undogmatic, non-judgemental, hard-working, cheerful, compassionate, and able to see and solve problems. A devout Christian, she worshipped with Anglicans, Unitarians, and Quakers alike, and demanded of her guild members allegiance to no particular creed. A convinced abstainer, she organized a temperance group within the guild, but membership was optional, and she wrote of a woman who had drunk herself to death, 'There's a great content that we haven't to sort out the good and evil in people, haven't to judge, 'can't' judge, -- but that with God all is seen and allowed for and understood' (Unwin, 41). The name Poor Things had been her choice, but she was happy to change it to the Guild of the Handicapped after young male members found the expression 'poor things' hindered their chance of finding work. From comfortable circumstances and physically weak, she undertook exhausting manual work, such as giving daily baths to twenty guild members on holiday in a farmhouse with no bathroom. She talked of soldierly discipline and decked her meeting-rooms with flags and banners, but ensured that guild holidays were marked by freedom and lack of rules, and remarked of her members that 'Heroes are with us yet, and some live upon parish pay' (Unwin, 49). 
Miss Vachell, who as well as pursuing her voluntary work kept an interest in the theatre and advocated women's suffrage, died suddenly of pneumonia on 29 December 1923 at her home, Foley Cottage, Hampton Road, Clifton, Bristol. After a funeral service attended by weeping crowds at Bristol Cathedral on 2 January 1924, her body was cremated at Golders Green crematorium the next day. A tablet raised in the cathedral to her memory bears the guild emblem of crutch and sword. Nearly one hundred years later the state had taken over much of the guild's work, and its administration costs per member were becoming too large. It was decided to cease activity from January 1987 and use the guild's by then considerable assets to give grants to individual disabled people so that Miss Vachell's work would continue. 


@@@@@


doc= 59843


Riddell, Hannah (1855-1932), medical missionary, was born on 17 October 1855 at 9 The Barracks, Barnet, Hertfordshire, the only daughter of Daniel Riddle (1810-1889) (he always spelt his name differently from his wife and daughter) and Hannah Wright (1814-1886), 'nee' Hunt. Daniel was born in Glasgow, the son of a weaver. He joined the army in 1837 and served in India and China. In 1853 he was appointed a staff sergeant in the militia and posted to Barnet. After retiring from the army in 1877 he took his family to live in Oystermouth near Swansea. Here they rented Russell House where Hannah ran a boarding-school for young ladies until she became bankrupt soon after her father's death in 1889. After release from bankruptcy she went to Liverpool in October 1889, where she was appointed deputy superintendent at the YMWCA. 
Hannah was in Liverpool for less than a year before joining the Church Missionary Society (CMS) which in 1888 had decided to start sending women missionaries abroad. Apart from her orphaned niece, Ada Wright, to whom she was devoted, Hannah had few ties in England and accepted her posting to Japan with enthusiasm. She arrived in Kobe on 16 January 1891, where she stayed for several months before being sent to Kumamoto in Kyushu. A strong, forceful woman over 6 feet tall, Hannah was soon at odds with the small band of British missionaries stationed there, most of whom she regarded as lacking drive and ambition. They in turn found her pushy and extravagant, and disliked her practice of ignoring orthodox channels by writing directly to CMS headquarters in London in order to achieve her aims. 
Soon after arriving in Kumamoto, Hannah visited the Honmyoji Temple, a favourite gathering place for lepers, where for the first time she encountered leprosy 'in every degree of loathsomeness' (report to CMS, 1 Dec 1891, Archives of the CMS). Profoundly shocked by the experience, she discovered that little or no provision was made for the victims of leprosy, a disease prevalent in Japan until effective drugs were developed in the 1940s. 
Hannah decided to build a hospital in Kumamoto devoted to the care of lepers, and energetically set about raising the necessary funds. She received only lukewarm support from her fellow missionaries who felt that such a venture detracted from their primary task of converting the 'heathen' to Christianity. But, despite many difficulties, the Hospital of the Resurrection of Hope was finally opened on 12 November 1895. 
Over the next few years Hannah's relations with her missionary colleagues steadily deteriorated. The CMS eventually decided to remove her altogether from Japan, but Hannah, determined not to abandon her patients, instead resigned from the society in 1900 and thereafter directed the hospital independently until her death. Money was a constant problem, but she established an impressive network of support, and donations (many of them very small) came in from Japan, England, and America. The hospital's precarious income did not deter Hannah from living in a lavish style that many people considered inappropriate for a missionary. She vigorously justified such expenditure by claiming that unless she appeared to be a lady of class and substance, she would not be taken seriously by those in a position to underpin her work. 
Along with most of her contemporaries (including many distinguished doctors) Hannah had a minimal understanding of the pathology of leprosy. She erroneously asserted that the only way to eliminate the disease was by strict sex segregation. But she did influence official and public attitudes to leprosy. The result was more humane treatment of its victims. Thanks in part to her impassioned lobbying of the Japanese government the first legislation to provide for the care, rather than control, of lepers went through the Diet in 1907, and over the next few years five national leprosaria were built. She also initiated leper relief work in Kusatsu and Okinawa. Articulate and energetic, Hannah was a tireless traveller and lecturer in the promotion of her cause. She won both moral and financial support from many influential figures in Meiji Japan and, most important, from the imperial family. For her contribution to the fight against leprosy she was awarded the medal of the Blue Ribbon in 1906 and the order of the Sacred Treasure (sixth class) in 1922. Hannah died on 3 February 1932 at 436 Furushinyashiki, Kumamoto, and was buried in Kumamoto the following day. After her death the hospital was continued under the direction of her niece, Ada Wright, until its closure in 1941. 


@@@@@


doc= 59844


Digby, Mabel Mary Josephine (1835-1911), Roman Catholic nun, was born at Ashford House, Staines, Middlesex, on 7 April 1835, the fourth of the six children of Simon Digby (died 1858) and Elizabeth Anne Morse (died 1890), heir of Baron Haversham. When Mabel Digby was five the family moved to Aranhill House, Bath, where she was educated under the supervision of her mother. Digby was, however, a much keener hunter than scholar, an enthusiasm she shared with her adored father. On account of her mother's health a further move was made to France in 1849. In September 1852 both her mother and her sister Geraldine were received into the Roman Catholic church. This caused a rift in the family: Mabel Digby at once avowed her intent of remaining a protestant and returned to England with her equally staunch father. The following winter her health broke down and she rejoined her mother at Montpellier. On 17 February 1853 Mabel Digby was coaxed into the church of Notre-Dame des Tables by some Catholic friends on the pretext of attending a concert of sacred music. The performance concluded with benediction of the blessed sacrament, during which she underwent a profound spiritual experience which led to her reception into the Roman church a month later, when she took the additional names Mary Josephine. 
At Marmoutier-les-Tours, where her younger sister Eva was at school, Mabel Digby became acquainted with the sisters of the Sacred Heart. Her application to enter the society was initially rejected by the assistant-general. After the personal intervention of the founder Madeleine-Sophie Barat, who recognized Digby's qualities of leadership, she was accepted and received the habit at the noviceship of Conflans-Ste Honorine on 20 March 1857. A year later she returned to teach at Marmoutier, becoming superior of the house in 1865. Her term of office saw the terrible floods of 1866, and the Franco-Prussian War and occupation of 1870-71. During this time the convent became a hospital, and Mother Digby herself assisted the surgeons. In August 1872 she was appointed vicaress of the English house at Roehampton. Within the year she had established a teachers' training college at Wandsworth, with further houses following at Hove, Carlisle, and Hammersmith. The new English vicariate also made foundations in Dublin, Sydney, and Melbourne. 
During the thirteenth General Congregation of the society in August 1894 Mother Digby was elected assistant-general of the Society of Sacred Heart. Within a year, upon the sudden death of Mother von Satorius, she was elected to succeed her as superior-general of the society. Mother Digby's generalate was a period of enormous difficulty but great hope. It saw the celebration of the centennial of the society in 1900 and the beatification of the founder in 1908, both of which served as focal points for the renewal of its spirit and vigour. Soon after her election Mother Digby began the visitation of the houses in Europe and north Africa, and in 1898-9 those of Mexico, the United States, and Canada. 
On the other hand, in France, the anti-association legislation of the Combes government in 1903 effectively closed all religious teaching establishments in the country. Beginning with Moulins in March 1903 and ending with Conflans in 1909, forty-seven Sacred Heart houses were closed, their furnishings disposed of, and more than 2000 religious sent to existing and newly established houses across the globe. The general administration moved to Ixelles, near Brussels. Mother Digby conducted the business of the society under such difficult conditions with diplomacy and efficiency, displaying great clarity of mind and strength of will. However, some in the society considered her style of government too independent: complaints were made to the cardinal protector in Rome, and Archbishop Richard of Paris was sent as apostolic delegate to the fifteenth General Congregation which met in 1904. Nevertheless, despite her outward reserve Digby had gained the affection of many of her sisters in religion; she possessed a quick wit and the ability to express herself in a powerfully succinct manner. Richard expressed his satisfaction with both the government of the society and its general direction. 
In 1895 Mother Digby had suffered a severe heart attack. The heavy administrative burdens arising from the situation in France further undermined her health. On 15 May 1911 she suffered a stroke and died on the 21st at the Convent of the Sacred Heart, Ixelles. Because the society possessed no cemetery in Belgium the decision was made to take Digby's body to Roehampton, where she was buried after a requiem mass celebrated on 26 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 59845


Richard Cely (d. 1482) is first mentioned in 1449, when he was already a substantial stapler and was one of a group lending 2000 marks for the support of the Calais garrison. He was married to Agnes Andrew of Adderbury, Oxfordshire, the sister of Richard Andrew, secretary to Henry VI, dean of York, and first warden of All Souls College, Oxford. This established an ecclesiastical link which had some importance for his sons. His brother John was also a stapler. In 1455 Richard was in a group of leading staplers indenting with the victualler of Calais, and in 1460 he was accused, with other staplers, of helping the mayor of the staple to seize wool. In 1461 and 1474 he was joint constable at Calais. In 1481 he was an unsuccessful candidate for election as sheriff of London. He died in January 1482. The family correspondence suggests that he had been a careful, rather irritable businessman, evidently quite successful. His wife, Agnes, died a year later in January 1483, leaving to her son Robert money to be used as trading capital. 
Richard and Agnes had three sons, Robert, Richard, and George. 


@@@@@


doc= 59846


Robert Cely (d. 1485), the eldest, seems to have been a rather unsatisfactory person, devoted to good living, often in debt, and casual about the business. He was a stapler by 1474-5 and also married. There are reports of his buying hawks and horses and holding dinner parties at Calais. In 1478 he was in debt at Calais, and his brother Richard appears to have threatened to imprison him. His wife, whose name is unknown, and his child died in 1479. After his wife's death he was betrothed in 1480 to a lady named Joan Hart, but quickly quarrelled with her. He fled to Calais, but she sued for breach of promise, and he was compelled to flee further, to Bruges, to escape the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of Canterbury. A settlement was made with her by Robert's father and brothers. Back in London he fell sick and was in need of money, and apparently ceased to be a stapler. In 1484 he made a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela; he died in February of the following year. 
The younger 


@@@@@


doc= 59847


Richard Cely (d. 1493), the second son, was the effective manager of the business after his father's death. He established a partnership with his brother George in 1476 which lasted until George's death. He was patronized by Sir John Weston, the prior of the order of St John of Jerusalem in England, with whom he may have been acquainted because of the Andrew connection. He accompanied Sir John on an embassy to the French court in 1480, and on a trip to Gravesend to meet Margaret of Burgundy. In 1482 he was apparently wooing Elizabeth Limerick convivially at Northleach, but in the same year he in fact made an advantageous marriage with Anne, daughter of Richard Rawson, an alderman of London, who brought a dower of 500 marks. In 1486 Richard and George, together with William Maryon, bought a ship from a Breton, which they renamed the 'Margaret Cely'; she was used to carry grain exported to the Low Countries and wool to Calais, and to import wine from Bordeaux. Richard was his father's executor, and usually remained in England, handling the purchase of wool in the Cotswolds and its dispatch abroad. After the death of his brother George in 1489 he tried to obtain repayment of debts owed to them jointly. He died, however, on 5 July 1493, fairly heavily in debt to his wife's family. He left three daughters, Margaret, Isabel, and Barbara. His widow married Walter Frost of West Ham and lived until 1527. 



@@@@@


doc= 59848


George Cely (c.1458-1489), the third son, appears from his surviving letters to have been an amiable person, and a rather casual and free writer. He is first mentioned in the records in 1472 as buying clothes in London. In 1474 he was learning music from a harpist at Calais, how to play 'Mine Heart's Lust' and 'O Freshest Flower'. In 1478 he was with the other two brothers in an excursion from Calais to Boulogne. In 1479 George appears to have been enjoying a love affair with a French lady at Calais, but later in the same year he fell seriously ill at Bruges, causing his relatives some anxiety. In 1482 he moved to London, remaining Richard's partner, and about 18 May 1484 married Margery, 'nee' Punt, the childless widow of Edmund Rygon, a prosperous draper; it was probably a very favourable match. George lived at Mark Lane, London. He died in 1489, leaving four sons, Richard, Avery, George, and John, and his wife pregnant with a fifth, Edmund. His widow married Sir John Haleghwell. There was afterwards a good deal of litigation between the widows Anne and Margery Cely and their new husbands, about the finances of the brothers Richard and George and lands that they had acquired, principally in Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 59849


Blunden, Humphrey (b. 1609, d. in or after 1654), publisher and bookseller, was born on 12 November 1609, the son of Richard Blunden (died 1621?), gentleman, of Chelton, Shropshire. He was bound apprentice on 4 September 1626 to Philemon Stephens, bookseller, and made free of the London Stationers' Company on 22 June 1635. Richard Baxter fondly recalled his acquaintance with Blunden, remarking that he was 'a sober godly, understanding Apprentice' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.11). In April 1636 Blunden took out a loan from his company, doubtless using the money to help finance a publishing venture. In the following year he paid for the copyright of his first two publications, James Day's 'A New Spring for Divine Poetry' (1637) and a Latin narrative of the Leipzig colloquy of 1631 by the Saxon court preacher, Matthias Hoe von Hoenegg, entitled 'Colloquii inter praecipuos aliquot Germaniae theologos, de conciliandis ecclesiarum evangelicarum dissidiis. Anno MDCXXXI' (1637). Blunden's shop was at The Castle in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange and all his known future imprints bore a variation of this address. 
By October 1638 Blunden had been admitted to the yeomanry of the Stationers and in the coming years he became actively involved in company politics. In January 1642 Blunden published one issue of 'A Continuation of the True Diurnall of Passages in Parliament' (printed for 'Humphry Blunden' in 'Cornhill'). The events surrounding the outbreak of civil war saw his productivity soar and in August 1642 he published 'Certain Information from Devon and Dorset: concerning the Commission of Array' (printed for 'H. Blunden', 1642) and the third number of 'Speciall Passages and Certain Informations from Severall Places' (printed for 'H. Blunden', 1642); one writer mockingly termed the latter newsbook 'Blunden's Passages' ('Mercurius Civicus', 25, 1 May-8 June 1643, 40). On 19 August 1644 Blunden signed the Stationers' Company petition to the House of Commons protesting at the 'monopolies' held by royal patent to print English bibles and 'sundry Bookes of generall use' (Stationers' Company, Liber A: letter-book of the Stationers' Company, fol. 149'r'). 
During the latter half of the 1640s Blunden entered into partnership with the bookseller John Partridge (died 1649) and the printer Thomas Brudnell to issue the writings of the astrologer William Lilly. On Partridge's death Brudnell presented his executors, the booksellers Philemon Stephens and Luke Fawne, with a bill for $368 18's'. 0died This included a schedule of expenses incurred in the printing of Lilly's almanac 'Merlini Anglici Ephemeris' (13,500 copies in 1646, 17,000 copies in 1647, and 18,500 copies in 1648). The last edition of Lilly's almanac issued by Blunden was for the year 1655. Blunden also published six works by Thomas Vaughan, and may be the H. B. who appended an encomium to 'his ever honour'd' friend's 'Magia Adamica, or, The Antiquity of Magick' (1650). Blunden himself was accounted 'an extraordinary Chymist' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.11). He was known to Samuel Hartlib, and also corresponded with the alchemist Johan Rudolph Glauber. Blunden had 'gotten an Instrument for curing of deafnes from Glauber which hee purposed to apply to his wife, but hee was faine to pay for it 5 lib.' (Sheffield University, Hartlib papers, 31/22/4A), and was the same Mr Blunden who queried 'some passages' in Glauber's books (Sheffield University, Hartlib papers, 'Ephemerides', Jan-June 1648, 60/3/6A). Baxter, moreover, noted that it was Blunden who 'got Jacob Behmen his Books translated and printed' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.11). Indeed, such was Blunden's enthusiasm for that 'deep illuminated man of God' that he supplied the Yorkshire JP Durand Hotham with material for the latter's brief memoir of the German mystic (J. Boehme, 'Four Tables of Divine Revelation', trans. H. B., 1654, sig.H3; D. Hotham, 'The Life of Jacob Behmen', 1654, sig.B2). In all Blunden published ten works by or derived from the writings of Jacob Boehme, several in association with the printer Matthew Simmons. He is most likely the H. Blunden who supplied a prefatory epistle to Boehme's 'Four Tables of Divine Revelation' (1654), a work rendered into English by H. B. -- either Blunden, a namesake licensed to practise medicine, or Humphrey Blundell (educated in Shropshire and a former pupil of Charles Hotham's) may be identified with this translator's monogram. 
In his ephemeris for 1654 Hartlib noted that the servant of one White, a stationer near Aldgate, was 'very active' and 'comes to dwel in Blundens-shop' (Sheffield University, Hartlib papers, 'Ephemerides', 1 Jan-24 April 1654, 29/4/6A). Little else is known of Blunden's activities, though in March 1657 Johann Moriaen, a former minister at Cologne with interests in Helmontian medicine and chemistry, informed Hartlib that Blunden had corresponded with Petrus Serrarius, a millenarian resident in Amsterdam and an enthusiastic student of iatrochemistry and mystical theology. Another of Blunden's correspondents was the Bohemian-born chiliast and visionary Paul Felgenhauer (1563-1661), with whom he discussed magic. In October 1671 a Mrs Blunden, widow, began receiving money from the Stationers' Company poor fund. Richard Baxter 'very much loved' Blunden, 'who by his Consolotary Letters and Directions for Books, did afterwards do me the Offices of an useful Friend' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.11). 


@@@@@


doc= 59850


Earl, George Samuel Windsor (1813-1865), colonist and geographer, the son of a veteran sea captain and shipowner, Percy Earl (1771-1827), and his second wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Sharp (1778/9-1874), was born at Hampstead, Middlesex, on 10 February 1813. His brief formal education was at the Revd John Stephenson's school at Orpington and at Dr Alexander Jamieson's Wyke House Academy until his father's death in June 1827. Later that year, aged fourteen, he made a voyage to India as midshipman on the 'Lady Holland', returning to England in March 1829. In August of that year he took ship for Swan River Colony on the 'Egyptian' with the intention of becoming a farmer with his elder brother, William Percy, who arrived later with four indentured servants and some sheep. 
Finding that the 200 acres allocated to him on the lower Swan were unsuitable, Earl spent some time exploring the coast before going south to Augusta. There he was employed as clerk to the resident, Captain John Molloy, and was assigned town land. In February 1832 he sailed 150 miles in an open boat to Fremantle to seek relief supplies for the struggling settlement. Deciding that there was no future for him in the colony, he took ship in August for Batavia (Jakarta), learning the Malay language and the rudiments of navigation while on board. During the next two years he served as chief officer on trading voyages to the Malay states and Thailand as well as ports in Java, becoming proficient in Bugis, Bajau, and Macassarese. In March 1834, on behalf of some Singapore Chinese merchants, he took an 80 ton schooner, the 'Stamford', with a cargo of opium, tea, and iron to the west Borneo port of Singkawang in the hope of breaking the Dutch trade embargo. During this time he visited the Chinese gold-mining 'gongsi' (co-operative autonomous community) at Montrado. 
On returning to England in early 1835, when he was still only twenty-one, Earl became involved in agitation for a British settlement in northern Australia. Elected as a fellow of the Royal Asiatic Society after an address to its members, his authority on the area was further strengthened by his pamphlet 'Observations on the Commercial and Agricultural Capabilities of the North Coast of New Holland' (1836) and his book, 'The Eastern Seas' (1837). This important work also described north-western Borneo in detail for the first time, and led to the visit there by James Brooke in 1839. Indeed, it seems likely that Brooke asked him to join his party. Instead, in late 1837 Earl was appointed linguist and draughtsman with the north Australia expedition under Sir J. J. Gordon Bremer. From October 1838 he was based at the garrison settlement of Port Essington, which he had advocated as a 'second Singapore', to tap the trade of eastern Indonesia. In 1844 he was appointed crown lands commissioner and police magistrate. During his five years at Port Essington he made several voyages to the islands to the north to obtain supplies. He also developed a knowledge of the Aboriginal peoples of the Cobourg peninsula. 
Suffering from malaria and dysentery, Earl returned to England on leave in September 1844 and completed 'Enterprise in Tropical Australia' (1846), a historical account of the Port Essington settlement with chapters on the climate, flora, and fauna of northern Australia and the prospects of growing cotton there using Asian labour. While in London he met, and later married on 4 April 1846, sixteen-year-old Clara, daughter of the Waterloo veteran and historian Captain William Siborne of the Royal Military Asylum at Chelsea. He also gave a lecture to the Royal Geographical Society on the Aboriginal peoples of northern Australia. Later that year he and Clara sailed to Sydney to settle the affairs of his brother, who had drowned at sea in April 'en route' for Port Essington. After the birth of their only child, Elisabeth Christiana, in Sydney in the following year they travelled via Hong Kong to Singapore, where Earl was admitted as a law agent in April 1849. He also contributed articles on a wide range of subjects to the lawyer and antiquary J. F. Logan's 'Journal of the Indian Archipelago' and began work on a major ethnographical undertaking. 'Native Races of the Indian Archipelago: the Papuans' was published in London in 1853, where he spent the years 1852-4 in poor health but cheered by his election as one of the first corresponding members of the Ethnological Society. In 1853 he became involved in a public controversy with Sir Roderick Murchison as to who first anticipated the discovery of gold in New South Wales in 1851. This brought him to the attention of the engineer and antiquary Hyde Clarke, and to a spell as agent on the New South Wales and Victoria goldfields for the Berdan Pan, a gold ore processing machine patented by the American inventor Colonel Hiram Berdan. When this failed to make his fortune, he returned with his family to Singapore in mid-1855. 
Appointed magistrate and third assistant resident councillor for Singapore in 1857, Earl then took Thomas Braddell's place in Penang for a year as senior assistant resident councillor before moving to Province Wellesley on the mainland to a similar post. In early 1864, while visiting Adelaide with his wife and daughter for the latter's marriage to the Anglo-Irish merchant William Alt, he influenced the South Australian government in its choice of Adam Bay, near the mouth of the Adelaide River, as the site for the capital of its newly acquired Northern Territory. Earl spent his remaining years as resident councillor and police magistrate in Penang and Province Wellesley. Retaining his keen interest in northern Australia, in 1863 he published 'A Handbook for Colonists in Tropical Australia'. Despite deteriorating health, he offered to lead a rescue party when the first South Australian expedition to Adam Bay was a failure. He died of dysentery on 9 August 1865 when about to return to England, and was buried at Penang the following day. There is a monument to him there and also an Earl family commemorative stone at St John's, Hampstead. An imperialist in the tradition of Dalrymple and Raffles, Earl was a gifted hydrographer, geographer, linguist, and ethnographer, and an effective publicist in the cause of northern Australian settlement. He coined the term 'Indonesia' in the context of linguistic groupings. 


@@@@@


doc= 59851


Dorothea Klumpke (1861-1942); despite the difference in their ages, their friendship developed, and they married in 1901. Dorothea was born in San Francisco, one of five gifted daughters of a failed goldminer who later made a fortune in real estate. Their mother believed that her daughters should have the same educational advantage as men, and, as this was impossible in San Francisco, placed them in schools in Germany, Switzerland, and France, and herself settled in Paris. Dorothea gained her bachelor's degree in mathematics from the Sorbonne in 1886 and joined the Paris observatory to assist the astro-photographers. When the international Carte du Ciel project was set up, Dorothea, with her linguistic abilities and expertise, competed against fifty men to become the first woman to head a department at the observatory. In 1893 she became the first woman to gain a mathematics doctorate, with a treatise on Saturn's rings. In 1899 she ascended to over 1600 feet in a balloon to observe the Leonid meteor shower. After her marriage to Roberts she settled at Starfield, where she assisted him with his photography. Roberts had no children from either marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 59855


Mary Proctor (1862-1957) was born on 1 April 1862 at Dublin. As a teenager she was a constant companion of her father, fascinated by the mythology of the stars; she arranged his library and proof-read for him. After his second marriage he taught her the craft of commercial writing. After her graduation from Columbia University and his death in 1888 she made a career popularizing astronomy. Mary Proctor was elected a member of the American Association of Astronomical Societies in 1898, and was a member of several American, Mexican, and British astronomical societies. She visited observatories, and was supplied with material and illustrations by leading astronomers. She attended the total solar eclipses at Bodo, Norway (1896); Virginia (1900); Burgos (1905), where she drew the corona; from an aeroplane in England (1927); in Canada (1932); and in the Mediterranean (1936). Her articles were published in 'Science', her father's magazine 'Knowledge', 'Scientific American', and after 1897 in 'Popular Astronomy'. An acclaimed lecture in 1893 at the World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago led to popular engagements, a contract with the New York board of education, and lecture tours in the USA, Canada, England (1908-9), Australia, and New Zealand; she was equally comfortable addressing children, working men's institutes, or literary and scientific societies. 


@@@@@


doc= 59857


Maclagan, Sir Andrew Douglas (1812-1900), physician and expert in forensic medicine and public health, born on 17 April 1812 in Ayr, was the eldest of seven sons of David Maclagan and his wife, Jane, daughter of Philip Whiteside, a medical practitioner of Ayr. Maclagan's father was serving as physician to the forces in Portugal at the time of his son's birth and did not see him until 'he was eating a mutton chop'. Of the six siblings, two entered the medical profession and William Dalrymple Maclagan (1826-1910) became the archbishop of York. Maclagan entered Edinburgh high school in 1818. He studied medicine at the University of Edinburgh and graduated MD in 1833. He became a licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1831 and a fellow in 1833. After further study in Berlin, Paris, and London, he was elected assistant surgeon to the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary. 
In 1845 Maclagan's interest in chemistry led him to take up extramural teaching of the subject at Surgeons' Hall, Edinburgh. His forensic career began as a medical witness for the defence of Madeleine Smith on the charge of poisoning her lover, Emil L'Angelier, in 1859, when Robert Christison appeared for the crown. The charge was not proven. Christison and Maclagan became great friends and often appeared together for the crown. Maclagan appeared for the crown with Henry Littlejohn in the trial of Dr Pritchard for the murder of his wife and mother-in-law by poisoning (Glasgow, 1865) and in the trial of Eugene Chantrelle for the drugging and gassing of his wife (Edinburgh, 1878). Both defendants were found guilty and hanged. Maclagan became a leading authority on the analysis of poisons and published important works on the subject, such as 'Contributions to Toxicology, Cases of Poisoning' (1849). 
In 1862 Maclagan was appointed regius professor of forensic medicine and public health at Edinburgh University, succeeding Thomas Trail. He was instrumental in raising the profile of medical practitioners in Scottish public health administration, and immediately entered into the task of instructing undergraduate medical students in the basic rules of public hygiene. He introduced postgraduate teaching in 1875. The BSc in public health, open only to medical graduates, was timely, as Scottish medical officers of health were struggling for the status and recognition given to that office in England and Wales under the 1875 'Public Health Act'. Both lecture courses took the English approach to public health, Scottish practice being dealt with separately. The degree examinations consisted of chemistry, medicine, practical sanitation, and sanitary law. The BSc was followed by the establishment of a DSc degree in 1877. Maclagan's postgraduate courses attracted many doctors who took up responsible posts in English public health administration, for example Edward Hope, medical officer of health for Liverpool. At a time when medical practitioners working in Scottish public health were pressing for recognition (they were eventually acknowledged in the 1897 'Public Health Act', Scotland), Maclagan's public health qualifications formed an essential part of the successful argument. 
When Maclagan was appointed regius professor he automatically became one of the professors of clinical medicine, and during the later years, when he became the senior professor, he lectured almost entirely on dermatology. It is due to him that a department for skin diseases was formed in the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary. Maclagan retired from the chair of forensic medicine and public health in 1897. The university bestowed upon him the degree of LLD, an honour accorded to him also by Glasgow University in 1881. He was elected president in Edinburgh of both the Royal College of Surgeons (1859-60) and the Royal College of Physicians (1884-7), a distinction shared only with his father. In 1886 he was knighted by Queen Victoria, and between 1890 and 1895 he served as president of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. 
Maclagan was married to Elizabeth Allan Thompson. He was an excellent amateur musician and poet, his most notable contribution being 'Nugae canorae medicae', and was a fellow of the Harveian and the Aesculapian societies, delighting the membership with his ballads. He died at 28 Heriot Row, Edinburgh, on 5 April 1900, after a short illness. He was buried four days later in Dean cemetery, Edinburgh. Among the pall bearers were his son, Robert Craig Maclagan, and his brother William. His wife had predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 59858


Glaister, John (1856-1932), expert in medical jurisprudence and public health, was born on 9 March 1856 in the county town of Lanark, the eldest of four children born to Joseph Glaister (1830-1871) and Marion Hamilton Weir (1832-1871), small property owners, grocers, and spirit merchants. Glaister was educated at Hugh Brown's School, Westport, and Lanark grammar school before entering into a legal apprenticeship at the age of fifteen. After the death of his parents the family business was bought by an uncle, who became his guardian. Glaister then turned his back on the law and entered Glasgow University, in 1873, to study medicine. He proved a gifted student, gaining many prizes, and completed his studies in less than four years, though he was refused permission to sit the final MB examinations immediately because he was still some months under the age of twenty-one. 
Undeterred, in 1877 Glaister obtained licences from both the Royal College of Physicians and the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, and after a brief period as assistant to a practitioner in Carluke he set up practice in the then affluent Townhead district of Glasgow. An archetypal young man in hurry, he married in 1878 Mary Scott Clarke, daughter of Robert Clarke, of Wishaw. The first of their six children was born in 1879. In the same year Glaister graduated MD at Glasgow. With a young family to support and no medical connections or continental study to further his career, he augmented his income by obtaining the post of police surgeon for the St Rollox division, an industrial district on the banks of the Forth and Clyde Canal. The foundations of Glaister's ensuing medico-legal career were laid in this period. He rapidly became acquainted with a wide range of wounds caused by crimes and industrial accidents. The canal provided him with material to differentiate between injuries caused to bodies by the screws of passing steamers before and after death. By 1893 he had seen 300 dead bodies as part of his duties. 
Glaister's wide circle of medical friends included the rising surgeon William Macewen, then a part-time extramural lecturer on medical jurisprudence at Glasgow Royal Infirmary medical school. In 1881 Glaister succeeded Macewen in this post, the latter having obtained the infirmary lectureship in surgery, and he also became a fellow of the Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow. In the mid-1880s he added lectures in public health to his course, responding to the demand for suitably qualified medical officers of health. He was appointed, in 1887, as special lecturer in public health at the Royal Infirmary, with a laboratory which he equipped at his own expense. Glaister took the Cambridge diploma in public health in 1889. His was the sole laboratory in Glasgow and the west of Scotland to offer sufficient tuition for the Cambridge diploma. 
Glaister was appointed professor of forensic medicine and public health in 1889 when the Glasgow Royal Infirmary school merged with St Mungo's medical school. At this point public health appeared the more important field to Glaister. He published a book and several articles on the subject but it is doubtful whether he shared James Burn Russell's ideology: Glaister's writings on sanitary failings are tinged more with nature than with nurture. During the 1890s he campaigned for improved standards in death certification. With Russell he toured public health laboratories throughout the United Kingdom for Glasgow University. In 1899 he was elevated to the university's regius chair of forensic medicine and public health; he taught female students separately at the nearby Queen Margaret College. In 1903 Glaister introduced postgraduate degrees for BSc and DSc in public health. By 1907 Glaister had successfully acquired custom-built and specially equipped laboratory facilities for both forensic medicine and public health within the university's latest extension. 
When the sheriff of Lanarkshire appointed him a crown medical witness in 1899, Glaister resigned his police position and sold his private practice. From that time onwards he derived his income mainly from his professorial salary and his medico-legal fees, and he styled himself 'medico-legal examiner in crown cases'. He lived in some comfort, with a small country estate in Dumfriesshire, where he indulged his leisure pursuits of golf, fishing, and motoring. 
Glaister became a household name as his appearances increased in the busy Glasgow high courts. Like his Edinburgh counterpart, Henry Littlejohn, Glaister considered himself the complete medical detective: a forensic pathologist, toxicologist, serologist, psychiatrist, and ballistics and fingerprint expert, who dealt with all theatres of death. Notorious trials such that of Oscar Slater in 1909 for the murder of Marion Gilchrist by assault with a hammer, and of Donald Merrett in 1926 for the murder by shooting of his mother, secured Glaister's position in a forensic firmament later inhabited by Bernard Spilsbury and Sydney Smith, with whom he did battle, or so it seemed to his medical students and the average Glaswegian. 
Unlike Littlejohn, however, Glaister was a full-time academic who also wrote valuable textbooks. His first, published in 1902, conjoined the two subjects professed from his chair: 'A Textbook of Medical Jurisprudence, Toxicology and Public Health'. Thereafter, subsequent editions were restricted to medical jurisprudence and toxicology, with one edition of 'A Textbook of Public Health' in 1910. He dedicated each edition to his wife under the acronym MSG. Glaister's was the first British textbook to use photographic evidence to illustrate violent death and other aspects of forensic medicine, each further edition amplified by his latest cases. In court his textbook was often quoted back at him by defence counsels, notably the eminent Craigie Aitchison. It pleased Glaister enormously to gain student recognition through the affectionately scurrilous 'Ballad of John Glaister', which encapsulated many of his lecture and textbook themes. The ballad's fame crossed the Atlantic to Harvard medical school, whose students thought Glaister to be a fictional character similar to Sherlock Holmes. In his lifetime Glaister published five editions of his textbook. John Glaister the younger, his son and successor in the chair, continued with further editions. 
Glaister carried his forensic skills beyond the criminal courts and into the arena of industrial disease and death. He was the specialist medical referee in industrial diseases for the counties of Lanark, Ayr, Renfrew, Bute, Stirling, and Dumbarton. He made a unique study of accidental arsine poisoning through the triggering of the Marsh test effect, which produces arseniuretted hydrogen. 
During the First World War Glaister carried the bulk of teaching and examination in public health and forensic medicine at Glasgow. The post-war growth of the subjects' specialisms forced him to recognize what had been accepted in Edinburgh in 1897 -- that the traditional Scottish teaching of both subjects in tandem was no longer viable. In 1923 one of Glaister's friends, the industrialist Sir Henry Mechan, endowed a separate chair of public health. Glaister continued as professor of forensic medicine until 1931. When he retired the university conferred upon him the honorary degree of LLD. Until the end of his career Glaister's idiosyncratic court attire consisted of the silk top hat, long frock-coat, and Gladstone high collar of his younger days. 
Between 1907 and 1909, when Glaister was president of the Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow, the faculty applied for and was granted the title 'Royal'. In his time Glaister was also elected president of the Royal Glasgow Philosophical Society, vice-president of the Medico-legal Society of Great Britain, the Medico-legal Institute of New York, and academician and gold medallist of the Royal Chemico-Physico Academy of Palermo. He was a member and fellow of many societies including the Edinburgh Royal Society, the Chemical Society, and the Royal Sanitary Institute. Closer to home Glaister was a member of the management board of the Royal Infirmary and a long-time member of the Southern Medical Club. He also worked enthusiastically for the British Medical Association: he was joint secretary at the 1888 annual general meeting in Glasgow, president of the section of industrial diseases and forensic medicine at the 1922 meeting, and, shortly before his death, vice-president of the section on forensic medicine at the centenary meeting in 1932. He was a staunch member of the St Rollox Conservative Association, and for fifty-six years he was a member and senior deacon at the Elgin Place Congregational Church. Glaister was a moving force in the foundation of the Scottish Burial Reform and Cremation Society, of which he was a medical referee, director for thirty years, and chairman from 1922 to 1932. 
In December 1932 Glaister and his wife succumbed to an influenza epidemic sweeping Glasgow. On 18 December they died within four hours of each other at their home in Newton Place. Their joint funeral service was held on 23 December in the university chapel, Glaister's coffin distinguished by his scarlet robe. They were cremated at the Maryhill crematorium, Glasgow, and their ashes interred in the family grave in Lanark. 


@@@@@


doc= 59859


McVail, John Christie (1849-1926), physician and public health administrator, was born in Kilmarnock on 22 October 1849, the second son of James McVail and his wife, Jean Christie. After an early education in Kilmarnock he studied medicine at Glasgow and St Andrews, where he graduated MB, CM, with high honours in 1873. Two years later he graduated MD and entered private practice in Kilmarnock, encouraged by John Borland, the town's leading medical figure. 
McVail developed an early interest in vital statistics and public health. In 1885 he took the Cambridge diploma in public health and succeeded Borland as medical officer of health for Kilmarnock and as physician to the Kilmarnock Infirmary. McVail combined these offices with private practice until 1891, when he left Kilmarnock to become the first full-time medical officer of health for the joint counties of Stirling and Dumbarton, formed under the 'Local Government Act (Scotland)' 1889. This post gave him a basis for his pioneering work in Scottish public health. 
A large man with large ideas which he vigorously expressed in speech and writings, McVail had already published work on smallpox and vaccination. He appeared before the royal commission on vaccination (1892-3) as an expert on the disease and in 1907 the BMA awarded him the Jenner medal. From 1887 to 1889, and again in 1905, he was president of the Sanitary Association of Scotland. In 1909 he produced a special report on the housing of miners for the Scottish Local Government Board. He also became the expert witness in the sometimes fraught boundary disputes dealt with by the Scottish burgh and county health administration. In 1907 he was appointed medical examiner for the royal commission on poor laws, and, unusually, he reported on the poor-law system covering England and Wales. McVail had a firm commitment to the voluntary principle in general and to workers' insurance schemes in particular: he acted as medical adviser to the Kilmarnock Foresters friendly society. 
When the National Health Insurance scheme came into operation in 1912, McVail was appointed deputy chairman of the National Health Insurance Commission for Scotland. In 1919 the board of health for Scotland replaced the insurance commission and the Local Government Board, and McVail and his long-term colleague Leslie Mackenzie became the new board's medical members. Both men were members of the Dewar committee of 1912, whose recommendations formed the basis of the Highlands and Islands Medical Service, instituted in 1913, and both served on its board. During the First World War, McVail gave great service on the emergency committee. 
Early in his career McVail was a frequent contributor to the 'British Medical Journal'. He was an active member of the British Medical Association, becoming president of the Glasgow and west of Scotland branch in 1905. He was a member of the constitution committee which drafted the association's new constitution in 1901, and later he wrote a historical sketch in the 'British Medical Journal' of the steps leading to the changed constitution. McVail presided over the state medicine and medical sociology sections of various BMA congresses. In 1922 he received the Alexander Patrick Stewart prize for research into the origin, spread, and prevention of epidemic disease, at the association's Glasgow meeting. Although involved in the practical application of public health administration, McVail also kept in touch with the academic teaching of his subject. For many years he was external examiner in public health and forensic medicine for all four Scottish universities. In 1908 the University of Glasgow conferred on him the honorary degree of LLD. In 1912 he was appointed crown nominee for Scotland on the General Medical Council, succeeding his elder brother, Sir David McVail, in the post. 
McVail married Jessie Schoolbred, daughter of John Rowat, on 17 June 1877. They had two sons and two daughters, of whom a son and a daughter followed their father into the medical profession. McVail was a friend of John Glaister, professor of public health and forensic medicine at Glasgow, and their families were united when McVail's eldest son, Dr John Borland McVail, married one of Glaister's daughters. McVail was a staunch Liberal and a member of the Evangelical Union Congregational church. 
Ill health forced McVail to retire from public service in 1922. He lived in Golders Green, Middlesex, for some time afterwards, but later moved to Netherway, Falkland Road, Torquay, where he died on 29 July 1926. He was an acknowledged giant in Scottish public health, and many expressed surprise at the lack of recognition of his services. 


@@@@@


doc= 59861


Hay, Matthew (1855-1932), physician and expert in forensic medicine and public health, was born at Hill Head, Denny, Stirlingshire, on 27 December 1855, the son of Matthew Hay, colliery owner, and his wife, Elizabeth ('nee' Stirling). An outstanding scholar, educated at Dollar Academy, Hay studied the arts course for two years and the first year of medicine at Glasgow University. He then transferred to Edinburgh University and graduated MB, CM, with highest honours, in 1878; he also won the Ettles prize and the Goodsir fellowship. He became assistant to Richard Fraser, professor of materia medica, and during vacations he studied under Schmiedeberg at Strasbourg. In Berlin he reputedly shared rooms with William Osler, and in 1881 his MD thesis on saline cathartics won him the gold medal and the triennial Goodsir prize for physiological research. 
Hay worked on the effects of sodium nitrite and nitroglycerine on angina pectoris and developed a test (which now bears his name) for bile acids. The period he spent as Fraser's assistant fostered his studies in toxicology, and these stood him in good stead when, aged twenty-seven, he successfully applied for the Aberdeen chair of forensic medicine vacated on Francis Ogston's retirement. Hay had barely settled into his teaching of forensic medicine when Dyce Davidson died; Hay then also taught his materia medica course until the university appointed a new professor. 
In 1884 Hay was offered and accepted the prestigious chair of pharmacology and therapeutics at Johns Hopkins University medical school, Baltimore. He did not take up the position for what his obituarists have politely termed 'family reasons', but these may well have been connected to a wrangle between Hay and Johns Hopkins over Hay's desire to continue treating private patients. He became a director of the Hay family business, the Callendar ironworks. On 27 August 1884 Hay married Margaret Ferguson Crawford (1854/5-1926), daughter of John Crawford, a Grangemouth shipowner; they had four sons and two daughters. 
Hay was appointed part-time medical officer of health at Aberdeen in 1888, following two short-term appointments for the post. His own appointment was bitterly contested within the town council, which was split by fears that a part-time medical officer could not give sufficient time to the city's health needs. Hay gave up private practice in exchange for a salary of $300 per annum. He had already introduced public health and hygiene lectures into his forensic medicine course at Aberdeen, thus conforming to the established Scottish pattern of undergraduate teaching of forensic medicine and public health in tandem. Following the example of Sir Douglas Maclagan at Edinburgh, in 1891 Hay instituted postgraduate public health teaching, for a diploma in public health; in addition he provided separate laboratory facilities for public health and forensic medicine. 
As well as his medical teaching, by 1890 Hay was also carrying out part-time duties as crown medico-legal examiner, police surgeon, and medical officer of health for Aberdeen city -- in positions similar to those held by Henry Duncan Littlejohn in Edinburgh. In 1893 Hay and Littlejohn gave medical and ballistic testimony for opposing counsels in the Monson murder trial at the Edinburgh High Court. As Aberdeen's medical officer of health, Hay brought scientific logic and organization into the realms of mother and child care, the treatment of tuberculosis and venereal disease, medical statistics, and many other areas of public health. His analytical talents were employed not merely in health and sanitary matters, but included the more exotic tasks of ensuring the purity of water used in local whisky distilling and of analysing the city's gas supply. In Aberdeen Hay is remembered mostly for his farsighted plan to centralize the city's municipal and voluntary hospital provision together with university medical teaching, at the Foresterhill site; his plans were brought to fruition by his successor, John Parlane Kinloch. 
Hay was a quiet, inventive man. At the age of twenty he planned the processes of the family's newly acquired ironworks. In later life he designed anthropological instruments for his own purposes which were considered valuable by experts. During his teaching career he played a major role in university affairs, which included the building of extensions to Marischal College and which cost more than $250,000. Hay represented Aberdeen University on the General Medical Council and was an original member of the Medical Research Council. As a member of the Carnegie Trust, he drafted the conditions for research fellowships and scholarships. In 1902, together with Leslie Mackenzie, the royal commission appointed him to enquire into the health of schoolchildren. The commission's 1903 recommendation on the medical inspection of schoolchildren was based on their report. 
Ill health forced Hay to resign as medical officer of health in 1923 and to resign his chair in 1925. He died at his home, 14 Rubislaw Terrace, Aberdeen, on 30 July 1932. His funeral service on 2 August, held in Marischal College, was a notable Aberdeen town-and-gown occasion, after which his body was buried on the following day at Cameloan cemetery, Stirlingshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 59862


Russell, James Burn (1837-1904), medical officer of health, was born on 5 May 1837 at 16 Robertson Street, Glasgow, the elder child of David Russell (1808-1871), printer, and his wife, Agnes (1816-1839), daughter of John Cassels, a grain merchant of the burgh of Calton (now part of Glasgow), and his wife, Jean Harvie. His mother died when he was aged two and his father emigrated to Australia several years later. Russell and his sister were brought up in Rutherglen, near Glasgow, in the home of their grandfather James Russell, Glasgow's first steamboat harbour-master and veteran of the battle of Waterloo. 
Russell attended Glasgow high school before entering Glasgow University in 1854 and graduating BA in 1857. He showed literary flair, winning prizes for essays, writing verse, and teaching himself Anglo-Saxon. His natural philosophy teacher was Professor William Thomson (later Lord Kelvin), who recruited him as his assistant on his 1858 expedition to lay an Atlantic cable; they were nearly lost at sea during a storm of exceptional ferocity. On his return Russell enrolled in Glasgow University medical school, where his teachers included Joseph Lister. After graduating MD CM in 1862 he worked as a houseman at Glasgow Royal Infirmary and then as assistant medical officer of Glasgow poorhouse, with responsibility for the fever wards. 
In 1865 Professor William Gairdner, who three years earlier had become the city's first medical officer of health, put Russell in charge of the city's first municipal fever hospital, and in 1870 he was given command also of the new Belvidere Fever Hospital. Russell's marriage to Helen Fenton Davidson (1842-1884), daughter of the Revd Peter Davidson, minister of Queen Street United Presbyterian Church, Edinburgh, took place on 3 September 1868, and a son and two daughters were born in the 1870s; but soon afterwards his wife was committed to Glasgow Royal Asylum at Gartnavel, where she died in 1884. 
It was as Glasgow's first full-time medical officer of health, from 1872 to 1898, that Russell made his greatest contributions to public health. He was selected from a field of forty-five candidates after the town council had decided to rescind Gairdner's part-time appointment and replace him with a full-time medical officer of health -- the first such appointment in Scotland. Russell faced a formidable task amid the squalor and overcrowding created by Glasgow's rapid industrial expansion. No other city in Britain had as high a proportion of one-room and two-room houses. However, by the time Russell left his post Glasgow was internationally renowned for its public health services; mortality had dropped from 29 to 21 per 1000 and was lower than that of Liverpool and Manchester. Deaths from tuberculosis and other respiratory diseases had declined more sharply than in the rest of Scotland and the city led the fight against childhood diseases. 
Russell initially had no medical staff but worked through the sanitary inspectors, particularly the epidemic inspectors, widening the scope of their work. Taking a scientific approach he established a set of small-area health statistics unmatched in Britain, and propounded the law of occupancy, relating death rates to room density. He used his literary skills to overcome public apathy and ignorance, writing prolifically and becoming a moving public speaker, this despite a crippling shyness which made it difficult for him to speak even at committee meetings. In the 1880s his lectures, 'The Children of the City' and 'Life in one room', prepared the way for reform by opening middle-class eyes to the realities of slum life. Russell worked closely with a group of enlightened town councillors on the health committee to initiate local legislation on public health and building standards, and he energetically enforced existing laws -- tracking down smallpox vaccination defaulters, warring with irresponsible landlords, pouncing on jobbing butchers who were selling suspect sausages, denouncing industrialists for polluting the environment, and pursuing the miscreants through the law courts with a regard to detail that made him almost invincible. 
Russell's influence extended beyond the city. In a series of investigations which did much to establish the connection between enteric fever and infected milk he travelled by train and gig to inspect waterlogged farm steadings, and his memorandum on the sanitary requirements of dairy farms, issued in 1888, was widely circulated. His paper on tuberculosis, published in 1896, which typified Russell's broad, environmentally conscious approach to public health, received international recognition. In the 1890s Russell was a key figure in Glasgow's great age of municipal enterprise, which attracted civic delegations from the United States. Yet his outspokenness attracted controversy, and the strong statutory powers that he and the health committee wielded made them a target for criticism, particularly among opponents of sanitary reform. 
In 1898 Russell resigned to become medical member of the Local Government Board for Scotland, where he rigorously enforced the provisions of the 'Scottish Public Health Act' of 1897. Despite deteriorating health he remained at his post -- sometimes working from his bed -- until his death at a private hospital at 41 Drummond Place, Edinburgh, on 22 October 1904. Glasgow sanitary inspectors formed a guard of honour at the Glasgow necropolis on 26 October, following a funeral service held at Morningside Congregational Church, Edinburgh. A memorial service was held at Elgin Place Memorial Church, Glasgow, on 6 November. 
Russell was a committed Congregationalist and, from 1886, an active Liberal Unionist. He was a president of the Royal Philosophical Society of Glasgow. In 1889 he received the first Bisset-Hawkins memorial medal of the Royal College of Physicians of London for zeal in promoting public health. He declined a knighthood. In addition to numerous contributions to the 'Glasgow Medical Journal' (which he edited for several years) and the 'Sanitary Journal', he was the author of 'The Evolution of the Function of Public Health Administration' (1895). A posthumous collection of his writing, 'Public Health Administration in Glasgow', edited by his successor as medical officer of health, A. K. Chalmers, was published in 1905. 


@@@@@


doc= 59864


Chalmers, Archibald Kerr (1856-1942), medical officer of health, son of William Kerr Chalmers, a joiner, and Margaret Nichol, was born at Greenock, near Glasgow, on 10 April 1856. He entered Glasgow University in 1874 and graduated MB, CM, with high honours in 1879 and became houseman at the city's Belvidere Fever Hospital. Chalmers was in private practice for seven years before taking his MD with commendation in 1887 and the Cambridge diploma in public health in 1889. He was admitted to the fellowship of the Royal Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow in 1901. In 1892 he became full-time assistant to James Burn Russell, medical officer of health for Glasgow from 1872 to 1898. Russell joined the Scottish Local Government Board in 1898, and Chalmers was appointed Glasgow's medical officer of health, a position he occupied with distinction until his retirement in 1925. 
Chalmers had a baptism of fire when, in 1900, Glasgow was struck with an outbreak of plague, which resurfaced in 1901. The plague was thought to have originated in Hong Kong about 1896 and had arrived, via Porto, in Britain, where previously it had been absent since 1665. Despite his relative inexperience Chalmers, backed by the impressive sanitary organization built up by Russell, faced the difficulties well, perhaps in part because of his military experience, dating from the 1870s, with the local volunteer forces. Smallpox raged concurrently with plague, causing many deaths. However, apart from the rarity of plague, Glasgow's health problems were legion, stemming from overcrowded, insanitary living accommodation and poverty and hunger, and Chalmers met them all head on. It took time to improve housing and to increase environmental standards, but he made an early start on personal medical services such as those for mothers and children soon after the 1904 report of the interdepartmental committee on physical deterioration. The medical inspection of schoolchildren revealed the poor state of child health, against the backdrop of a crippling infant mortality in Glasgow of 14.9 per cent in 1901. Chalmers and some progressive councillors pioneered infant feeding by opening milk depots in 1904, based on Professor Budin's 'Goutes de lait' in Paris. A female doctor employed in the city's health department began infant consultations. The child health movement grew and voluntary provisions followed on from Chalmers's initiative. Chalmers himself attended congresses in Paris on milk depots, to keep informed of European progress. By 1914 Glasgow had opened fourteen consultation centres with four doctors and ten trained health workers. 
Strong leadership such as this was also echoed in the control of infectious disease and tuberculosis through the provision of new hospitals. Robroyston Hospital, for treating tuberculosis, opened in 1919, and Mearnskirk Hospital opened in 1922 specifically for children suffering from that disease. Chalmers carried out a positive onslaught on infectious diseases during his term of office, much of it aimed at protecting the health of the young. In 1920 he oversaw the reorganization of the city's sanitary department, when it became the public health department. This was no idle change of nomenclature. It was the point at which Glasgow accepted medical supervision of all medico-sanitary related provision. It was one of the last Scottish cities to do so. 
Chalmers played a wide role in Scottish health policy. He was a member of the Belfast health commission in 1907 and a member of the Medical Research Committee from 1916 to 1918. He was an early member of the General Nursing Council and the Central Midwives' Board (Scotland), and of the consultative council of the Medical and Allied Services Committee (Scotland) shortly after the formation of the Scottish board of health in 1919. He was equally evident in academic and professional governance, being examiner for the Cambridge diplomas in public health, in hygiene, and in tropical medicine. He examined for the fellowship of the Royal Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow and for the degrees of public health and forensic medicine at the universities of Glasgow, Aberdeen, St Andrews, and Liverpool. He was deeply involved in the Royal Sanitary Association of Scotland and the British Medical Association. He wrote on a wide range of topics related to public health during his term of office, and he continued producing publications for many years after his retirement. He was made honorary LLD (Glasgow) in 1926. 
Chalmers married Margaret Jessie, daughter of Henry Stewart, about 1879; the couple had two sons. Chalmers died in the Croydon Nursing Home, Bridge of Weir, Renfrewshire, on 24 January 1942. 


@@@@@


doc= 59868


Behan, (Francis) Brendan (1923-1964), writer, was born on 9 February 1923 at Holles Street Hospital, Dublin, the first of the four sons of Stephen Behan (died 1968), house painter, and his wife, Kathleen, daughter of John Kearney, grocer. Stephen was doing time for IRA activities and Kathleen held the baby up high so that from a prison cell the father might see his first-born. He was Kathleen's second husband. From her first marriage she had brought two sons, Rory and Sean Furlong, one of them to become a socialist, both book lovers. Peadar Kearney, her brother, had written the 'Soldier's Song' which became the Irish national anthem. 
Brendan, a precocious child, could read before he went to school, which in his case was the William Street Convent, where the French Sisters of Mercy adored him. The Christian Brothers of St Canice's, Brunswick Street, to whom he was sent at eleven, were less keen on the tenement kid, themselves being of peasant stock. 
Growing up in the classic Dublin of Sean O'Casey with the songs of Ireland and the stories of her martyrs, Behan lived for Ireland to be 'Free from the centre to the sea'. He lived at 14 Russell Street, in a house owned by Granny English, his paternal grandmother, widow of Patrick English, her second husband. Granny English adored the boy, spoiled him, and gave him the taste for strong drink, while his maternal grandmother, Granny Furlong, would sound off about the splendid work the communists were doing upsetting the English. His family being so well read, Behan was soon familiar with Swift, Sheridan, Wilde, and Shaw as well as the English classics. P. J. Bourke, whose company played at the Queen's Theatre, was married to his aunt and as a boy Behan delighted in the shows there. 
At fourteen when he left school Behan was apprenticed to his father's trade at the Bolton Street Technical School and became 'Peintre comme Picasso? Non! Peintre des batiments'. He read widely not only in the English language but also in Irish, carried a banner for the IRA, and thought up heroic speeches to be made from the dock in the style of Wolfe Tone and Robert Emmet. A member of Fianna Eireann, the junior branch of the IRA, Behan at an early age began contributing to the republican newspapers, anxiously waiting for the time when he could join the IRA. He had been rejected as too young also by the International Brigades. Some say that the IRA made use of the boy Behan in their bombing campaign in England, but others insist that he went to Liverpool on his own initiative, taking his home-made explosives, or 'conjuring tricks' as he called them. In any event, he was followed and arrested. He made a patriotic speech at his trial in February 1940, got sentenced to three years in borstal (he served only two), and was, for a while, denied the solace of his religion. 
The borstal he was detained in at Hollesley Bay, Suffolk, had an unexpected effect on Behan. Very quickly the writer in him had to recognize the wit of the English boys around him. Their accents and speech rhythms had to be learned. C. A. Joyce, the governor, was an enlightened man who favoured dialogue and a sense of fair play. He encouraged Behan in his reading and writing. The debating and swimming which Behan enjoyed were just part of the curriculum. He could go to mass but not holy communion. In this liberal atmosphere Behan flourished and his blind hatred of the English began to dissolve. However, he would not forswear his IRA activities. In April 1942, six months after his release, Behan was sentenced to fourteen years' penal servitude for the attempted murder of an Irish policeman. In prison he noted all the Dublin characters he had known, tried writing a play, read anything he could get his hands on, and improved his Irish, 'Largely so that the screws couldn't understand what we were saying'. He found the IRA men in with him were an uninteresting lot and he looked for intellectual companionship. While he was in Mountjoy prison (his sentence was not served in just the one place) two prisoners were hanged. This had a profound effect on him, which found expression in 'The Quare Fellow', the name given in Irish prisons to the condemned man. Behan was released under general amnesty in 1946, having also served his time at Arbor Hill barracks and Curragh camp. 
Dublin had changed. The young ones had created their own Bohemia. Tired of Yeats, Lady Gregory, George Russell (AE), and George Moore, they met in pubs or the smoke-filled cellars of the club known as The Catacombs. Parties went on all night, Behan holding court with his stories and songs, being entertainer, clown, satirist. In ordinary conversation he stammered, but once in full flow he left his impediment behind. No one was safe from his wicked tongue. He would do Hugh MacDiarmid, the Scots nationalist poet, reciting endlessly in gibberish. MacDiarmid replied that you could hear Behan's language in any boozer. 
Soon Behan took refuge among the Irish-speaking people of Kerry, where he found refreshment for his soul, thinking and writing in the language he loved as dearly as he loved English. When he saw Marlowe's 'Edward II' at the Theatre Royal, Stratford-le-Bow, he said that he had thought so highly of Gaveston's first speech that he had translated it into Irish 'And claimed it as me own'. 
In March 1947 Behan was again in an English prison, for visiting England, which was forbidden to him, and spent four lonely months in Strangeways gaol. Back in Dublin, he served a month inside for starting a punch-up in a pub: he had been provoked by an antisemitic boozer. 
Tired of it all, Behan made for Paris, where he lived on his wits, the occasional cheque, and the hospitality of anybody who cared to offer it. Desperately hungry, he tried his hand at pornography but even with the vision of half a pound of steak and a jug of wine floating before his eyes, he could not manage it until inspiration seized him. He made his chosen heroine an undercover agent for the IRA. Then it went swimmingly. Finally, he turned to house painting again, bars mainly. One found itself graced with 'This is the finest fucking bar in Paris' beautifully painted on the white wall. 
In 1950 Behan was in Dublin again and made a serious attack on 'Borstal Boy', the account of his experience at Hollesley Bay. It was a short spurt, but from it came the first chapter. Stories and articles were accepted and in 1952 he was still working on his autobiography. In 1953 the 'Irish Times' announced the first instalment of a serial about the Dublin underworld, 'The Scarperer', by Emmet Street. The story ran for thirty days but nothing further was heard from Mr Street. Behan published 'The Confirmation Suit' under his own name. By now he was presenting a regular ballad programme, writing sketches for Radio Eireann and three columns a week for the 'Irish Press'. These columns were later published as a book, 'Hold your Hour and have Another' (1963). 
It was in this year, 1953, that diabetes attacked Behan, but it was not diagnosed until 1956. From then on drinking became much more dangerous while the effects of the disease could be mistaken for drunkenness. As a teenager Behan had been slim, fit, and good-looking with black hair, clear skin, and even teeth. A few short years of boozing and brawling had put an end to most of that. His face and body had run to fat. Only his tiny hands and feet gave a clue to the shape he should have been. In 1954 he sent his version of 'The Quare Fellow', which he had first called 'Another Twist of the Rope', to the Abbey Theatre. He had already sent a play, 'The Landlady', to them in 1946. Both were turned down. He also tried The Gate, run by Hilton Edwards and Micheal MacLiammoir. They too turned it down but The Pike, a pocket theatre with fifty seats run by Alan Simpson and Carolyn Swift, were delighted with it and agreed to stage the play if Behan consented to work on it. In November 1954, on its first night, 'The Quare Fellow' was acclaimed in Dublin. Brendan Behan made $25 and found a lifelong love, Beatrice ffrench-Salkeld (1925-1993), a botanist, the daughter of Cecil ffrench-Salkeld, a painter. They met at a performance and were married in February 1955. In January 1956 Behan sent his play to Theatre Workshop, where the style was exactly suited to his. It opened on 24 May and was a phenomenal hit, the first Irish play to succeed in London. Two months later it transferred to the Comedy Theatre in the West End. 
Meanwhile Behan was selling extracts from 'Borstal Boy' to the 'Sunday Dispatch' and 'The People' without letting the one know about the other. With Beatrice watching over him, early rising, regular hours, and tea instead of booze, Behan managed to complete the book that was to be 'Borstal Boy'. 
When the first English hostage was taken in Cyprus, Theatre Workshop proposed a play on the subject. Behan offered to go away and write it if Theatre Workshop could pay him. They did, and bits of script began to arrive from Kerry, the hostage in Behan's work being Irish. In fact, as with the 'Dispatch' and 'The People', he was selling the play twice over, first in Irish in Dublin as 'An Giall' then in English, fragments only, to Theatre Workshop as 'The Hostage'. 
The subject was exciting and the company cared deeply for Behan but the play had to be finished from its memories of his stories. Luckily it had among it good memories. The drink was already taking hold of Behan. The writer was already submerged in the entertainer. He would join in 'The Hostage' every night during the Stratford East production. Some nights he would be anti-British, other nights anti-Irish, and his participation then and later became a great draw. The show opened on 14 October 1958 and in 1959 was selected for the international festival of theatre at the Sarah Bernhardt Theatre in Paris, where Behan joyously joined in. Later it was voted play of the year there. In Germany it was panned. Perhaps Behan did not realize that his plays would not take the conventional nineteenth-century style still affected by the commercial theatres. 
Four days after the first night of 'The Hostage', 'Borstal Boy' was published to universal acclaim. In autumn 1960 'The Hostage' was presented on Broadway at the Cort Theater. Behan went over for the first night. 'Borstal Boy' had just been published in America, so New York was ready for him. In turn he was ready for it. Interviews and TV appearances, not to mention interruptions of his own play, ensured that he scored a great personal hit. The entertainer in Behan had triumphed. But he found it increasingly difficult to write, so his publishers encouraged him to record his stories and fragments of experience on tape. It was a way of appearing to be still at work but it was no substitute for writing and Behan knew it. He made an attempt at a new play, 'Richard's Cork Leg', but it was stillborn. Drink exacerbated by diabetes had damaged his health. Lack of discipline combined with the fatal ability to entertain by talking had weakened the writing muscle. Beatrice at his Dublin home, 5 Anglesea Road, had been ready to provide the right conditions for work but Behan's violent rages were now making her keep her distance. In any case, he was spending most of his time roaming from pub to pub, stopping out at night and talking, endlessly talking. In 1963 Beatrice gave birth to a daughter, Blanaid. Behan, although delighted, was unable to pull out of the nosedive. Three months into the following year he was taken to Meath Hospital, where he died, Beatrice by his side, on 20 March 1964. A glorious talent, a humane and gracious but very angry man died young. His coffin was draped in the tricolour and accompanied by an IRA guard of honour. A fourteen-year-old bugler from Fianna Eireann sounded the 'Last Post'. The funeral was said to have been the biggest since those of Michael Collins and C. S. Parnell as Brendan Behan was buried on 22 March 1964 at Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. 
Various memoirs recalling Behan were published in the years following his death, including those by his wife and his brother. 'Brendan Behan's New York' (1964), 'Confessions of an Irish Rebel' (1965), and 'The Scarperer' (1966), put together from his various tape recordings and sketches, were also published posthumously. Ulick O'Connor's 'Brendan Behan' (1970) remains the standard biography. 'Richard's Cork Leg' was staged in 1972 at the Peacock Theatre by Alan Simpson, who later assembled the 'Collected Poems' in 1978. The 'Collected Letters' appeared in 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 59869


Barnes, Djuna Chappell (1892-1982), writer and artist, was born on 12 June 1892 in a log cabin on Storm King Mountain, Cornwall-on-Hudson, New York state, USA. She was the daughter of an American father, Wald Harold Barnes (1865-1934), and an English mother, Elizabeth Chappell (1862-1945), both of whom were caretakers of the estate of Wald's brother at the time of her birth. Djuna described her father as a 'cabinet maker, a painter, a novelist, a poet, a musician who played five instruments, a composer who wrote librettos for his own operas, a man who could never stay put' (Herring, 25). He was also an advocate of free love, and his mistress Fanny Faulkner joined the household when Djuna was five. Djuna later accused her father of arranging for a neighbour to take her virginity. The large family -- which consisted of her elder brother, Thurn, younger brothers, Zendon, Saxon, and Shangar, and several half-siblings -- was presided over by her grandmother Zadel Barnes, a journalist and theosophist, who knew Speranza Wilde and Eleanor Marx. Djuna was exceptionally close to her grandmother, perhaps incestuously so, and would always turn to her when in difficulty. 
About 1895 the family moved to a farm in New York state. The children were educated mainly at home, and encouraged to write. Djuna was also encouraged by Zadel to 'marry' Fanny Faulkner's 52-year-old brother Percy in summer 1910, but it is not certain that an official ceremony took place. They lived in Bridgeport but Djuna left after two months, and returned to the farm. She nursed a lifelong resentment: 'father and his bastard children and mistresses had thrown me off marriage and babies' (Herring, 33). 
Difficult years followed her parents' divorce in 1912. Djuna felt bound to help support her mother and brothers. She attended the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn from 1912 to 1913, and excelled in pictorial composition, but left to become a freelance journalist. She contributed short stories, Beardsley-esque drawings, theatrical reviews, interviews, and news reports for almost every English-language newspaper in New York; Carl Van Vechten at the 'New York Press' called her his 'favourite genius' (Herring, 76). From 1914 to 1916 she was engaged to the bon vivant Ernst (Putzi) Hanfstaengl (1887-1975), later chief minister of the foreign press for Hitler. Ultimately, however, he refused to marry her because she was not German. 
Barnes's first major publication was 'A Book of Repulsive Women' (1915), a satire on women's sexual roles, which she called 'a disgusting little item', and of which she later burnt as many copies as she could find (O'Neal, 98). This book also contained illustrations -- from 1915 to 1916 she studied at the Art Students' League of New York. From 1916 she lived in Greenwich Village among painters, artists, and writers, and with her new lover, the drama critic Courtenay Lemon (1883-1933), known for his socialist views. She was closely associated with the Provincetown Players, the theatre collective that launched Eugene O'Neill, and they influenced the dramatic pieces she wrote for the 'New York Morning Telegraph'. These were not meant to be acted, but read as dialogue, and they show the emergence of her distinctive style: epigrams and striking imagery, with flashes of bitter wit. The best of her early work, including the short story 'A Night among the Horses' and the play 'Three from the Earth', was published in Margaret Anderson's and Jane Heap's 'Little Review' between 1918 and 1922. 
Barnes began a long association with Paris in 1921 with a journalistic assignment for 'McCall's'. In the following year she interviewed James Joyce for an article that appeared in 'Vanity Fair'. They became friends and Joyce sent Barnes a copy of the proof sheets of 'Ulysses'. Inspired by his stylistic virtuosity, she began to move away from the Wildean formalism of her early work. A collection of her short stories, 'A Book', appeared in 1923, and was later republished as 'A Night among the Horses' (1929). About this time Barnes became part of the expatriate group which included Man Ray, Hemingway, Yeats, Gertrude Stein, and Mina Loy. Her striking beauty -- auburn hair and angular features -- along with her famous black cape, her haughty manner, and cruel, 'wisecracking tongue' (McAlmon, 34), made her a legendary character. She featured in almost every literary memoir of Paris at this time. She was also part of Natalie Clifford Barney's lesbian circle, immortalized in her wickedly satirical 'Ladies Almanack' (published privately and pseudonymously, under the name 'a Lady of Fashion', in 1928). That same year she produced 'Ryder', a novel based on an extended family much like her own. It had a Chaucerian bawdiness, with her own scatological illustrations, and dazzled with its array of styles and voices. 
Barnes's time in Paris was dominated by her relationship with the American artist Thelma Ellen Wood (1901-1970). When Thelma's promiscuity and drunkenness ended the affair in 1928, Barnes started work on her novel 'Nightwood'. It is a highly charged work, linguistically complex, and riven with pain and loss. It centres on the anguished narratives of Matthew O'Connor, a transvestite gynaecologist, and Nora Flood, who is in love with the enigmatic and boyish woman Robin Vote. Barnes's friend Emily Coleman saw 'a new suffering, a new intensity' in the work: 'There has been nothing written of such intense jealousy before' (Fuchs, 31). It has one of the most shattering endings in modern literature. It took years for Barnes to find a publisher, until Coleman pressured T. S. Eliot at Faber and Faber to accept it. Eliot, who wrote the preface, thought it was like an Elizabethan tragedy for its 'quality of horror and doom' (preface, Faber edn, 1985). 
During the 1930s Barnes was restless: she was in New York and Tangier with the writer Charles Henri Ford, eighteen years her junior, but she felt that after Thelma Wood there was 'no room for any other 'terrible attraction'' (Guirl-Stearley, 114). In summer 1932 and 1933 she stayed with her benefactor Peggy Guggenheim and her entourage at Hayford Hall in Devon, where, despite the almost incessant drinking and sexual high jinks, she wrote and reworked much of 'Nightwood'. Pregnant after a fling with the French painter Jean Oberle, she had an abortion in Paris in June 1933, performed by Dan Mahoney, the model for 'Nightwood's' Matthew O'Connor. She worked for the Works Progress Administration to compile a guide to New York, and then, with 'Nightwood' finally settled at Faber, Barnes spent much of 1936-7 in London and Paris, where her drinking got steadily worse. 'Nightwood' was published to mixed reviews in October 1937: her friend Edwin Muir hailed it 'an undeniable work of genius' ('The Listener', 28 Oct 1936), but Philip Rahv denounced its 'minute shudders of decadence' ('New Masses', 4 May 1937). 
Ill and depressed, Barnes returned to New York in October 1939, and was sent to a sanatorium by her family in the following year. She produced no new work in the 1940s primarily because of her alcoholism, which did not abate until the early 1950s. In September 1940 she moved to a one-roomed apartment at 5 Patchin Place, Greenwich Village, where, apart from a final voyage to Europe in 1950, she spent the rest of her life. She became, as she described in a rare interview, 'a form of Trappist' ('New York Times Book Review', 24 May 1971). Her play 'The Antiphon' (1958), about hatred between mother and daughter, was set in her mother's birthplace in Oakham, Rutland. It was a poisonous revenge on her family. The 'New York Times Book Review' (20 April 1958) pronounced it 'scarcely a play', adding that 'one cannot imagine it on any stage'. It was performed in Stockholm in 1961. A clutch of poems and 'Spillway' (1962), a further collection of stories, followed. 
As her public life diminished, Barnes's status grew. Critical interest increased in the 1960s and 1970s, despite her attempts to block any enquiries (she ascribed her desire to protect her privacy to her 'English blood'). Increasingly cantankerous, she refused to allow critics to quote from her work, but her elegance and wit remained until the end. After an attempted suicide with pills in the late 1970s, she said she woke up feeling better than she had for years. She died of natural causes at 5 Patchin Place on 19 June 1982. She was cremated, and her ashes were scattered at Storm King Mountain. A collection of poems, 'Creatures in an Alphabet', appeared after her death. No longer the 'most famous unknown in the world' (Kaever, 5), Barnes is now considered one of the most significant writers of the first half of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 59873


Birkbeck, Morris (1764-1825), farmer and writer, was born on 23 January 1764 in Settle, Yorkshire, the only child of Morris Birkbeck (1734-1816), Quaker minister, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Bradford, of Lancaster, who died a few days after his birth. On 23 April in 1794 he married Prudence Bush, daughter of Richard Bush, a prominent Quaker of Wandsworth, Surrey, and his wife, Prudence. Seven children were born before Birkbeck was left a widower in 1804. He never remarried. 
Educated at the Friends' school in Tottenham from 1772 until 1776, when his father apprenticed him to a sheep farmer in Yorkshire, Birkbeck afterwards spent two years observing advanced agricultural techniques on large farms in Norfolk. With money borrowed from an uncle, a banker, he leased a farm in Hanford, Dorset, in 1785. By 1792 he was able to lease a farm of 1500 acres near Wanborough, Surrey. There he established his position as a successful commercial farmer with a reputation for importing and breeding merino sheep. 
About 1802 Birkbeck withdrew from the Society of Friends and thereafter professed no religion. A decisive meeting with Richard Flower in 1811 enhanced his radical leanings. Flower had ties with major figures of Unitarian radicalism and early Romantic literature. With Flower's son George, Birkbeck toured France during the summer of 1814 and published his impressions in 'Notes on a Journey through France' (1814). His praise of the beneficial effects of the French Revolution on the land, agriculture, education, and standard of living aroused considerable controversy. 
A man who chafed at his inability to vote or hold public office, and at paying tithes, Birkbeck had a vision of founding a colony in republican America. Following his father's death in 1816, he emigrated at the age of fifty-three with four of his children to Virginia, where George Flower had bought land. Birkbeck had other ideas, and announced that he intended to settle north of the Ohio River because of his profound hatred of slavery. 
After arriving in Boltonhouse Prairie in Edwards county, Illinois Territory, in the summer of 1817, and immediately purchasing about 1500 acres, Birkbeck published in 1818 both an account of the journey in 'Notes of a Journey from the Coast of Virginia to the Territory of Illinois' and an enthusiastic invitation to others to emigrate to his projected colony in 'Letters from Illinois'. Written in plain but lively prose that masked the underlying Romanticism of his message, the second book in particular praised the natural beauty of the prairies and the ease with which they might be cultivated. The two books received an astonishing reception not only in Britain but also on the continent of Europe. The fierce controversy they aroused in the press, journals, and pamphlets on both sides of the Atlantic magnified their impact. During the next few years, the 'English Prairie' became a required stop for British travellers in the west, who in turn published differing assessments. The fame of Birkbeck's pioneering venture undoubtedly contributed to the rise in emigration during the hard times and political repression of the post-war period. 
At one time scholars gave Birkbeck credit for recognizing the agricultural potential of prairie land, but there is no evidence that he cultivated the grassland. Although he presented ideas on ditching and fencing in his presidential address in 1823 to the first agricultural society in Illinois, his methods were not adopted. Above all, the projected colony failed to prosper. His hopes of founding a morally upright community were shattered when he learned of George Flower's adultery. He severed completely all communication with his wealthier partners. Even his most severe critics conceded his integrity and the persuasiveness of his pen. Because of his sanguine temperament, he misled himself as he misled others. He did none the less secure an honoured place in the history of Illinois. His newspaper articles and a pamphlet under the pseudonym Jonathan Freeman helped turn the vote against calling a special convention to amend its constitution of 1818 to legalize slavery. 
Returning from a visit to Robert Owen in New Harmony, Indiana, on 4 June 1825, Birkbeck was drowned while attempting to swim his horse across the Fox River and was later buried at New Harmony. The small fortune that he had brought to America had disappeared. On his death he left 600 acres and a large house. 


@@@@@


doc= 59874


Kingsley, Charles (1781-1860), Church of England clergyman, was born near Lymington in Hampshire. His family included some distinguished soldiers, notably General William Kingsley. Brought up as a country gentleman, he was educated at Harrow School and, for two months, at Brasenose College, Oxford. He then retired to Battramsley House near Lymington in the New Forest, where he devoted himself to the pursuits of a country gentleman before discovering, at the age of twenty-six, that all his money had gone. He married Mary (1787-1873), the daughter of Nathan Lucas of Barbados and Rushford Lodge, Norfolk. Mary's organizing ability was a great asset to Kingsley after his funds ran out; when, almost certainly following her advice, he eventually made his career in the church it was Mary who did most of the parish visiting. 
In 1807 Kingsley entered Trinity Hall, Cambridge, to study divinity, and nine years later, at the age of thirty-five, graduated from Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge with an LLB degree. While at Trinity Hall he had established a friendship with Herbert Marsh, then Lady Margaret professor of divinity, who became bishop of Peterborough in 1819. The two men shared an interest in the scientific approach to biblical criticism which Marsh had studied in Germany. 
After a curacy at Clifton in Nottinghamshire Kingsley became curate at Holne in Devon, where his son Charles Kingsley, the author, was born in June 1819. So great was Mary Kingsley's love of the Devon countryside that she walked about it constantly during her pregnancy, hoping to communicate this passion to her unborn child. After Holne, the family moved to Burton upon Trent, where Kingsley had been offered the position of curate-in-charge. Then, on 23 January 1824, he was appointed by his old friend the bishop of Peterborough to the rectory of Barnack, near Stamford, in Lincolnshire. In 1830, in accordance with a previous arrangement, Kingsley was succeeded at Barnack by Bishop Marsh's son. 
At Barnack Kingsley was able to enjoy field sports and natural history. He now received an income of $1200 a year (to which was added the living of North Clifton, where he had installed a friend as curate). When he was old enough, Charles junior was allowed to accompany his father on shooting expeditions in the fens. Having caught malaria, then prevalent in the fens, Kingsley was advised to return to Devon, where he was presented to the living at Clovelly (worth $350 a year) and encouraged his son's interest in courageous exploits at sea. His younger son George Henry Kingsley became a notable traveller. 
In 1836 Kingsley accepted the living of St Luke's, Chelsea, a large and wealthy church, recently built in the neo-Gothic style (which Kingsley hated) to serve the newly built Cadogan estates. His parishioners now numbered thousands, not hundreds. Describing life as a youth in Chelsea, the younger Charles Kingsley wrote of his boredom with the busy parish work in which his parents were absorbed. Charles junior described visitors to the rectory as ugly and splay-footed beings, 'three-fourths of whom can't sing, and the other quarter sing miles out of tune, with voices like love-sick parrots' (Chitty, 48). He recalled seeing 'silly women blown about with every wind, falling in love with the preacher instead of his sermon, and with his sermon instead of the 'Bible'' (Kingsley, 9). 
During the 1830s, when the Oxford Movement was at its height, Kingsley was known to 'The Times' as a significant evangelical, and was one of the earliest Anglican evangelical rectors to work with the London City Mission. He died on 29 February 1860 at the Chelsea rectory, survived by his wife, with his now famous son at his side. He was buried in Brompton cemetery under an epitaph composed by Charles junior which described him as: 'endowed by God with many noble gifts of mind and body. He preserved through all vicissitudes of fortune a loving heart and stainless honour, and having won in all his various Cures the respect and affection of his people, [he] ruled the Parish of Chelsea well and wisely for more than twenty years.' 


@@@@@


doc= 59876


Rodocanachi, Peter Pandia (1831-1899), merchant and banker, was born on 22 September 1831 in Leghorn, Italy, the youngest of five children of Pandia Paul Rodocanachi (1786-1846), merchant, and his wife, Marigo, daughter of Theodore Petrocochino. He was a member of one of the most influential families in the Greek merchant diaspora; and the merchant enterprises run by the Rodocanachis, along with those of the Ralli family, were to be among the most important in the City of London. 
Rodocanachi is believed to have come to England about 1850, and very soon afterwards he assumed responsibility for his family's commercial interests in London. His eldest brother, Paul, had returned to Leghorn to head the family firm there on the death of their father in 1846, and his other brother, Theodore, left England permanently in the mid-1850s. On 29 September 1860 Rodocanachi married Jenny Sechiari (1842-1927), the daughter of George Sechiari. They had six children, two of whom died in infancy. 
In 1860 Rodocanachi set up the trading firm Peter Pandia Rodocanachi & Co., which had links with Theodore P. Rodocanachi & Co., St Petersburg, and Theodore Mavrogordato & Co., Odessa. The firm graduated into finance and continued to operate in banking until 1970. As a banker Rodocanachi in the 1860s was a director of the short-lived Mercantile and Exchange Bank Ltd, and in 1872 he joined with other prominent London-based Greek merchants, to found the Anglo-Foreign Banking Company, which went into voluntary liquidation in 1893, with its assets being acquired by the Societe Generale de Belgique. 
An active member of the Greek Orthodox church in London, Rodocanachi served as a churchwarden in 1864, and in 1873 he was one of seven members of the Greek community who supervised the construction of St Sophia's, the Greek Orthodox cathedral in west London. He retired to Worthing in 1890, where he died at 2 Heene Terrace on 18 December 1899. He was buried at the Greek Orthodox cemetery at West Norwood, London. 
His eldest son and fourth child, 
On 12 October 1889 Rodocanachi married Alexandra ('b'. 1870), the daughter of Paul Schilizzi, and they had three sons and one daughter. Like his father, he was a prominent member of the Greek Orthodox community in England, serving as a churchwarden at St Sophia's Cathedral in 1901. In the same year King George I of Greece conferred on him the order of the Redeemer. In 1902 Rodocanachi purchased an estate, The Toft, Dunchurch, Warwickshire, and increasingly he devoted himself to agricultural and social pursuits. He became an enthusiastic follower of local hunts and a successful breeder of hunters. He was a regular exhibitor at shows in Warwickshire and the surrounding counties. Pandia Peter Rodocanachi died on 27 October 1936 at The Toft, Dunchurch, and was interred in the Greek Orthodox cemetery at West Norwood, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 59877


Pandia Peter Rodocanachi (1865-1936), banker, was born in London on 3 May 1865. He was educated in Paris, and returned after his studies to join the family banking firm. Although he was considered to be a shrewd businessman and was for a time a director of the Commercial Union Assurance Company, his commitment to commerce was half-hearted. He retired from the family firm in 1911, and thereafter the effective control of the firm passed to members of the Mavrogordato family. 


@@@@@


doc= 59878


Rodocanachi, Michael Emmanuel (1821-1901), merchant and banker, was born on 14 December 1821 on the Turkish island of Khios, the third of five children of Emmanuel Paul Rodocanachi (1789-1855), merchant, and his wife, Franga (1795-1880), daughter of Theodore Mavrogordato. He was a member of the Vlachou branch of one of the most influential families in the Greek merchant diaspora. Taken by his parents to Marseilles to avoid the turbulence which resulted in the 1822 Turkish massacre, Rodocanachi then moved to London in 1838. Here he combined a successful commercial career with a prominent role in the city's Greek community. 
Michael Rodocanachi's emigration to London is believed to have been linked with his family's desire to extend its international trading network. Established in 1830 in Marseilles under the name Rodocanachi Sons, this network at its peak in the mid-1850s encompassed filial branches in Leghorn, London, Odessa, St Petersburg, and New York. The London operation under Michael Rodocanachi was given a fillip by the repeal of the corn laws, which offered great opportunities to merchants with links to such grain-exporting regions as the Black Sea littoral. Rodocanachi secured membership of the Baltic exchange, and also bought three ships to complement his grain-trading activities. He diversified his activities into property and finance. On 18 May 1853 Michael Rodocanachi married in Marseilles, Ariadne Michael (1827-1859), the daughter of Michael Petrocochino, a Greek merchant trading out of that port. The newlyweds returned to London but the marriage was cut short by Ariadne's death, on 15 April 1859. Rodocanachi was left a widower with two sons and he never remarried. 
In 1857, as a leading member of the exchange, Rodocanachi became a founding shareholder of the Baltic Company Ltd, which acquired the freehold of South Sea House, the exchange's premises. He set up a number of property companies, most notably the City Offices Company. His most important commercial venture was his participation with A. P. Petrocochino, D. S. Schilizzi, and others, in the establishment in 1862 in London of the Imperial Bank, which had a subscribed capital of $2.25 million. In 1893 this business was acquired by the London Joint Stock Bank Ltd on very favourable terms. When the latter bank was taken over by the London City and Midland Bank (later the Midland Bank) in 1918, Rodocanachi's son Emmanuel Michael became a director of that bank for life. 
Rodocanachi was an active member of the Greek Orthodox church in London, playing a leading role in fund-raising for the construction of St Sophia's, the Greek Orthodox cathedral in Bayswater, London. This replaced the church at London Wall in the City, whose location by the late 1870s had become inconvenient to a community now gravitating nearer to London's West End. Rodocanachi was a trustee of the building fund and in the early 1880s was one of St Sophia's three churchwardens. He was also responsible for setting up the cathedral's trust fund in 1888. In 1897 he moved to Worthing for health reasons, building an impressive residence at 19 Heene Road, which he named after the island of his birth, 'Chios'. He died at his son's house, 58 Westbourne Terrace, London, on 3 April 1901, and was interred in the Greek Orthodox cemetery at West Norwood. 
His elder son, 


@@@@@


doc= 59879


Emmanuel Michael Rodocanachi (1855-1932), banker and financier, was born on 11 September 1855 at 3 Gloucester Square, London. Educated at Westminster School and at Trinity College, Oxford, he began his commercial career with Rodocanachi Sons & Co., eventually succeeding his father as its head. He also took over as chairman of the other firms established by his father. To the directorship in the Midland Bank were added directorships of the Bank of Athens and the Royal Automobile Club Buildings Company. However, these trappings of commercial success were somewhat at variance with the lacklustre performance under his stewardship of the family's flagship company, Rodocanachi Sons & Co. At the 1918 general election he unsuccessfully contested Horsham and Worthing, as an independent against the coalition government candidate. Keenly interested in economic matters he championed the need to curb government expenditure. He married in 1888 Alexandra J. Angelasto (1870-1958) and they had a son and three daughters. He died at his home, 66 Westbourne Terrace, London, on 14 February 1932, and was buried in the Greek Orthodox cemetery at West Norwood on 17 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 59880


Shakespeare, Sir Geoffrey Hithersay, first baronet (1893-1980), politician, was born at The Wilderness, St Peter Southgate, Norwich, on 23 September 1893, the second son of John Howard Shakespeare (1857-1928), minister of St Mary's Baptist Church, Norwich, and later secretary of the Baptist Union of Great Britain, and his wife, Amy Gertrude, 'nee' Goodman. He went to Highgate School and Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where his education was interrupted by the outbreak of war in 1914. He served as a captain with the Norfolk regiment in Gallipoli and Egypt, and returned to Cambridge in 1919, where he was president of the union. He graduated BA and LLB in 1920, and was called to the bar at Middle Temple in 1922. 
Shakespeare intended a law career, but in March 1921 he was invited by Lloyd George, a friend of his father, to join his secretariat at 10 Downing Street. He soon entered parliament, winning Wellingborough, Northamptonshire, as a national (that is, Lloyd George) Liberal in the general election of November 1922. He lost the seat in December 1923 before he had even made his maiden speech, and for the next six years pursued a successful career as a political journalist on the 'Daily Chronicle' and the 'Financial News'. He was briefly famous for predicting the early end of the general strike in 1926. On 16 September 1926 he married Aimee Constance (died 1950), daughter of Walter Loveridge of Codsall, Staffordshire, and widow of Commander Sir Thomas Fisher KBE; they had a son and a daughter. 
In the general election of 1929 Shakespeare was returned as a Liberal for Norwich. He made his maiden speech in the debate on the address in July, commenting drily on the Labour government's reliance on Liberal proposals to reduce unemployment: 'I wish the Lord Privy Seal would pin 'We Can Conquer Unemployment' as an appendix to the King's Speech.... I notice that he has already borrowed one or two ideas from it, but he will find out sooner or later that he will take the lot. ('Hansard 5C', 229, 1929, 126-33)' When the government resigned in August 1931 Shakespeare supported Ramsay MacDonald's National Government, serving from August until October as parliamentary private secretary to (Percy) John Pybus, minister of transport. 
Shakespeare now regularly voted independently of the leadership of Lloyd George, and associated instead with the Liberals who coalesced around Sir John Simon. The Simon group was ready to give 'whole-hearted support' to the government's emergency measures, even where these ran contrary to 'cherished formulas', notably free trade (Simon, 171). When in autumn 1931, with a general election impending, the group transformed itself into a party, Shakespeare was in 'the forefront', alongside Leslie Hore-Belisha. As Simon later recalled: 'Few political organisations have ever got into fighting trim so quickly' (ibid., 171). A party headquarters, staff, and campaign fund were swiftly established, and forty-one Liberal National candidates took the field in October, of whom thirty-five were elected. Shakespeare, at Norwich, was among them; he held the seat until 1945. 
Shakespeare was made a junior lord of the Treasury in Ramsay MacDonald's National Government in November 1931, and became chief Liberal National whip (the party changed its name to National Liberal in 1948). After the departure from the government in September 1932 of the Liberals led by Sir Herbert Samuel, following the Ottawa trade agreements, Shakespeare supported Simon in trying to preserve the independence of the Liberal Nationals. Though closely allied to the Conservatives, and virtually indistinguishable from them in the eyes of their erstwhile Liberal colleagues, they continued to regard themselves as a wing of Liberalism. They saw themselves as in government to defeat socialism while advancing social reform. Independent Liberals, they reasoned, could do neither. 
In the reshuffle following Samuel's departure Shakespeare became parliamentary secretary at the Ministry of Health, where he played a leading part in the national crusade against slums. In July 1936 he moved to the Board of Education, and in May 1937, upon Chamberlain becoming premier, he was appointed parliamentary and financial secretary to the Admiralty. In the next two years he saw first hand Britain's military unpreparedness, which he believed 'underlined the significance of Chamberlain's bid for peace at Munich' ('The Times', 11 Sept 1980). To the end he loyally supported Chamberlain's foreign policy, writing after the war: 'No nation democratically governed can embark on a war and all it involves unless it has a cast-iron moral case which the nation accepts as conclusive. Chamberlain gave us that moral case by his policy of appeasement and his action at Munich. (Shakespeare, 186)' Although Churchill thought well of Shakespeare's work at the Admiralty, particularly during difficult negotiations with the dockyard workers' unions in March 1940, he approved his transfer to the department of overseas trade in Chamberlain's reshuffle in April 1940. And when Churchill became premier in the following month Shakespeare moved again, becoming parliamentary under-secretary of state for the dominions. He was also chairman of the Children's Overseas Reception Board, in which capacity he made an extended visit to Canada in winter 1941. And in 1944 he visited South Africa as a member of a parliamentary delegation. After losing office in the government reconstruction of March 1942 he sat as a back-bencher until his defeat in the 1945 general election; he was created a baronet on 11 July 1942, and sworn of the privy council in June 1945. After the war he remained active in Liberal National affairs, serving as chairman of the party council in 1951. 
Outside politics Shakespeare was involved in various commercial activities: he was a director of the Abbey National Building Society (1943-77) and deputy chairman (1965-9); president of the Society of British Gas Industries (1953-4); and chairman of the Industrial Co-partnership Association (1958-68). He also enjoyed country life on his farm in Hertfordshire. After the death of his first wife, Aimee, in 1950, he married on 29 February 1952 Elizabeth, elder daughter of Brigadier-General Robert William Hare; there were no children. Shakespeare died on 8 September 1980 at his home, Great Ash, Lubbock Road, Chislehurst, Kent. 
A modest man with an air of quiet detachment, Shakespeare was also resolute and determined. He was often at the edge of great events and recorded his impressions in his memoirs, 'Let Candles Be Brought In' (1949). This includes a chapter entitled 'A close-up view of giants -- Lloyd George and Winston Churchill compared'. Revealingly, Shakespeare considered Churchill the more loyal to his colleagues, and Shakespeare's own relations with Lloyd George were damaged by his joining the Simon group in 1931. When Shakespeare later agreed to an out-of-court settlement in a legal action that he had brought against Lloyd George, over assistance he had given in the sale of the 'Daily Chronicle', he received only a fraction of what he had expected: it was, recorded Robert Bruce Lockhart, a 'remarkable example of L. G.'s vindictiveness towards any of his henchmen who turned against him' ('Diaries', 627). 
Shakespeare, though, always defended the Liberal National secession, which he believed helped to secure the social reforms of the 1930s. He saw Liberal National support for the Conservatives in much the same light as he saw appeasement, as practical politics. Given this, it was almost inevitable that talks about a Liberal reunion during the war would founder. They broke up over the Liberal National insistence on preserving in peacetime a 'national front' led by Churchill. Violet Bonham Carter, one of the Liberal negotiators, was not surprised at the outcome, and wrote of Shakespeare and his colleagues: 'None of them is the least interested in 'politics' or ideas -- & they all frankly admit that they lean to the right' ('Champion Redoubtable: the Diaries and Letters of Violet Bonham Carter, 1914-1945', ed. M. Pottle, 1998-9, 284). In April 1947 the Liberal Nationals formally merged with the Conservative Party, through the Woolton-Teviot agreement, thereafter maintaining only symbols of their former independence. 


@@@@@


doc= 59883


Blackburn, Hugh (1823-1909), mathematician and college administrator, was born on 2 July 1823 at Craigflower in Fife, the seventh and youngest son of the eight children of John Blackburn (1756-1840), Glasgow sugar merchant, and his wife, Rebecca Leslie ('b'. 1788), daughter of Dr Colin Gillies (1748-1810), a minister in the Church of Scotland, and his wife, Isabella (died 1833). 
Hugh's father made a fortune in Jamaica and returned to Glasgow in 1810, married in the following year, and built Killearn House, an elegant mansion on the banks of the Blane. He supported his large family as well as numerous natural descendants of mixed race either left in Jamaica or resettled in Nova Scotia (to his friends he was known as Bluebeard). Hugh's mother was a grandniece of the mathematician Colin MacLaurin (1698-1746). His eldest brother, Peter Blackburn (1811-1870), became Conservative MP for Stirlingshire (1859-65), while the second eldest, Colin Blackburn (1813-1896), became a queen's bench judge and was elevated to the peerage. 
Killearn House was a centre of gaiety and family activity while Hugh was growing up. The Wedderburns (one of Scotland's most distinguished families, and distantly related) were visitors, including the young Jemima Wedderburn and her first cousin James Clerk-Maxwell. Hugh was a quiet, studious youth with an interest in conducting experiments. He possessed a four-volume set of Charles Hutton's 'Mathematical Recreations', chock-full of games and practical devices. Optics fascinated him and he experimented with photography, though his progress was hampered by a lack of interest in chemistry. 
Hugh attended Edinburgh Academy (1831-6), where he was taught by the classics scholar George Ferguson, and then Eton College for his upper school education (1836-41), being admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner on 3 December 1840. In his first term in October 1841 he became a close friend of William Thomson (1824-1907). In the middle of winter they went outdoor swimming together and spent evenings reading 'Faust'. In Blackburn's rooms they swung on 'Blackburn's pendulum', an ingenious device with a double suspension, which could oscillate in planes at right angles to each other. Blackburn gained a Trinity scholarship in 1843 and for ten months (1844-5) was a member of the Cambridge Apostles. 
In the mathematical tripos of 1845 Blackburn graduated fifth wrangler. He was elected a fellow of Trinity in the tight competition of 1846; he was a clear choice for a fellowship, while the seniority of Trinity vacillated between the senior wrangler and the senior classic of that year. Blackburn intended a career in the law and on 2 November 1847 was admitted at the Inner Temple, but afterwards an academic career loomed, and he formally withdrew on 8 May 1849 without being called to the bar. Following the tripos, William Thomson had written to his father, James, professor of mathematics at Glasgow: 'I wish you could hear of a professorship for him at a Scotch University. I think if there were any more professorships in Natural Philosophy he would answer exceedingly well' (S. P. Thompson, 'The Life of Lord Kelvin', 2 vols., 1910, 1.93). Four years later, James Thomson died, and Blackburn was appointed to his chair and took up duties on 23 April 1849. 
On 12 June 1849, at St John's Episcopal Chapel, Edinburgh, Hugh Blackburn married Jemima Wedderburn (1823-1909) ['see 'Blackburn, Jemima] his childhood visitor, youngest daughter of James Wedderburn (1782-1822), solicitor-general for Scotland in 1816, and his wife, Isabella Clerk (1789-1865) of Penicuik (another daughter, Jean, married Hugh's brother Peter). In 1855 they built Roshven House on Loch Ailort in Moidart and invariably spent their summers at this remote property. It became a meeting place for many notables in the sciences and the arts (Jemima Blackburn was a noted book illustrator). Sailing from Skye on one occasion, Thomson took his yacht 'Lalla Rookh' to Loch Ailort in the company of Hermann von Helmholtz, who was impressed by the friendly and relaxed atmosphere of the Blackburns' home. Around their dinner table could be found all shades of political and religious affiliation. Hugh was a devout Christian and apolitical, while Jemima's atheism was coupled with a stout defence of Disraeli's brand of toryism. Outwardly an upright Victorian paterfamilias, Blackburn loved to spend time with his children: William (named after godfather William Thomson), Margaret, Hugh, and Alan. The Blackburns were prodigious travellers: Algeria, Spain, Italy, Corfu, Greece, and Iceland (in the company of Anthony Trollope) were all visited, where their largely unplanned expeditions progressed at a leisurely pace. 
William Thomson never wavered in his admiration of Blackburn's mathematical ability and frequently consulted him. In reading James Clerk-Maxwell's work Blackburn was able to offer useful critical advice. Blackburn himself published remarkably little. He wrote a single paper (on astronomy) while at Cambridge (published in the 'Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal', 1, 1846) and in 1854 revised a popular edition of George Biddell Airy's 'Treatise on Trigonometry'. In collaboration with Thomson he edited an edition (1871) of Newton's 'Principia'. Blackburn's mathematical interest lay in its applications to the natural world, in which his broad span covered botany, geology, marine biology, and ornithology. He was in the tradition of the natural philosopher, but one with a gift for analysing detail and a ready eye for flaws in a scientific argument. He was not a pure mathematician but Arthur Cayley, who had recommended him for the Glasgow chair, knew him as a maker of geometrical models. 
Blackburn's mathematical classes grew large, rising from ninety when he began at Glasgow to three or four hundred when he stepped down. In 1871-4 he was joined by Thomas Muir (1844-1934), who acted as his assistant. Generations of Glasgow students could thank him for the firm grounding in mathematics which he imparted. Yet Blackburn had all the necessary qualities for teaching save one: he was unable to instil student discipline. His explanations were models of logical exposition and he presented them with the lucidity of a cultured man, but in his boisterous lecture room this mastery often counted for little. As the air grew thick with flying paper darts, Blackburn retreated to his chair hoping for calm but powerless to effect it. 
Blackburn contributed to the administration of the university. His love of order, bordering on pedantry at times, found another outlet. He was clerk of faculty or, as he styled himself, 'Clericus Collegii Glasuensis'. In this role he allowed no wastage and kept the college servants firmly in line (and the mathematical staff too, it was whispered). He took an unusually keen interest in university regalia and academic dress, and brought out a short constitutional history of Glasgow University with remarks on the 1858 'Universities (Scotland) Bill'. 
Blackburn retired from Glasgow in 1879 on account of growing deafness. It was a cruel blow as he was passionately fond of music. Before the affliction he used to collect highland stories and songs about Moidart, particularly those connected with the Jacobite rebellion of the '45. In 1885 he was awarded the LLD for his services to the university. In retirement he lived at Roshven, where he spent his days with his books and involved in photography, cultivating his property, and researching the Blackburn genealogy. His passion for excruciating detail never left him. If a book had no index, he made one. Roshven was made more isolated by all of his clocks being set to 'Blackburn time'. He remained astute, and his argument to the House of Lords explaining reasons why the railway line should avoid his property, based on the sensible grounds that Loch Ailort was unsuitable as a harbour, was masterful. 
Hugh Blackburn died on 9 October 1909 at his estate, two months after Jemima. He is buried in Roshven graveyard on the family estate. He was a man of ingenuity and wide-ranging capabilities who made a valuable contribution to the well-being of the University of Glasgow and was an intimate of an illustrious group of British scientists. 


@@@@@


doc= 59885


Glaisher, Cecilia Louisa (1828-1892), photographer, was born on 20 April 1828 in Greenwich, Kent, the only child of John Henry Belville (1795?-1856) ['see under 'Belville, (Elizabeth) Ruth], an assistant astronomer at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, who was possibly of French descent, and his second wife, Apollonia Slaney (1810/1811-1851). She had two elder half-sisters and three elder half-brothers from her father's first marriage in 1819 to Sarah Dixon (died 1826), and a younger half-sister, Ruth Belville, from his third in 1851 to Maria Elizabeth Last (1811/12-1899) ['see 'Maria Elizabeth Belville, 'under' Belville, (Elizabeth) Ruth]. Little is known about her early life or education except for a pencilled note in one of her father's Greenwich workbooks recording that 'Cecilia took her first lesson in painting April 17th 1841 of Mr Villalobos'. On 31 December 1843, at the age of fifteen years and eight months, she married James Glaisher (1809-1903), superintendent of the meteorological and magnetic department at the Royal Observatory. The legal age for marriage in England was twelve at the time. The Glaishers had three children: Cecilia Appelina (1845-1932), James Whitbread Lee Glaisher (1848-1928), and Ernest Henry (1858-1885). 
Made during the 1850s, Cecilia Glaisher's work consists of photographs of ferns, illustrations of snow crystals, and coloured nature-prints of leaves. It is likely that she learned about photography, at least initially, through her husband and his scientific contacts at the Greenwich observatory, and by meeting other practitioners and experimenters in photography during visits to Hartwell House in Buckinghamshire, home of the antiquary and astronomer John Lee (1783-1866). During the severe winter of 1854-5 Cecilia and James Glaisher studied the formation of snow crystals. Cecilia Glaisher made drawings of 151 different crystal types that were used to illustrate the paper 'Snow crystals observed by James Glaisher, Esq., F.R.S. from February 8th to March 10th 1855'. These show with scientific accuracy in magnified detail varying forms of snow crystal structure, and reveal the beauty of a world not visible to the unaided human eye. 
Also at this time Cecilia Glaisher undertook a project to photograph the British ferns, lifesize on folio paper, in collaboration with the fern expert and publisher Edward Newman, who supplied the specimens. Using William Henry Fox Talbot's photogenic drawing process, a fern specimen was arranged on a sheet of paper previously rendered light-sensitive by applications of salt and silver nitrate, placed in a printing frame, and exposed to sunlight until a negative image formed. After fixing, washing, and drying, the paper negative could be used to make multiple positive prints. 
In September 1855 twelve prints of British ferns by Cecilia Glaisher were exhibited at the Glasgow Photographic Exhibition, held in conjunction with the annual meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. These examples of her work, entitled 'The British ferns, photographed from nature by Mrs Glaisher', which were seen alongside that of some of the most respected photographers of the day, publicized the project with Edward Newman. In the competitive world of fern publishing during the Victorian fern craze the intention was to use the still relatively new art of photography to rival in beauty and surpass in exactness the many fern publications illustrated by other techniques. In December 1855 Newman presented a portfolio of ten of Cecilia Glaisher's salt paper prints to the Linnean Society in London, along with a flyer advertising the work at a price not to exceed four guineas. However, for unknown reasons, but possibly due to difficulties in production, or in raising subscriptions, publication appears to have been abandoned in 1856. Cecilia Glaisher's other work at this time consists of coloured nature-prints of leaves collected in an album, 'Leaves of the British forest trees 1857 nature printed C J Glaisher', presumably the initials of both Cecilia and James Glaisher. 
Family correspondence indicates that Cecilia Glaisher suffered ill health after the birth of Ernest, the Glaishers' third child, in 1858. At present nothing is known of work she may have done after that date, and from the early 1860s facts about her life are few. Latterly she lived in west London, where she died, at 162 Lancaster Road, Kensington, from bronchitis on 28 December 1892. She was buried in All Souls cemetery, Kensal Green, on 31 December. 
Cecilia Glaisher had an intuitive feel for composition, an accurate eye for detail, and a sense of colour which she skilfully applied to nature-prints of leaves. She mixed media, using paint, ink, and photography, painstakingly retouching her photogenic drawings where necessary in order to get them to print more cleanly, overworking prints, altering the line of a fern frond, or painting-in details of rootball systems which had not registered adequately by photographic printing alone. Her photographs of ferns, recognized at the time from both a technical and an artistic point of view, remain a beautiful and unique body of work from the early years of photography. 


@@@@@


doc= 59893


Buck, Adam (1759-1833), miniature and portrait painter, was born in Castle Street, Cork, the elder son of Jonathan Buck (1729/30-1786), a silversmith, of Castle Street, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Sydney (died 1817). Frederick Buck ['see below'] was his younger brother. His artistic training remains obscure but an anonymously published article in volume 26 of the 'Journal of the Cork Historical and Archaeological Society' (1920) records that he studied under a little-known artist called Minasi. However, Anthony Pasquin states that he was self-taught (Pasquin, 41). 
By the 1780s Buck was well established in Ireland as a miniature portrait painter working in watercolour on ivory. He lived in Cork and later moved to Dublin but travelled about the country for commissions. He specialized in painting small, whole-length portraits in watercolour on card, a type of portrait he popularized. He also did portraits on card with a special wax crayon which he invented. His early portraits, such as his group portrait in watercolour on paper of the Edgeworth family (1787, priv. coll.; exh. Dublin, Belfast, and London 1969-70) and the miniatures of the Ellis family (National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin), show that he had evolved his own decorative neo-classical style early in his career. This was commented on by Pasquin, who may have known Buck when he was in Ireland. In an account of Buck's life, written along with a note on beauty, Pasquin stated: 'He [Buck] appears to study the antique more rigorously than any of our emerging artists and by that means he will imbibe a chastity of thinking, which may eventually lead him to the personification of apparent beauty' (Pasquin, 41). 
In 1795 Buck moved permanently to London, where he lived at 174 Piccadilly (1795-8), Frith Street, Soho (1799-1802), and Bentinck Street (1813-20). He married, on 15 November 1804, Margaret (1784-1867), daughter of Sampson George, solicitor, of Middleton Tyas, Yorkshire. They had three sons and a daughter. 
Buck had a fashionable clientele which included George IV, the duke of York, the duke's mistress Mary Anne Clarke, the opera singer Angelica Catalani, the politician Sir Francis Burdett, the art collector Thomas Hope (all National Portrait Gallery, London), the seventh earl and the countess of Cavan, Lady Chatterton, and the actor J. P. Kemble. He also taught drawing and portrait painting. From 1795 to 1833 he exhibited over 170 miniatures and small, full-length portraits at the Royal Academy. He also exhibited at the British Institution and the Society of British Artists in Suffolk Street. He only exhibited once in Ireland, in 1802, when he sent a portrait to the Society of Artists in Ireland exhibition at the parliament house, Dublin. 
Buck influenced Regency taste through his work, which was engraved and widely published. He did fashion plates, produced decorative engravings, and did illustrations (1801) for Sterne's 'Sentimental Journey'. The decorative pieces were fanciful genre pictures of mothers and children, personifications of Faith, Hope, and Charity, and classical subjects such as Cupid and Psyche. Sentimental figurative pieces were used to decorate furniture and were adapted as designs for the decoration of china, embroidery, and fans. 
Buck was greatly influenced by the Greek Revival and he included Greek vases and sculpture, as well as Greek-inspired furniture, in his portraits. His sitters wear high-waisted muslin dresses and have curly hair-styles 'a la grecque'. He was a collector of Greek vases and was familiar with private collections which he used as devices in his work, as in his 'Self-Portrait with his Family' (Yale U. CBA). 
Buck published a prospectus for a book on Greek vase painting: 'Proposals for publishing by subscription 100 engravings from paintings on Greek vases which have never been published, drawn and etched by Adam Buck from private collections now in England, dedicated to the earl of Carlisle' (1811). This publication was intended as a continuation of Sir William Hamilton's 'Collection of Engravings from Ancient Vases...' (1791-7) and the prints were to be issued in fascicules of ten, over a period of one year. Public interest must have been slight, as only one instalment of ten etched outlines seems to have been issued (on 31 March 1812), and contrary to almost all accounts of Buck's life the book 'Paintings on Greek Vases' was never published. The only recorded copy of the prospectus is in the British Museum. The drawings and aquatint engravings for the unpublished book are in the Library of Trinity College, University of Dublin. 
Adam Buck died in August 1833 at his home in Ebury Street, Pimlico, London. He was survived by his wife and their four children. His third son, Sydney Buck (1816-1899), also became a miniature painter. A miniature self-portrait by Buck is in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; other work is in the collections of the National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin; the British Museum, National Portrait Gallery, and Kenwood House (the Draper gift), London; the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut; the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York; and the Art Institute of Chicago. 
Adam Buck's brother Frederick Buck (1771-1840), born in Cork, was also a miniature painter. He was admitted as a pupil to the Dublin Society's drawing school in 1782. He practised over a long period as a miniature painter in Cork, where he executed many portraits of officers prior to their embarkation on ships bound for the Peninsular War. His work is inferior to that of his brother, the features often badly drawn and modelled; this is probably the result of their being imposed on partly painted ivories to which he hastily added faces and regimental facings. He also engraved some book-plates. He married twice: first, on 9 February 1796, to Elizabeth Reilly, with whom he had at least two daughters and one son; and, second, on 21 October 1816, to Harriet Mahony Craig (died 1870), with whom he had at least one daughter and six sons. Successful in his work, Buck retired some years before his death in Cork on 7 September 1840. Examples of his miniatures are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and the National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 59900


Hastings, Henry Weysford Charles Plantagenet Rawdon, fourth marquess of Hastings (1842-1868), rake, was born on 22 July 1842, at 6 Cavendish Square, Marylebone, Middlesex, second son of George Augustus Francis Rawdon Hastings, second marquess of Hastings (1808-1844), and his wife, Barbara Yelverton, 'suo jure' Baroness Grey of Ruthin (1810-1858) ['see 'Hastings, Barbara Rawdon, marchioness of Hastings], only child of Henry Edward Yelverton, the nineteenth Baron Grey of Ruthin, who had initiated his country neighbour the poet Byron in homosexuality. In 1851 Hastings succeeded his brother in the marquessate, three earldoms, a viscountcy, and nine baronies; he inherited his mother's barony in 1858. Together with the dukes of Abercorn, the marquesses of Lansdowne, and the earls of Verulam, the marquesses of Hastings were the only peers who enjoyed distinct peerages in the three kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. He was educated at Eton College (1854-5) and at Christ Church, Oxford (1860-61), but left both institutions abruptly for unknown reasons. 
Having already owned racehorses under the alias of Mr Weysford, Hastings was elected as a member of the Jockey Club on his twenty-first birthday. He was not wildly extravagant at horse sales -- his two best runners, the Duke and the Earl, cost him 500 and 450 guineas respectively -- but his craving for the odds became excessive. This feeble, runtish, orphaned 'enfant gate' revelled in the deference of the betting ring and the admiration which accompanied his huge wagers. Initially his betting coups were so brilliant that he believed in his power to break the ring. Although for Hastings the excitement of gambling was more intense and enduring than sex, he attracted Lady Florence Cecilia Paget (1842-1907), youngest daughter of the second marquess of Anglesey. On 16 July 1864, shortly before her intended marriage to a rich squire, Henry Chaplin, afterwards first Viscount Chaplin, she went to Marshall and Snelgrove's drapery store in Oxford Street, entering by one door and swiftly leaving by another for the nearby church of St George, Hanover Square. There she married Hastings. This elopement raised a great stir in society. The marriage proved anxious, discontented, and childless. 
In 1866 Hastings became master of the Quorn hounds, but never cared much for hunting and knew little about the sport. Dissolute living was ruining his judgement and health: mackerel poached in gin, with caviare on devilled toast, washed down by claret cup was his favourite breakfast; an eternal cigarette in his mouth maintained his famous pose of nonchalance. He lost heavily at Crockford's gaming club as well as on the turf. His estate at Donington, Leicestershire, was neglected; he sold Scottish land to the third marquess of Bute for $300,000. By the winter of 1867-8 he had gravely damaged his kidneys. It is difficult to say whether, knowing that he was doomed by illness, he became wilder in his betting, or whether his losses drove him deeper into desperate, self-destructive courses. Despite the magnanimity of Chaplin after the theft of his fiancee, Hastings developed a spiteful and immature obsession against him. This came to focus on his rival's colt Hermit, and he lost $120,000 in wagers against the horse when it won the Derby by a neck at 66 to 1 (22 May 1867). Much of that money was lost to Hermit's owner. 'Every one will be glad that [Chaplin] has this sweet revenge for Lord H.'s shabby conduct about Lady F. P.', noted John Wodehouse, afterwards first earl of Kimberley ('Journal', 203). Rather than retrench after this fiasco, Hastings persisted in a reckless gambling campaign which only more tightly ensnared him in the moneylenders' traps. 'For the sake of the peerage wh. he disgraces the sooner he disappears from public view, the better', Wodehouse wrote in May 1868 of 'that miserable man Lord Hastings' (ibid., 220). 
Hounded by creditors, Hastings resigned from the Jockey Club, and broken in fortune, nerves, and health succumbed to Bright's disease on 10 November 1868, at 34 Grosvenor Square, Mayfair. Reportedly his last words were, 'Hermit's Derby broke my heart; but I did not show it, did I?' (Blyth, 266). On 14 November he was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. E. H. Stanley, afterwards fifteenth earl of Derby, noted in his diary on 16 November: 'Much writing in the papers about the death of Lord Hastings, aged 26: in five years he had destroyed a fine fortune, ruined his health, and by associating with low characters, on the turf and elsewhere, considerably damaged his reputation. To the peerage his death is a clear gain: and as his titles (except a Scotch earldom) die with him, the ruin of his family matters less. His sister has saved the family place.' 



@@@@@


doc= 59910


James Bullough (1799-1868) and his wife, Martha, 'nee' Mellor. In becoming a textile machinery maker, John Bullough had before him the example of his father, whose inventions greatly improved the powered weaving of cloth. James Bullough was born at Westhoughton, Lancashire, the son of Ann Bullough, and was put to the hand-loom when he was seven. The need to improve the clumsy power-looms of his youth stimulated his inventive genius and for most of his life he strove to make weaving more efficient. James Bullough is best remembered for the weft fork, which stopped the loom when the thread broke, thus preventing the shuttle from damaging the cloth. Controversy surrounded the invention, which Bullough and James Kenworthy, co-workers in a Blackburn mill, patented in 1841 (no. 8790); John Osbaldeston ('c'.1777-1842) also laid claim to it. Bullough, either alone or with others, took out patents covering all aspects of weaving. These included a roller temple that kept the woven cloth at its correct width and a loose reed that allowed the lathe to back away on encountering a shuttle trapped in the warp. With two employees, James Whittaker and John Walmsley, Bullough perfected a machine that sized two warps and wound them on two beams at the same time. Bullough managed and ran a number of small mills in Lancashire before joining John Howard in a textile machinery business at Accrington in 1856. Howard had begun three years earlier with four employees but with Bullough's backing expansion accelerated. The firm of Howard and Bullough specialized in machines for preparing and spinning cotton, and by 1866, the year of Howard's death, employed 300 workpeople. James Bullough died on 31 July 1868, leaving the business to his son John. 


@@@@@


doc= 59911


Greg, Samuel (1758-1834), cotton manufacturer, was born on 26 March 1758 in Belfast, the second surviving son of Thomas Greg, a wealthy Belfast merchant and shipowner, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Samuel Hyde, a Lancashire merchant and landowner. In 1766, at the age of eight, he went to live with his childless uncle Robert Hyde of Ardwick Hall, near Manchester. Robert Hyde, a substantial Manchester linen merchant in partnership with his brother Nathaniel, was trading with both Europe and the American colonies, and to secure succession in the business, he effectively adopted Samuel. Samuel Greg completed his formal education at Harrow School under Dr Parr; in 1778 he began learning the textile trade at Hyde & Co., becoming a partner in the firm in 1780. Robert Hyde died in 1782 and, since his uncle Nathaniel was by then a confirmed alcoholic, Samuel Greg inherited the firm. As heir to $10,000 from Robert Hyde and to the stock and goodwill of one of Manchester's largest merchant manufacturers, he became a wealthy young man. On 3 November 1789 he married Hannah (1766-1828), third daughter of Adam Lightbody, a prominent Liverpool merchant, and his wife Elizabeth. They had six boys and seven girls, though one son died as a child; one daughter, Ellen Maria (1807-1894), was the mother of the liberal politician George Melly. They lived first at 35 King Street, Manchester, retaining it as a town house for a number of years. In 1796 Greg built Quarry Bank House adjacent to his cotton mill at Styal near Wilmslow in Cheshire. Raised in a Scottish Presbyterian family, Greg married into a prominent Unitarian family. His children were brought up as Unitarian, but his own religious affiliation remains uncertain. However, he became part of the 'charmed circle' of nonconformist families which dominated Manchester's commerce and society in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries and he was a member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society. 
Greg was one of the pioneers of the industrial revolution, and his achievements were entirely as a cotton factory owner and a merchant. His first cotton-spinning mill, Quarry Bank Mill, began operation in 1784, and was the foundation of what became, by his retirement in 1832, the largest coarse spinning and weaving concern in the country. The firm grew slowly during the Napoleonic wars, allowing Greg to divert some of his wealth into a small estate in Styal and land at Reddish, near Stockport in Cheshire, adding to real estate he owned in Manchester, North America, and the West Indies. However, to secure his sons' futures, he built or purchased four other cotton mills during the 1820s -- at Caton near Lancaster, Lancaster, Bury, and Bollington, near Macclesfield. At the same time he expanded spinning capacity at Quarry Bank and undertook extensive community development in the adjacent village of Styal. Unlike his son Samuel ['see below'], Greg was not a philanthropist, but viewed his factory colony as an essential adjunct to rural factory ownership. However, his labour policies and some of the institutions that developed in the village, such as the Female Society, reflected the strong influence of his free-thinking wife Hannah. Her interest in religion and education also had a lasting impact on her younger sons, especially Samuel, and William, and she provided a calming influence on the increasingly difficult relationship between Greg and his sons. After Hannah's death, on 4 February 1828, Greg remained in good health until 1832 when, at seventy-four, he was attacked by a tame stag in the grounds of Quarry Bank House and his injuries forced his retirement. His four younger sons, Robert, John, Samuel, and William Rathbone Greg, took control of Samuel Greg & Co., with Robert becoming the senior partner. Greg never fully recovered from his accident and died at Quarry Bank House on 4 June 1834. 
The fourth surviving son, 
Unlike his father and elder brother Robert, for whom business success was a driving force, the younger Samuel Greg saw mill ownership as an opportunity for social experiment. Passionately committed to improving the educational opportunities of working people, in 1830 and 1831 he gave a series of scientific lectures to his father's workers at Styal. His move to Bollington gave him ample opportunities for more wide-ranging social experimentation and the creation of a model village. He outlined his plans and objectives for his community in 'Two Letters to Leonard Horner on the Capabilities of the Factory System' (1840). He established a Sunday school, a gymnasium, drawing and singing classes, baths and libraries, and founded the order of the Silver Cross in 1836 as a reward for good conduct for young women. In 1847 he introduced new machinery for stretching cloth, a move which proved so unpopular that his workforce came out on strike, devastating him and precipitating a nervous breakdown. This led him to retire from business, though he continued to live at The Mount, Bollington. His philanthropic interests were transferred to Macclesfield, where, in the 1850s and 1860s, he gave evening classes and scientific lectures to working people and became president of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. He died at The Mount on 14 May 1876, after a long illness, survived by his wife. Prefaced by a brief memoir by Dean Stanley, 'A Layman's Legacy' (1877), which contains a selection of his writing, was published to celebrate his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 59912


Maelgwn ap Rhys (d. 1231), who was to found a second important lineage. Rhys placed Maelgwn in Briouze's prison but he escaped in 1192 and joined his father at the siege of the castle of Swansea, an offensive that occasioned the summoning of a large English army. Maelgwn's presence was still troublesome and, during the continuing internecine conflict, Rhys ap Gruffudd was himself incarcerated by Maelgwn and another son in 1194. Promptly upon Rhys's death in 1197 Gruffudd went to Richard I to secure recognition of his succession and he made his peace with the bishop of St David's, consenting to be scourged as penance for an outrage upon the bishop with which his father had been charged. Gruffudd immediately faced strenuous conflict with Maelgwn who, forming an alliance with Gwenwynwyn ab Owain ('fl'. 1186-1216) of Powys, wrested possession of Ceredigion from him. Gruffudd was captured and placed first in Gwenwynwyn's prison and then transferred to the king's custody in Corfe Castle. Released in 1198, he scored considerable success in asserting his authority in Ceredigion, and Maelgwn incurred the Welsh annalist's censure when, in 1199, he sold Cardigan Castle to the English so as to deny it to his brother. Gruffudd was also engaged to good purpose in Ystrad Tywi, taking the castle of Llandovery and Cantref Bychan. He had done much to secure his patrimony when he died on 25 July 1201. The annalist's encomium of Gruffudd, who was buried at the Cistercian abbey of Strata Florida, reflects his highly favourable estimation of the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd who was by Welsh right a true prince and heir, and conveys his critical regard for Maelgwn who, though once extolled for his valour, had recently incurred much adverse comment. 
Gruffudd's young sons, Rhys (died 1222) and 


@@@@@


doc= 59913


Gruffudd ap Rhys (d. 1201), prince of Deheubarth, was the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd (the Lord Rhys) (1131/2-1197). Gruffudd was the ancestor of a lineage that shared lordship over the patrimony of Rhys ap Gruffudd until the virtual extinction of the dynasty during Edward I's conquest of Wales. 
Gruffudd, a son of Rhys and his wife, Gwenllian, daughter of Madog ap Maredudd (died 1160) of Powys, was the eldest of Rhys's legitimate sons. He appears to have been the designated heir to the patrimony and he was married to Matilda (died 1210), daughter of William (III) de Briouze (died 1211), the most powerful of the marcher lords of the late twelfth century. The impending succession had led to conflict within the family as early as 1189 when Rhys is known to have encountered resistance from his eldest but illegitimate son, Maelgwn ap Rhys (d. 1231), who was to found a second important lineage. Rhys placed Maelgwn in Briouze's prison but he escaped in 1192 and joined his father at the siege of the castle of Swansea, an offensive that occasioned the summoning of a large English army. Maelgwn's presence was still troublesome and, during the continuing internecine conflict, Rhys ap Gruffudd was himself incarcerated by Maelgwn and another son in 1194. Promptly upon Rhys's death in 1197 Gruffudd went to Richard I to secure recognition of his succession and he made his peace with the bishop of St David's, consenting to be scourged as penance for an outrage upon the bishop with which his father had been charged. Gruffudd immediately faced strenuous conflict with Maelgwn who, forming an alliance with Gwenwynwyn ab Owain ('fl'. 1186-1216) of Powys, wrested possession of Ceredigion from him. Gruffudd was captured and placed first in Gwenwynwyn's prison and then transferred to the king's custody in Corfe Castle. Released in 1198, he scored considerable success in asserting his authority in Ceredigion, and Maelgwn incurred the Welsh annalist's censure when, in 1199, he sold Cardigan Castle to the English so as to deny it to his brother. Gruffudd was also engaged to good purpose in Ystrad Tywi, taking the castle of Llandovery and Cantref Bychan. He had done much to secure his patrimony when he died on 25 July 1201. The annalist's encomium of Gruffudd, who was buried at the Cistercian abbey of Strata Florida, reflects his highly favourable estimation of the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd who was by Welsh right a true prince and heir, and conveys his critical regard for Maelgwn who, though once extolled for his valour, had recently incurred much adverse comment. 
Gruffudd's young sons, Rhys (died 1222) and Owain ap Gruffudd (d. 1235), maintained the struggle for the inheritance with the other two main contenders, Maelgwn ap Rhys and Rhys Gryg (d. 1233), another son of Rhys ap Gruffudd, who founded a third important lineage. In the early years of the thirteenth century, with the benefit of the support of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (died 1240), prince of Gwynedd, Rhys and Owain vigorously contested possession of Ceredigion and deprived their adversaries of the key castles of Dinefwr and Llandovery in Ystrad Tywi. They shared Llywelyn's discomfiture following John's invasion of Gwynedd in 1211 and were forced to yield their territory in Ceredigion, where Falkes de Breaute fortified the castle of Aberystwyth for the king. When, during the next year, Maelgwn ap Rhys and Rhys Gryg joined Llywelyn in fierce resistance to John, Rhys and Owain found themselves dependent upon the king's support. This proved to be of little avail and the successes of the previous years were placed in jeopardy. It was only in 1215 that the contenders for supremacy in Deheubarth were reconciled when, for the first time, all the surviving descendants of Rhys ap Gruffudd were allied with Llywelyn against John. At a gathering at Aberdyfi the next year Deheubarth was partitioned. The sons of Gruffudd ap Rhys secured the greater part of Ceredigion, Rhys Gryg won the main part of Ystrad Tywi, including the castle of Dinefwr, and Maelgwn received lands in Dyfed and the remaining parts of Ceredigion and Ystrad Tywi. Adjustments were made in 1222, upon the death of Rhys ap Gruffudd, and again in 1225. Rhys Gryg held the whole of Ystrad Tywi, which after his death came to be shared between his sons Rhys Mechyll and Maredudd ap Rhys Gryg (d. 1271). In Ceredigion the distribution which initially gave Maelgwn the southern portion and Owain the northern portion came to be much changed. Ultimately the descendants of Owain secured an extensive estate in the southern and middle commotes (Is Coed, Gwynionydd, Caerwedros, Mabwynion, Pennardd, Anhuniog, and Mefenydd), while those of Maelgwn were confined to a much smaller estate in the north (Creuddyn, Perfedd, and Genau'r-glyn). Their fortunes, and particularly their relations with the successive princes of Gwynedd, Llywelyn ab Iorwerth, Dafydd ap Llywelyn (died 1246), and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282), are recorded by successive annalists at Strata Florida. 
Maelgwn ap Rhys was succeeded in 1231 by his son Maelgwn Fychan (d. 1257), who had to struggle to safeguard the interests of his house in the vicissitudes of the period following the death of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth in 1240. His difficulties were particularly acute during the conflicts of 1244-6 when royal officers were able to exploit differences among the princes to further their purposes. Maelgwn was forced to flee to Gwynedd where he joined its princes in a defiant resistance in the mountains which was likened by the annalist to the valour of the Maccabees. He returned to an estate further diminished by the crown's annexation of the commote of Perfedd. Predeceased by his son Rhys ap Maelgwn (died 1255), Maelgwn Fychan was succeeded by his grandson Rhys Fychan ap Rhys ap Maelgwn (d. 1302). A sworn man of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, Rhys Fychan was confronted in 1277 with the advance of a powerful royal army into his lands. Following his submission in early May he was among the lords of Deheubarth sent to the king to do homage, but his troubles were not ended. Shortly afterwards, with a royal castle being built at Llanbadarn Fawr and his authority destroyed, he, like his grandfather before him, took refuge in Gwynedd. Under the terms of the treaty of Aberconwy in November, Rhys Fychan became one of five lords whose homage Llywelyn ap Gruffudd was allowed to retain, but he remained exiled from his estates in Ceredigion. He participated in the war of 1282-3 in the alliance of Welsh princes against Edward I and briefly endeavoured to reassert his position in northern Ceredigion. He withdrew to Gwynedd once more, but then submitted to the king and served in his forces. As late as May 1283 he received a grant of the cantref of Penweddig (the three commotes of northern Ceredigion) from Dafydd ap Gruffudd, but, with the king's forces already well entrenched there, the charter was of no practical significance and was probably made in an attempt to wean Rhys from the king's alliance. He broke with the king yet again, but by August 1283 he had been captured and dispatched for perpetual imprisonment. On his death in 1302 he was accorded the honour of a burial in Windsor at the king's expense. 
The lineage of Owain ap Gruffudd (died 1235) was represented in the middle years of the century by Maredudd ab Owain (d. 1265), a substantial figure who, at his death, was commemorated by the poet Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268) and described by the Welsh annalist as 'defender of all Deheubarth and counsellor of all Wales' ('Brut: Peniarth MS 20', 114). In the period following the death of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth his allegiance was sought by Dafydd ap Llywelyn and the crown. Maredudd's importance can be gauged by the attempts that were made by the king's commanders in south-west Wales to wean him from his attachment to Dafydd ap Llywelyn in 1244-6. They were conscious that 'it is not easy to control the Welsh except through one of their own nation ['lingua']' (Edwards, 'Calendar', 48), and urged that terms be agreed with Maredudd that would bring him into the king's allegiance. He was enticed with the prospect that he might benefit from Maelgwn Fychan's disinheritance. His adherence to Llywelyn ap Gruffudd upon his advance into Deheubarth at the end of 1256 ensured the prince's supremacy in Ceredigion. He was among the prince's leading magnates, sharing in his military achievements and participating in his councils. Married to a daughter of Gilbert de Vall of Dale in the earldom of Pembroke, for whom he made dower provision much in accord with English practice, Maredudd ruled a substantial and stable barony. At his death, however, his lands were divided among his sons. Owain ap Maredudd died in 1275, leaving as his heir Llywelyn ab Owain (fl. 1275-1283), whose young age enabled him to survive the tumultuous years which saw his kinsmen's lordship erased. Cynan ap Maredudd (fl. 1277-1297) and Gruffudd ap Maredudd (d. in or before 1319) submitted to the king's commander in May 1277 and were sent to Edward I to do homage. They were reinstated in their lands but, finding the extension of royal authority in Ceredigion irksome, they were among the princes in rebellion in 1282. In their statement to Archbishop Pecham they alleged that Robert de Tibetot (died 1298), justice of west Wales from 1280, had undermined their jurisdiction over their patrimony. Whereas, they insisted, all Christian men enjoyed their laws and customs in their lands, they had been denied the laws of Wales, which had remained inviolate until the imposition of royal authority after the war of 1277. At the start of renewed conflict in March 1282 Gruffudd ap Maredudd and his third cousin, Rhys Fychan ap Rhys ap Maelgwn, attacked the castle of Llanbadarn Fawr. They maintained their resistance and forced the king's commanders to send a contingent to take their castle of Trefilan in September. Gruffudd remained in arms, a member of the small cohort of princes allied with Dafydd ap Gruffudd until, in June 1283, he and his nephew Llywelyn ab Owain surrendered. Cynan and Rhys Fychan were serving with the king's forces in the spring but later resumed an active resistance which they maintained until their surrender in August. Gruffudd, Cynan, and Rhys Fychan were detained at various English castles, including Bridgnorth, Nottingham, Bamburgh, and Newcastle, Northumberland. They were in time allowed to be counted among the 'king's Welshmen' in the royal household, and Gruffudd and Cynan served in the Flanders campaign in 1297. Gruffudd, who was dead by 1319, and Cynan were allowed an income from the manor of Edwinstowe, Nottinghamshire, but they never returned to the lands of their forebears. 
By the end of the conflict the only territory allowed to any member of the lineages of Gruffudd ap Rhys and Maelgwn ap Rhys was the estate in Is Coed and Mabwynion held by Llywelyn ab Owain. In the mid-fourteenth century this was divided between his granddaughters, one of whom, Elen, was the mother of Owain Glyn Dwr. He came to her share of the estate and through his mother he was thus linked with the princes who had once ruled Deheubarth in its entirety. 

'Brut y tywysogyon', containing numerous references to the activities of members of the lineages and notices of their burial in the chapter house, reflects the close association between the Cistercian convent of Strata Florida and those who exercised lordship in Ceredigion. Secular patronage is indicated in charters of Maelgwn ap Rhys and Maelgwn Fychan, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and Cynan ap Maredudd, which refer to gifts by other members of their family. Literary associations are illustrated in poetry addressed by Phylip Brydydd to Rhys ap Gruffudd and by Y Prydydd Bychan's estimation of the valour and generosity of Owain ap Gruffudd, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and Maredudd ab Owain. The later years of the thirteenth century bring evidence of lay interest in prose works. Madog ap Selyf, a cleric or possibly a monk, translated the legendary chronicle of Turpin from Latin into Welsh at the request of Gruffudd ap Maredudd. Brother Gruffudd Bola translated the Athanasian creed into Welsh at the request of Efa ferch Maredudd (fl. 1300), daughter of Maredudd ab Owain, a task he undertook out of love for her and in her honour. She was one of the first Welsh women whose ability to read is documented, and her descendants were patrons of devotional treatises in Welsh in the fourteenth century. Brother Gruffudd and Madog ap Selyf may have been members of the convent at Strata Florida where, late in the century, a major corpus of court poetry of the period of the princes, the Hendregadredd manuscript, was written. No surviving manuscript of 'Brut y tywysogyon' can be shown to have been written in the abbey scriptorium, but both the lost Latin text on which the surviving Welsh versions were based, and one of the Welsh texts, may well have been composed there. 


@@@@@


doc= 59914


Gruffudd ap Rhys (d. 1201), prince of Deheubarth, was the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd (the Lord Rhys) (1131/2-1197). Gruffudd was the ancestor of a lineage that shared lordship over the patrimony of Rhys ap Gruffudd until the virtual extinction of the dynasty during Edward I's conquest of Wales. 
Gruffudd, a son of Rhys and his wife, Gwenllian, daughter of Madog ap Maredudd (died 1160) of Powys, was the eldest of Rhys's legitimate sons. He appears to have been the designated heir to the patrimony and he was married to Matilda (died 1210), daughter of William (III) de Briouze (died 1211), the most powerful of the marcher lords of the late twelfth century. The impending succession had led to conflict within the family as early as 1189 when Rhys is known to have encountered resistance from his eldest but illegitimate son, Maelgwn ap Rhys (d. 1231), who was to found a second important lineage. Rhys placed Maelgwn in Briouze's prison but he escaped in 1192 and joined his father at the siege of the castle of Swansea, an offensive that occasioned the summoning of a large English army. Maelgwn's presence was still troublesome and, during the continuing internecine conflict, Rhys ap Gruffudd was himself incarcerated by Maelgwn and another son in 1194. Promptly upon Rhys's death in 1197 Gruffudd went to Richard I to secure recognition of his succession and he made his peace with the bishop of St David's, consenting to be scourged as penance for an outrage upon the bishop with which his father had been charged. Gruffudd immediately faced strenuous conflict with Maelgwn who, forming an alliance with Gwenwynwyn ab Owain ('fl'. 1186-1216) of Powys, wrested possession of Ceredigion from him. Gruffudd was captured and placed first in Gwenwynwyn's prison and then transferred to the king's custody in Corfe Castle. Released in 1198, he scored considerable success in asserting his authority in Ceredigion, and Maelgwn incurred the Welsh annalist's censure when, in 1199, he sold Cardigan Castle to the English so as to deny it to his brother. Gruffudd was also engaged to good purpose in Ystrad Tywi, taking the castle of Llandovery and Cantref Bychan. He had done much to secure his patrimony when he died on 25 July 1201. The annalist's encomium of Gruffudd, who was buried at the Cistercian abbey of Strata Florida, reflects his highly favourable estimation of the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd who was by Welsh right a true prince and heir, and conveys his critical regard for Maelgwn who, though once extolled for his valour, had recently incurred much adverse comment. 
Gruffudd's young sons, Rhys (died 1222) and Owain ap Gruffudd (d. 1235), maintained the struggle for the inheritance with the other two main contenders, Maelgwn ap Rhys and Rhys Gryg (d. 1233), another son of Rhys ap Gruffudd, who founded a third important lineage. In the early years of the thirteenth century, with the benefit of the support of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (died 1240), prince of Gwynedd, Rhys and Owain vigorously contested possession of Ceredigion and deprived their adversaries of the key castles of Dinefwr and Llandovery in Ystrad Tywi. They shared Llywelyn's discomfiture following John's invasion of Gwynedd in 1211 and were forced to yield their territory in Ceredigion, where Falkes de Breaute fortified the castle of Aberystwyth for the king. When, during the next year, Maelgwn ap Rhys and Rhys Gryg joined Llywelyn in fierce resistance to John, Rhys and Owain found themselves dependent upon the king's support. This proved to be of little avail and the successes of the previous years were placed in jeopardy. It was only in 1215 that the contenders for supremacy in Deheubarth were reconciled when, for the first time, all the surviving descendants of Rhys ap Gruffudd were allied with Llywelyn against John. At a gathering at Aberdyfi the next year Deheubarth was partitioned. The sons of Gruffudd ap Rhys secured the greater part of Ceredigion, Rhys Gryg won the main part of Ystrad Tywi, including the castle of Dinefwr, and Maelgwn received lands in Dyfed and the remaining parts of Ceredigion and Ystrad Tywi. Adjustments were made in 1222, upon the death of Rhys ap Gruffudd, and again in 1225. Rhys Gryg held the whole of Ystrad Tywi, which after his death came to be shared between his sons Rhys Mechyll and Maredudd ap Rhys Gryg (d. 1271). In Ceredigion the distribution which initially gave Maelgwn the southern portion and Owain the northern portion came to be much changed. Ultimately the descendants of Owain secured an extensive estate in the southern and middle commotes (Is Coed, Gwynionydd, Caerwedros, Mabwynion, Pennardd, Anhuniog, and Mefenydd), while those of Maelgwn were confined to a much smaller estate in the north (Creuddyn, Perfedd, and Genau'r-glyn). Their fortunes, and particularly their relations with the successive princes of Gwynedd, Llywelyn ab Iorwerth, Dafydd ap Llywelyn (died 1246), and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282), are recorded by successive annalists at Strata Florida. 
Maelgwn ap Rhys was succeeded in 1231 by his son Maelgwn Fychan (d. 1257), who had to struggle to safeguard the interests of his house in the vicissitudes of the period following the death of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth in 1240. His difficulties were particularly acute during the conflicts of 1244-6 when royal officers were able to exploit differences among the princes to further their purposes. Maelgwn was forced to flee to Gwynedd where he joined its princes in a defiant resistance in the mountains which was likened by the annalist to the valour of the Maccabees. He returned to an estate further diminished by the crown's annexation of the commote of Perfedd. Predeceased by his son Rhys ap Maelgwn (died 1255), Maelgwn Fychan was succeeded by his grandson Rhys Fychan ap Rhys ap Maelgwn (d. 1302). A sworn man of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, Rhys Fychan was confronted in 1277 with the advance of a powerful royal army into his lands. Following his submission in early May he was among the lords of Deheubarth sent to the king to do homage, but his troubles were not ended. Shortly afterwards, with a royal castle being built at Llanbadarn Fawr and his authority destroyed, he, like his grandfather before him, took refuge in Gwynedd. Under the terms of the treaty of Aberconwy in November, Rhys Fychan became one of five lords whose homage Llywelyn ap Gruffudd was allowed to retain, but he remained exiled from his estates in Ceredigion. He participated in the war of 1282-3 in the alliance of Welsh princes against Edward I and briefly endeavoured to reassert his position in northern Ceredigion. He withdrew to Gwynedd once more, but then submitted to the king and served in his forces. As late as May 1283 he received a grant of the cantref of Penweddig (the three commotes of northern Ceredigion) from Dafydd ap Gruffudd, but, with the king's forces already well entrenched there, the charter was of no practical significance and was probably made in an attempt to wean Rhys from the king's alliance. He broke with the king yet again, but by August 1283 he had been captured and dispatched for perpetual imprisonment. On his death in 1302 he was accorded the honour of a burial in Windsor at the king's expense. 
The lineage of Owain ap Gruffudd (died 1235) was represented in the middle years of the century by Maredudd ab Owain (d. 1265), a substantial figure who, at his death, was commemorated by the poet Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268) and described by the Welsh annalist as 'defender of all Deheubarth and counsellor of all Wales' ('Brut: Peniarth MS 20', 114). In the period following the death of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth his allegiance was sought by Dafydd ap Llywelyn and the crown. Maredudd's importance can be gauged by the attempts that were made by the king's commanders in south-west Wales to wean him from his attachment to Dafydd ap Llywelyn in 1244-6. They were conscious that 'it is not easy to control the Welsh except through one of their own nation ['lingua']' (Edwards, 'Calendar', 48), and urged that terms be agreed with Maredudd that would bring him into the king's allegiance. He was enticed with the prospect that he might benefit from Maelgwn Fychan's disinheritance. His adherence to Llywelyn ap Gruffudd upon his advance into Deheubarth at the end of 1256 ensured the prince's supremacy in Ceredigion. He was among the prince's leading magnates, sharing in his military achievements and participating in his councils. Married to a daughter of Gilbert de Vall of Dale in the earldom of Pembroke, for whom he made dower provision much in accord with English practice, Maredudd ruled a substantial and stable barony. At his death, however, his lands were divided among his sons. Owain ap Maredudd died in 1275, leaving as his heir Llywelyn ab Owain (fl. 1275-1283), whose young age enabled him to survive the tumultuous years which saw his kinsmen's lordship erased. Cynan ap Maredudd (fl. 1277-1297) and Gruffudd ap Maredudd (d. in or before 1319) submitted to the king's commander in May 1277 and were sent to Edward I to do homage. They were reinstated in their lands but, finding the extension of royal authority in Ceredigion irksome, they were among the princes in rebellion in 1282. In their statement to Archbishop Pecham they alleged that Robert de Tibetot (died 1298), justice of west Wales from 1280, had undermined their jurisdiction over their patrimony. Whereas, they insisted, all Christian men enjoyed their laws and customs in their lands, they had been denied the laws of Wales, which had remained inviolate until the imposition of royal authority after the war of 1277. At the start of renewed conflict in March 1282 Gruffudd ap Maredudd and his third cousin, Rhys Fychan ap Rhys ap Maelgwn, attacked the castle of Llanbadarn Fawr. They maintained their resistance and forced the king's commanders to send a contingent to take their castle of Trefilan in September. Gruffudd remained in arms, a member of the small cohort of princes allied with Dafydd ap Gruffudd until, in June 1283, he and his nephew Llywelyn ab Owain surrendered. Cynan and Rhys Fychan were serving with the king's forces in the spring but later resumed an active resistance which they maintained until their surrender in August. Gruffudd, Cynan, and Rhys Fychan were detained at various English castles, including Bridgnorth, Nottingham, Bamburgh, and Newcastle, Northumberland. They were in time allowed to be counted among the 'king's Welshmen' in the royal household, and Gruffudd and Cynan served in the Flanders campaign in 1297. Gruffudd, who was dead by 1319, and Cynan were allowed an income from the manor of Edwinstowe, Nottinghamshire, but they never returned to the lands of their forebears. 
By the end of the conflict the only territory allowed to any member of the lineages of Gruffudd ap Rhys and Maelgwn ap Rhys was the estate in Is Coed and Mabwynion held by Llywelyn ab Owain. In the mid-fourteenth century this was divided between his granddaughters, one of whom, Elen, was the mother of Owain Glyn Dwr. He came to her share of the estate and through his mother he was thus linked with the princes who had once ruled Deheubarth in its entirety. 

'Brut y tywysogyon', containing numerous references to the activities of members of the lineages and notices of their burial in the chapter house, reflects the close association between the Cistercian convent of Strata Florida and those who exercised lordship in Ceredigion. Secular patronage is indicated in charters of Maelgwn ap Rhys and Maelgwn Fychan, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and Cynan ap Maredudd, which refer to gifts by other members of their family. Literary associations are illustrated in poetry addressed by Phylip Brydydd to Rhys ap Gruffudd and by Y Prydydd Bychan's estimation of the valour and generosity of Owain ap Gruffudd, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and Maredudd ab Owain. The later years of the thirteenth century bring evidence of lay interest in prose works. Madog ap Selyf, a cleric or possibly a monk, translated the legendary chronicle of Turpin from Latin into Welsh at the request of Gruffudd ap Maredudd. Brother Gruffudd Bola translated the Athanasian creed into Welsh at the request of Efa ferch Maredudd (fl. 1300), daughter of Maredudd ab Owain, a task he undertook out of love for her and in her honour. She was one of the first Welsh women whose ability to read is documented, and her descendants were patrons of devotional treatises in Welsh in the fourteenth century. Brother Gruffudd and Madog ap Selyf may have been members of the convent at Strata Florida where, late in the century, a major corpus of court poetry of the period of the princes, the Hendregadredd manuscript, was written. No surviving manuscript of 'Brut y tywysogyon' can be shown to have been written in the abbey scriptorium, but both the lost Latin text on which the surviving Welsh versions were based, and one of the Welsh texts, may well have been composed there. 


@@@@@


doc= 59915


Gruffudd ap Rhys (d. 1201), prince of Deheubarth, was the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd (the Lord Rhys) (1131/2-1197). Gruffudd was the ancestor of a lineage that shared lordship over the patrimony of Rhys ap Gruffudd until the virtual extinction of the dynasty during Edward I's conquest of Wales. 
Gruffudd, a son of Rhys and his wife, Gwenllian, daughter of Madog ap Maredudd (died 1160) of Powys, was the eldest of Rhys's legitimate sons. He appears to have been the designated heir to the patrimony and he was married to Matilda (died 1210), daughter of William (III) de Briouze (died 1211), the most powerful of the marcher lords of the late twelfth century. The impending succession had led to conflict within the family as early as 1189 when Rhys is known to have encountered resistance from his eldest but illegitimate son, Maelgwn ap Rhys (d. 1231), who was to found a second important lineage. Rhys placed Maelgwn in Briouze's prison but he escaped in 1192 and joined his father at the siege of the castle of Swansea, an offensive that occasioned the summoning of a large English army. Maelgwn's presence was still troublesome and, during the continuing internecine conflict, Rhys ap Gruffudd was himself incarcerated by Maelgwn and another son in 1194. Promptly upon Rhys's death in 1197 Gruffudd went to Richard I to secure recognition of his succession and he made his peace with the bishop of St David's, consenting to be scourged as penance for an outrage upon the bishop with which his father had been charged. Gruffudd immediately faced strenuous conflict with Maelgwn who, forming an alliance with Gwenwynwyn ab Owain ('fl'. 1186-1216) of Powys, wrested possession of Ceredigion from him. Gruffudd was captured and placed first in Gwenwynwyn's prison and then transferred to the king's custody in Corfe Castle. Released in 1198, he scored considerable success in asserting his authority in Ceredigion, and Maelgwn incurred the Welsh annalist's censure when, in 1199, he sold Cardigan Castle to the English so as to deny it to his brother. Gruffudd was also engaged to good purpose in Ystrad Tywi, taking the castle of Llandovery and Cantref Bychan. He had done much to secure his patrimony when he died on 25 July 1201. The annalist's encomium of Gruffudd, who was buried at the Cistercian abbey of Strata Florida, reflects his highly favourable estimation of the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd who was by Welsh right a true prince and heir, and conveys his critical regard for Maelgwn who, though once extolled for his valour, had recently incurred much adverse comment. 
Gruffudd's young sons, Rhys (died 1222) and Owain ap Gruffudd (d. 1235), maintained the struggle for the inheritance with the other two main contenders, Maelgwn ap Rhys and Rhys Gryg (d. 1233), another son of Rhys ap Gruffudd, who founded a third important lineage. In the early years of the thirteenth century, with the benefit of the support of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (died 1240), prince of Gwynedd, Rhys and Owain vigorously contested possession of Ceredigion and deprived their adversaries of the key castles of Dinefwr and Llandovery in Ystrad Tywi. They shared Llywelyn's discomfiture following John's invasion of Gwynedd in 1211 and were forced to yield their territory in Ceredigion, where Falkes de Breaute fortified the castle of Aberystwyth for the king. When, during the next year, Maelgwn ap Rhys and Rhys Gryg joined Llywelyn in fierce resistance to John, Rhys and Owain found themselves dependent upon the king's support. This proved to be of little avail and the successes of the previous years were placed in jeopardy. It was only in 1215 that the contenders for supremacy in Deheubarth were reconciled when, for the first time, all the surviving descendants of Rhys ap Gruffudd were allied with Llywelyn against John. At a gathering at Aberdyfi the next year Deheubarth was partitioned. The sons of Gruffudd ap Rhys secured the greater part of Ceredigion, Rhys Gryg won the main part of Ystrad Tywi, including the castle of Dinefwr, and Maelgwn received lands in Dyfed and the remaining parts of Ceredigion and Ystrad Tywi. Adjustments were made in 1222, upon the death of Rhys ap Gruffudd, and again in 1225. Rhys Gryg held the whole of Ystrad Tywi, which after his death came to be shared between his sons Rhys Mechyll and Maredudd ap Rhys Gryg (d. 1271). In Ceredigion the distribution which initially gave Maelgwn the southern portion and Owain the northern portion came to be much changed. Ultimately the descendants of Owain secured an extensive estate in the southern and middle commotes (Is Coed, Gwynionydd, Caerwedros, Mabwynion, Pennardd, Anhuniog, and Mefenydd), while those of Maelgwn were confined to a much smaller estate in the north (Creuddyn, Perfedd, and Genau'r-glyn). Their fortunes, and particularly their relations with the successive princes of Gwynedd, Llywelyn ab Iorwerth, Dafydd ap Llywelyn (died 1246), and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282), are recorded by successive annalists at Strata Florida. 
Maelgwn ap Rhys was succeeded in 1231 by his son Maelgwn Fychan (d. 1257), who had to struggle to safeguard the interests of his house in the vicissitudes of the period following the death of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth in 1240. His difficulties were particularly acute during the conflicts of 1244-6 when royal officers were able to exploit differences among the princes to further their purposes. Maelgwn was forced to flee to Gwynedd where he joined its princes in a defiant resistance in the mountains which was likened by the annalist to the valour of the Maccabees. He returned to an estate further diminished by the crown's annexation of the commote of Perfedd. Predeceased by his son Rhys ap Maelgwn (died 1255), Maelgwn Fychan was succeeded by his grandson Rhys Fychan ap Rhys ap Maelgwn (d. 1302). A sworn man of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, Rhys Fychan was confronted in 1277 with the advance of a powerful royal army into his lands. Following his submission in early May he was among the lords of Deheubarth sent to the king to do homage, but his troubles were not ended. Shortly afterwards, with a royal castle being built at Llanbadarn Fawr and his authority destroyed, he, like his grandfather before him, took refuge in Gwynedd. Under the terms of the treaty of Aberconwy in November, Rhys Fychan became one of five lords whose homage Llywelyn ap Gruffudd was allowed to retain, but he remained exiled from his estates in Ceredigion. He participated in the war of 1282-3 in the alliance of Welsh princes against Edward I and briefly endeavoured to reassert his position in northern Ceredigion. He withdrew to Gwynedd once more, but then submitted to the king and served in his forces. As late as May 1283 he received a grant of the cantref of Penweddig (the three commotes of northern Ceredigion) from Dafydd ap Gruffudd, but, with the king's forces already well entrenched there, the charter was of no practical significance and was probably made in an attempt to wean Rhys from the king's alliance. He broke with the king yet again, but by August 1283 he had been captured and dispatched for perpetual imprisonment. On his death in 1302 he was accorded the honour of a burial in Windsor at the king's expense. 
The lineage of Owain ap Gruffudd (died 1235) was represented in the middle years of the century by Maredudd ab Owain (d. 1265), a substantial figure who, at his death, was commemorated by the poet Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268) and described by the Welsh annalist as 'defender of all Deheubarth and counsellor of all Wales' ('Brut: Peniarth MS 20', 114). In the period following the death of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth his allegiance was sought by Dafydd ap Llywelyn and the crown. Maredudd's importance can be gauged by the attempts that were made by the king's commanders in south-west Wales to wean him from his attachment to Dafydd ap Llywelyn in 1244-6. They were conscious that 'it is not easy to control the Welsh except through one of their own nation ['lingua']' (Edwards, 'Calendar', 48), and urged that terms be agreed with Maredudd that would bring him into the king's allegiance. He was enticed with the prospect that he might benefit from Maelgwn Fychan's disinheritance. His adherence to Llywelyn ap Gruffudd upon his advance into Deheubarth at the end of 1256 ensured the prince's supremacy in Ceredigion. He was among the prince's leading magnates, sharing in his military achievements and participating in his councils. Married to a daughter of Gilbert de Vall of Dale in the earldom of Pembroke, for whom he made dower provision much in accord with English practice, Maredudd ruled a substantial and stable barony. At his death, however, his lands were divided among his sons. Owain ap Maredudd died in 1275, leaving as his heir Llywelyn ab Owain (fl. 1275-1283), whose young age enabled him to survive the tumultuous years which saw his kinsmen's lordship erased. Cynan ap Maredudd (fl. 1277-1297) and Gruffudd ap Maredudd (d. in or before 1319) submitted to the king's commander in May 1277 and were sent to Edward I to do homage. They were reinstated in their lands but, finding the extension of royal authority in Ceredigion irksome, they were among the princes in rebellion in 1282. In their statement to Archbishop Pecham they alleged that Robert de Tibetot (died 1298), justice of west Wales from 1280, had undermined their jurisdiction over their patrimony. Whereas, they insisted, all Christian men enjoyed their laws and customs in their lands, they had been denied the laws of Wales, which had remained inviolate until the imposition of royal authority after the war of 1277. At the start of renewed conflict in March 1282 Gruffudd ap Maredudd and his third cousin, Rhys Fychan ap Rhys ap Maelgwn, attacked the castle of Llanbadarn Fawr. They maintained their resistance and forced the king's commanders to send a contingent to take their castle of Trefilan in September. Gruffudd remained in arms, a member of the small cohort of princes allied with Dafydd ap Gruffudd until, in June 1283, he and his nephew Llywelyn ab Owain surrendered. Cynan and Rhys Fychan were serving with the king's forces in the spring but later resumed an active resistance which they maintained until their surrender in August. Gruffudd, Cynan, and Rhys Fychan were detained at various English castles, including Bridgnorth, Nottingham, Bamburgh, and Newcastle, Northumberland. They were in time allowed to be counted among the 'king's Welshmen' in the royal household, and Gruffudd and Cynan served in the Flanders campaign in 1297. Gruffudd, who was dead by 1319, and Cynan were allowed an income from the manor of Edwinstowe, Nottinghamshire, but they never returned to the lands of their forebears. 
By the end of the conflict the only territory allowed to any member of the lineages of Gruffudd ap Rhys and Maelgwn ap Rhys was the estate in Is Coed and Mabwynion held by Llywelyn ab Owain. In the mid-fourteenth century this was divided between his granddaughters, one of whom, Elen, was the mother of Owain Glyn Dwr. He came to her share of the estate and through his mother he was thus linked with the princes who had once ruled Deheubarth in its entirety. 

'Brut y tywysogyon', containing numerous references to the activities of members of the lineages and notices of their burial in the chapter house, reflects the close association between the Cistercian convent of Strata Florida and those who exercised lordship in Ceredigion. Secular patronage is indicated in charters of Maelgwn ap Rhys and Maelgwn Fychan, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and Cynan ap Maredudd, which refer to gifts by other members of their family. Literary associations are illustrated in poetry addressed by Phylip Brydydd to Rhys ap Gruffudd and by Y Prydydd Bychan's estimation of the valour and generosity of Owain ap Gruffudd, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and Maredudd ab Owain. The later years of the thirteenth century bring evidence of lay interest in prose works. Madog ap Selyf, a cleric or possibly a monk, translated the legendary chronicle of Turpin from Latin into Welsh at the request of Gruffudd ap Maredudd. Brother Gruffudd Bola translated the Athanasian creed into Welsh at the request of Efa ferch Maredudd (fl. 1300), daughter of Maredudd ab Owain, a task he undertook out of love for her and in her honour. She was one of the first Welsh women whose ability to read is documented, and her descendants were patrons of devotional treatises in Welsh in the fourteenth century. Brother Gruffudd and Madog ap Selyf may have been members of the convent at Strata Florida where, late in the century, a major corpus of court poetry of the period of the princes, the Hendregadredd manuscript, was written. No surviving manuscript of 'Brut y tywysogyon' can be shown to have been written in the abbey scriptorium, but both the lost Latin text on which the surviving Welsh versions were based, and one of the Welsh texts, may well have been composed there. 


@@@@@


doc= 59916


Gruffudd ap Rhys (d. 1201), prince of Deheubarth, was the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd (the Lord Rhys) (1131/2-1197). Gruffudd was the ancestor of a lineage that shared lordship over the patrimony of Rhys ap Gruffudd until the virtual extinction of the dynasty during Edward I's conquest of Wales. 
Gruffudd, a son of Rhys and his wife, Gwenllian, daughter of Madog ap Maredudd (died 1160) of Powys, was the eldest of Rhys's legitimate sons. He appears to have been the designated heir to the patrimony and he was married to Matilda (died 1210), daughter of William (III) de Briouze (died 1211), the most powerful of the marcher lords of the late twelfth century. The impending succession had led to conflict within the family as early as 1189 when Rhys is known to have encountered resistance from his eldest but illegitimate son, Maelgwn ap Rhys (d. 1231), who was to found a second important lineage. Rhys placed Maelgwn in Briouze's prison but he escaped in 1192 and joined his father at the siege of the castle of Swansea, an offensive that occasioned the summoning of a large English army. Maelgwn's presence was still troublesome and, during the continuing internecine conflict, Rhys ap Gruffudd was himself incarcerated by Maelgwn and another son in 1194. Promptly upon Rhys's death in 1197 Gruffudd went to Richard I to secure recognition of his succession and he made his peace with the bishop of St David's, consenting to be scourged as penance for an outrage upon the bishop with which his father had been charged. Gruffudd immediately faced strenuous conflict with Maelgwn who, forming an alliance with Gwenwynwyn ab Owain ('fl'. 1186-1216) of Powys, wrested possession of Ceredigion from him. Gruffudd was captured and placed first in Gwenwynwyn's prison and then transferred to the king's custody in Corfe Castle. Released in 1198, he scored considerable success in asserting his authority in Ceredigion, and Maelgwn incurred the Welsh annalist's censure when, in 1199, he sold Cardigan Castle to the English so as to deny it to his brother. Gruffudd was also engaged to good purpose in Ystrad Tywi, taking the castle of Llandovery and Cantref Bychan. He had done much to secure his patrimony when he died on 25 July 1201. The annalist's encomium of Gruffudd, who was buried at the Cistercian abbey of Strata Florida, reflects his highly favourable estimation of the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd who was by Welsh right a true prince and heir, and conveys his critical regard for Maelgwn who, though once extolled for his valour, had recently incurred much adverse comment. 
Gruffudd's young sons, Rhys (died 1222) and Owain ap Gruffudd (d. 1235), maintained the struggle for the inheritance with the other two main contenders, Maelgwn ap Rhys and Rhys Gryg (d. 1233), another son of Rhys ap Gruffudd, who founded a third important lineage. In the early years of the thirteenth century, with the benefit of the support of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (died 1240), prince of Gwynedd, Rhys and Owain vigorously contested possession of Ceredigion and deprived their adversaries of the key castles of Dinefwr and Llandovery in Ystrad Tywi. They shared Llywelyn's discomfiture following John's invasion of Gwynedd in 1211 and were forced to yield their territory in Ceredigion, where Falkes de Breaute fortified the castle of Aberystwyth for the king. When, during the next year, Maelgwn ap Rhys and Rhys Gryg joined Llywelyn in fierce resistance to John, Rhys and Owain found themselves dependent upon the king's support. This proved to be of little avail and the successes of the previous years were placed in jeopardy. It was only in 1215 that the contenders for supremacy in Deheubarth were reconciled when, for the first time, all the surviving descendants of Rhys ap Gruffudd were allied with Llywelyn against John. At a gathering at Aberdyfi the next year Deheubarth was partitioned. The sons of Gruffudd ap Rhys secured the greater part of Ceredigion, Rhys Gryg won the main part of Ystrad Tywi, including the castle of Dinefwr, and Maelgwn received lands in Dyfed and the remaining parts of Ceredigion and Ystrad Tywi. Adjustments were made in 1222, upon the death of Rhys ap Gruffudd, and again in 1225. Rhys Gryg held the whole of Ystrad Tywi, which after his death came to be shared between his sons Rhys Mechyll and Maredudd ap Rhys Gryg (d. 1271). In Ceredigion the distribution which initially gave Maelgwn the southern portion and Owain the northern portion came to be much changed. Ultimately the descendants of Owain secured an extensive estate in the southern and middle commotes (Is Coed, Gwynionydd, Caerwedros, Mabwynion, Pennardd, Anhuniog, and Mefenydd), while those of Maelgwn were confined to a much smaller estate in the north (Creuddyn, Perfedd, and Genau'r-glyn). Their fortunes, and particularly their relations with the successive princes of Gwynedd, Llywelyn ab Iorwerth, Dafydd ap Llywelyn (died 1246), and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282), are recorded by successive annalists at Strata Florida. 
Maelgwn ap Rhys was succeeded in 1231 by his son Maelgwn Fychan (d. 1257), who had to struggle to safeguard the interests of his house in the vicissitudes of the period following the death of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth in 1240. His difficulties were particularly acute during the conflicts of 1244-6 when royal officers were able to exploit differences among the princes to further their purposes. Maelgwn was forced to flee to Gwynedd where he joined its princes in a defiant resistance in the mountains which was likened by the annalist to the valour of the Maccabees. He returned to an estate further diminished by the crown's annexation of the commote of Perfedd. Predeceased by his son Rhys ap Maelgwn (died 1255), Maelgwn Fychan was succeeded by his grandson Rhys Fychan ap Rhys ap Maelgwn (d. 1302). A sworn man of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, Rhys Fychan was confronted in 1277 with the advance of a powerful royal army into his lands. Following his submission in early May he was among the lords of Deheubarth sent to the king to do homage, but his troubles were not ended. Shortly afterwards, with a royal castle being built at Llanbadarn Fawr and his authority destroyed, he, like his grandfather before him, took refuge in Gwynedd. Under the terms of the treaty of Aberconwy in November, Rhys Fychan became one of five lords whose homage Llywelyn ap Gruffudd was allowed to retain, but he remained exiled from his estates in Ceredigion. He participated in the war of 1282-3 in the alliance of Welsh princes against Edward I and briefly endeavoured to reassert his position in northern Ceredigion. He withdrew to Gwynedd once more, but then submitted to the king and served in his forces. As late as May 1283 he received a grant of the cantref of Penweddig (the three commotes of northern Ceredigion) from Dafydd ap Gruffudd, but, with the king's forces already well entrenched there, the charter was of no practical significance and was probably made in an attempt to wean Rhys from the king's alliance. He broke with the king yet again, but by August 1283 he had been captured and dispatched for perpetual imprisonment. On his death in 1302 he was accorded the honour of a burial in Windsor at the king's expense. 
The lineage of Owain ap Gruffudd (died 1235) was represented in the middle years of the century by Maredudd ab Owain (d. 1265), a substantial figure who, at his death, was commemorated by the poet Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268) and described by the Welsh annalist as 'defender of all Deheubarth and counsellor of all Wales' ('Brut: Peniarth MS 20', 114). In the period following the death of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth his allegiance was sought by Dafydd ap Llywelyn and the crown. Maredudd's importance can be gauged by the attempts that were made by the king's commanders in south-west Wales to wean him from his attachment to Dafydd ap Llywelyn in 1244-6. They were conscious that 'it is not easy to control the Welsh except through one of their own nation ['lingua']' (Edwards, 'Calendar', 48), and urged that terms be agreed with Maredudd that would bring him into the king's allegiance. He was enticed with the prospect that he might benefit from Maelgwn Fychan's disinheritance. His adherence to Llywelyn ap Gruffudd upon his advance into Deheubarth at the end of 1256 ensured the prince's supremacy in Ceredigion. He was among the prince's leading magnates, sharing in his military achievements and participating in his councils. Married to a daughter of Gilbert de Vall of Dale in the earldom of Pembroke, for whom he made dower provision much in accord with English practice, Maredudd ruled a substantial and stable barony. At his death, however, his lands were divided among his sons. Owain ap Maredudd died in 1275, leaving as his heir Llywelyn ab Owain (fl. 1275-1283), whose young age enabled him to survive the tumultuous years which saw his kinsmen's lordship erased. Cynan ap Maredudd (fl. 1277-1297) and Gruffudd ap Maredudd (d. in or before 1319) submitted to the king's commander in May 1277 and were sent to Edward I to do homage. They were reinstated in their lands but, finding the extension of royal authority in Ceredigion irksome, they were among the princes in rebellion in 1282. In their statement to Archbishop Pecham they alleged that Robert de Tibetot (died 1298), justice of west Wales from 1280, had undermined their jurisdiction over their patrimony. Whereas, they insisted, all Christian men enjoyed their laws and customs in their lands, they had been denied the laws of Wales, which had remained inviolate until the imposition of royal authority after the war of 1277. At the start of renewed conflict in March 1282 Gruffudd ap Maredudd and his third cousin, Rhys Fychan ap Rhys ap Maelgwn, attacked the castle of Llanbadarn Fawr. They maintained their resistance and forced the king's commanders to send a contingent to take their castle of Trefilan in September. Gruffudd remained in arms, a member of the small cohort of princes allied with Dafydd ap Gruffudd until, in June 1283, he and his nephew Llywelyn ab Owain surrendered. Cynan and Rhys Fychan were serving with the king's forces in the spring but later resumed an active resistance which they maintained until their surrender in August. Gruffudd, Cynan, and Rhys Fychan were detained at various English castles, including Bridgnorth, Nottingham, Bamburgh, and Newcastle, Northumberland. They were in time allowed to be counted among the 'king's Welshmen' in the royal household, and Gruffudd and Cynan served in the Flanders campaign in 1297. Gruffudd, who was dead by 1319, and Cynan were allowed an income from the manor of Edwinstowe, Nottinghamshire, but they never returned to the lands of their forebears. 
By the end of the conflict the only territory allowed to any member of the lineages of Gruffudd ap Rhys and Maelgwn ap Rhys was the estate in Is Coed and Mabwynion held by Llywelyn ab Owain. In the mid-fourteenth century this was divided between his granddaughters, one of whom, Elen, was the mother of Owain Glyn Dwr. He came to her share of the estate and through his mother he was thus linked with the princes who had once ruled Deheubarth in its entirety. 

'Brut y tywysogyon', containing numerous references to the activities of members of the lineages and notices of their burial in the chapter house, reflects the close association between the Cistercian convent of Strata Florida and those who exercised lordship in Ceredigion. Secular patronage is indicated in charters of Maelgwn ap Rhys and Maelgwn Fychan, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and Cynan ap Maredudd, which refer to gifts by other members of their family. Literary associations are illustrated in poetry addressed by Phylip Brydydd to Rhys ap Gruffudd and by Y Prydydd Bychan's estimation of the valour and generosity of Owain ap Gruffudd, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and Maredudd ab Owain. The later years of the thirteenth century bring evidence of lay interest in prose works. Madog ap Selyf, a cleric or possibly a monk, translated the legendary chronicle of Turpin from Latin into Welsh at the request of Gruffudd ap Maredudd. Brother Gruffudd Bola translated the Athanasian creed into Welsh at the request of Efa ferch Maredudd (fl. 1300), daughter of Maredudd ab Owain, a task he undertook out of love for her and in her honour. She was one of the first Welsh women whose ability to read is documented, and her descendants were patrons of devotional treatises in Welsh in the fourteenth century. Brother Gruffudd and Madog ap Selyf may have been members of the convent at Strata Florida where, late in the century, a major corpus of court poetry of the period of the princes, the Hendregadredd manuscript, was written. No surviving manuscript of 'Brut y tywysogyon' can be shown to have been written in the abbey scriptorium, but both the lost Latin text on which the surviving Welsh versions were based, and one of the Welsh texts, may well have been composed there. 


@@@@@


doc= 59917


Gruffudd ap Rhys (d. 1201), prince of Deheubarth, was the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd (the Lord Rhys) (1131/2-1197). Gruffudd was the ancestor of a lineage that shared lordship over the patrimony of Rhys ap Gruffudd until the virtual extinction of the dynasty during Edward I's conquest of Wales. 
Gruffudd, a son of Rhys and his wife, Gwenllian, daughter of Madog ap Maredudd (died 1160) of Powys, was the eldest of Rhys's legitimate sons. He appears to have been the designated heir to the patrimony and he was married to Matilda (died 1210), daughter of William (III) de Briouze (died 1211), the most powerful of the marcher lords of the late twelfth century. The impending succession had led to conflict within the family as early as 1189 when Rhys is known to have encountered resistance from his eldest but illegitimate son, Maelgwn ap Rhys (d. 1231), who was to found a second important lineage. Rhys placed Maelgwn in Briouze's prison but he escaped in 1192 and joined his father at the siege of the castle of Swansea, an offensive that occasioned the summoning of a large English army. Maelgwn's presence was still troublesome and, during the continuing internecine conflict, Rhys ap Gruffudd was himself incarcerated by Maelgwn and another son in 1194. Promptly upon Rhys's death in 1197 Gruffudd went to Richard I to secure recognition of his succession and he made his peace with the bishop of St David's, consenting to be scourged as penance for an outrage upon the bishop with which his father had been charged. Gruffudd immediately faced strenuous conflict with Maelgwn who, forming an alliance with Gwenwynwyn ab Owain ('fl'. 1186-1216) of Powys, wrested possession of Ceredigion from him. Gruffudd was captured and placed first in Gwenwynwyn's prison and then transferred to the king's custody in Corfe Castle. Released in 1198, he scored considerable success in asserting his authority in Ceredigion, and Maelgwn incurred the Welsh annalist's censure when, in 1199, he sold Cardigan Castle to the English so as to deny it to his brother. Gruffudd was also engaged to good purpose in Ystrad Tywi, taking the castle of Llandovery and Cantref Bychan. He had done much to secure his patrimony when he died on 25 July 1201. The annalist's encomium of Gruffudd, who was buried at the Cistercian abbey of Strata Florida, reflects his highly favourable estimation of the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd who was by Welsh right a true prince and heir, and conveys his critical regard for Maelgwn who, though once extolled for his valour, had recently incurred much adverse comment. 
Gruffudd's young sons, Rhys (died 1222) and Owain ap Gruffudd (d. 1235), maintained the struggle for the inheritance with the other two main contenders, Maelgwn ap Rhys and Rhys Gryg (d. 1233), another son of Rhys ap Gruffudd, who founded a third important lineage. In the early years of the thirteenth century, with the benefit of the support of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (died 1240), prince of Gwynedd, Rhys and Owain vigorously contested possession of Ceredigion and deprived their adversaries of the key castles of Dinefwr and Llandovery in Ystrad Tywi. They shared Llywelyn's discomfiture following John's invasion of Gwynedd in 1211 and were forced to yield their territory in Ceredigion, where Falkes de Breaute fortified the castle of Aberystwyth for the king. When, during the next year, Maelgwn ap Rhys and Rhys Gryg joined Llywelyn in fierce resistance to John, Rhys and Owain found themselves dependent upon the king's support. This proved to be of little avail and the successes of the previous years were placed in jeopardy. It was only in 1215 that the contenders for supremacy in Deheubarth were reconciled when, for the first time, all the surviving descendants of Rhys ap Gruffudd were allied with Llywelyn against John. At a gathering at Aberdyfi the next year Deheubarth was partitioned. The sons of Gruffudd ap Rhys secured the greater part of Ceredigion, Rhys Gryg won the main part of Ystrad Tywi, including the castle of Dinefwr, and Maelgwn received lands in Dyfed and the remaining parts of Ceredigion and Ystrad Tywi. Adjustments were made in 1222, upon the death of Rhys ap Gruffudd, and again in 1225. Rhys Gryg held the whole of Ystrad Tywi, which after his death came to be shared between his sons Rhys Mechyll and Maredudd ap Rhys Gryg (d. 1271). In Ceredigion the distribution which initially gave Maelgwn the southern portion and Owain the northern portion came to be much changed. Ultimately the descendants of Owain secured an extensive estate in the southern and middle commotes (Is Coed, Gwynionydd, Caerwedros, Mabwynion, Pennardd, Anhuniog, and Mefenydd), while those of Maelgwn were confined to a much smaller estate in the north (Creuddyn, Perfedd, and Genau'r-glyn). Their fortunes, and particularly their relations with the successive princes of Gwynedd, Llywelyn ab Iorwerth, Dafydd ap Llywelyn (died 1246), and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282), are recorded by successive annalists at Strata Florida. 
Maelgwn ap Rhys was succeeded in 1231 by his son Maelgwn Fychan (d. 1257), who had to struggle to safeguard the interests of his house in the vicissitudes of the period following the death of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth in 1240. His difficulties were particularly acute during the conflicts of 1244-6 when royal officers were able to exploit differences among the princes to further their purposes. Maelgwn was forced to flee to Gwynedd where he joined its princes in a defiant resistance in the mountains which was likened by the annalist to the valour of the Maccabees. He returned to an estate further diminished by the crown's annexation of the commote of Perfedd. Predeceased by his son Rhys ap Maelgwn (died 1255), Maelgwn Fychan was succeeded by his grandson Rhys Fychan ap Rhys ap Maelgwn (d. 1302). A sworn man of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, Rhys Fychan was confronted in 1277 with the advance of a powerful royal army into his lands. Following his submission in early May he was among the lords of Deheubarth sent to the king to do homage, but his troubles were not ended. Shortly afterwards, with a royal castle being built at Llanbadarn Fawr and his authority destroyed, he, like his grandfather before him, took refuge in Gwynedd. Under the terms of the treaty of Aberconwy in November, Rhys Fychan became one of five lords whose homage Llywelyn ap Gruffudd was allowed to retain, but he remained exiled from his estates in Ceredigion. He participated in the war of 1282-3 in the alliance of Welsh princes against Edward I and briefly endeavoured to reassert his position in northern Ceredigion. He withdrew to Gwynedd once more, but then submitted to the king and served in his forces. As late as May 1283 he received a grant of the cantref of Penweddig (the three commotes of northern Ceredigion) from Dafydd ap Gruffudd, but, with the king's forces already well entrenched there, the charter was of no practical significance and was probably made in an attempt to wean Rhys from the king's alliance. He broke with the king yet again, but by August 1283 he had been captured and dispatched for perpetual imprisonment. On his death in 1302 he was accorded the honour of a burial in Windsor at the king's expense. 
The lineage of Owain ap Gruffudd (died 1235) was represented in the middle years of the century by Maredudd ab Owain (d. 1265), a substantial figure who, at his death, was commemorated by the poet Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268) and described by the Welsh annalist as 'defender of all Deheubarth and counsellor of all Wales' ('Brut: Peniarth MS 20', 114). In the period following the death of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth his allegiance was sought by Dafydd ap Llywelyn and the crown. Maredudd's importance can be gauged by the attempts that were made by the king's commanders in south-west Wales to wean him from his attachment to Dafydd ap Llywelyn in 1244-6. They were conscious that 'it is not easy to control the Welsh except through one of their own nation ['lingua']' (Edwards, 'Calendar', 48), and urged that terms be agreed with Maredudd that would bring him into the king's allegiance. He was enticed with the prospect that he might benefit from Maelgwn Fychan's disinheritance. His adherence to Llywelyn ap Gruffudd upon his advance into Deheubarth at the end of 1256 ensured the prince's supremacy in Ceredigion. He was among the prince's leading magnates, sharing in his military achievements and participating in his councils. Married to a daughter of Gilbert de Vall of Dale in the earldom of Pembroke, for whom he made dower provision much in accord with English practice, Maredudd ruled a substantial and stable barony. At his death, however, his lands were divided among his sons. Owain ap Maredudd died in 1275, leaving as his heir Llywelyn ab Owain (fl. 1275-1283), whose young age enabled him to survive the tumultuous years which saw his kinsmen's lordship erased. Cynan ap Maredudd (fl. 1277-1297) and Gruffudd ap Maredudd (d. in or before 1319) submitted to the king's commander in May 1277 and were sent to Edward I to do homage. They were reinstated in their lands but, finding the extension of royal authority in Ceredigion irksome, they were among the princes in rebellion in 1282. In their statement to Archbishop Pecham they alleged that Robert de Tibetot (died 1298), justice of west Wales from 1280, had undermined their jurisdiction over their patrimony. Whereas, they insisted, all Christian men enjoyed their laws and customs in their lands, they had been denied the laws of Wales, which had remained inviolate until the imposition of royal authority after the war of 1277. At the start of renewed conflict in March 1282 Gruffudd ap Maredudd and his third cousin, Rhys Fychan ap Rhys ap Maelgwn, attacked the castle of Llanbadarn Fawr. They maintained their resistance and forced the king's commanders to send a contingent to take their castle of Trefilan in September. Gruffudd remained in arms, a member of the small cohort of princes allied with Dafydd ap Gruffudd until, in June 1283, he and his nephew Llywelyn ab Owain surrendered. Cynan and Rhys Fychan were serving with the king's forces in the spring but later resumed an active resistance which they maintained until their surrender in August. Gruffudd, Cynan, and Rhys Fychan were detained at various English castles, including Bridgnorth, Nottingham, Bamburgh, and Newcastle, Northumberland. They were in time allowed to be counted among the 'king's Welshmen' in the royal household, and Gruffudd and Cynan served in the Flanders campaign in 1297. Gruffudd, who was dead by 1319, and Cynan were allowed an income from the manor of Edwinstowe, Nottinghamshire, but they never returned to the lands of their forebears. 
By the end of the conflict the only territory allowed to any member of the lineages of Gruffudd ap Rhys and Maelgwn ap Rhys was the estate in Is Coed and Mabwynion held by Llywelyn ab Owain. In the mid-fourteenth century this was divided between his granddaughters, one of whom, Elen, was the mother of Owain Glyn Dwr. He came to her share of the estate and through his mother he was thus linked with the princes who had once ruled Deheubarth in its entirety. 

'Brut y tywysogyon', containing numerous references to the activities of members of the lineages and notices of their burial in the chapter house, reflects the close association between the Cistercian convent of Strata Florida and those who exercised lordship in Ceredigion. Secular patronage is indicated in charters of Maelgwn ap Rhys and Maelgwn Fychan, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and Cynan ap Maredudd, which refer to gifts by other members of their family. Literary associations are illustrated in poetry addressed by Phylip Brydydd to Rhys ap Gruffudd and by Y Prydydd Bychan's estimation of the valour and generosity of Owain ap Gruffudd, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and Maredudd ab Owain. The later years of the thirteenth century bring evidence of lay interest in prose works. Madog ap Selyf, a cleric or possibly a monk, translated the legendary chronicle of Turpin from Latin into Welsh at the request of Gruffudd ap Maredudd. Brother Gruffudd Bola translated the Athanasian creed into Welsh at the request of Efa ferch Maredudd (fl. 1300), daughter of Maredudd ab Owain, a task he undertook out of love for her and in her honour. She was one of the first Welsh women whose ability to read is documented, and her descendants were patrons of devotional treatises in Welsh in the fourteenth century. Brother Gruffudd and Madog ap Selyf may have been members of the convent at Strata Florida where, late in the century, a major corpus of court poetry of the period of the princes, the Hendregadredd manuscript, was written. No surviving manuscript of 'Brut y tywysogyon' can be shown to have been written in the abbey scriptorium, but both the lost Latin text on which the surviving Welsh versions were based, and one of the Welsh texts, may well have been composed there. 


@@@@@


doc= 59918


Gruffudd ap Rhys (d. 1201), prince of Deheubarth, was the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd (the Lord Rhys) (1131/2-1197). Gruffudd was the ancestor of a lineage that shared lordship over the patrimony of Rhys ap Gruffudd until the virtual extinction of the dynasty during Edward I's conquest of Wales. 
Gruffudd, a son of Rhys and his wife, Gwenllian, daughter of Madog ap Maredudd (died 1160) of Powys, was the eldest of Rhys's legitimate sons. He appears to have been the designated heir to the patrimony and he was married to Matilda (died 1210), daughter of William (III) de Briouze (died 1211), the most powerful of the marcher lords of the late twelfth century. The impending succession had led to conflict within the family as early as 1189 when Rhys is known to have encountered resistance from his eldest but illegitimate son, Maelgwn ap Rhys (d. 1231), who was to found a second important lineage. Rhys placed Maelgwn in Briouze's prison but he escaped in 1192 and joined his father at the siege of the castle of Swansea, an offensive that occasioned the summoning of a large English army. Maelgwn's presence was still troublesome and, during the continuing internecine conflict, Rhys ap Gruffudd was himself incarcerated by Maelgwn and another son in 1194. Promptly upon Rhys's death in 1197 Gruffudd went to Richard I to secure recognition of his succession and he made his peace with the bishop of St David's, consenting to be scourged as penance for an outrage upon the bishop with which his father had been charged. Gruffudd immediately faced strenuous conflict with Maelgwn who, forming an alliance with Gwenwynwyn ab Owain ('fl'. 1186-1216) of Powys, wrested possession of Ceredigion from him. Gruffudd was captured and placed first in Gwenwynwyn's prison and then transferred to the king's custody in Corfe Castle. Released in 1198, he scored considerable success in asserting his authority in Ceredigion, and Maelgwn incurred the Welsh annalist's censure when, in 1199, he sold Cardigan Castle to the English so as to deny it to his brother. Gruffudd was also engaged to good purpose in Ystrad Tywi, taking the castle of Llandovery and Cantref Bychan. He had done much to secure his patrimony when he died on 25 July 1201. The annalist's encomium of Gruffudd, who was buried at the Cistercian abbey of Strata Florida, reflects his highly favourable estimation of the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd who was by Welsh right a true prince and heir, and conveys his critical regard for Maelgwn who, though once extolled for his valour, had recently incurred much adverse comment. 
Gruffudd's young sons, Rhys (died 1222) and Owain ap Gruffudd (d. 1235), maintained the struggle for the inheritance with the other two main contenders, Maelgwn ap Rhys and Rhys Gryg (d. 1233), another son of Rhys ap Gruffudd, who founded a third important lineage. In the early years of the thirteenth century, with the benefit of the support of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (died 1240), prince of Gwynedd, Rhys and Owain vigorously contested possession of Ceredigion and deprived their adversaries of the key castles of Dinefwr and Llandovery in Ystrad Tywi. They shared Llywelyn's discomfiture following John's invasion of Gwynedd in 1211 and were forced to yield their territory in Ceredigion, where Falkes de Breaute fortified the castle of Aberystwyth for the king. When, during the next year, Maelgwn ap Rhys and Rhys Gryg joined Llywelyn in fierce resistance to John, Rhys and Owain found themselves dependent upon the king's support. This proved to be of little avail and the successes of the previous years were placed in jeopardy. It was only in 1215 that the contenders for supremacy in Deheubarth were reconciled when, for the first time, all the surviving descendants of Rhys ap Gruffudd were allied with Llywelyn against John. At a gathering at Aberdyfi the next year Deheubarth was partitioned. The sons of Gruffudd ap Rhys secured the greater part of Ceredigion, Rhys Gryg won the main part of Ystrad Tywi, including the castle of Dinefwr, and Maelgwn received lands in Dyfed and the remaining parts of Ceredigion and Ystrad Tywi. Adjustments were made in 1222, upon the death of Rhys ap Gruffudd, and again in 1225. Rhys Gryg held the whole of Ystrad Tywi, which after his death came to be shared between his sons Rhys Mechyll and Maredudd ap Rhys Gryg (d. 1271). In Ceredigion the distribution which initially gave Maelgwn the southern portion and Owain the northern portion came to be much changed. Ultimately the descendants of Owain secured an extensive estate in the southern and middle commotes (Is Coed, Gwynionydd, Caerwedros, Mabwynion, Pennardd, Anhuniog, and Mefenydd), while those of Maelgwn were confined to a much smaller estate in the north (Creuddyn, Perfedd, and Genau'r-glyn). Their fortunes, and particularly their relations with the successive princes of Gwynedd, Llywelyn ab Iorwerth, Dafydd ap Llywelyn (died 1246), and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282), are recorded by successive annalists at Strata Florida. 
Maelgwn ap Rhys was succeeded in 1231 by his son Maelgwn Fychan (d. 1257), who had to struggle to safeguard the interests of his house in the vicissitudes of the period following the death of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth in 1240. His difficulties were particularly acute during the conflicts of 1244-6 when royal officers were able to exploit differences among the princes to further their purposes. Maelgwn was forced to flee to Gwynedd where he joined its princes in a defiant resistance in the mountains which was likened by the annalist to the valour of the Maccabees. He returned to an estate further diminished by the crown's annexation of the commote of Perfedd. Predeceased by his son Rhys ap Maelgwn (died 1255), Maelgwn Fychan was succeeded by his grandson Rhys Fychan ap Rhys ap Maelgwn (d. 1302). A sworn man of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, Rhys Fychan was confronted in 1277 with the advance of a powerful royal army into his lands. Following his submission in early May he was among the lords of Deheubarth sent to the king to do homage, but his troubles were not ended. Shortly afterwards, with a royal castle being built at Llanbadarn Fawr and his authority destroyed, he, like his grandfather before him, took refuge in Gwynedd. Under the terms of the treaty of Aberconwy in November, Rhys Fychan became one of five lords whose homage Llywelyn ap Gruffudd was allowed to retain, but he remained exiled from his estates in Ceredigion. He participated in the war of 1282-3 in the alliance of Welsh princes against Edward I and briefly endeavoured to reassert his position in northern Ceredigion. He withdrew to Gwynedd once more, but then submitted to the king and served in his forces. As late as May 1283 he received a grant of the cantref of Penweddig (the three commotes of northern Ceredigion) from Dafydd ap Gruffudd, but, with the king's forces already well entrenched there, the charter was of no practical significance and was probably made in an attempt to wean Rhys from the king's alliance. He broke with the king yet again, but by August 1283 he had been captured and dispatched for perpetual imprisonment. On his death in 1302 he was accorded the honour of a burial in Windsor at the king's expense. 
The lineage of Owain ap Gruffudd (died 1235) was represented in the middle years of the century by Maredudd ab Owain (d. 1265), a substantial figure who, at his death, was commemorated by the poet Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268) and described by the Welsh annalist as 'defender of all Deheubarth and counsellor of all Wales' ('Brut: Peniarth MS 20', 114). In the period following the death of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth his allegiance was sought by Dafydd ap Llywelyn and the crown. Maredudd's importance can be gauged by the attempts that were made by the king's commanders in south-west Wales to wean him from his attachment to Dafydd ap Llywelyn in 1244-6. They were conscious that 'it is not easy to control the Welsh except through one of their own nation ['lingua']' (Edwards, 'Calendar', 48), and urged that terms be agreed with Maredudd that would bring him into the king's allegiance. He was enticed with the prospect that he might benefit from Maelgwn Fychan's disinheritance. His adherence to Llywelyn ap Gruffudd upon his advance into Deheubarth at the end of 1256 ensured the prince's supremacy in Ceredigion. He was among the prince's leading magnates, sharing in his military achievements and participating in his councils. Married to a daughter of Gilbert de Vall of Dale in the earldom of Pembroke, for whom he made dower provision much in accord with English practice, Maredudd ruled a substantial and stable barony. At his death, however, his lands were divided among his sons. Owain ap Maredudd died in 1275, leaving as his heir Llywelyn ab Owain (fl. 1275-1283), whose young age enabled him to survive the tumultuous years which saw his kinsmen's lordship erased. Cynan ap Maredudd (fl. 1277-1297) and Gruffudd ap Maredudd (d. in or before 1319) submitted to the king's commander in May 1277 and were sent to Edward I to do homage. They were reinstated in their lands but, finding the extension of royal authority in Ceredigion irksome, they were among the princes in rebellion in 1282. In their statement to Archbishop Pecham they alleged that Robert de Tibetot (died 1298), justice of west Wales from 1280, had undermined their jurisdiction over their patrimony. Whereas, they insisted, all Christian men enjoyed their laws and customs in their lands, they had been denied the laws of Wales, which had remained inviolate until the imposition of royal authority after the war of 1277. At the start of renewed conflict in March 1282 Gruffudd ap Maredudd and his third cousin, Rhys Fychan ap Rhys ap Maelgwn, attacked the castle of Llanbadarn Fawr. They maintained their resistance and forced the king's commanders to send a contingent to take their castle of Trefilan in September. Gruffudd remained in arms, a member of the small cohort of princes allied with Dafydd ap Gruffudd until, in June 1283, he and his nephew Llywelyn ab Owain surrendered. Cynan and Rhys Fychan were serving with the king's forces in the spring but later resumed an active resistance which they maintained until their surrender in August. Gruffudd, Cynan, and Rhys Fychan were detained at various English castles, including Bridgnorth, Nottingham, Bamburgh, and Newcastle, Northumberland. They were in time allowed to be counted among the 'king's Welshmen' in the royal household, and Gruffudd and Cynan served in the Flanders campaign in 1297. Gruffudd, who was dead by 1319, and Cynan were allowed an income from the manor of Edwinstowe, Nottinghamshire, but they never returned to the lands of their forebears. 
By the end of the conflict the only territory allowed to any member of the lineages of Gruffudd ap Rhys and Maelgwn ap Rhys was the estate in Is Coed and Mabwynion held by Llywelyn ab Owain. In the mid-fourteenth century this was divided between his granddaughters, one of whom, Elen, was the mother of Owain Glyn Dwr. He came to her share of the estate and through his mother he was thus linked with the princes who had once ruled Deheubarth in its entirety. 

'Brut y tywysogyon', containing numerous references to the activities of members of the lineages and notices of their burial in the chapter house, reflects the close association between the Cistercian convent of Strata Florida and those who exercised lordship in Ceredigion. Secular patronage is indicated in charters of Maelgwn ap Rhys and Maelgwn Fychan, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and Cynan ap Maredudd, which refer to gifts by other members of their family. Literary associations are illustrated in poetry addressed by Phylip Brydydd to Rhys ap Gruffudd and by Y Prydydd Bychan's estimation of the valour and generosity of Owain ap Gruffudd, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and Maredudd ab Owain. The later years of the thirteenth century bring evidence of lay interest in prose works. Madog ap Selyf, a cleric or possibly a monk, translated the legendary chronicle of Turpin from Latin into Welsh at the request of Gruffudd ap Maredudd. Brother Gruffudd Bola translated the Athanasian creed into Welsh at the request of Efa ferch Maredudd (fl. 1300), daughter of Maredudd ab Owain, a task he undertook out of love for her and in her honour. She was one of the first Welsh women whose ability to read is documented, and her descendants were patrons of devotional treatises in Welsh in the fourteenth century. Brother Gruffudd and Madog ap Selyf may have been members of the convent at Strata Florida where, late in the century, a major corpus of court poetry of the period of the princes, the Hendregadredd manuscript, was written. No surviving manuscript of 'Brut y tywysogyon' can be shown to have been written in the abbey scriptorium, but both the lost Latin text on which the surviving Welsh versions were based, and one of the Welsh texts, may well have been composed there. 


@@@@@


doc= 59919


Gruffudd ap Rhys (d. 1201), prince of Deheubarth, was the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd (the Lord Rhys) (1131/2-1197). Gruffudd was the ancestor of a lineage that shared lordship over the patrimony of Rhys ap Gruffudd until the virtual extinction of the dynasty during Edward I's conquest of Wales. 
Gruffudd, a son of Rhys and his wife, Gwenllian, daughter of Madog ap Maredudd (died 1160) of Powys, was the eldest of Rhys's legitimate sons. He appears to have been the designated heir to the patrimony and he was married to Matilda (died 1210), daughter of William (III) de Briouze (died 1211), the most powerful of the marcher lords of the late twelfth century. The impending succession had led to conflict within the family as early as 1189 when Rhys is known to have encountered resistance from his eldest but illegitimate son, Maelgwn ap Rhys (d. 1231), who was to found a second important lineage. Rhys placed Maelgwn in Briouze's prison but he escaped in 1192 and joined his father at the siege of the castle of Swansea, an offensive that occasioned the summoning of a large English army. Maelgwn's presence was still troublesome and, during the continuing internecine conflict, Rhys ap Gruffudd was himself incarcerated by Maelgwn and another son in 1194. Promptly upon Rhys's death in 1197 Gruffudd went to Richard I to secure recognition of his succession and he made his peace with the bishop of St David's, consenting to be scourged as penance for an outrage upon the bishop with which his father had been charged. Gruffudd immediately faced strenuous conflict with Maelgwn who, forming an alliance with Gwenwynwyn ab Owain ('fl'. 1186-1216) of Powys, wrested possession of Ceredigion from him. Gruffudd was captured and placed first in Gwenwynwyn's prison and then transferred to the king's custody in Corfe Castle. Released in 1198, he scored considerable success in asserting his authority in Ceredigion, and Maelgwn incurred the Welsh annalist's censure when, in 1199, he sold Cardigan Castle to the English so as to deny it to his brother. Gruffudd was also engaged to good purpose in Ystrad Tywi, taking the castle of Llandovery and Cantref Bychan. He had done much to secure his patrimony when he died on 25 July 1201. The annalist's encomium of Gruffudd, who was buried at the Cistercian abbey of Strata Florida, reflects his highly favourable estimation of the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd who was by Welsh right a true prince and heir, and conveys his critical regard for Maelgwn who, though once extolled for his valour, had recently incurred much adverse comment. 
Gruffudd's young sons, Rhys (died 1222) and Owain ap Gruffudd (d. 1235), maintained the struggle for the inheritance with the other two main contenders, Maelgwn ap Rhys and Rhys Gryg (d. 1233), another son of Rhys ap Gruffudd, who founded a third important lineage. In the early years of the thirteenth century, with the benefit of the support of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (died 1240), prince of Gwynedd, Rhys and Owain vigorously contested possession of Ceredigion and deprived their adversaries of the key castles of Dinefwr and Llandovery in Ystrad Tywi. They shared Llywelyn's discomfiture following John's invasion of Gwynedd in 1211 and were forced to yield their territory in Ceredigion, where Falkes de Breaute fortified the castle of Aberystwyth for the king. When, during the next year, Maelgwn ap Rhys and Rhys Gryg joined Llywelyn in fierce resistance to John, Rhys and Owain found themselves dependent upon the king's support. This proved to be of little avail and the successes of the previous years were placed in jeopardy. It was only in 1215 that the contenders for supremacy in Deheubarth were reconciled when, for the first time, all the surviving descendants of Rhys ap Gruffudd were allied with Llywelyn against John. At a gathering at Aberdyfi the next year Deheubarth was partitioned. The sons of Gruffudd ap Rhys secured the greater part of Ceredigion, Rhys Gryg won the main part of Ystrad Tywi, including the castle of Dinefwr, and Maelgwn received lands in Dyfed and the remaining parts of Ceredigion and Ystrad Tywi. Adjustments were made in 1222, upon the death of Rhys ap Gruffudd, and again in 1225. Rhys Gryg held the whole of Ystrad Tywi, which after his death came to be shared between his sons Rhys Mechyll and Maredudd ap Rhys Gryg (d. 1271). In Ceredigion the distribution which initially gave Maelgwn the southern portion and Owain the northern portion came to be much changed. Ultimately the descendants of Owain secured an extensive estate in the southern and middle commotes (Is Coed, Gwynionydd, Caerwedros, Mabwynion, Pennardd, Anhuniog, and Mefenydd), while those of Maelgwn were confined to a much smaller estate in the north (Creuddyn, Perfedd, and Genau'r-glyn). Their fortunes, and particularly their relations with the successive princes of Gwynedd, Llywelyn ab Iorwerth, Dafydd ap Llywelyn (died 1246), and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282), are recorded by successive annalists at Strata Florida. 
Maelgwn ap Rhys was succeeded in 1231 by his son Maelgwn Fychan (d. 1257), who had to struggle to safeguard the interests of his house in the vicissitudes of the period following the death of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth in 1240. His difficulties were particularly acute during the conflicts of 1244-6 when royal officers were able to exploit differences among the princes to further their purposes. Maelgwn was forced to flee to Gwynedd where he joined its princes in a defiant resistance in the mountains which was likened by the annalist to the valour of the Maccabees. He returned to an estate further diminished by the crown's annexation of the commote of Perfedd. Predeceased by his son Rhys ap Maelgwn (died 1255), Maelgwn Fychan was succeeded by his grandson Rhys Fychan ap Rhys ap Maelgwn (d. 1302). A sworn man of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, Rhys Fychan was confronted in 1277 with the advance of a powerful royal army into his lands. Following his submission in early May he was among the lords of Deheubarth sent to the king to do homage, but his troubles were not ended. Shortly afterwards, with a royal castle being built at Llanbadarn Fawr and his authority destroyed, he, like his grandfather before him, took refuge in Gwynedd. Under the terms of the treaty of Aberconwy in November, Rhys Fychan became one of five lords whose homage Llywelyn ap Gruffudd was allowed to retain, but he remained exiled from his estates in Ceredigion. He participated in the war of 1282-3 in the alliance of Welsh princes against Edward I and briefly endeavoured to reassert his position in northern Ceredigion. He withdrew to Gwynedd once more, but then submitted to the king and served in his forces. As late as May 1283 he received a grant of the cantref of Penweddig (the three commotes of northern Ceredigion) from Dafydd ap Gruffudd, but, with the king's forces already well entrenched there, the charter was of no practical significance and was probably made in an attempt to wean Rhys from the king's alliance. He broke with the king yet again, but by August 1283 he had been captured and dispatched for perpetual imprisonment. On his death in 1302 he was accorded the honour of a burial in Windsor at the king's expense. 
The lineage of Owain ap Gruffudd (died 1235) was represented in the middle years of the century by Maredudd ab Owain (d. 1265), a substantial figure who, at his death, was commemorated by the poet Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268) and described by the Welsh annalist as 'defender of all Deheubarth and counsellor of all Wales' ('Brut: Peniarth MS 20', 114). In the period following the death of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth his allegiance was sought by Dafydd ap Llywelyn and the crown. Maredudd's importance can be gauged by the attempts that were made by the king's commanders in south-west Wales to wean him from his attachment to Dafydd ap Llywelyn in 1244-6. They were conscious that 'it is not easy to control the Welsh except through one of their own nation ['lingua']' (Edwards, 'Calendar', 48), and urged that terms be agreed with Maredudd that would bring him into the king's allegiance. He was enticed with the prospect that he might benefit from Maelgwn Fychan's disinheritance. His adherence to Llywelyn ap Gruffudd upon his advance into Deheubarth at the end of 1256 ensured the prince's supremacy in Ceredigion. He was among the prince's leading magnates, sharing in his military achievements and participating in his councils. Married to a daughter of Gilbert de Vall of Dale in the earldom of Pembroke, for whom he made dower provision much in accord with English practice, Maredudd ruled a substantial and stable barony. At his death, however, his lands were divided among his sons. Owain ap Maredudd died in 1275, leaving as his heir Llywelyn ab Owain (fl. 1275-1283), whose young age enabled him to survive the tumultuous years which saw his kinsmen's lordship erased. Cynan ap Maredudd (fl. 1277-1297) and Gruffudd ap Maredudd (d. in or before 1319) submitted to the king's commander in May 1277 and were sent to Edward I to do homage. They were reinstated in their lands but, finding the extension of royal authority in Ceredigion irksome, they were among the princes in rebellion in 1282. In their statement to Archbishop Pecham they alleged that Robert de Tibetot (died 1298), justice of west Wales from 1280, had undermined their jurisdiction over their patrimony. Whereas, they insisted, all Christian men enjoyed their laws and customs in their lands, they had been denied the laws of Wales, which had remained inviolate until the imposition of royal authority after the war of 1277. At the start of renewed conflict in March 1282 Gruffudd ap Maredudd and his third cousin, Rhys Fychan ap Rhys ap Maelgwn, attacked the castle of Llanbadarn Fawr. They maintained their resistance and forced the king's commanders to send a contingent to take their castle of Trefilan in September. Gruffudd remained in arms, a member of the small cohort of princes allied with Dafydd ap Gruffudd until, in June 1283, he and his nephew Llywelyn ab Owain surrendered. Cynan and Rhys Fychan were serving with the king's forces in the spring but later resumed an active resistance which they maintained until their surrender in August. Gruffudd, Cynan, and Rhys Fychan were detained at various English castles, including Bridgnorth, Nottingham, Bamburgh, and Newcastle, Northumberland. They were in time allowed to be counted among the 'king's Welshmen' in the royal household, and Gruffudd and Cynan served in the Flanders campaign in 1297. Gruffudd, who was dead by 1319, and Cynan were allowed an income from the manor of Edwinstowe, Nottinghamshire, but they never returned to the lands of their forebears. 
By the end of the conflict the only territory allowed to any member of the lineages of Gruffudd ap Rhys and Maelgwn ap Rhys was the estate in Is Coed and Mabwynion held by Llywelyn ab Owain. In the mid-fourteenth century this was divided between his granddaughters, one of whom, Elen, was the mother of Owain Glyn Dwr. He came to her share of the estate and through his mother he was thus linked with the princes who had once ruled Deheubarth in its entirety. 

'Brut y tywysogyon', containing numerous references to the activities of members of the lineages and notices of their burial in the chapter house, reflects the close association between the Cistercian convent of Strata Florida and those who exercised lordship in Ceredigion. Secular patronage is indicated in charters of Maelgwn ap Rhys and Maelgwn Fychan, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and Cynan ap Maredudd, which refer to gifts by other members of their family. Literary associations are illustrated in poetry addressed by Phylip Brydydd to Rhys ap Gruffudd and by Y Prydydd Bychan's estimation of the valour and generosity of Owain ap Gruffudd, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and Maredudd ab Owain. The later years of the thirteenth century bring evidence of lay interest in prose works. Madog ap Selyf, a cleric or possibly a monk, translated the legendary chronicle of Turpin from Latin into Welsh at the request of Gruffudd ap Maredudd. Brother Gruffudd Bola translated the Athanasian creed into Welsh at the request of Efa ferch Maredudd (fl. 1300), daughter of Maredudd ab Owain, a task he undertook out of love for her and in her honour. She was one of the first Welsh women whose ability to read is documented, and her descendants were patrons of devotional treatises in Welsh in the fourteenth century. Brother Gruffudd and Madog ap Selyf may have been members of the convent at Strata Florida where, late in the century, a major corpus of court poetry of the period of the princes, the Hendregadredd manuscript, was written. No surviving manuscript of 'Brut y tywysogyon' can be shown to have been written in the abbey scriptorium, but both the lost Latin text on which the surviving Welsh versions were based, and one of the Welsh texts, may well have been composed there. 


@@@@@


doc= 59920


Gruffudd ap Rhys (d. 1201), prince of Deheubarth, was the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd (the Lord Rhys) (1131/2-1197). Gruffudd was the ancestor of a lineage that shared lordship over the patrimony of Rhys ap Gruffudd until the virtual extinction of the dynasty during Edward I's conquest of Wales. 
Gruffudd, a son of Rhys and his wife, Gwenllian, daughter of Madog ap Maredudd (died 1160) of Powys, was the eldest of Rhys's legitimate sons. He appears to have been the designated heir to the patrimony and he was married to Matilda (died 1210), daughter of William (III) de Briouze (died 1211), the most powerful of the marcher lords of the late twelfth century. The impending succession had led to conflict within the family as early as 1189 when Rhys is known to have encountered resistance from his eldest but illegitimate son, Maelgwn ap Rhys (d. 1231), who was to found a second important lineage. Rhys placed Maelgwn in Briouze's prison but he escaped in 1192 and joined his father at the siege of the castle of Swansea, an offensive that occasioned the summoning of a large English army. Maelgwn's presence was still troublesome and, during the continuing internecine conflict, Rhys ap Gruffudd was himself incarcerated by Maelgwn and another son in 1194. Promptly upon Rhys's death in 1197 Gruffudd went to Richard I to secure recognition of his succession and he made his peace with the bishop of St David's, consenting to be scourged as penance for an outrage upon the bishop with which his father had been charged. Gruffudd immediately faced strenuous conflict with Maelgwn who, forming an alliance with Gwenwynwyn ab Owain ('fl'. 1186-1216) of Powys, wrested possession of Ceredigion from him. Gruffudd was captured and placed first in Gwenwynwyn's prison and then transferred to the king's custody in Corfe Castle. Released in 1198, he scored considerable success in asserting his authority in Ceredigion, and Maelgwn incurred the Welsh annalist's censure when, in 1199, he sold Cardigan Castle to the English so as to deny it to his brother. Gruffudd was also engaged to good purpose in Ystrad Tywi, taking the castle of Llandovery and Cantref Bychan. He had done much to secure his patrimony when he died on 25 July 1201. The annalist's encomium of Gruffudd, who was buried at the Cistercian abbey of Strata Florida, reflects his highly favourable estimation of the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd who was by Welsh right a true prince and heir, and conveys his critical regard for Maelgwn who, though once extolled for his valour, had recently incurred much adverse comment. 
Gruffudd's young sons, Rhys (died 1222) and Owain ap Gruffudd (d. 1235), maintained the struggle for the inheritance with the other two main contenders, Maelgwn ap Rhys and Rhys Gryg (d. 1233), another son of Rhys ap Gruffudd, who founded a third important lineage. In the early years of the thirteenth century, with the benefit of the support of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (died 1240), prince of Gwynedd, Rhys and Owain vigorously contested possession of Ceredigion and deprived their adversaries of the key castles of Dinefwr and Llandovery in Ystrad Tywi. They shared Llywelyn's discomfiture following John's invasion of Gwynedd in 1211 and were forced to yield their territory in Ceredigion, where Falkes de Breaute fortified the castle of Aberystwyth for the king. When, during the next year, Maelgwn ap Rhys and Rhys Gryg joined Llywelyn in fierce resistance to John, Rhys and Owain found themselves dependent upon the king's support. This proved to be of little avail and the successes of the previous years were placed in jeopardy. It was only in 1215 that the contenders for supremacy in Deheubarth were reconciled when, for the first time, all the surviving descendants of Rhys ap Gruffudd were allied with Llywelyn against John. At a gathering at Aberdyfi the next year Deheubarth was partitioned. The sons of Gruffudd ap Rhys secured the greater part of Ceredigion, Rhys Gryg won the main part of Ystrad Tywi, including the castle of Dinefwr, and Maelgwn received lands in Dyfed and the remaining parts of Ceredigion and Ystrad Tywi. Adjustments were made in 1222, upon the death of Rhys ap Gruffudd, and again in 1225. Rhys Gryg held the whole of Ystrad Tywi, which after his death came to be shared between his sons Rhys Mechyll and Maredudd ap Rhys Gryg (d. 1271). In Ceredigion the distribution which initially gave Maelgwn the southern portion and Owain the northern portion came to be much changed. Ultimately the descendants of Owain secured an extensive estate in the southern and middle commotes (Is Coed, Gwynionydd, Caerwedros, Mabwynion, Pennardd, Anhuniog, and Mefenydd), while those of Maelgwn were confined to a much smaller estate in the north (Creuddyn, Perfedd, and Genau'r-glyn). Their fortunes, and particularly their relations with the successive princes of Gwynedd, Llywelyn ab Iorwerth, Dafydd ap Llywelyn (died 1246), and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282), are recorded by successive annalists at Strata Florida. 
Maelgwn ap Rhys was succeeded in 1231 by his son Maelgwn Fychan (d. 1257), who had to struggle to safeguard the interests of his house in the vicissitudes of the period following the death of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth in 1240. His difficulties were particularly acute during the conflicts of 1244-6 when royal officers were able to exploit differences among the princes to further their purposes. Maelgwn was forced to flee to Gwynedd where he joined its princes in a defiant resistance in the mountains which was likened by the annalist to the valour of the Maccabees. He returned to an estate further diminished by the crown's annexation of the commote of Perfedd. Predeceased by his son Rhys ap Maelgwn (died 1255), Maelgwn Fychan was succeeded by his grandson Rhys Fychan ap Rhys ap Maelgwn (d. 1302). A sworn man of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, Rhys Fychan was confronted in 1277 with the advance of a powerful royal army into his lands. Following his submission in early May he was among the lords of Deheubarth sent to the king to do homage, but his troubles were not ended. Shortly afterwards, with a royal castle being built at Llanbadarn Fawr and his authority destroyed, he, like his grandfather before him, took refuge in Gwynedd. Under the terms of the treaty of Aberconwy in November, Rhys Fychan became one of five lords whose homage Llywelyn ap Gruffudd was allowed to retain, but he remained exiled from his estates in Ceredigion. He participated in the war of 1282-3 in the alliance of Welsh princes against Edward I and briefly endeavoured to reassert his position in northern Ceredigion. He withdrew to Gwynedd once more, but then submitted to the king and served in his forces. As late as May 1283 he received a grant of the cantref of Penweddig (the three commotes of northern Ceredigion) from Dafydd ap Gruffudd, but, with the king's forces already well entrenched there, the charter was of no practical significance and was probably made in an attempt to wean Rhys from the king's alliance. He broke with the king yet again, but by August 1283 he had been captured and dispatched for perpetual imprisonment. On his death in 1302 he was accorded the honour of a burial in Windsor at the king's expense. 
The lineage of Owain ap Gruffudd (died 1235) was represented in the middle years of the century by Maredudd ab Owain (d. 1265), a substantial figure who, at his death, was commemorated by the poet Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268) and described by the Welsh annalist as 'defender of all Deheubarth and counsellor of all Wales' ('Brut: Peniarth MS 20', 114). In the period following the death of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth his allegiance was sought by Dafydd ap Llywelyn and the crown. Maredudd's importance can be gauged by the attempts that were made by the king's commanders in south-west Wales to wean him from his attachment to Dafydd ap Llywelyn in 1244-6. They were conscious that 'it is not easy to control the Welsh except through one of their own nation ['lingua']' (Edwards, 'Calendar', 48), and urged that terms be agreed with Maredudd that would bring him into the king's allegiance. He was enticed with the prospect that he might benefit from Maelgwn Fychan's disinheritance. His adherence to Llywelyn ap Gruffudd upon his advance into Deheubarth at the end of 1256 ensured the prince's supremacy in Ceredigion. He was among the prince's leading magnates, sharing in his military achievements and participating in his councils. Married to a daughter of Gilbert de Vall of Dale in the earldom of Pembroke, for whom he made dower provision much in accord with English practice, Maredudd ruled a substantial and stable barony. At his death, however, his lands were divided among his sons. Owain ap Maredudd died in 1275, leaving as his heir Llywelyn ab Owain (fl. 1275-1283), whose young age enabled him to survive the tumultuous years which saw his kinsmen's lordship erased. Cynan ap Maredudd (fl. 1277-1297) and Gruffudd ap Maredudd (d. in or before 1319) submitted to the king's commander in May 1277 and were sent to Edward I to do homage. They were reinstated in their lands but, finding the extension of royal authority in Ceredigion irksome, they were among the princes in rebellion in 1282. In their statement to Archbishop Pecham they alleged that Robert de Tibetot (died 1298), justice of west Wales from 1280, had undermined their jurisdiction over their patrimony. Whereas, they insisted, all Christian men enjoyed their laws and customs in their lands, they had been denied the laws of Wales, which had remained inviolate until the imposition of royal authority after the war of 1277. At the start of renewed conflict in March 1282 Gruffudd ap Maredudd and his third cousin, Rhys Fychan ap Rhys ap Maelgwn, attacked the castle of Llanbadarn Fawr. They maintained their resistance and forced the king's commanders to send a contingent to take their castle of Trefilan in September. Gruffudd remained in arms, a member of the small cohort of princes allied with Dafydd ap Gruffudd until, in June 1283, he and his nephew Llywelyn ab Owain surrendered. Cynan and Rhys Fychan were serving with the king's forces in the spring but later resumed an active resistance which they maintained until their surrender in August. Gruffudd, Cynan, and Rhys Fychan were detained at various English castles, including Bridgnorth, Nottingham, Bamburgh, and Newcastle, Northumberland. They were in time allowed to be counted among the 'king's Welshmen' in the royal household, and Gruffudd and Cynan served in the Flanders campaign in 1297. Gruffudd, who was dead by 1319, and Cynan were allowed an income from the manor of Edwinstowe, Nottinghamshire, but they never returned to the lands of their forebears. 
By the end of the conflict the only territory allowed to any member of the lineages of Gruffudd ap Rhys and Maelgwn ap Rhys was the estate in Is Coed and Mabwynion held by Llywelyn ab Owain. In the mid-fourteenth century this was divided between his granddaughters, one of whom, Elen, was the mother of Owain Glyn Dwr. He came to her share of the estate and through his mother he was thus linked with the princes who had once ruled Deheubarth in its entirety. 

'Brut y tywysogyon', containing numerous references to the activities of members of the lineages and notices of their burial in the chapter house, reflects the close association between the Cistercian convent of Strata Florida and those who exercised lordship in Ceredigion. Secular patronage is indicated in charters of Maelgwn ap Rhys and Maelgwn Fychan, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and Cynan ap Maredudd, which refer to gifts by other members of their family. Literary associations are illustrated in poetry addressed by Phylip Brydydd to Rhys ap Gruffudd and by Y Prydydd Bychan's estimation of the valour and generosity of Owain ap Gruffudd, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and Maredudd ab Owain. The later years of the thirteenth century bring evidence of lay interest in prose works. Madog ap Selyf, a cleric or possibly a monk, translated the legendary chronicle of Turpin from Latin into Welsh at the request of Gruffudd ap Maredudd. Brother Gruffudd Bola translated the Athanasian creed into Welsh at the request of Efa ferch Maredudd (fl. 1300), daughter of Maredudd ab Owain, a task he undertook out of love for her and in her honour. She was one of the first Welsh women whose ability to read is documented, and her descendants were patrons of devotional treatises in Welsh in the fourteenth century. Brother Gruffudd and Madog ap Selyf may have been members of the convent at Strata Florida where, late in the century, a major corpus of court poetry of the period of the princes, the Hendregadredd manuscript, was written. No surviving manuscript of 'Brut y tywysogyon' can be shown to have been written in the abbey scriptorium, but both the lost Latin text on which the surviving Welsh versions were based, and one of the Welsh texts, may well have been composed there. 


@@@@@


doc= 59922


London, John of (fl. c.1260), mathematician, was praised by Roger Bacon (died 1292/1294) in his 'Opus tertium' as one of two 'perfect' mathematicians (the other being Peter of Maricourt, called Peregrinus, author of a noted tract on the magnet), and judged superior to two other 'good' mathematicians, namely, Campanus of Novara, the prolific editor and writer on geometry and astronomy, and Master Nicolas, tutor of Amaury de Montfort (died 'c'.1300), third son of Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester (died 1265). Thus ranked with Peter and Campanus, John must have been a mathematician of distinction, known to Bacon at Paris in the 1260s. 
Further data are conjectural. John of London may perhaps be the John Bandoun whom Bacon cites at about the same time, in conjunction with Robert Grosseteste (died 1253) and Adam Marsh (died 1259), as having flourished in the mathematical sciences. He may also be the Paris master, John of London, author of a short letter on astronomical questions posed to him by his own master, 'R. de Guedingue', and the accompanying table of stellar co-ordinates, established by observation at Paris in 1246 (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 7413/2, fols. 19'v'-21, 36). In an edition of the same star catalogue, dated four years later, its compiler, Roger of Lincoln, cites Master John of London as 'astronomus famosus', designer of a form of astrolabe used for verifying the star table (Erfurt, Stadtbibliothek MS Amplon. 4 degree 369, fol. 217). Kunitzsch, noting John's wide learning in astronomy and his unusual effort to establish the co-ordinates through observation, shows that John's table significantly influenced the tabulation and nomenclature of the stars in later catalogues. John may also be the Master John of London, owner and corrector of a copy of the 'De aspectibus' of Alhazen 
(Ibn al-Haitham; died 1038)
that was consulted by Guido de Grana in his correction of another copy in 1269 (Edinburgh, Royal Observatory, MS Cr.3.3, fol. 189). 
Other proposals made concerning Bacon's Master John of London doubtless are false. In particular, he cannot have been the gifted Franciscan friar John (not denominated 'of London', whose mathematical training was sponsored by Bacon; for the friar was barely twenty years old when Bacon wrote the 'Opus tertium'. 
Another John London (fl. c.1290-c.1325), astronomer, is recorded as the donor of a substantial collection of books to the library of the Benedictine abbey of St Augustine in Canterbury. From the extant inventory of the library, made late in the fifteenth century, it may be inferred that John London contributed over eighty books, including twenty-three in mathematics and astronomy, another twenty-three in medicine, and the balance in history, philosophy, and theology. Apart from works long standard, the astronomical titles display a concentration on research undertaken at Paris from the 1290s to the mid-1320s, for example, tracts by Peter of Denmark (Dacia) and Gillaume de St Cloud early in this period and by Jean de Lignieres toward its end. No titles of later currency are discernible. Most of the thirteen surviving books from this donation have 'ex libris' markings that identify the owner as either 'magister' or 'frater'. In one of them, Bodl. Oxf., MS Digby 174, fol. 99, a heading gives the owner's name as 'Johannes de Lond. cum monoculo', and affixes a rough sketch of a head, wearing a sort of master's cap, with a conspicuous left eye, but missing the right eye. 
It can be inferred that John London was active as an astronomical master at Paris over three decades, before retiring to St Augustine's, where for a while he seems to have shared his astronomical interests with Michael Northgate. He appears not to be associable with anyone else attested under the same name. Against the suggestion that he may have been Bacon's protege, the Franciscan friar John, is the later date of the book donor's activity, his Benedictine association, and the wealth implied by his substantial library. And against suggestions that he may have been the 'Dom. Joh. de London.' to whom the monk Reginald Lambourne wrote concerning the eclipse of 1363 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Digby 176, fols. 50-53'v'), is the implied gap of four decades between this date and the latest title in the book owner's astronomical collection; it has also been argued that this correspondent might be the Oxford scholar John Ashenden (died in or before 1368). 


@@@@@


doc= 59924


Mario, Jessie Jane Meriton White (1832-1906), advocate of Italian unity, was born on 9 May 1832, probably at 15 Chapel Row, Forton, Gosport, Hampshire, daughter of Thomas White ('c'.1800-1863) and his second wife, Jane Teage, 'nee' Meriton (1805-1834). Her mother, related to a liberal New Orleans family, showed more enthusiasm for the local Pestalozzian school than for the High Street Independent Chapel where Thomas White was a zealous worshipper. She died, however, when Jessie was only two, and was instantly replaced by the schoolteacher, White's third wife, Jane Gain (1813-1866). Jessie White grew up beside Forton inlet among numerous variously mothered siblings. 
Thomas White came from a family of shipwrights and wrote a treatise on their profession (1848), but his speciality was designing loading slips and installing them abroad. Despite his narrow righteousness he had a social conscience, and was versed in European democratic movements such as Mazzini's Young Italy. He interested his daughter in these, even though she hated his biblical humbug (noting, for instance, in her diary that Abel was preferred to Cain only because God liked roast lamb better than greens). Her conviction that humanity was the one true basis of belief, gained first from an unconventional local preacher, was strengthened by hearing the reformer George Dawson (1821-1876) during her years at school in Birmingham. 
By the age of twenty-one Jessie White was living from private lessons and her writing, which included entries for the 'Biographical Magazine' and stories for 'Eliza Cook's Journal'. During a period of work and study in Paris, her radical ideas were further encouraged by meetings with Cousin, Martin, and Lamennais. In the autumn of 1854 she accompanied Emma Roberts, a widow who believed herself engaged to Garibaldi, for a stay with the general in Nice and Sardinia. She afterwards described this trip as the realization of a dream, binding her to a cause for which she would live and die. In Florence she became intimate with the Brownings, learning much through them about Italian politics. On returning to England in May 1855, she applied to study medicine but was refused because of her sex; instead she became a sedulous reader at the British Museum, preparing articles on Italy for the 'Daily News' and other papers. Through Garibaldi she met Orsini and translated his 'Austrian Dungeons in Italy'; through the Ashursts she was introduced to Mazzini, who in 1856 asked her to undertake a lecture tour of British cities. 
In 1857 Jessie White went back to Italy and was welcomed like a revolutionary saint, but, following the disastrous Pisacane expedition, she was arrested in Genoa together with Mazzini's associate Alberto Mario (1825-1883). On her release she took Mario home to Portsmouth, where they married on 19 December 1857. During another lecture tour in 1858, witnesses praised the graphic eloquence and truthfulness that emerged from this plump, dowdy figure with her shock of flaming hair and partiality for cigars. In the opinion of a later commentator, she blended 'the staunch tenacity of the Anglo-Saxon race with the poetic enthusiasm of the Latin' (Litta-Visconti-Arese, introduction to 'Birth of Modern Italy', i). In the winter of 1858-9 the Marios rallied support for Mazzini in America, but Jessie's forthright manner and extremist views provoked controversy on both sides of the Atlantic and led to a painful break with the more conservative Brownings. The couple returned to Italy full of hope that France's initiative against Austria would bring freedom, but experienced instead the disillusionment of Villafranca. They were imprisoned again, but released, and wintered in Lugano. By now they were drifting away from Mazzinian idealism. In the summer of 1860 they joined Garibaldi in his Sicilian campaign, Alberto as aide-de-camp and Jessie as nurse; she boldly took charge of hospital activities under conditions of great chaos and corruption. Mario's 'The Red Shirt' (1865) portrays this 'Miss Uragano' as tender with the wounded but tough and versatile in the field. She successfully appealed to wealthy Englishwomen for ambulance supplies, but in battle tore up her underclothes to make bandages. She became known as 'Garibaldi's Englishwoman', nursing him after Aspromonte and serving under him in 1866 and again in 1867, in which year they also attended together the Geneva Congress of the League of Peace; she began the anti-Prussian campaign of 1870 as a war reporter, but Garibaldi made her chief of ambulances with the rank of major. 
With the unity of Italy complete, the Marios resided there permanently. Jessie still travelled about for purposes of research, but lived chiefly at Florence, where she taught and wrote prolifically for the press, including 'The Nation', for which she was Italian correspondent on and off from 1866 to her death. Among her many books were studies of poverty and the convict system, editions of Mazzini and Bertani, and several works on Garibaldi. Her splendid 'Garibaldi et son temps' (1884) was dedicated to the memory of Alberto, who died of cancer on 2 March 1883; she also published a biography of Mario and an edition of his writings. This productivity was achieved with little financial reward and at much cost to herself: she developed writer's cramp and suffered a mild stroke, but struggled on with the help of a typewriter and an amanuensis. Although her grasp on content was seldom perfect, readers were swept along by her commitment and her candid expressiveness, as in her essays on hygiene, abortion, boy-labourers in Sicilian sulphur mines, and a frightful paupers' cemetery with 365 covered pits, one for each day of the year. 
Jessie White Mario died at Florence on 5 March 1906 and was cremated after a funeral procession through the city; her ashes were buried beside her husband's at Lendinara. A selection of her posthumous papers was published in 1909 as 'The Birth of Modern Italy' -- a phenomenon to which she had contributed so much and so courageously. 


@@@@@


doc= 59926


Guest, Lady Theodora (1840-1924), author and benefactor, was born at 15 Grosvenor Square, London, on 7 July 1840, the youngest of the thirteen children of Richard Grosvenor, second marquess of Westminster (1795-1869), and his wife, 'nee' Lady Elizabeth Mary Leveson-Gower (1797-1891), younger daughter of George Granville Leveson-Gower, first duke of Sutherland, and his wife, Elizabeth Leveson-Gower, nineteenth countess of Sutherland in her own right. Lady Theodora spent most of her early life at Motcombe House, near Shaftesbury, in Dorset, where she was educated privately by governesses and tutors. Her parents, especially her father, gave her a strict moral upbringing, endeavouring -- with great success -- to instil the principle of 'noblesse oblige'. Between 1865 and 1868 she contributed several articles and poems to 'Once a Week' and the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. Her fondness for her Dorset home and the surrounding countryside led her to write her first book, 'Motcombe Past and Present' (1867). Two further editions followed in 1868 and 1873. A devout, low-church Anglican, she demonstrated her biblical knowledge and evangelical zeal in her second book, 'Simple Thoughts on Bible Truths' (1873). 
When Lady Theodora's father died in 1869 Lady Westminster inherited his Dorset and Wiltshire estates for her lifetime. Lady Theodora then became a constant companion and support to her mother, undertaking many duties on her behalf and assisting in the management of the estates. She gave much personal attention to the village schools and to the night school at Motcombe where she taught. She rode regularly to hounds and was an enthusiastic supporter of hunting throughout her life. It was owing to her that the Hunt Servants Benefit Society was founded in 1872. 
In 1874 Lady Westminster purchased Barcote, an estate near Faringdon, Berkshire, and built a large house there for her daughter. But before its completion Lady Theodora became engaged to Thomas Merthyr Guest (1838-1904), second son of Sir Josiah John Guest and his wife, subsequently Lady Charlotte Schreiber. They were married in Motcombe church on 8 March 1877. Their only child, Elizabeth Augusta, was born in 1879. In that year Inwood House at Henstridge, Somerset, became their home. The Guests travelled extensively and a tour of North America prompted Lady Theodora to write 'A Round Trip in North America' (1895), illustrated by her own sketches. 
Lady Theodora was well known in the south-west for her charitable works and her generous support for many good causes. Her biggest single philanthropic act was building and equipping a cottage hospital, in memory of her husband, at Templecombe, near her home, which she ran for several years at her own expense. She was a staunch Conservative, actively campaigning on behalf of the party, particularly at election times, when she spoke from the platform. In 1908 she declined an invitation to join the suffragette organization the Women's Social and Political Union, and published her reasons for doing so. She then aligned herself with the Anti-Suffrage League. 
Like her mother-in-law, Lady Theodora was a collector and connoisseur of porcelain and Battersea enamels. A keen gardener, her gardens and conservatories at Inwood contained many varieties of tropical plants and fruit, for which they were well known. 
Even after the rural aristocracy had lost much of their power and influence in the twentieth century, Lady Theodora remained a representative of the old order. She was a great personality, 'a 'grande Dame' of the old school' ('The Times', 26 March 1924), and a link with Victorian society. She died at Inwood on 24 March 1924 and was buried in Henstridge churchyard on 28 March. 


