@@@@@


doc= 59927


Hayter, Sir William Goodenough, first baronet (1792-1878), politician and barrister, youngest son of John Hayter, and his wife, Grace, daughter of Stephen Goodenough of Codford, Wiltshire, was born at Winterbourne Stoke, Wiltshire, on 28 January 1792. He entered Winchester College in 1804 and matriculated on 24 October 1810 from Trinity College, Oxford, where he took his BA in 1814. On being called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 23 November 1819, he became an equity draftsman and conveyancer, and attended the Wiltshire sessions, but retired from practice on being made a QC on 21 February 1839; he was, however, bencher of his inn on 15 April 1839, and treasurer in 1853. On 18 August 1832 he married Anne (1806/7-1889), eldest daughter of William Pulsford of Linslade. 
On 24 July 1837 Hayter was returned as a Liberal to the House of Commons as one of the members for Wells, and sat for that constituency until 6 July 1865. From 30 December 1847 to 30 May 1849 he was judge-advocate-general. At the latter date he became financial secretary to the Treasury, and in July 1850 was appointed parliamentary and patronage secretary, a post which he held until March 1852, and again from December 1852 to March 1858. Hayter was an effective whip, especially during the minority tory government of 1852 and the early years of the subsequent Aberdeen coalition. He failed to prevent the collapse of the coalition in 1855, and probably preferred working for Palmerston, Aberdeen's successor as prime minister. On 11 February 1848 he was sworn of the privy council. After his retirement, on 19 April 1858, he was created a baronet, and on 27 February 1861, to commemorate his record as whip, he was presented by Lord Palmerston and 365 members of the House of Commons with a service of plate at a banquet in Willis's Rooms ('Illustrated London News', 9 March 1861, with view of the testimonial). 
Hayter was a successful farmer, his farm, Lindsay, near Leighton, Buckinghamshire, being a byword for economy and profitable management. He was one of the council of the Agricultural Society from its commencement in 1838. He voted with C. P. Villiers in 1839 for the repeal of the corn laws, and was present at all the divisions in favour of free trade. He was not a frequent speaker, but took part in debates on matters within his knowledge. In Lord Denman's inquiry into the management of the woods and forests he was a member of the committee, and was chairman of the committee on Feargus O'Connor's land scheme. During 1878 he fell into a depressed state of mind, and on 26 December was found drowned in a small lake in the grounds of his residence, South Hill Park, Easthampstead, Berkshire. He was buried at Easthampstead on 2 January 1879. He was survived by his wife who died in London on 2 June 1889. 
Hayter was succeeded by his only son, Arthur Divett Hayter, Baron Haversham (1835-1917), politician, who was born on 9 August 1835. After Eton College and Brasenose College, Oxford, Arthur Hayter joined the Grenadier Guards. He was Liberal MP for Wells (1865-8), for Bath (1873-85), and for Walsall (1893-95). Hayter was a reliable Liberal. After succeeding his father as second baronet in 1878, he was a junior whip from 1880 to 1882 and was financial secretary to the War Office from 1882 to 1885. He chaired the public accounts committee from 1901 to 1905 and was created Baron Haversham in January 1906. In 1866 he married Henrietta 'nee' Hope. They had no children and his titles became extinct when he died on 10 May 1917. 


@@@@@


doc= 59928


Bennis, Eliza (1725-1802), Methodist leader, was born in Limerick. Little is known of her background except that her family were Presbyterian and that her father died when she was eighteen. Two years later she married Mitchell Bennis (died 1788), who in 1769 was master of the corporation of Saddlers. The marriage was apparently a happy one: her husband was described as a 'tender and affectionate partner' ('Christian Correspondence', 244) and Bennis, following her spiritual conversion, worried that her husband and children were 'idols set up in... the place that God should have' (ibid., 285). 
For much of her early life Bennis was troubled by a sense of spiritual emptiness: 'I saw I was not right', she remembered, 'yet thought that I was not as bad as many' ('Christian Correspondence', 266). When Robert Swindells, the first Methodist missionary to visit Limerick, preached there on 17 March 1749, she went to hear him. She was 'much affected' (ibid., 267) and shortly afterwards became the first member of the Methodist society in the city. Although she continued for some years to be troubled by 'unbelief' (ibid., 282) and by self-doubt, her conversion marked the beginning of a wholehearted and energetic commitment to the consolidation and expansion of Methodism. 
As a member of the local congregation Bennis took charge of class and band meetings and ultimately assumed a leadership role within the society. In 1769 she successfully petitioned the Methodist conference for the appointment of a preacher to Limerick -- the earliest example, according to C. H. Crookshank, 'of the voice of the people being heard in connection with a preaching appointment' (Crookshank, 'History of Methodism', 229). Under her supervision, the society in Limerick flourished: in 1772 she reported that 'the select band in particular, and the society in general, are much stirred up... the class-meetings are lively; the prayer meetings... are revived; the public congregation is in general much larger, and a deeper seriousness and spirit of enquiry observable. ('Christian Correspondence', 55)' From 1768 Bennis spent much of her time in Waterford, involving herself in the affairs of the society there. In 1770 she informed Wesley that 'the people here go on at a poor rate, nor do I think it likely to be otherwise until they have a stationed preacher; they desired me to mention this, and would thank you to think of them' (Crookshank, 'History of Methodism', 237). Wesley acceded to her request and in 1772 acknowledged her success in building up the society in Waterford, going on to commission her to re-establish order in Limerick, where the society was currently in disarray. She continued to report to Wesley on the state of Methodism in Waterford and Limerick, interesting herself not only in spiritual questions but also in more practical matters: noting that a wealthy Mr T -- had joined the Waterford society, she remarked that 'God does graciously throw in a rich person here and there, to bear the needful expenses of his poor followers' ('Christian Correspondence', 55). 
Bennis's incessant zeal and ability to inspire are suggested by the Methodist preacher John McGregor, who, recalling their association in Limerick, described her as his 'golden spur', and asked, 'Whose parlour can I now turn into a study? What woman will throw away her work, to meditate and converse with me on the things of God?... Who will now counsel, instruct, or admonish me?... Who will thrust me into the jail, among the malefactors; to the barracks, amongst the soldiers; to sick beds, and distressed souls? This have you often done, when I was able, but not always willing. ('Christian Correspondence', 245)' In 1773 Bennis had rejoiced that 'the Lord has blessed my husband's industry far above our expectation' ('Christian Correspondence', 76), but some unspecified 'trials' (ibid., 297) resulted in a decline in the family's fortunes and led her and her husband to leave Limerick for Waterford. Widowed in 1788, Bennis later emigrated with her family to Philadelphia, where she died in June 1802. 


@@@@@


doc= 59930


Cambridge, Alice (1762-1829), preacher, was born on 1 January 1762 in Bandon, co. Cork, the daughter of a Church of Ireland father and a Presbyterian mother (died 1780). According to a fragment of autobiography, her father was a convivial man, whose love of company 'led him from his God, and kept him from making his own home and family as comfortable as they should be'. Her mother, on the other hand, was 'of a meek and quiet spirit and... of a very sweet and peaceable demeanour' ('Memoir', 3). She was educated locally, but left school early despite a 'wish to learn, and... a degree of capacity' (ibid., 5). She was brought up in the Church of Ireland, but, following the death of her mother in 1780, began to attend meetings at the Methodist preaching-house in Bandon, and shortly afterwards joined the society. Resolving to dedicate herself to the pursuit of holiness and to the promotion of Methodism, she broke off her engagement to a young man, 'having no other fault to find... but that his mind did not bend heavenward; that indeed was enough' (ibid., 24). 
Having begun her missionary career privately among friends and neighbours, Cambridge went on to speak at Methodist meetings in Bandon, Kinsale, Youghal, and other towns in Munster. Her eloquence, coupled with the novelty of female preaching, made a powerful impact on her hearers and attracted many new converts. Nevertheless, there were some within the movement who opposed her right to speak in public, declaring female preaching to be contrary to Christian teaching and practice. In response to such objections, Cambridge appealed to John Wesley, who counselled discretion and against any 'appearance of pride or magnifying yourself', but defended her right to preach: conscience, he wrote, 'will not permit you to be silent when God commands you to speak' ('Memoir', 39). Following Wesley's death, however, and as Methodism became increasingly institutionalized, hostility to women preachers intensified. In 1802 the Methodist conference outlawed female preaching, and Cambridge herself was excluded from the society. She continued to preach, but resisted suggestions that she establish a breakaway organization. As she told a correspondent in 1814, 'I love Wesleyan Methodists, and Methodism' ('Memoir', 55), and she regretted the disputes which resulted in a number of splits within the movement. In 1811 she herself was readmitted to the society by a special resolution of the Methodist conference. 
About 1800 Cambridge moved to Dublin, where she worked for some years as a shop assistant before setting up business in Cork in 1809. During these years she held frequent public meetings, and from 1813 devoted herself entirely to preaching. In 1813-14 she visited Longford, co. Westmeath, Roscommon, and King's county; in 1815 she spoke in Cork, the west, and the midlands, and later that year made the first of several visits to Ulster. This was the area in which she was to enjoy her greatest success: describing her experience there in 1816, she reported that 'in Lurgan, I had to go to a field, where it was judged that eight or ten thousand were assembled to hear... Yesterday, and on one day in the preceding week, I had to speak in the open air also: I think I may say with truth, that at each time, thousands assembled, and God was with us' ('Memoir', 60-61). 
Cambridge spent most of the years 1818-20 in the north and west of Ireland and in Dublin. Despite a serious illness in 1820, she continued to tour and to preach, but a relapse forced her to curtail her activities. In 1823 she paid a final visit to Bandon and spoke in Kinsale and Nenagh. In the following year she visited Dublin for the last time, before retiring to Nenagh, where she spent her final years, holding regular meetings in her house and addressing the local congregation on alternate Sundays. Following a further attack of illness in 1827, her physical and mental health deteriorated sharply. She died in Nenagh on her sixty-seventh birthday, 1 January 1829, and was buried in the graveyard there. 


@@@@@


doc= 59931


Gayer, Henrietta (d. 1814), Methodist leader, was the daughter of Valentine Jones of Lisburn, co. Antrim; her date of birth and her mother's name are unknown. In 1758 she married Edward Gayer (died 1799) of Derryaghy, near Lisburn, clerk to the Irish House of Lords. Vivacious, sociable, and worldly, Mrs Gayer was described as 'remarkably attractive in her appearance and manner, a charming singer and highly accomplished, the life and soul of a highly respectable and fashionable circle of friends' (Crookshank, 'Memorable Women', 117). Following her marriage Mrs Gayer's 'ardent temperament' was increasingly directed towards spiritual fulfilment (ibid.). A scrupulous member of the established church, she sought guidance from a clergyman, who advised her to 'travel, go more into society, and engage more frequently in fashionable amusements' (ibid.). Still dissatisfied, she embarked on a rigorous regime of fasting and prayer, while maintaining her social activities, and allegedly once took her prayer book to a ball at Dublin Castle 'and after each dance retired and read a portion of it' (ibid.). 
About 1772 Mrs Gayer came into contact with Methodism, which had established itself in Ulster's 'linen triangle', of which Lisburn was a part, during the previous decade. Although attracted to the movement she hesitated to become a member, 'being unwilling to act contrary to the prejudices of her husband against Methodists and Methodism' (Crookshank, 'Memorable Women', 119). Shortly afterwards, however, she was invited by Jane Cumberland, a baker's wife and leader of Methodism in Lisburn, to attend a meeting in her house. She did so, bringing with her her thirteen-year-old daughter, Mary. Both were converted and subsequently became members of the society. 
When John Wesley visited Lisburn in 1773 he was introduced to Mrs Gayer, and on the following day visited her and preached at Derryaghy. Mr Gayer's hostility to Methodism was overcome by Wesley's 'culture and gentlemanly deportment', and Derryaghy subsequently became a centre of Methodism (Crookshank, 'Memorable Women', 120). A room, known as 'the Prophet's Chamber', was set aside in the Gayers' house and used for many years by itinerant preachers as a resting place (Crookshank, 'History of Methodism', 1.277). Wesley himself visited Derryaghy on a number of occasions, and in 1775 was nursed there through a serious illness. Following her conversion Mrs Gayer devoted herself to the promotion of Methodism in her locality and social circle, and was instrumental in attracting a number of new members, among them her niece Mrs Agnes Smyth, who herself became an effective proponent of the movement. Mrs Gayer was also instrumental in having a chapel built at Lisburn, facilitating the expansion of Methodism in the district. 
Widowed in 1799, Mrs Gayer continued to take an active leadership role in her local congregation. Her outstanding traits were her humility and her zeal, described by Crookshank as 'remarkable' but regarded by other observers as 'excessive'; the Revd Henry Moore remarked of her that he 'never was acquainted with a person more dead to the world' (Crookshank, 'Memorable Women', 122). Charitable giving was an essential tenet of her faith, undertaken with characteristic fervour: according to Crookshank, 'she... curtailed her personal expenses in every possible way, sometimes depriving herself of even the necessaries of life, that she might have more to give to those in greater need. She often said that, as she received all her mercies from God, it would be very ungrateful if she did not give back a part to Him in His poor. (ibid., 122)' In March 1814 her health began to decline and she died on the 25th. Giving instructions for her funeral, which took place at Derryaghy, where was buried at Christ Church, she directed that no unnecessary expense be incurred, 'so that all that could be spared might be given to the poor' (ibid., 124). In fact her various charities had entirely dissipated her fortune and she died 'without having one shilling to leave to any person or for any purpose whatever' (ibid., 123-4). 


@@@@@


doc= 59932


Johnson, Dorothea (1732-1817), Methodist leader, was born on 4 December 1732 in Dublin, the only daughter of John Garrat (died 1765), a Dutchman who had settled in Ireland in 1707 and established a business in Dublin. Nothing is known of her mother but Dorothea was partly brought up by her paternal grandmother, whose piety contrasted with her father's irreligion. Her early education was reportedly scanty: she taught herself to write in adulthood and 'carefully cultivated her mind by the diligent study of useful books' (Crookshank, 'Memorable Women', 56). In appearance, she was 'very beautiful, a little above the average height' with a 'fair complexion' and a 'sweet placid smile' (ibid., 55). 
When Dorothea was about sixteen her father's business failed. In order to save him from imprisonment she agreed to marry one of his creditors, a man named King. The couple had two children, a daughter, and a son who died in childhood, but the marriage was unhappy and after some years Dorothea left her husband and returned to live with her father. 
On 15 December 1757 Dorothea was converted to Methodism by the Revd George Whitefield. Shortly afterwards her father followed her into the society. She soon became a prominent figure in the local congregation, taking charge of classes and bands, and achieving a reputation for charity, humility, and holiness. According to Crookshank, 'many women occupied a more prominent position in the Society, and displayed talents of a higher order, but none lived closer to God' (Crookshank, 'Memorable Women', 56). John Wesley, visiting Dublin in 1762, witnessed her entry into the state known by Methodists as 'sanctification': 'She had been seeking it for some time; but her convictions and desires grew stronger and stronger, as the hour approached... On the Lord's day, she felt an entire change... She now walks in sweet peace and rejoices evermore' (Smith, 47-8). In 1771 she began a journal, primarily as a record of her spiritual development, which she kept intermittently for the rest of her life. 
Dorothea's first husband died in 1774, and in 1784 she married John Johnson, a Methodist preacher, and moved with him to Lisburn, co. Antrim. Adam Averell, visiting the Johnsons there some years later, saw them as a pattern of married life: 'This couple have never had a dispute, nor the slightest difference to settle. O religion! What a treasure!... If all our friends possessed the invaluable secret of living as they do, what a heaven it would bring upon earth' (Stewart and Revington, 185). In Lisburn Dorothea worked alongside her husband to promote Methodism, taking particular responsibility for female members of the society. Her efforts were instrumental in the expansion of Methodism in the district: in 1785 John Wesley noted the liveliness of the society in Lisburn, 'owing chiefly to the good providence of God in bringing Mrs Johnson hither' (Crookshank, 'History of Methodism', 1.402). 
John Johnson died in 1803 but Dorothea maintained her involvement in the affairs of the Lisburn congregation, leading groups in study and worship and corresponding with believers on spiritual matters. The final entry in her journal, dated 19 January 1817, is a catalogue of blessings received and a reiteration of faith: 'He gives me peace in my family, protection from the wicked, a great measure of health, a competency of this world's treasure, and... a constant witness of His indwelling spirit, that I am His child. I feel no inward corruption, and I have strong confidence that He will, through the blood and righteousness of my Redeemer, bring me where He is, His hand graciously holding me up in death. (Johnson, 78)' Dorothea Johnson died of typhus fever in Lisburn on 23 July 1817. Her 'Memoirs', including extracts from her journal and correspondence, and a number of short poems on religious themes, were edited by the Revd Adam Averell and published in 1818. 


@@@@@


doc= 59934


Smyth, Edward (fl. 1764-1790), Methodist preacher, was son of the Revd John Smyth (1697-1781) of co. Limerick, chancellor of Conor, and Anne Drysdale ('c'.1706-1777). His uncle was the archbishop of Dublin, F. A. Smyth. Educated at the University of Glasgow between 1764 and 1770, Smyth was ordained in 1770, which was also the year of his marriage to fifteen-year-old Agnes Higginson, who had been born in Lisburn, the daughter of William Higginson [Agnes Smyth (1754/5-1783)]. The couple had five children, three of whom died in childhood. In 1773, disappointed in his hopes of inheriting wealth from his uncle, Edward Smyth took up a curacy in Ballyculter, co. Down. Two years later, following Agnes's introduction to Methodism, he too adopted a much more evangelical approach to religion, attracting large crowds and stimulating revivalist fervour when he preached in local barns. Agnes Smyth, who proved an important influence on her husband's spiritual life, was noted at this time for her 'excessive zeal', disapproving of all frivolous behaviour, adopting plain dress, and, when the opportunity came her way, preaching and leading prayers and hymn singing. Edward Smyth's newly discovered zeal was not, however, appreciated by his patron, Lord Bangor. When the curate publicly admonished Bangor for adultery, he responded by accusing Smyth of erroneous teaching. Smyth was brought to trial in the consistory court of Down, and although the case against him was eventually dismissed, Bishop Trail deprived him of his living in December 1776, and his licence was revoked in 1777. 
John Wesley, impressed by Smyth's vigorous and effective preaching, appointed him as a 'general missionary', and when he moved to Bath in 1779 because of his wife's ill health invited him to preach at the chapel there on Sunday evenings. Smyth returned to Ireland for a brief spell and then, in 1782, served as one of Wesley's curates in London. Smyth appears to have been greatly affected by the piety and religious ardour of his wife, Agnes, and her death at Bath on 22 May 1783 must have been a considerable blow. He later married a Miss Dawson, though further details are unknown. 
In 1783 Smyth settled in Dublin, where a year later his brother William, a wealthy layman, began the building of the Bethesda Chapel on Dorset Street. At this stage Smyth withdrew from the Methodist itinerancy -- his relationship with the connection always somewhat uneasy. In 1778 he had advocated the immediate separation of Methodists from the Church of Ireland, while in Bath his presence caused tensions with the conference appointee, Alexander McNab, resulting in division within the society and McNab's temporary withdrawal. When he was appointed co-chaplain (with John Walker) of Bethesda in 1786 a substantial number of wealthy Dublin Methodists left the local society to join the new congregation. Wesley was aware of the power of Smyth's preaching, referring to him as 'a son of thunder' ('Letters', 7.209), and he himself preached at Bethesda on several occasions. He was also aware of Smyth's propensity for conflict, however, writing to his brother Charles, 'I doubt Edward 'needs a bridle'; but who can put the bit into his mouth?' (ibid., 7.324). 
Smyth was the author of several religious pamphlets, including a vigorous defence of his actions at Ballyculter, 'An Account of the Trial of Edward Smyth' (1777), and while at Bethesda he also compiled a hymnbook and a prayer book revision. By 1790, however, Wesley was noting a decline in Smyth's popularity, and he subsequently moved to Manchester, where he became curate of St Clement's and St Luke's, after which no further information is known of his life. Edward Smyth's zealous evangelicalism, interpreted by some as spiritual arrogance, had the power both to alienate and attract. The daughter of his first public opponent, the Hon. Sophia Ward of Bangor, was an early convert, and despite Lord Bangor's wholehearted opposition subsequently bequeathed virtually her whole estate to religious and charitable organizations. The Bethesda Chapel, to which he introduced a Wesleyan element, was to become an important focus of evangelical activity in Dublin. Smyth's religious career reflects some of the tensions both within early Methodism and between the connection and the Church of Ireland, and demonstrates the potential of early evangelical activity for both progress and disruption. 


@@@@@


doc= 59940


Eckenstein, Lina Dorina Johanna (1857-1931), feminist polymath and cultural historian, was born on 23 September 1857 at 17 St George's Villas, Islington, London, the daughter of Frederick Gottlieb Eckenstein (1820/21-1891), a German businessman, and his wife, Julie Amalie Antonia Helmke (1830/31-1921). One of six children, her younger brother was the mountaineer Oscar Eckenstein. No trace of her education in England has been found, so it is likely that she was educated in Germany and Switzerland; it is improbable that she acquired her proficiency in French, German, and Italian, classical and medieval Latin, Middle High German, Middle English, and classical and medieval European history entirely unaided. In 1881 she was living at her parents' home in Islington. 
The first reference to Lina Eckenstein's activities is found in the manuscript record made by her friend Maria Sharpe of her time with the Men and Women's Club (1885-9). The club had been founded by Karl Pearson for a few 'middle class radical-liberals, socialists and feminists... to talk about sex' (Walkowitz, 57). In 1888 Eckenstein, whose membership of the club was supported by Olive Schreiner, presented papers entitled 'Sexual relations among the Romans' and 'Sexual relations during the Reformation period in Switzerland', having already taken up a feminist stance the previous year in the club's discussions on state regulation of prostitution. In 1889 she accompanied Maria Sharpe on a pilgrimage to Ibsen's Norway. 
Herself a 'new woman', strong-faced as well as 'strong-minded', Lina Eckenstein is an illuminating example of what the new woman did next -- once she was no longer 'new'. First she earned a little money teaching, translating, proof-reading, indexing, and being a research assistant to more eminent male scholars while she herself researched and wrote her ambitious cultural study 'Woman under monasticism: chapters on saint-lore and convent life, 500-1500 AD', published by Cambridge University Press in 1896. Citing a vast range of translated materials from medieval France, Sweden, Britain, and Germany, she postulated that the 'right to self-development and social responsibility which the woman of to-day so persistently asks for, is in many ways analogous to the right which the convent secured to womankind a thousand years ago' (preface), while also appreciating that it was, eventually, to be in the lands of the Reformation 'that the modern movement for women's education [arose]' (conclusion). 
In the late 1890s Lina Eckenstein became German governess to Margery Corbett, later Dame Margery Corbett Ashby, who became her lifelong friend as well as a leading suffragist and Liberal advocate of disarmament. In 1902 Eckenstein published her detailed account of the life and art of Albrecht Durer and 'Through the Casentino', a record of her tramp, knapsack on back, through the upper valley of the Arno. During 1903 to 1906 she was occupied in the startlingly different world of Egyptology, as she joined Flinders Petrie and his wife Hilda -- another close friend -- on several important archaeological digs. She 'took charge of the registration, mending and storing of objects and helped in the general running of the camp' at Abydos, Sethos, Saqqara, El Shatt, and Serabit (Drower, 268). At one testing moment, when village hooligans were reported to be out to destroy the excavation in the dark, 'Miss Eckenstein, always enterprising... joined hands and danced with a great variety of fancy steps all the way from the camp to the dig' with Hilda Petrie and Margaret Murray in the moonlight to scare away the men (Murray, 116). At the age of forty-eight she rode with Hilda Petrie and an Egyptian desert tracker on camel-back to Sinai, across rough mountain country and red sandstone gorges, armed with whip, revolver, and water bottle. Eckenstein later turned her archaeology into historical and imaginative reconstruction in her article 'The moon cult in Sinai' (1911), 'A History of Sinai' (1921), and her strange fable of Moses's youth under the pharaohs, 'Tutankh-aten' (1924). Fifty years before the Opies' authoritative work, she published her pioneering 'Comparative Studies in Nursery Rhymes' (1906), triggered by her sight of a cult scene in the temple of King Sety that seemed to anticipate 'The Death and Burial of Cock Robin' 3000 years later. 
Between 1908 and 1910 Eckenstein's antiquarian work gave way to the contemporary struggle for equal citizenship, as she contributed articles for the Women's Franchise League and gave public lectures on the history of the changing status of women. In 1920, at the International Women's Suffrage Alliance congress at Geneva, she helped Margery Corbett Ashby with translation of the congress proceedings from and into English, French, German, and Italian. She was interested that the international women's movement should still be urging the endowment of motherhood and the abolition of state regulation of vice -- questions discussed over thirty years earlier in the Men and Women's Club. 
Despite suffering from ill health, Lina Eckenstein continued to be intellectually vigorous to the end. She wrote the drafts of two works published posthumously -- 'A Spell of Words: Studies in Language Bearing on Custom' (1932) and 'The Women of Early Christianity' (1935) about the first women disciples, including 'those who cut off their hair and, assuming the garb of a man, went forth devoting themselves to the cure of bodies and souls' (p. xiv). Herself a lifelong sceptic, she focused on the contribution made by Christianity to humanism and feminism. She died from coma and exhaustion, together with chronic cystitis, at her home, The Cell, Little Hampden, Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire, on 4 May 1931. She was unmarried. Her friend from the Men and Women's Club days, the pioneering doctor Ethel Williams, wrote of her: 'It is easy for the feminist movement to appraise what it owes to its executive and political leaders; it is more difficult to realize what it owes to its scholars and philosophers' ('Woman's Leader'). 


@@@@@


doc= 59941


Alice Dryden (1866-1956), historian, who was born at Canons Ashby on 3 August 1866. She left the area shortly after her father's death and married John Marcon (died 1928) on 6 April 1913, eventually settling in Oxford, where she died on 4 February 1956 at 7 Hamilton Road. 


@@@@@


doc= 59945


Kendall, Henry Edward (1776-1875), architect, was born on 23 March 1776 in York. A pupil of Thomas Leverton (1743-1824), who was helped early in his career by Kendall's banker father, he may also have worked in the office of John Nash (1752-1835) before entering the barrack department of the War Office, where he remained until appointed (1823) surveyor to the districts of St Martin-in-the-Fields and St Anne, Soho, positions he held for half a century. He was a regular exhibitor at the Royal Academy (1799-1843). Twice married, his first wife, Ann (1793/4-1863), bore him four children: two sons, Henry Edward Kendall junior (1805-1885) and Charles ('b'. 'c'.1840), and two daughters, one of whom, Sophia, married his pupil Lewis Cubitt. He married secondly, Matilda Alice Clowser (died 1876), daughter of Samuel Clowser, on 1 March 1866. 
In 1825-7 Kendall completed the Gothic church of St George, Ramsgate, Kent, commenced in 1824 to designs by Henry Hemsley (died 1825): its west tower was derived from Boston Stump, Lincolnshire. This was followed by: Christ Church, Cockfosters, Middlesex (1829); Holy Trinity Church, Claygate, Surrey (1840; exhibited RA, 1841); the remodelling of Bedford Chapel, Bloomsbury Street, London (1846; dem.); and a church at Bantry, co. Cork, Ireland (1840s). 
Kendall's output was stylistically varied, rising occasionally to distinction: the Greek-Doric sessions-house and house of correction (1824-6) at Spilsby, Lincolnshire, plans of which were published in Christopher Davy's 'Architectural Precedents: with Notes and Observations', 1841, is a good example of his work. He also designed two other Lincolnshire houses of correction, at Spalding (1824) and Louth (1828; exhibited RA, 1829). In 1828 he submitted Classical and Gothic entries for the competition to build the sessions-house at Sleaford, Lincolnshire, winning with a Tudor Gothic essay (completed 1831), and, in the same town, designed the east range and chapel of the Tudor Gothic Carr's Hospital almshouses (1830), and (probably) the south range (1841-6). In 1832 he won the competition for the design of the buildings at Kensal Green cemetery, Middlesex, with proposals in the Gothic style which were published in 'Sketches of the Approved Designs of a Chapel and Gateway Entrances... at Kensal Green' (1832) with lithographs by Thomas Allom, but Gothic met with opposition, and the buildings later erected to designs by John Griffith of Finsbury (1796-1888) were in the Greek revival style. 
With John Douglas Hopkins (died 1869) Kendall entered Gothic proposals for the Houses of Parliament competition (1835), won by Charles Barry. By the early 1830s his son Henry Edward Kendall junior was working with him, and together they carried out various schemes, including: the esplanade and tunnel, Kemp Town, Brighton (1828-30); houses at Brighton, including 19-20 Sussex Square (1829-31); and the hotel, pier, and gardens at Rosherville, Northfleet, near Gravesend (1837). Kendall designed the workhouses at Uckfield, Sussex, and Semington, Wiltshire (1836-9); the school for blind children in St John's Wood, London (1838); the corn exchange, Sudbury, Suffolk (1841-2); the rectories at Tillington, near Petworth, Sussex (1817-18; exhibited RA, 1818), and Fishtoft, Lincolnshire (1826; dem.); 24 Belgrave Square, London, a handsome Greek-Ionic composition (1827-33); the remodelling of Haverholme Priory, Lincolnshire (1830; dem.; exhibited RA, 1830); Ashurst Lodge, Surrey ('c'.1835; exhibited RA, 1838); additions to The Castle, Chiddingstone, Kent (1837-8; exhibited RA, 1838); and sundry works at Wimpole Hall, Cambridgeshire (1842-5). 
With his son Henry, Kendall helped to found the Institute of British Architects; early meetings to that end were held in his house, 17 Suffolk Street, Pall Mall, London, in 1834, the year in which he was elected a fellow of the institute. 
Tall, handsome, generous, with refined and gentlemanly manners, Kendall was personally successful. A competent architect, his houses were among the finest of his time, and he was a master of scenic and picturesque effects, as his developments at Brighton and Rosherville demonstrated. In old age he was called the Nestor of British architecture ('The Builder', 33, 9 Jan 1875, 33). He died at home at 78 Dean Street, Soho, London, on 4 January 1875 and was buried on 12 January 1875 in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 59956


Sir James Nicoll McAdam (1786-1852), builder and administrator of roads, was born at Sauchrie House, Ayrshire, on 9 April 1786. He married Harriet Younger, and they had at least two children. He followed a career as a government contractor, supplying the Ordnance, the Royal Military College, and other departments, for several years, until in 1817 he undertook the surveyorship of the Epsom Trust at the request of his busy father. He went on to become the surveyor to thirty-nine turnpike trusts, including the Metropolitan Trust established in 1826 (7 Geo. IV c. 142), which amalgamated fourteen London trusts north of the Thames. The new trust controlled the chief roads radiating to the north and west of the city. Although not always above criticism, he showed the same skills of professional competence in road construction and financial management as his father had done, allied to an attention to detail that enabled him personally to assemble the facts on the turnpike trusts in England and Wales presented annually to parliament from 1836. He became a distinguished professional figure in his own right and although family piety held his knighthood, granted in 1834, to be in lieu of one declined by his father, it may also have been granted on individual but overshadowed merit. The timing of the cartoon 'Colossus of Roads' (1827), the fact that the figure is athwart the main north and west roads into the metropolis, and that he bears a closer resemblance to the son than the father, suggest that popular sentiment may here have been referring to another talented member of the McAdam family and not their progenitor. 


@@@@@


doc= 59962


Hinden, Rita (1909-1971), journalist and campaigner on colonial issues, was born on 16 December 1909 in Cape Town, Cape Colony, and given the name Rebecca, which she never used. She was the second of the four children of Jacob or Jacov Gesundheit (1880-1955), an ostrich farmer originally from Warsaw, Poland, and his wife, Bella Harris (1881-1950), who was born in Lodz. After the farm failed in 1912 the family moved into the city, where Jacob prospered sufficiently in the textile industry to emigrate with them to Palestine in 1927 -- the first South African family to do so -- and to establish himself in the citrus industry in Tel Aviv. At home Rita received a traditional Jewish preparation for marriage and family life, and she became fluent in Hebrew. Wanting to pursue her studies further, after matriculating in December 1925 from the Seminary of Good Hope, she attended the University of Cape Town for a year. In Tel Aviv she could find no equivalent higher education and so practised journalism until she could prevail upon her father to allow her to continue her education in England. In 1928 she entered the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE), where she joined some socialist and Jewish societies. On gaining a second-class degree in economics in 1931 she returned to journalism in Palestine. The previous year, on a Young Zionists walking holiday, she had met, and soon became engaged to, Elchon Hinden (1907-1977), a graduate of Cambridge University and a medical student at St George's Hospital, London. His father, a Latvian, had started as a barrow-boy and became a moneylender in Liverpool. The couple married in Tel Aviv on 14 February 1933 and returned to London for Elchon to complete specialist training in paediatrics, though as ardent Zionists they intended to settle in Palestine. Meanwhile they joined the Willesden branch of the Independent Labour Party. 
Their return to Palestine in 1935 was a disappointment. Possibly because her family were settled there, Rita easily found work as a freelance journalist. In addition, under the auspices of the Jewish Agency for Palestine Economic Research Institute, supervised by David Horowitz, she undertook research into the Palestinian economy. While there Rita developed osteosclerosis, a condition of the inner ear, aggravated by pregnancy, in which the bones fuse to the ear-drum, resulting in deafness. The only remedy at that time was a hearing aid; however, shortly before her death an operation restored her hearing, to her great delight. At the same time, Elchon encountered difficulty in obtaining a permanent hospital post because of local medical ethics and practices, and both Elchon and Rita were troubled by the aggressive nationalism and dogmatism developing in Palestine in reaction to Hitler's activities in Europe. They became agnostics, and in 1938, while on holiday in England, decided after great heart searching that they should bring up their children, Judith and Jonathan, in London. 
Although a proud and devoted mother, Rita could not settle into the housewifely role envisaged by her parents. With the help of a nanny she was able to return to the LSE to complete her research and in 1939 was awarded a doctorate for her thesis 'Palestine: an experiment in colonialism'. Spin-offs from that research were four papers written in collaboration with Horowitz and her husband on Palestinian industry, economy, demography, and food. Following advice from R. R. Kuczinski, a reader at the LSE, to specialize in colonial economic studies, she sought openings in that field. Early in 1939 she had joined both the Labour Party and the Fabian Society. A few days before the Hindens had departed for Tel Aviv, at an Independent Labour Party reception, Rita had greatly impressed Arthur Creech Jones by her interest in colonial issues. He kept in touch with her activities and in 1939 contrived her appointment as assistant to Leonard Woolf in drawing up a colonial version of the society's series 'Facts and Figures'. When the Second World War broke out, G. D. H. Cole and Margaret Cole formed a Fabian war aims committee. Rita was made joint secretary with Margaret Cole, principally to liaise with the Labour Party and other political groups embarking on similar investigations to prevent duplication of work. The Fabians chose to study the League of Nations, the colonies, and post-war reconstruction. Advised by a working party of Margery Perham, Creech Jones, Leonard Barnes, and Julian Huxley, Rita produced 'Plan for Africa' (1942), which defined most of the principles of Fabian colonial policy developed and expounded during the war years. 
Rita Hinden always claimed that she knew nothing about the colonies as a whole before 1938. At the outset of this new work she had great difficulty in gathering reliable facts. Discussion of this problem with Woolf and Margaret Cole led to the creation of the Fabian Colonial Bureau, to act as a 'clearing-house' for information of all kinds on the colonies, to provide the Labour Party with a sound basis for the formation of colonial policy, to supply MPs with reliable facts for parliamentary debates on colonial affairs, and to organize their questions in the house. Creech Jones, who had long pressed for such a body within the labour movement, was nominated chairman and Rita its unsalaried secretary. Thus began a powerful partnership and a deep friendship which lasted far longer than their running of the bureau. This exacting work filled the painful gap caused by the necessary evacuation of her children to the country and Elchon's departure for India in the Royal Army Medical Corps. To elicit information, Rita consulted Creech Jones's contacts in the Colonial Office, and thereby gained the trust and friendship of colonial officials and servants. She devised conferences of Fabians, academics, and colonial experts, and edited and wrote much of the journal 'Empire' (later 'Venture') as well as a continuous stream of 'Tracts', 'Research' series, and 'Colonial Controversy' series pamphlets on specific colonial subjects. These helped shape opinion in Britain and throughout the empire on political, social, and economic colonial development; her edition of 'Fabian Colonial Essays' (1945) co-ordinated and lent further authority to those statements. Rita and Creech Jones became recognized as experts on colonial affairs and respected advisers to and friends of many of the emerging political leaders in the colonies. Her office was an essential port of call for colonial officers on leave. To her delight, she was an official guest of the Ghanaian government at its independence celebration. 
Before 1945 Rita and Creech Jones jointly led delegations on topical issues to the colonial and dominions offices. After 1945 her clear-thinking, creative criticism was recognized by appointment to the Colonial Office's Economic and Development Council and its labour advisory committee, the Labour Party's advisory committee on imperial affairs, and the TUC's colonial affairs committee. After serving very critically on the 1951 Waddington commission of inquiry into the constitution of British Guiana, she became a founding member of the Africa Bureau in protest against the federation of Central Africa. 
By 1950 opinion on development as an essential prerequisite for independence was becoming less generous because of the perceived cost. Rita Hinden, hurt by the current trend, resigned from the bureau, which she thought had become less of a research body and too much of a pressure group. She moved to the Labour Party research department before taking on the editorship of the monthly publication 'Socialist Commentary'. In editorials and articles in this journal, and in her choice of contributors, Hinden was again able to give voice to her ardent and essentially ethical form of socialism, which made her an influential revisionist and the ideal presenter of 'The Radical Tradition' (1964), the memorial volume of R. H. Tawney's essays. 'Socialist Commentary' presented the views of the Gaitskellite section of the Labour Party as opposed to those of Harold Wilson's adherents and 'Tribune'; nevertheless, Rita herself staunchly opposed Hugh Gaitskell's anti-Common Market stance at the 1962 Labour Party conference. In 'Socialist Commentary' and in many articles for other journals and newspapers she expounded the fundamental principles of socialism, whether writing about trade unionism, higher education, or political developments in the newly independent states. 
In her youth Rita Hinden was good-looking, with dark eyes and hair, a thoughtful, listening expression, and a sensitive mouth. In her early sixties one was struck less by her appearance -- the grey hair escaping from a bun, lines on her face, bird-like posture of her head, and slight limp (the relic of a mild stroke suffered in her fifties) -- than by her benign, gentle authority, that of the Jewish matriarch, which coaxed others to accede to her wishes. She died of a second stroke on 18 November 1971, at Whipps Cross Hospital, London, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. Memorial lectures were given in her honour until 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 59970


Osgood, James Ripley (1836-1892), publisher, was born on 22 April 1836 in Fryeburg, Oxford, Maine, USA, the son of Colonel Edward Lewis Osgood and his wife, Abigail Ripley Dana, the daughter of a distinguished Boston family. He was the brother of Kate Putnam Osgood ('b'. 1841), who later became a poet and wrote the famous civil war poem 'Driving home the cows'. He was educated at Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine, from 1850 to 1854, and in August 1855 became a clerk in the publishing firm of Ticknor & Fields. He was made a junior partner in 1864, and it was in this capacity that he travelled to London in 1867. He was commissioned with the task of soliciting contributions from Charles Dickens for the company's periodicals, but a more significant outcome was reported in the 'American Literary Gazette' on 1 June 1867: 'One of the results of his successful tour is [that]... Charles Dickens... [has] decided to recognize Ticknor & Fields as the only authorized publisher of his works in America' (Moss and Moss, 84n.). 
It was at this time that Dickens was considering a second reading tour of North America and was in contact with J. T. Fields, among others, about arrangements. Osgood became involved in these, travelling with George Dolby, the tour's general manager, on the initial inspection of venues. His extensive social connections were useful in this regard; Dolby called him 'one of the most popular men in America' (Dolby, 107). On the tour proper Osgood was engaged in administrative duties, including acting as treasurer -- Dickens commented that the financial records were 'excellently kept by Mr. Osgood' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 12.12) and engaging in the constant battle against speculators, attempting (with limited success) to prevent ticket touts from obtaining and re-selling tickets. He was also a member of Dickens's unofficial 'body-guard', conducting the novelist to and from his readings and protecting him during the performances, in one instance literally throwing a dog out of the room 'in a transport of presence of mind and fury' (ibid., 12.3, 41). Dickens described him in another letter with a combination of admiration and good-humoured fun: 'Osgood is on guard. He made a most brilliant appearance before the Philadelphia public, and looked hard at them. The mastery of his eye diverted their attention from his boots: -- charming in themselves, but (unfortunately) two left ones' (ibid., 12.18). 
Osgood and Dolby also paid particular attention to Dickens's morale, as he himself admitted to being 'often heavy, and rarely sleep[ing] much'. Osgood's place in Dickensian legend was secured by his role in a 'ridiculous', twelve-mile walking competition designed to keep Dickens in spirits; as the Boston Bantam, Osgood represented America, competing against Dolby, as the Man of Ross ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 12.29-30, 714). Dickens drew up the articles of agreement for the contest, held on 29 February 1868, and Osgood emerged victorious by half a mile. Dickens later often referred to him as the 'Bantam', and he was feted at a sumptuous dinner given by Dickens for eighteen friends in honour of the event. Upon his return from America, however, Dickens became caught up with business and a British reading tour, and neglected to correspond with Osgood for over a year. This led to a remonstrative letter from Osgood; Dickens admitted the fault, assuring Osgood in December 1868 that 'The remembrance of your ever ready interest and zeal, and of your cheery companionship in scorching railway cars and eccentric hotels, is never to be so lightly dealt with on my side' (ibid., 12.238). 
Due largely to his success in dealing with Dickens's second reading tour Osgood became a senior partner of Fields, Osgood & Co. in 1868. Having accumulated sufficient publishing experience he set up on his own in 1871 as James R. Osgood & Co., a company that published Henry James's first volume of fiction, 'A Passionate Pilgrim and other Tales' (1875), as well as some other early works by James, including 'Roderick Hudson' (1875) and 'The American' (1877). As director of this firm Osgood also arranged with Thomas Hardy for the American publication of some works first published in the 'Cornhill Magazine'. In May 1885, however, Henry James noted that 'J. R. Osgood & Co., my dear Boston publishers, have failed' (James, 79). Although a 'man of integrity... he had apparently managed his business poorly' (Edel, 82), as his 'enthusiasm for literary publishing [had] unfortunately often remained unchecked by economic realities' (Winship, 23). After this bankruptcy Osgood left America and settled in London in 1886. There he acted as an agent for Harper & Brothers, where, while he had few further dealings with James, he continued to correspond with Hardy, this time about the printing of his work in 'Harper's New Monthly Magazine'. In November 1890, with the assistance of Harpers, Osgood set up business again -- as partner, with Clarence W. McIlvaine, in Osgood, McIlvaine & Co., at 45 Albemarle Street. In the following year they published Hardy's 'A Group of Noble Dames' and the first edition in volume format of 'Tess of the D'Urbervilles' (initially published in instalments in 'The Graphic') -- commissions given to the new firm by Hardy probably '[i]n part as a gesture of friendship towards... Osgood' (Millgate, 308). 
Osgood died at his home, 161A Piccadilly, London, on 18 May 1892; Hardy travelled up to the city for his funeral, on 22 May. The firm continued for a few years, publishing in 1895-6 the handsome and textually important 'first uniform and complete edition' of Hardy's Wessex novels, which included the first edition in book format of 'Jude the Obscure' (1896 [1 November 1895]). Osgood, McIlvaine & Co., however, was soon afterwards absorbed by Harper & Brothers, with McIlvaine continuing to act as their representative in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 59974


Frederick Perkins (1780-1860), who was baptized on 29 September 1780 at St Swithin London Stone. With apparent relish at taking down the 'arrivistes', Hester Thrale noted that they were 'sad mean boys... [their mother] fancied they would be scholars, but they prov'd poor creatures it seems' (Pudney, 73). Frederick was apprenticed at the brewery in February 1796, and received half of his father's quarter share in the concern by an indenture of September 1808; Henry received the other moiety, probably at the same time. Neither son appears to have taken a particularly forward role in the firm's management, though both served a term as master of the Brewers' Company -- Henry in 1817 and Frederick in 1823. 


@@@@@


doc= 59975


Piercy, Benjamin (1827-1888), civil engineer, was born at Cilcain, Flintshire, on 16 March 1827, the third son of Robert Piercy (1773-1855), surveyor, road contractor, and valuer, and his wife, Arabella, 'nee' Williams. His birthplace is often cited as Trefeglwys, Montgomeryshire, probably a family home, where his elder brother Robert Piercy (1825-1894), also a civil engineer, was born. He was trained as a surveyor in his father's office and then became chief assistant to the surveyor and land agent Charles Mickleburgh of Montgomery. He studied railway engineering in his spare time. His first practical work in this field was for the railway engineer Henry Robertson, who is said to have engaged the young Piercy in making the parliamentary surveys for the Shrewsbury and Chester Railway. This line included the construction of the nineteen-arch Dee Viaduct in 1846-8, which at 1508 feet (459.6 metres) long and 147 feet (44.8 metres) high was the largest then built. Robertson employed Piercy on two of the early surveys for lines between Oswestry and Newtown in mid-Wales. 
In 1852-3 Piercy independently prepared the engineering plans for the Shrewsbury and Welshpool Railway and is credited with pushing the project through parliament, although the authorizing act for the present railway was not passed until 1856. He married, on 19 September 1855, Sarah (died 1912), daughter of Thomas Davies, farmer, of Montgomery, with whom he had three sons and six daughters. 
Piercy first became associated with the influential Welsh railway contractors David Davies and Thomas Savin during the construction of the Vale of Clwyd Railway in 1857-8. He then joined them as engineer of the Oswestry and Newtown Railway after the death of the original engineer, Rice Hopkins, in 1858. He probably designed the Italianate three companies headquarters building at Llanidloes that was constructed in 1864 after the completion of the Mid-Wales Railway. On the linked Oswestry and Newtown Railway, his elder brother joined him in what became a long partnership, both joining Savin and Davies as resident engineers under the engineer Joseph Cubitt in 1857. The fine French-style pavilioned station at Welshpool, the company headquarters in 1860-61, is often said (like Oswestry station) to be Piercy's design. In 1860 Piercy was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers and by 1861 all the mid-Wales railway companies and Piercy himself had moved their offices to Westminster. 
Piercy's work with Davies, taking the continuation of these lines through the Cambrian Mountains to the coast by the construction of the Newtown and Machynlleth Railway, launched his international engineering career. Work started in 1859 with Piercy as engineer on the mountain summit section at Talerddig. The original plan was for a tunnel but the contractors altered this when it was realized what a large quantity of stone and materials was required for the succession of bridge and earthworks needed to cross ravines on the sharp descent to the coast. The 120 foot cutting was the deepest in the world, and the railway was completed at moderate cost, both of which facts attracted international attention. Below the summit the railway was actually carried over the bed of the Wynnstay stream in a 450 foot continuous arch because of the restricted terrain. 
In 1862 the Anglo-Italian Royal Sardinian Railway Company sought the advice of Piercy and Davies. The concession involved the construction of 250 miles of railways on the island of Sardinia. Plans and sections had already been prepared by Italian engineers working for the Baratelli Company. These plans included 20 miles of tunnels and very heavy earthworks through the mountainous terrain and there was no local contractor willing to undertake the construction within the time allowed under the concession or within the funds available. Piercy, with Davies's help, resurveyed the projected railways and considerably reduced the engineering involved. Piercy also won the contract for engineering of the Napoleon-Vendee railway between Tours and Bressuire and on to the Vendee coast at Les Sables d'Olonne, a distance of 160 miles (257 kilometres), construction taking place between 1862 and 1866. 
In Wales, Piercy and Savin concluded the construction of the missing link on what became the Cambrian coast mainline by engineering the Aberystwyth and Welsh Coast Railway to Pwllheli in 1862-7. Considerable engineering features included the cliff-edge line at Y Friog around the western flank of the Cadair Idris massif and the designs for two very large estuary viaducts over the Dyfi and Mawddach. Unfortunately borings failed to locate firm foundations for the former, and a diversion line was built. The 2,400 foot 113-span length of the latter, carried on 500 timber piles, was the longest in Wales but was completed by another engineer after Piercy supported the losing side in a boardroom battle. The company headquarters station in 'cottage orne' style at Machynlleth may have been designed by Piercy. 
Other railways for which Piercy is credited with the engineering in the 1860s include three more sections linked or near to his mid-Wales and border lines: the Mid-Wales Railway (Caersws to Talgarth, 1859-64); the Hereford, Hay, and Brecon Railway (1861-4); and the Oswestry, Ellesmere, and Whitchurch Railway (1863-4), with a simplified Italianate headquarters station at Ellesmere. Lines in north Wales and the borders included the Denbigh, Ruthin, and Corwen Railway (1862-4); the Bishops Castle Railway (1865); the Hoylake Railway (Birkenhead-Hoylake, 1866); the Wrexham, Mold, and Connahs Quay Railway (1862-6); the Buckley Railway (1865-6); and the Caernarvonshire Railway (Caernarfon-Menai Bridge, 1866-7). 
In Sardinia work on the easier sections of the railways had almost been completed by British contractors in 1865 when it was stopped until 1869 by the outbreak of war between Italy and Austria. Piercy was then recalled by the Royal Sardinian Railway Company. He negotiated a new finance agreement with the Italian government under which the 197 kilometres of line already started were to be completed by 1874. For some months he revitalized construction, acting as contractor before returning to his role as engineer-in-chief in Sardinia in 1870-79, assisted by his elder brother Robert, also an engineer. These lines were largely completed by 1872. The 194 kilometres of more difficult lines over the mountains were then completed by 1880-81. As an afterthought he was asked to construct a heavily engineered 27 kilometre line to the new port of Golfo di Aranci, where he also designed a mole and other harbour works. 
Piercy was given land on his first visit to Sardinia in 1862. He returned for a brief supervisory visit in 1865 and then after an initial period working in India settled on the island for the eleven years from 1870 to 1881; some of his nine children were born there. In 1879-83 he accommodated his wife and his large family in his new four-towered Anglo-Italian style Villa Piercy on his 3700 hectare Badde Salighes estate (between Bolotana and Bonorva) at the highest point of his railway network (of which he was also a shareholder). He sought to improve the economic development of the island by applying the latest technological principles to agriculture and mining and became a substantial entrepreneur. He bought land throughout the island from Chia to Palau. He constructed over 50 miles of roads on his estates and built a dairy and cheese factory using the latest technology and interbred Welsh and Sardinian animals. Earlier in his career he had constructed railways connecting with the Ffestiniog Railway, then pioneering steam locomotion on mountainous railways, and he outlined plans for a possible additional 2000 kilometres of lines in the mountains of the more remote parts of Sardinia, a significant part of which were subsequently built. His efforts attracted the attention of Giuseppe Garibaldi, whose son Ricciotti became Piercy's godson and later his apprentice in India. In recognition of his service King Umberto of Italy made him a commander of the Italian Crown and there were several royal visits to his estates. Umberto later called on Piercy to improve the water supply (rebuilding the Aqua Marcia) of the Italian capital and also to canalize the River Tiber through Rome. 
In 1879 Piercy and his brother began building the 90 mile Assam Railway through the tea plantations and up to the coalmines, which the Piercys substantially developed together with the associated petroleum springs. 
Piercy returned to Wales in 1881 and acquired Marchwiel Hall to the south of Wrexham. He pushed forward the development of north-east Wales in tandem with Henry Robertson and developed its links to the port of Liverpool. He offered to stand as a Liberal candidate at a parliamentary by-election in Peterborough in 1883, but withdrew to avoid splitting the Liberal vote. After attending a dinner of the City of London Gold and Silver Wire Drawers' Company Piercy contracted bronchopneumonia and died of that and cardiac failure at his London home, 15 Portman Square, on 24 March 1888. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 
Britain was the source of international ideas for railway development between 1830 and about 1860. Piercy is especially important for exporting the lessons learned in effective railway engineering in the mountains of Wales, for standard and narrow-gauge practice, to other areas of Europe and to Asia. He was unusual in becoming resident in a particular area of continental Europe and playing a critical role in its railway and economic development. His legacy is in the great engineering works he designed at Talerddig, Y Friog, and Barmouth in mid-Wales and the entire mountainous railway network of Sardinia. Among the various buildings attributed to Piercy with varying degrees of certainty are the surviving and impressive headquarter stations of Llanidloes, Machynlleth, and Ellesmere, and many of those in Sardinia. The Villa Piercy and its estates were expropriated in 1953 after a perceived conflict between British and Italian trust laws, but the building survives surrounded by the forests of Welsh and Sardinian trees planted by Piercy. Piercy's descendents live elsewhere on an island where his contributions to its economic development are still treated with considerable respect. 


@@@@@


doc= 59984


Salmon, Frederick (1796-1868), rectal surgeon and founder of St Mark's Hospital, London, was born on 11 April 1796 in Bath, the son of Henry Salmon (1754/5-1827), attorney, and his wife, Denne (1762/3-1853). Salmon was the sixth of nine children, of whom three boys and four girls survived into adulthood. His brothers Edward and Henry were apprenticed in law, whereas Frederick was apprenticed on 27 November 1811 to Joseph Hume Spry ('c'.1778-1859), a member of a family of apothecary-surgeons in Bath. Salmon attended the Casualty Hospital in Bath for two years, possibly as a pupil to James Norman, to whose surgeon son, George, Salmon dedicated a book. Salmon was also associated with William White (1762-1826), surgeon to the City Infirmary and Dispensary and one of the few rectal disease specialists of the time. 
Salmon became a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries on 27 March 1817 and followed Spry to London to gain experience so that he could practise there. From October 1817 for six months he walked the wards at St Bartholomew's Hospital, Smithfield, as a pupil of John Abernethy. In 1818 Salmon was granted membership of the Royal College of Surgeons, and in 1820 he became Abernethy's house surgeon. 
Between 1820 and 1827 Salmon attempted four times to gain an appointment at the General Dispensary in Aldersgate Street, in the City of London. In 1820 he declared that he would not, as usually happened, pay to create governors who would then vote him onto the staff. However, in 1824 he did pay out at least 200 guineas, but failed to match a competitor. 
In 1827, on Abernethy's retirement, Salmon sought to succeed him at St Bartholomew's but discovered that Abernethy was supporting another applicant, Frederick Skey, who had promised to pass the position later to Abernethy's young son. The newly established reformist medical journal 'The Lancet' took up the case, but to no avail. In 1827 Salmon finally secured an appointment to the General Dispensary after vote-buying had been banned there. 
Salmon lived and practised in the City of London, from 1818 at 30 Bucklersbury, off Cheapside, and from 1828 at 12 Old Broad Street. He married Clara Breese (1805/6-1877), possibly the daughter of a clock manufacturer of 5 North Place, Gray's Inn Road, London, about 1828. They had three sons. The eldest, Frederick Breese Salmon ('c'.1832-1853), joined the 9th Bombay native infantry and died aged twenty-one on 17 January 1853 at Belgaum, in east India. The second son, Percy Howell Salmon, was born in Dulwich and died in Ostend on 1 June 1893. The third son, William Mayer Salmon ('c'.1837-1880), became a civil servant and magistrate in Bombay. 
By the late 1820s Salmon was specializing in the treatment of rectal diseases. He published 'A Practical Essay on Stricture of the Rectum' (1828) and 'Practical Observations on Prolapsus of the Rectum' (1831). He also published in 'The Lancet'. Salmon argued that stricture of the rectum was the cause of many rectal complaints. However, James O'Beirne (1786-1862), a Dublin surgeon, challenged him, arguing that what Salmon described as stricture was in fact part of the normal rectum. Later surgeons concurred with O'Beirne's interpretation. 
Salmon associated himself with medical reformers. In 1833 he gave an oration to the Medical Society of London in which he lambasted the Royal College of Surgeons for promoting the lucrative interests of the few rather than supporting surgery generally or fighting quackery. Also in 1833 Salmon lost his position at the dispensary, when the staff resigned over perceived lay interference. If Salmon were to secure a hospital position again, essential for its contacts with well-off governors who might become patients, one possibility was to establish his own institution. By the 1830s a number of special hospitals were being established, despite opposition from leaders in the medical profession. 
Salmon was a member of the City of London Club, whose chairman, John Masterman, a banker and later an MP, supported Salmon as he now established his own hospital. At least eight of the club's committee members and about twenty-five other members were among the founding benefactors when, in 1835, Salmon set up in Aldersgate Street the Benevolent Dispensary for the Relief of the Poor afflicted with Fistula, Piles and Other Diseases of the Rectum. Club member William Taylor Copeland, of the porcelain makers Copeland Spode, and lord mayor of London (1835-6), was its first president. Within its first year the dispensary became an infirmary with seven beds. Salmon was the only full (that is consultant) surgeon; he was assisted by a resident house surgeon and a matron. 
In 1837 the infirmary moved to a 14 bed house in Charterhouse Square, off Smithfield. In 1853 it moved again, to a new building in the City Road near the Angel, Islington. The governors wished to name the hospital something suitable and unembarrassing, while Salmon wished to emphasize its speciality. It became St Mark's Hospital for Fistula and Other Diseases of the Rectum, and was officially opened by the lord mayor on St Mark's day, 25 April 1854. Salmon used his hospital position to good effect: he developed influential treatments, and his private practice flourished. Among his notable patients was Charles Dickens, treated in 1841 for fistula. By 1849 Salmon and his family had moved to 18 Lower Berkeley Street; afterwards he moved again, to Manchester Square, though he also continued to practise in Old Broad Street. 
In 1857 Salmon retired from practice and from active surgical involvement at St Mark's. He moved to Woodfield Cedars, Ombersley, near Droitwich, Worcestershire, though retaining his house in Manchester Square. He retired as honorary surgeon in 1859, and to mark this the governors commissioned a portrait by Francis Grant RA, to hang in the hospital. 
On 3 January 1868 Salmon died of acute bronchitis at Woodfield Cedars; he was buried on 10 January in Kensal Green cemetery, in west London. His widow, Clara, died of cancer in Brighton, Sussex, aged seventy-one, on 23 November 1877. Following his death the 'British Medical Journal' suggested that 'the course he took was prompted by difficulties in pursuing an useful and honourable career in a general hospital', and that his establishment of his hospital was 'contrary to the interests of the profession and the public', and had 'encouraged similar enterprises'. Nevertheless, it noted that he had 'influence in certain wealthy circles' and a 'lucrative practice', despite professional isolation ('BMJ', 1.41-2). 
However, it was specialization such as Salmon's which gathered in pace in the nineteenth century and took off in the twentieth. Staff at St Mark's increasingly came to play a key role at the top of the profession and in developing the fields of rectal, later colorectal, surgery, and also of gastroenterology. Salmon could thus be judged a successful medical entrepreneur at a time when entrepreneurial activity of all kinds was in the ascendant. 


@@@@@


doc= 59994


Stephen, Harriet Marian (1840-1875), wife of Leslie Stephen, was born in London on 27 May 1840, the youngest of the three daughters of William Makepeace Thackeray (1811-1863) and his wife, Isabella Gethin Creagh, 'nee' Shawe (1816-1893). One of her sisters, Jane, had died in infancy in 1839, but Minny (as she was always known) was very close to her older sister, Anne ['see 'Ritchie, Anne Isabella]. Shortly after Minny's birth, her mother sank into a deep post-partum depression, the gravity of which her father did not wholly appreciate. The depression developed into a more serious mental illness, and Isabella Thackeray was subsequently confined in a private asylum in 1842. Thackeray then put his daughters in the care of his mother in Paris for the next four years, and reclaimed them when he moved to 13 Young Street, London. 
The unusual circumstances of their childhood meant that Minny and her sister were closer to their famous father than might otherwise have been the case. In London they were brought up in the midst of literary visitors and guests -- Tennyson recalled a young Minny looking up from a book that she was reading and asking her father: 'Papa, why don't you write books like 'Nicholas Nickleby'?' (Gerin, 31). Minny's education, like that of Anne, was not rigorous -- it was conducted by a series of governesses, visiting masters, the occasional attendance at lectures, and the experience of foreign travel. Unlike her sister, however, Minny demonstrated no particular gift for writing, although her letters demonstrate 'a capacity for shrewd and witty commentary on the people she met' (Peters, 140). Thackeray seems to have worried that his youngest daughter might have inherited the mental fragility of her mother, and was very careful to shield her from worrying or depressing situations; part of the reason for the move to Young Street had been to remove Minny from the constant influence of his mother's severe Calvinism. But he also felt that Minny represented 'the balance wheel in the family' ('Selected Letters of Leslie Stephen', 1.280), her practical intelligence and sweetness of personality counteracting the sometimes fiery creativity of Thackeray and Anne. 
In 1860 Thackeray was finally financially secure enough to buy an impressive house at 2 Palace Green, near Kensington Palace. Mrs M. C. M. Simpson recalled the cooking parties and amateur theatricals that the family held there, saying that Minny was a 'first-rate actress' (Simpson, 107), and commenting more generally on her appearance and character: 'No one who knew intimately Thackeray's younger daughter... could ever forget her. The heroine in her sister's novel 'Old Kensington' must have been drawn from her. Her beautiful bronze hair, brilliantly white teeth and delicate complexion one minute with the soft tint of the china rose and then again white as a lily, gave one the impression of the most exquisite freshness. One day she would look like the young girl she really was and, on the next, twenty years older, so varying were her moods and expression. (ibid., 109)' The death of their father in 1863 left both his daughters desolate, and they went to live with their gloomily Calvinistic grandmother, who insisted on casting doubts on the salvation of Thackeray's soul. She died a year later, and by 1865 Minny and Anne were entering into company again. Thackeray had died intestate, but Minny and Anne were left in comfortable financial circumstances, and they bought and shared a house at 16 Onslow Gardens. Here they divided the household duties, Minny acting as housekeeper and Anne as hostess, each finding the occupation of the other distasteful. 
It was at a dinner party held by Lady Stephen that Minny first met Leslie Stephen (1832-1904). Elizabeth Gaskell had also been present, and told Stephen afterwards that she had foreseen that Minny would become his wife. Stephen took his time over the courtship, however: 'I was shy, diffident, and fully impressed with the conviction acquired at Cambridge that I was an old don -- a superannuated bachelor standing apart from all thought of domestic happiness' (Stephen, 'Mausoleum Book', 9-10). Nevertheless, Minny and Stephen were engaged in December 1866, and married in St Paul's, Onslow Square, on 19 June 1867 at eight o'clock in the morning. After the wedding, which was small and informal, they continued to live in the Onslow Gardens house with Anne. 
Minny and Stephen had a very successful marriage. Stephen adored his loving, sincere, and unaffected wife, and Minny was quick to interest herself in his pursuits and views. She accompanied him on his tour of America in 1868 and, although no great walker, she shared in his love of mountains and mountaineering. They had honeymooned in Switzerland, and Minny's interest in the subject meant that she later prevented Stephen from being part of the tragic expedition in 1874 on which James Marshall was killed in Courmayeur -- Stephen, in this case, had deferred to her opinion: 'Minny fancied him [Marshall] to be an unsafe walker' (Stephen, 'Mausoleum Book', 21). She was also interested in Stephen's intellectual views, even in his most controversial opinions. Of his 'Broad church' article in 'Fraser's Magazine' (March 1870) she wrote to her brother that she was 'very thankful that he has written it, & that I belong to a man who can speak the bare truth & who tries to make others do the same' ('Selected Letters of Leslie Stephen', 1.18). 
Minny suffered two miscarriages before giving birth prematurely to her daughter, Laura Makepeace (1870-1945), on 7 December 1870. In 1873 the couple moved to their new home at 8 Southwell Gardens, and in summer 1875 Minny was pregnant again, but on 27 November 1875 she was taken ill in the night with convulsions and did not regain consciousness, dying of eclampsia on 28 November 1875, Stephen's forty-third birthday. He never celebrated his birthday again. Minny was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. Their daughter, Laura, was later diagnosed as mentally handicapped and after much soul-searching on Stephen's part was placed in an institution for the mentally infirm in 1891. 
Minny seems to have been somewhat sentimentalized by Stephen and his contemporaries as the perfectly gentle, sweet-tempered, and motherly Victorian woman. Stephen's view of her accords well with his pre-feminist outlook. Wary of emancipated women, he felt that they lacked the education needed for the vote, and as a young Cambridge radical he had opposed the reform for fear that 'it might save the Church of England for a quarter of a century' (Annan, 110). Harriet Stephen's letters, however, reveal aspects of her character which have been glossed over: 'Like her father, she had an acute sense of human ridiculousness, which she could pillory in a phrase, and she had a rod of iron in her character' ('Selected Letters of Leslie Stephen', 1.18). She certainly helped to inspire a new sense of confidence and assertiveness in her husband. Though Stephen later remarried, he was devastated by the loss of his first wife and continued to respect her memory; she features prominently in the first section of his 'Mausoleum Book', a memoir of his domestic life, which suggests that, while he felt guilty about leaving domestic arrangements to his second wife, Julia, he had been less distanced from them in his life with Harriet. 


@@@@@


doc= 60012


Bolan, Marc (1947-1977), musician and poet, was born on 30 September 1947 in Hackney, London, the second child of Simeon Feld, cosmetics salesman (1920-1991), and his wife, Phyllis Winifred, 'nee' Atkins (1927-1991). The energy of 1950s rock'n'roll captivated the young Mark Feld, prompting him to take up the guitar. He left school at fourteen, worked as a model, and wrote reams of prose and poetry in his characteristic dyslexic hand. He released several solo records in the mid-1960s, changed his name to Marc Bolan, and joined the group John's Children for a short spell. Their hit single 'Desdemona' (1967) was banned by the BBC for what were regarded at the time as risque lyrics. When the band broke up shortly afterwards, Bolan found himself adrift in London with no musical equipment. 
During the 'summer of love' of 1967 Bolan formed an acoustic duo, called Tyrannosaurus Rex, with Steve Took (1949-1980) on bongoes, percussion, and backing vocals. Took was born in Eltham, London, on 28 July 1949, the son of Leonard Henry Porter, bakery manager, and Betty George. They recorded three albums, 'My People were Fair and had Sky in their Hair' (1968), 'Prophets, Seers, and Sages' (1968), and 'Unicorn' (1969), all produced by Tony Visconti. With the help of the disc jockey John Peel, Tyrannosaurus Rex became a successful 'underground' act. Bolan's other vital support was his wife, June Ellen Child (1943/4-1995), a record company receptionist, whom he married on 30 January 1970. She provided vital organization and a stable domestic life where the creativity of the less firmly grounded Bolan could flourish. 
The acoustic, whimsical songs of Tyrannosaurus Rex (T. Rex) contrasted with much of 1968's high-volume rock-blues and revolutionary stances; at their best, these albums have a childlike innocence. Sung with an inimitable vibrato and steeped in a Tolkienesque mythology, Bolan's songs evoked a gentler pastoral world of wizards, queens, fauns, and unicorns. This mythology also shaped 'The Warlock of Love' (1969), a best-selling collection of poetry, and other writings published posthumously. Bolan's verse shows a lack of literary awareness, yet demonstrates an instinctive sensitivity to rhyme and rhythm, and the romanticized imagery which made his song lyrics original. 

'A Beard of Stars' (1969) saw Mickey Finn (1947-2003) replace the increasingly unreliable Steve Took, who went on to join the Pink Fairies and Shagrat. Took died, after choking on a cherry stone, on 27 October 1980. Much of his music was unreleased at his death, but has since gained a cult following. On 'A Beard of Stars' Bolan introduced electric guitars into the music and, like Bob Dylan before him, faced cries of 'sell-out' from part of his audience. Dreaming of mainstream success, Bolan spent the summer of 1970 listening to old rock'n'roll records and recorded 'T. Rex' (1970), an evocative and distinctly English-sounding record that struck an excellent balance between the acoustic and electric elements. 
These sessions produced his first hit, 'Ride a white swan', which spent five months in the UK top forty, and reached number two. In March 1971 the follow-up 'Hot love' went to number one for six weeks. Steve Currie (bass) and Bill Legend (drums) were hired to make T. Rex a functioning rock quartet. Once glimpsed on television, Bolan's androgynous beauty, wild corkscrew hair, lurex jackets, and glitter make-up seized the imagination of a generation of post-1960s teenagers looking for a figurehead. Along with David Bowie, Bolan was the epitome of the 'glam rock' phenomenon. A third single, 'Get it on', went to number one for four weeks. T. Rex embarked on an autumn UK tour to promote 'Electric Warrior', one of the best-selling albums of 1971. 'Jeepster', released as a single against Bolan's wishes, went to number two, his fourth hit of the year. The music press heralded a new 'Beatlemania'. Bolan had taken elements of 1950s rock'n'roll but filtered them through a 1960s post-Dylan, post-Hendrix sensibility. It was as though Chuck Berry had collided with 'Lord of the Rings'. Sexy, commercial, yet imaginative, T. Rex seemed a breath of fresh air in the otherwise over-serious 'progressive' music scene. As a guitarist and song-writer, Bolan was self-taught and had a limited technique and no knowledge of theory. But T. Rex records of 1970-72 are full of simple but elegant lead guitar, and fine rhythm guitar playing. 
Now a teenage idol, Bolan signed with EMI, set up his own label -- the T. Rex Wax Company -- and had four more hits in 1972: 'Telegram Sam', 'Metal guru' (both number ones), 'Children of the revolution', and 'Solid gold easy action'. 'The Slider' was a patchy but strong album overall, and Bolan's biggest ever UK gigs came with two shows in March at the Wembley Empire Pool (later Wembley Arena). These were filmed by Ringo Starr and given a cinema release as 'Born to Boogie'. 
By the end of 1972 Bolan had passed his commercial and artistic peak. The music became formulaic, and stardom brought the usual problems of ego-inflation and drug abuse. Much to his frustration, America stubbornly refused to find any virtue in T. Rex, with only 'Get it on' managing to be a moderate hit, while in the UK he was eclipsed by Slade, David Bowie, and Roxy Music. By 1973 Bolan had parted from his wife June (though apparently they never divorced), and became estranged from supporters such as John Peel and his fellow disc jockey Bob Harris. Later T. Rex albums such as 'Tanx' (1973) are not without some good songs, but pretentious arrangements often overwhelm simple ideas. In 1976 Bolan regained some credibility by re-positioning himself as the 'godfather of punk' and showcasing new bands on a Granada television series entitled 'Marc'. 
On 16 September 1977, just before his thirtieth birthday, Bolan was killed when the Mini driven by his girlfriend, the singer Gloria Jones ('b'. 1947), crashed into a tree on Barnes Common, west London. Despite filling his songs with references to cars, Bolan never learned to drive, believing that like Eddie Cochran he would die in one. Bolan was survived by Rolan ('b'. 1975), the son he had with Jones. He was cremated on 20 September at Golders Green, London. 
Along with David Bowie, Marc Bolan is remembered as the leading light of early 1970s popular music in the UK, revitalizing the singles charts with records that paid homage to and successfully updated 1950s rock'n'roll. 


@@@@@


doc= 60017


Logue, Lionel George (1880-1953), speech therapist, was born on 26 February 1880 in College Town, Adelaide, South Australia, the eldest of three children of George Edward Logue, clerk, and his wife, Lavinia, 'nee' Rankin. Logue was educated at Prince Alfred College, Adelaide, between 1889 and 1896, and studied elocution with Edward Reeves. As a Christian Scientist, Logue was dedicated to healing and had originally wanted to train as a doctor but soon realized that he did not like the sight of blood. Instead, in 1902, he became secretary and assistant teacher to Edward Reeves and also studied at the Elder Conservatorium of Music. For a while Logue's career changed direction and he moved to Western Australia to work with an electrical engineering firm at a goldmine in Kalgoorlie. 
With the capital that he amassed from his engineering work Logue was able to return to his previous interest and he set up a school of elocution in Perth, where he taught elocution, public speaking, and acting. He enjoyed plays and reciting Shakespeare at concerts and founded a public speaking club. Logue also taught part time at the Young Men's Christian Association and later at Perth Technical School. It was during his residence in Perth that, on 20 March 1907 at St George's Anglican Cathedral, Logue married Myrtle Gruenert, a 21-year-old clerk, the eldest daughter of Francis Gruenert. They had three sons. 
Logue came to speech therapy, like many other of his professional peers, during the First World War. He treated soldiers returned from fighting who were afflicted with a number of speech disorders as a result of shell-shock. Logue found that he had a special talent for the treatment of stammering and was said to have effected 'dramatic cures' (Judd, 97) on these soldiers. Logue's approach to the treatment of stammering was twofold, tackling both the psychological and physical aspects of the condition. He recognized the importance of building the patient's confidence and was always keen to stress that a cure could only be effected by the stammerers themselves. He used exercises to relax muscle tension, taught correct breathing, and also slowed the patient's rate of speech considerably. 
In 1924 Logue and his family visited England for what was intended as a holiday. However, while staying in London he saw the possibilities of establishing a speech therapy practice in the capital and rented rooms at 146 Harley Street. Logue had no medical qualifications and, initially, little capital but he built up his practice steadily. The fees paid him by wealthier clients enabled him to treat poorer patients without charge. 
Logue's association with his most famous client began in October 1925; he was present when the duke of York (later George VI) gave his closing speech as president of the British Empire Exhibition in which he stammered badly throughout. Logue is reported to have said to his son that he was sure that he could 'very nearly... manage a complete cure' (Bradford, 122). The duke was put in touch with Logue by Eileen Macleod, an eminent speech therapist, who when approached concerning treatment felt that a male therapist might be more effective. The first consultation took place on 19 October 1926 in Logue's rooms; despite an initial reluctance to attempt further therapy following several previous failures, the duke was deeply impressed by Logue's confidence and sincerity saying of him 'I wish I could have found him before, as now I know the right way to breathe my fear of talking will vanish' (Wheeler-Bennett, 214). He attended sessions almost daily for about two and a half months and strictly adhered to the exercises given to him by Logue which included intoning vowels by an open window and gargling with warm water. The treatment produced an almost instant improvement and while the duke still spoke slowly and deliberately his speech showed only occasional hesitations. 
Logue was invaluable in preparing George VI for all his major speeches, using tongue twisters to aid practice and changing difficult words where necessary. He coached him in his responses for the coronation service on 12 May 1937, which he watched from a specially chosen seat in Westminster Abbey, and prepared the king for the live broadcast that evening and during which George VI did not stammer at all. During the Second World War, Logue frequently attended the king before most of his speech making engagements and broadcasts and it was often noted that his slow and measured pace while speaking added to the impact of his delivery. He continued to advise the king until the latter's death in February 1952. The only formal recognition of Logue's service to George VI was the ribbon of the Royal Victorian Order (elevated to CVO in 1944) presented to him by the king on the evening before his coronation. His friendship with George VI was said to be 'the greatest pleasure of Logue's life' ('AusDB', 117). 
Logue's contribution to the speech therapy profession was significant. He was a pioneer of work with shell-shocked soldiers, many of whom stammered as a result of their trauma. He was also active in the founding of the College of Speech Therapists, which was formed in 1945 when the British Society of Speech Therapists, of which Logue was a founder in 1935, and the Association of Speech Therapists were unified. Logue became a fellow enrolled on foundation and indeed it was he who, in 1948, wrote to George VI requesting his royal patronage, which was duly granted. 
Logue was a freemason and was speech therapist to the Royal Masonic School in Bushey. His practice shrank during the Second World War and during the war he regularly acted as an air-raid warden. Logue's wife died in 1945 and he took up spiritualism. He retained his love of music and the theatre and also enjoyed gardening and walking. 
Logue died of pneumonia on 12 April 1953 at his home, 68 Princes Court, Brompton Road, London, following a prolonged illness and was cremated. He was survived by his three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 60018


Lawrenson, Mary Ann (1850-1943), co-operative movement activist and educationist, was born on 23 March 1850 at 49 Castle Street East, Marylebone, Middlesex, the eldest of eleven children of John Molyneux, printer, trade unionist, and co-operative movement activist, and his wife, Ellen, 'nee' Keys. After moving to Woolwich in 1862, Molyneux did printing work for local organizations including the Royal Arsenal Co-operative Society (RACS). This contact with working-class initiatives shaped his daughter's social and intellectual development. She also inherited from her father a faith in the somewhat unusual combination of Roman Catholicism and Christian socialism. From 1869 she taught English in several schools, including a spell in Paris. On returning to Woolwich in 1876 she married John Marcus Lawrenson, a government clerk and auditor for the RACS, with whom she had one son. 
In February 1883 Mary Lawrenson responded to Alice Acland's suggestion in the 'Co-operative News' that a women's co-operative league be formed. Lawrenson advocated a national organization to co-ordinate local branches which would themselves assist co-operative extension and promote female educational and social development. For this, and her role in framing its constitution, she deserves recognition with Acland as a co-founder of the Women's Co-operative Guild. 
Lawrenson established a guild branch in Woolwich, the second of three founded nationally during 1883, and joined the first national guild central committee in 1884. She was also elected to the education committee of the RACS in 1884, when female participation in co-operative management remained rare. She organized classes for women and a juvenile guild for children. However, her educational and charitable agenda and her advocacy of productive workshops were at odds with 'progressive' elements in Woolwich, who sought links with the labour movement and campaigners for women's suffrage. Hence she resigned as Woolwich Guild secretary in 1885 and from the education committee in 1888. Her subsequent involvement with the RACS was limited, although she returned to the education committee in 1895-8 and 1902-5. 
Lawrenson assumed national office as guild general secretary in 1885-9. An accomplished speaker, she travelled widely, promoting new and established guild branches. The increase in guild branches to fifty-one by 1889 prompted Lawrenson's suggestion of regional co-ordination, a system implemented after her departure as secretary. Lawrenson resented the termination of her office in that year. The secretaryship passed to Margaret Llewelyn Davies, ostensibly because she was thought better placed to carry the administrative burden created by the expanding guild; but Lawrenson was also seen as too independent in her Christian socialism, particularly her enthusiasm for co-operative workshops and labour co-partnerships. She lost her place on the guild's central committee in 1893, but her service on the southern sectional board of the Co-operative Union in 1893-4 and 1896-8 breached another male bastion. She was also the first female member of a national co-operative committee, through her place on the union's central board. 
In 1905 Lawrenson moved to Bournemouth, where she was active in the local guild. After her husband's death during the First World War she withdrew from co-operative work. Latterly she lived quietly in Brighton with her son. The guild leadership still regarded her as a maverick, and initially resisted her nomination for the freedom of the guild in 1931. She was, however, feted at the guild's jubilee celebrations in 1933, and both the guild and the RACS supported Lawrenson financially in old age. Bedridden in her final years, Lawrenson died at the Brighton Municipal Hospital on 1 January 1943. Her funeral on 7 January at St Joseph's Roman Catholic Church, Brighton, and burial in the borough cemetery were attended by numerous guild representatives. 
Mary Lawrenson was somewhat isolated in the co-operative movement, both as a woman in a male-dominated movement and in her faith in co-operative production amid advocates of consumers' interests. She was a determined champion of education, Christian socialism, and improvements in women's daily lives. The women's guild which she helped establish was a pioneer among organizations to give a public role and voice to working-class women. 


@@@@@


doc= 60019


Bruce, Christian (d. 1356), noblewoman, was one of the many daughters of Robert (VI) de Brus, earl of Carrick (1243-1304), and his wife, Marjorie; Robert I was her brother. She is supposed to have married Gartnait, earl of Mar, in the 1290s, but a number of objections have been raised against this. In the first place, she is never described as countess of Mar, nor even just 'of Mar'. Second, there is no evidence of any communication between her and Donald, earl of Mar, who should have been her son, when both were imprisoned in England after 1306. Abbot Walter Bower (died 1449) explicitly states that Gartnait married the eldest Bruce daughter, a description never applied to Christian, and made unlikely by the date of her death. Her later holding of Kildrummy Castle, the centre of the earldom of Mar, could point to a connection, but if there was one its nature remains incapable of definition. 
Before 1305 Christian undoubtedly married Sir Christopher Seton (c.1278-1306), a knight with lands in Annandale and northern England. He was captured at Loch Doon Castle and executed by Edward I in 1306; she kept sacred his sacrifice in her brother's cause as late as 1324, when she founded a chapel in Dumfries to his memory. In 1306 she herself was captured by Edward, along with her sister Mary, her niece Marjorie, Bruce's queen, Elizabeth, and the countess of Buchan, at Tain in Ross-shire, possibly 'en route' for Norway, where another sister, Isabel, was queen. Christian's punishment was captivity in the Gilbertine nunnery of Sixhills in Lincolnshire; her freedom was secured only in 1314 with the exchange of prisoners following the battle of Bannockburn. At some point after her release she was granted the lands of the Garioch, Aberdeenshire, which had come to the Bruces as part of their inheritance from David, earl of Huntingdon (died 1219). 
Although it is possible that she was the sister of King Robert whom English sources rumoured was intended for the hand of Andrew Harclay, earl of Carlisle, when he made an unsuccessful attempt to negotiate a peace treaty with Scotland early in 1323, Christian did not remarry until 1326. Perhaps the memory of the fate of her first husband was sufficient to deter her from a speedy second marriage, or perhaps her brother, now king, was keen to prevent the arrival of another nephew to complicate the succession so long as he himself remained without an heir. Her second husband was Sir Andrew Murray (1298-1338), son of the joint victor of the battle of Stirling Bridge, a man most certainly many years her junior. Being a member of the royal family, Christian took part in the coronation of her nephew David II in 1331 and shared a room in the palace at Scone with her nieces, the new king's sisters. When war broke out again shortly afterwards, Murray played a prominent role, as guardian of Scotland, in repulsing the attempts at conquest of Edward Balliol and Edward III of England. To this end he entrusted Christian with the keeping of Kildrummy Castle, and in 1335 she defended it against the earl of Atholl, Balliol's commander in the north. One of two vital defences of castles by women in this period (the other was that of Dunbar by Agnes Dunbar in 1338), her resistance enabled her husband to confront Atholl at Culblean and defeat him. Christian remained in custody of Kildrummy even after the death of Murray in 1338, entertaining her nephew's wife, Queen Joan, there in 1342. King David permitted her to draw an income from a number of sources, including the customs of Aberdeen. The final reference to her in the exchequer rolls suggests that she died, surely at least in her seventies, in 1356. 


@@@@@


doc= 60020


Williamson, Isabel (b. c.1430, d. in or after 1493), merchant and burgess of Edinburgh, was probably the daughter of Simon Bras of Edinburgh ('fl'. 1467). She became one of the most prominent female merchants in late medieval Scotland, with a name so well known in mercantile circles that when her son John (died 'c'.1505) first appeared in the treasurer's accounts in 1474, he was referred to as 'Isabel Williamson's son'. Isabel's husband, Thomas Williamson, was a leading figure in Edinburgh trade in the 1450s; her own mercantile career flourished after Thomas died, between about 1464 and 1473, probably during the time John was being trained in the family business. Thomas had built up a successful concern trading with Flanders, presumably with Isabel's help, as she showed herself so proficient in continuing it. The importance of a known reputation is shown by the fact that in her mercantile affairs Isabel called herself by her husband's name rather than by her maiden name, as was common practice in medieval Scottish society. Instead of turning the business over to John, Isabel carried on trading until the 1490s, though in the 1480s she began to work more in partnership with her son, who became a burgess and member of the Edinburgh merchant guild in 1487. Both John and his son, also John, became distinguished members of Edinburgh society. 
Isabel specialized in importing fine goods from the continent, for which she exported wool in exchange. In the 1470s she was an active supplier to the royal household, in particular providing luxury cloths and textiles, including velvet and satin, for the king and queen, the nursery, and important household servants. In the 1490s her son John continued supplying the royal household. Isabel's trading activities involved her in transactions with prominent people throughout Scotland, such as the bishops of Glasgow and Aberdeen. By 1493 she had acquired the lands of Mortonhall, near Edinburgh, although her possession was disputed by the countess of Caithness. Isabel appeared several times before the lords of council, both defending and prosecuting her interests. 
Isabel Williamson was devoted to the Edinburgh parish church of St Giles. She endowed the altar of St Laurence from her properties in Edinburgh in 1489 and reserved the right of patronage to herself. This is the one record in which she uses her maiden name of Bras, perhaps because it concerned religious rather than business matters. She was probably buried there when she died in or after October 1493, leaving a wealthy inheritance and a trusted family name to her descendants. 


@@@@@


doc= 60023


Crowder, John (1756-1830), printer and mayor of London, was born in Wyradsbury, Buckinghamshire, the son of John Crowder ('b'. 'c'.1720), a playing-card maker, and his wife, Frances (later Frances Scriven). Like his paternal grandfather of the same name, John Crowder was brought up in the book trades and, after moving to London, found early employment in his majesty's printing office under William Strahan. About 1780 he obtained a position with Francis Blyth, printer and part proprietor of the 'Public Ledger', a daily morning newspaper, and the 'London Packet', an evening paper published three times a week. In the year leading up to Blyth's death in 1788, Crowder took control of the 'Public Ledger' and was trading from Blyth's premises at 2 Queen's Head Alley, Paternoster Row. Following Blyth's death on 27 May 1788 Crowder also became proprietor of the 'London Packet'. He managed the publication of both newspapers 'with the greatest impartiality, diligence and integrity' ('GM', 100/2, 1830, 568) until 1822, when they were taken over by T. Richards. In the same year that Crowder gained ownership of the 'London Packet' he married Blyth's niece, Mary Annabella James (died 1823), on 2 February at St Mary Aldermanbury, and was admitted to the freedom of the City of London by patrimony through the Playing-Card Makers' Company in July. Within two years he had moved his printing business to 12 Warwick Court, where, on 2 February 1790, Robert Crakelt was bound to him as an apprentice printer. While still maintaining publication of the 'Public Ledger' and the 'London Packet', Crowder also published the 'Mirror of the Times' between 1799 and 1803, was 'frequently employed in printing valuable works for the booksellers, by whom he was equally esteemed for punctuality, intelligence, and accuracy' (ibid., 568), and in 1802 was trading in partnership with another printer, E. Hemsted. 
After amassing a considerable fortune through 'some successful speculations' ('GM', 100/2, 1830, 568) Crowder relinquished his printing business in 1820 in the pursuit of a full-time civic career. As a longstanding and well-respected resident in the ward of Farringdon Within, he was first elected in 1800 as a representative of that ward in common council, and between 1814 and 1823 he served as one of two deputies. Although his wife died on 6 November 1823, Crowder maintained 'an assiduity and energy which more and more endeared him to his constituents' (ibid., 569) and was accordingly elected alderman of his ward on 24 April 1823 and sworn a week later. In that same year he joined the Stationers' Company by translation, sponsored by John Nichols, and was selected for the Stationers' Company court within a few months of being admitted to the livery; he served as under warden in 1827, as upper warden in 1828, and as master of the company in 1829. Between 1825 and 1826 Crowder was sheriff of London, and on 9 November 1829 he began his term as lord mayor, during which time he reputedly gave approximately $1000 for charitable purposes. He was known for his 'industry and integrity' in both public and private life, and he possessed a 'spirit, vivacity, and intelligence which rendered him an agreeable companion' (ibid., 570). Within months of entering his mayoralty, however, ill health forced him temporarily to abandon his civic responsibilities, and in September 1830 an asthmatic affection was aggravated by a severe cold and failure of digestion. This eventually forced him to withdraw completely from public life on 9 November 1830 -- exactly one year after commencing as lord mayor. Crowder died at his residence at Sudbury House, King Street, Hammersmith, in the early hours of the morning on 2 December 1830 and was buried eleven days later in the same vault as his wife at Christ Church Greyfriars. 


@@@@@


doc= 60033


Otway, Sir Loftus William (1775-1854), army officer, was born on 28 April 1775, the fourth son of the six children of Cooke Otway (died December 1800), captain of horse, of Castle Otway, co. Tipperary, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1807), daughter of Samuel Waller of Lisbrian, co. Tipperary. Otway had three older brothers -- Henry (died 1815), Robert Waller 
(later Admiral Sir Robert; 1772-1846)
, and Samuel Jocelyn (died 1855), in holy orders -- one younger brother, George (died 1804), an infantry major, and a sister, Martha (died 1802). He joined the 5th dragoon guards as a cornet on 17 May 1796, and advanced to lieutenant on 2 September. Possibly he went to Ireland with the regiment in October; he was present during the defeat of rebels at Vinegar Hill on 21 June 1798. He became a captain on 27 October 1798, and obtained a majority on 24 February 1803, before transferring to the 8th light dragoons on 14 July 1804. Otway seems to have served as deputy adjutant-general in Canada at about this time. On 28 March 1805 he went on Irish half pay as lieutenant-colonel. Retaining that army rank, he obtained a majority in the 18th light dragoons on 12 February 1807. 
Otway embarked with the regiment for Portugal in July 1808, but saw no action before peace the following month. The 18th light dragoons remained in the Peninsula with Lieutenant-General Sir John Moore's army which marched into Spain to confront the French. Heavily outnumbered, Moore ordered retirement northwards towards Corunna on 5 December 1808, Otway's regiment forming part of the rearguard. On 12 December 1808, in a night attack at Rueda, Otway distinguished himself by capturing 'the whole of the French Cavalry out-lying picquet' ('Army List', 1840). Shortly afterwards near Valladolid he overwhelmed a strong French force, taking its colonel 'and more of his Chasseurs than he had dragoons to guard them, and brought them all into headquarters, horses, men, arms and baggage' (ibid.). Otway then led the regiment in the absence of its commanding officer in successful skirmishes at Sahagun. When it faced a superior enemy force at Benevente on 27 December the regiment held off six squadrons of the imperial guard for almost an hour, after which Otway's outlying picket captured a general and 150 prisoners. 
The 18th light dragoons reached Corunna on 16 January 1809 and the regiment was back in England by 8 February, where it stayed for four years. However, Otway returned to the Peninsula to command a cavalry brigade in Marshal William Carr Beresford's Portuguese army, and fought at Busaco on 27 September 1810. When Beresford advanced on Badajoz, at Campo Mayor on 25 March 1811 Otway captured over 500 men and sixteen guns, but vigorous enemy counter-attacks restricted him to sixteen prisoners and one tumbril. During the subsequent withdrawal towards Lisbon his cavalry protected Beresford's left flank at Albuera on 16 May 1811, a day after formally going on English half pay. His proposal to raise a unit of lancers from non-French prisoners of war was rejected by the Horse Guards in London during September 1812. Otway remained in the Peninsula until 1814, almost certainly training Portuguese recruits. He advanced to colonel in the British army on 4 June 1813, was knighted by the prince regent on 15 January 1815, appointed CB on 4 June 1815, and, in 1822, made a knight of the order of Charles III of Spain. He had married Frances, only daughter of Sir Charles Blicke of Caroon Park, Surrey; they had a son and a daughter. 
Otway received the military general service medal with three clasps for Sahagun and Benevente, Busaco, and Albuera. He was promoted major-general on 12 August 1819 and lieutenant-general on 10 January 1837, and was colonel of the 84th foot from 30 December 1840 until his death. He was promoted general on 11 November 1851. Otway died at his residence, 13 Grosvenor Square, London, on 7 June 1854, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. His son, Loftus Charles (1815-1861), diplomat, was minister-plenipotentiary to Mexico (1858-9) and consul-general at Milan (1860-1). 


@@@@@


doc= 60042


Neurath, Walter (1903-1967), publisher, was born in Josefstadterstrasse, Vienna, on 1 October 1903, the only child of Alois Neurath (1872-1934) and his wife, Gisela Frohlich (died 1944). The Neurath family came from Bratislava and Alois Neurath arrived in Vienna aged twenty-one; he worked in a bank until he was twenty-eight, when he founded his own business as a wholesale importer of tea, coffee, and luxury foods. Walter Neurath spent his entire childhood in Vienna, where he was educated at the Volks Schule and the Real Gymnasium from which he matriculated with distinction. He then attended the University of Vienna where he studied art history, archaeology, and history, becoming, in 1922, a member of the Institute for Art History. At the same time he worked for the art book publisher Wurthle & Sohn and organized various art exhibitions -- including one in Paris -- of nineteenth-century French paintings from Viennese collections. He also lectured on art history to the Austrian equivalent of the Workers' Educational Association. 
Neurath was a founder member of Neustift ('new foundations'), a small left-wing commune of intellectuals with a radical approach to both life and culture which included the psychoanalyst Bruno Bettelheim, whose seminal work on the German concentration camps, 'The Informed Heart', Neurath was to publish with great success nearly forty years later. In 1925 Neurath married Lilly Kruk (a marriage which was dissolved in 1933) and, because of his father's ill health, joined and ran the family firm, thus acquiring considerable routine business skills. On his father's recovery in 1929 Neurath turned to full-time publishing, with a strong interest in printing and typography. He joined the Verlag fur Kulturforschung ('publishing house for cultural research'), and Zinner Verlag, which published fiction and where, after six months, he was made production director. There he published a number of illustrated books, and the German language translations of English and American books. The rise to power in Germany of the Nazi party effectively closed the main German language market for this Jewish firm which therefore decided to close down. 
From 1935 to 1937 Neurath worked as an educational publisher, developing new illustration techniques and creating, as general editor, a series of illustrated textbooks for children designed as an educational counter-influence to Nazi ideology. The books had a strong democratic and anti-totalitarian bias and were translated into seven foreign languages by like-minded publishers abroad. In 1937 Neurath was appointed manager of the Wilhelm Frick publishing house, where he continued to commission and publish both illustrated books on the arts and anti-Nazi propaganda. However, on the occupation of Austria by the Nazis he was ordered to cease publishing immediately and a Nazi-approved 'Commissar' was appointed to run the house. 
Because of his anti-Nazi publishing activities, Neurath was soon on the Gestapo lists and, after several near misses and a period in hiding, managed to escape to England on 1 June 1938, taking with him his second wife, Marianne Muller (1909-1950), a schoolteacher. His sponsor for entry into England as an alien was Frances Margesson, wife of Captain (later Viscount) Margesson; the Neuraths stayed with the Margessons at Boddington, near Rugby, for some five years and their son Thomas was born there. Neurath was offered work by a company called Adprint, run by a fellow refugee, Wolfgang Foges. He soon became the production manager and both designed and produced the celebrated 'King Penguin' series. It was originally intended to print this series in Czechoslovakia, but Germany's invasion of that country also meant that the books, published by Allen Lane of Penguin Books, were printed in England. Belonging as he did to a European tradition of publishing where the series was the norm if not the rule, Neurath frequently thought in series terms rather than single volumes. Thus, after the success of what were in effect Penguin's first hardcover books, the beautifully made, jewel-like 'King Penguins', he developed a larger and more ambitious series called 'Britain in Pictures', edited by W. J. Turner. 
A formidably scholarly and erudite man, Neurath had a genius for making illustrations an integral part of a book, placing them prominently on the page together with the words to which they were related, rather than banishing them to the plates section in the centre or (worse still) at the back of the book. 'Britain in Pictures' married skilful picture research and fine design and printing with significant texts from George Orwell ('The English People'), Rose Macaulay ('Life among the English'), John Piper ('British Romantic Artists'), Michael Ayrton ('British Drawings'), and Jacquetta Hawkes ('Early Britain'); the series eventually comprised more than 100 volumes. 
Just as the series was about to be launched the Second World War broke out, leading to paper rationing which was based on publishers' output in preceding years. A new firm, Adprint had no proper track record with which to secure a paper ration. The 'book packager' emerged, becoming a significant part of book publishing in the second half of the twentieth century. The packager put together author and subject and looked after the design of a book all the way through to complete production by a publisher with an adequate paper ration; it was that publisher whose name appeared on the jacket, spine, and title-page of the book. Neurath's brilliant series was actually successfully published by Collins, who also took on his next project, the even more numerous and more permanently successful 'New Naturalist' series, edited by Julian Huxley. At a stroke, Adprint and Neurath had become a significant force in quality illustrated book publishing in Britain. The path was, however, not wholly smooth or unbroken: Neurath was not yet a naturalized British subject and was dispatched to an internment camp in the Isle of Man, alongside the Amadeus Quartet and other distinguished and blameless European artists and intellectuals viewed as 'enemy aliens'. Happily, aware that the 'Britain in Pictures' series had considerable propaganda value, a friendly civil servant, Richard Cowell, managed to get Neurath released rapidly and he was soon back at work, with eventual naturalization as a British subject to follow. 
Neurath stayed with Adprint, which was, however, less successful once the war ended. The firm had been financed by Tennants and its head, Lord Glenconner, lost faith in Foges and offered the managing directorship to Neurath, who declined it. He had more ambitious ideas and, on an exceedingly modest capital of $7000, departed to found Thames and Hudson in September 1949. His own contribution was his life savings of $3000; his co-directors included his Adprint colleague Eva Feuchtwang (who contributed her own savings of $150) and -- shrewdly on Neurath's part -- the printer John Jarrold and the process engraver Wilfrid Gilchrist. The firm's first book was a translation of a photographic work, 'English Cathedrals', by the Swiss photographer and publisher Martin Hurlimann. Happily this was successful and Neurath built on his American connections. The publishing house was named after the rivers of London and New York, to signify its ambition to publish on both sides of the Atlantic. However, the point was frequently missed in the business world and letters addressed to Mr Thames and Mr Hudson were often received. 
Because of Neurath's high reputation in America and because editing, design, printing, and binding were then much cheaper in England and Europe than in the United States, American art book publishers such as Abrams and the great museums such as the Metropolitan and the Museum of Modern Art in New York not only appointed Thames and Hudson as their representative, but also relied on the firm to package some of their more complex art historical books, as well as publishing under the firm's imprint in the UK. Thames and Hudson thus simultaneously established its Anglo-American business and acquired an immediate turnover base and a niche in the English publishing market. Neurath's second wife, Marianne, had died in 1950, and on 6 August 1953 he married his longtime colleague Eva Urvasi Feuchtwang (1908-1999) who, as Eva Neurath, was his full business partner as well as his wife and made an essential contribution to the success of the firm. 
At that time the leading art book publishing house in England was the Phaidon Press, established by Neurath's fellow Viennese refugee Bela Horovitz, who had transferred his existing business to London in 1938. Their books were of the conventional kind, separating text and plates and rarely using colour. The Neuraths, having already established the integration of text and illustrations, also pioneered the use of a much higher proportion of colour illustration which, because of its much greater engraving and printing costs, was a brave departure in the 1950s. Neurath invariably not only planned his books on an Anglo-American axis but also aimed at the European market, producing books which were simultaneously translated into the principal western European languages and printed for publishers both in the major publishing countries such as France, Germany, Italy, and Spain and also, provided that the subject was sufficiently accessible, in Dutch, Finnish, and the three Scandinavian languages. Eventually even the problem of publishing key books such as Herbert Read's 'A Concise History of Modern Painting' (1959) in Japanese was mastered. 
Read's volume was part of a series, the 'World of Art', which was to be (and still is) one of the mainstays of the Thames and Hudson list. Neurath was not only the first publisher to produce art books at readily affordable prices -- a 'World of Art' title with approximately 100 pictures in colour would, typically, cost no more than a decent biography -- but also the first to foresee the rise of the quality original paperback. By putting the 'World of Art' into paperback form he could issue the books at prices which fitted student budgets, and the best titles in the series, such as Read's work or Michael Levey's 'From Giotto to Cezanne' (1962), which had over 500 colour illustrations, went on student reading lists all over the world, in as many as twenty languages, and sold by the hundred thousand. This had as powerful an impact on international art education as Allen Lane's Penguins had in making the possession of works of literature, biography, and other genres open to all, regardless of income, a point once made appreciatively to Neurath by Lane himself. 
On the same principles of international co-production, Neurath also published in the fields of architecture, photography, archaeology, and history. Distinguished scholars responded to his enthusiasm, to the prospect of escaping the confines of a university press, to the idea of seeing their words sensitively illustrated by staff picture researchers who had studied their own disciplines, and, above all, to having their work reach an international market not previously available to them. Neurath had a considerable persuasive gift in attracting the leading figures in their subjects and historians such as H. R. Trevor-Roper, Asa Briggs, and A. J. P. Taylor were happy to join their art-historical colleagues in these ventures. When he got Glyn Daniel, then the editor of 'Antiquity', to edit for Thames and Hudson a new series of archaeological books called 'Ancient Peoples and Places', neither could have foreseen the publication of more than 100 separate titles. And when Richard Cowell retired from the civil service, Neurath -- never a man to forget a favour -- engaged him as a consultant editor and he created a successful series of books on the classics entitled 'Aspects of Greek and Roman Life'. 
A connoisseur of art, Neurath was often the first publisher to recognize the talents of new artists, and he published the first books on painters such as Sidney Nolan, Arthur Boyd, Jackson Pollock, and many more. He also had an enviable collection of drawings by Egon Schiele and works by Oskar Kokoschka, who was a lifelong friend as well as author. He built a beautiful house, Dolphin Villa, in Tuscany -- the emblem of the firm is a dolphin -- and in London lived in a fine eighteenth-century house in Highgate village. On 26 September 1967 Neurath succumbed to cancer which he had fought heroically for many months, working to the last to ensure that the substantial business he had created would continue without him, but on the principles he had established. His widow, Eva, became chairman, his son Thomas managing director, and his daughter Constance a director. He was buried on 2 October in Highgate cemetery, not far from the grave of Karl Marx, to whom he had always granted a certain sceptical admiration. 
Neurath was a tall, strongly built man who, with his heavy beetle brows and glasses which partially concealed intense, deep-set blue eyes, could be saturnine in repose but, when energized, became formidable, immensely charming, and indeed lovable. More or less until his death, the working day at Thames and Hudson began with all the departmental heads assembled in his office, to be confronted by their own pile of the day's post opened by the office manager, and already read by Neurath, who would comment and question all present volubly and in an English -- which was after all his second language -- that was sharply elegant and larded with telling neologisms. 'This book', he would proclaim of the occasional failed title, 'has not been published. It has been 'pri'vished.' Of another: 'It's been published to the 'exclusion' of the public.' A generous and supportive employer, Neurath could be quick to anger, but the explosions were soon over. He did, however, have an almost phobic inability to say 'Well done' to a subordinate or colleague. On one occasion, when one of his staff had just pulled off a considerable commercial coup, he asked what currency had been used for the transaction. On being told that it was in sterling on the day that the Germans had just massively revalued their currency, his only comment was: 'What a pity you didn't do the deal in Deutschmarks.' However, an hour later the employee was summoned and given an immediate rise, and a significant sum to be used to buy paintings. 
After Neurath's death, Thames and Hudson endowed an annual Walter Neurath memorial lecture, first at Birkbeck College in the University of London and then at the National Gallery in London. The lecture is always published as an illustrated book and, for the first thirty years at least, was delivered by scholars who had been published personally by him. It was a fitting memorial to one of the many German-speaking Jewish refugees who had such a deep influence on British cultural life. Neurath was, a little shamefully perhaps, awarded no decoration in Britain, but his native Austria gave him the Goldene Ehrenzeichen (the approximate equivalent of CBE). 


@@@@@


doc= 60045


Poole, Henry George (1814-1876), tailor, was born on 8 November 1814 at 7 Everett Street, Bloomsbury, London, where his parents, James Poole ('bap'. 1781, died 1846) and his wife, Mary ('c'.1777-1862), ran a draper's shop. Following the traditional family business, they had moved to London in 1806 from Baschurch, Shropshire. When James signed up to join the volunteer infantry corps during the Napoleonic wars, he would have made his own uniform. This was apparently so impressive that he was asked to make uniforms for the remainder of the corps and his tailoring career subsequently took off. By 1822 James had an emporium in the newly created Regent Street, at number 171. In 1828 he moved both his home and business headquarters to 4 Old Burlington Street, which backed onto 32 Savile Row at the other end of the block. The success of the expanding business enabled Henry to go to school at an 'Academy for Noblemen's and Gentlemen's Sons'. 
Henry Poole was fifteen when he joined the family business in 1830, after the departure of his father's partner, William Cooling. He was being trained to take it over, this being formalized in James's will of 1842. His elder brother, also James, had gone into stockbroking before succumbing to illness and early death in 1843. However, in the late 1830s and early 1840s Henry's role seems to have been as a walking advertisement for the business. He dressed up and moved in elite London bachelor circles, parading along Rotten Row, where modish society went to be seen. His friendship with the jockey James (Jem) Mason derived from this point in his life. Mason, the first winner of the Grand National, was a celebrity of the age and Poole dressing him could only be advantageous for the firm. The love of sport, and the clothing needed for them, had a profound influence on the direction of the business, especially when Henry took over on the death of his father in 1846. He renamed the firm and converted a rear stable block to make a showroom and main entrance on Savile Row itself, the first tailor to operate from the street. He gradually increased his frontage by expanding out from number 32, buying the leases and then the freeholds to adjacent buildings. 
Poole's close association with the riding, racing, and hunting communities differentiated him from other tailors. As was remarked in 1859, 'Poole, of Saville ['sic'] Row, makes hunting-dress a special study, and supplies more hunting men and masters of hounds than any other tailor in London, but his customers must be prepared to pay for perfection' (Rarey, 150-51). Mason was described as a 'smart, elegant figure, 'Pooled' from head to foot' ('Morning Post', 25 Oct 1866, 6, col. 1). Poole had a knack for promotion and placing his products on the right clients at the right time to ensure that they would be seen in the best light. 
The focus on both skill and high-end pricing suited his elite clientele. In 1846 Prince Louis Napoleon Bonaparte, pretender to the French throne and at that time in exile, was Poole's first royal customer, giving him his first royal warrant in 1858. A steady flow continued, culminating in his appointment in 1869 as court tailor, through making livery for the royal household of Queen Victoria. In 1863 he also gained the royal warrant of the prince of Wales. Twenty-two imperial or regal crests of special appointment had been received by the time of his death. 
Not all Poole's customers were titled. In a sample of his order books from 1861 only 31 per cent were aristocratic. His job was to help guide his clients through a complex series of coded social situations which were constantly evolving and which were manifested through dress. He appealed to both the conservative dresser through to the most fashionable, such as the prince of Wales, who in 1865 apparently commissioned a short smoking jacket for private use, the origin of the dinner jacket or tuxedo. 
The Savile Row tailors, and Poole in particular, have been accused of being part of the great masculine sartorial renunciation, leaving men in unchanging sober suits and unconcerned about fashion. However, examination of his account books show that during his lifetime, although plain suits were provided for formal occasions, the gaudy smoking jackets and sports clothing were very different. 
Poole married, on 10 February 1859, Emma (1817-1877), daughter of Thomas Walker, draper, of Lee, Kent. She was previously the head saleswoman at Holbrook, the royal glovers, and had then become the senior lady at Poole's. Some ladies ordered riding habits from Poole's -- Catherine ('Skittles') Walters, an infamous mistress of the age, being perhaps one of the most well-known. Emma Walker was forty-two years old at the time of her marriage and the relationship did not produce any children. They lived at Dorset Cottage, Crabtree Lane, Fulham, a property Henry had bought in 1851. Situated on the banks of the Thames, it enabled Poole to host fashionable parties, in particular following the university boat race with his own steamer boat, the prince of Wales in attendance. 
The Poole business was outwardly successful, and appealed to premier clients -- the shop becoming an attraction in itself with elaborate displays for special occasions. It was traditional for shopkeepers to have good credit relationships with clients and not to expect them to finalize bills. Nevertheless, Poole allowed debts to stand on the books for many years at the same time as servicing a mortgage. By 1870 his health was causing concern and he and Emma moved to 118 Marine Parade, Brighton. He died there on 4 May 1876, after suffering an apoplectic fit while driving in his carriage. He was buried in Highgate cemetery on 10 May in the family plot his father had purchased. One of his obituaries notably claimed that 'He was tailor... to all the crowned heads in the world of any note' ('The Tailor and Cutter', 11 May 1876). However, his failure to collect debts had plunged the firm into crisis with $10,000 of unrecoverable debt at the time of his death. His houses were sold along with his collection of art. His sister, Mary Ann, apparently sold her half-share of the Regent Street property rents to keep the business afloat. His cousin, Samuel Cundey, who had worked alongside Henry Peele since 1837, took over the running of the business, which is continued today by Cundey's descendants. 


@@@@@


doc= 60049


Devant, David (1868-1941), conjuror and illusionist, was born on 22 February 1868 at 4 Boston Terrace, Holloway, London, eldest of the seven children of James Wighton, a Scottish artist, and his wife, Mary Ansell. After attending local schools he worked at several jobs before becoming a professional entertainer. His interest in magic was aroused when he was about twelve and was fuelled by visits to Maskelyne and Cooke's 'Mysteries' at the Egyptian Hall, Piccadilly, London. At seventeen he gave his first public performance as David Devant, the surname being adopted from a French painting of David and Goliath entitled 'David devant Goliath'. About 1888 he married Annie Marion Melville (1864/5-1928), who as his stage assistant was known as Marion Melville; they had a daughter, Vida (died 1954), but apparently neither marriage nor birth was registered. Soon Devant was appearing at music-halls, where John Nevil Maskelyne saw and engaged him. For his debut at the Egyptian Hall in 1893 he devised a new illusion, 'The Artist's Dream', in which the portrait of a young woman came to life. There followed more than two decades of highly productive continuous association with Maskelyne, with whom he went into partnership as Maskelyne and Devant at St George's Hall, London, from 1905 until 1915. 
Devant's formative years were influenced by the inventive French magician Buatier de Kolta and by the gentlemanly, humorous presentation of Charles Bertram, the leading society magician of the time. Indeed, a characteristic of Devant's presentation was his 'drawing-room' style and his tremendous success undoubtedly derived from personal charm and a refreshingly new approach to the art. Thus he discarded the magic wand and any apparatus which might appear to have been made especially for conjuring purposes, reasoning that suspicion would thereby be allayed. He created numerous small tricks and more than twenty ingenious illusions, probably the finest being 'The Mascot Moth' (1905), the disappearance in full view of a woman, dressed as a moth with wings, when Devant approached her with a lighted candle. Another was 'Biff' (1913), in which a motorcycle and rider vanished from a wooden crate hoisted in the air. An outstanding feature of his illusions was that none involved the theme of mutilation: the element of horror was banished and his slogan of 'all done by kindness' never dispelled. 
When the Lumiere brothers' films were first demonstrated in London in 1896, Devant immediately realized their potential. He purchased a theatrograph machine from R. W. Paul, becoming the first independent operator in Britain, with three provincial touring companies besides exhibiting films at the Egyptian Hall. Devant toured with versions of the Maskelyne and Cooke entertainment during the late 1890s and early 1900s, extending his popularity to the provinces. Later, in 1912-13, when managing director of Maskelyne and Devant, he toured the music-halls, and he returned to this activity in 1915 after severing his connection with Maskelyne. 
When the Magic Circle was founded in London in 1905 Devant became its first president and donated his personal library to the society, but he retired from office after one year due to pressure of work. As a consequence of magazine articles he wrote exposing magical secrets, contrary to the society's rules, his resignation was tendered in 1910, and requested in 1936; after the first time he was reinstated in 1912, and after the second he was elected to honorary life membership in 1937. 
Throughout his active performing days Devant was the subject of numerous magazine and newspaper articles as well as himself being a prolific contributor. Additionally he was the author of eight substantial books, including 'Our Magic' (1911), written in collaboration with Nevil Maskelyne (J. N. Maskelyne's eldest son). He appeared in the first royal command variety performance at the Palace Theatre, London, in 1912, assisted by his daughter, Vida, and Nevil Maskelyne's son Jasper. Such now was his reputation that he received a testimonial address and silver plate from magicians worldwide at St George's Hall on 3 February the next year. 
At the height of his powers Devant was stricken with a progressive palsy and retired from public performing at the end of 1919. In retirement he gave lessons on conjuring and continued to write magazine articles and books, including his autobiography, 'My Magic Life' (1931), and 'Secrets of my Magic' (1936), an important work on illusions. Devant's wife died in 1928 and his daughter in 1954. Progressive incapacitation, throughout which he was tended by his companion, William Curtis, led in June 1937 to Devant's admission to the Royal Hospital for Incurables, Putney, where he died (of paralysis agitans according to the death certificate) on 13 October 1941, aged seventy-three, acclaimed 'the foremost magician of all time' by 'The Times' obituary. He was buried on 17 October at Highgate old (west) cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 60050


Harben, Philip Hubert Kendal Jerrold (1906-1970), television chef and writer on cookery, was born on 17 October 1906 at 40 Perham Road, Fulham, the son of Leonard Hubert Storey Harben (1878-1941) and his wife, Mary Jerrold Allen (1877-1955). His parents were both actors, known as Hubert Harben and Mary Jerrold. His sister, Joan Harben, often appeared on the West End stage and was best-known for her role in the BBC radio series 'It's that Man Again', where she played the part of the lugubrious Mona Lott, famous for her catch-phrase, 'It's being so cheerful that keeps me going.' Educated at Highgate School, Harben then went on the stage himself, and later worked with John Grierson on the documentary film 'Drifters' (1929), and with Egidio Scaioni doing studio and fashion photography. On 19 July 1930 he married Katharine Joyce Kenyon ('b'. 1906/7), and they had a son and a daughter. 
Far from being a chef, Harben never had a formal cookery lesson, but learned to cook because his parents were so often absent while on tour, leaving him to fend for himself in the kitchen. He developed a curiosity about the processes of cooking, and was technically so proficient that his friend Raymond Postgate, the author of the original 'Good Food Guide', referred to him for answers to most technical questions. A member of the avant-garde intellectual left, in 1937 Harben was cooking and running the kitchen at The Isobar, in the basement of the Isokon building, Wells Coates's architecturally advanced block of flats in Lawn Road, Hampstead. 
Harben and Postgate founded the Half Hundred Dining Club, 'a poor man's food and wine society'. The club had twenty-five members each of whom could bring one guest, hence the half-hundred. The club's aim was to combine 'good dining with economy'. Members, who included Julian Huxley, Walter Gropius, Marcel Breuer, Ernst Freud, and Francis Meynell, took it in turn to 'direct' the dinner, which could involve anything from planning the menu and getting someone else to cook it, to doing the whole task -- buying the ingredients and wine and cooking and serving the meal. A 'blurb' was required from the director, and could be anything from a simple menu to a full-blown mission statement. As each member and guest paid a strictly budgeted total of only 10's'. (2's'. 6died for food, 5's'. for wine, and 2's'. 6died for service), anything over had to come from the director's own pocket. Harben and Postgate laid down serious criteria for membership: election had to be unanimous and candidates had to profess that they were seriously interested in food and drink with 'no religious or other taboos or unsociable characteristics which may impede conversation' (www.lib.uea.ac.uk/libinfo/archives/pritchard/pp39ch.htm). The club ceased in 1940, though there was a failed attempt to revive it after the Second World War. When the war was over he was canteen manager for British Overseas Airways Corporation, where he came to the attention of the BBC. His first broadcasting work was radio cookery demonstrations after the eight o'clock news. 
When BBC television resumed in June 1946 Harben was chosen to front a cookery programme. He was not the first cook on British television (that distinction went to Marcel Boulestin in 1937), but he was generally thought of as the first of the British breed of that hybrid creature -- part entertainer, part teacher. Plump, bearded, and genial, with a racy delivery, his initial BBC television series, 'Cookery', ran from 1946 to 1951. The most bizarre turn required of him was on a programme celebrating Boulestin, when a 1939 sound recording was played of the Frenchman preparing his speciality, the Boulestin omelette. Harben, 'the new culinary star, mimed in vision, with split-second timing', as the eggs were whisked and the butter sizzled in the pan. This was followed by 'verbal homage from a master of the Science of cookery to the master of its Art', wrote Mary Adams, in a postscript to Harben's obituary in 'The Times' ('The Times', 29 April 1970). 
In 1950 Harben presented 'Cookery Lesson' for the BBC. There were several one-off cookery shows in 1952-3, including one late in 1953 called 'An Evening's Diversion of Elizabethan TV', in which, instead of wearing his usual stout butcher's apron, he cooked in a costume that featured a white ruff, doublets, and hose. In 1956 he had another series, 'What's Cooking?' Rationing ended in 1954; before that, it had been difficult even for television cooks to provision their programmes, and it was said that he had sometimes used his own rations to make the programme. Audiences were drawn by his professional-looking skill, his assurance, and his evident pleasure in preparing good food, as well by his clubbable personality. 
Harben was not a fraud, like Fanny Cradock, who soon followed him on the television screen, or a mere entertainer, like so many later television cooks; but he had his own lighter moments. Television shows were, of course, live in these years. One well-attested story has him going to the oven to retrieve a dish and saying, 'Well, they're not quite ready yet. Goodbye everybody.' Asked why he'd finished the programme when there were still several minutes to go, he explained, 'It wouldn't have done any good. I forgot to switch on the oven' (www.bbc.co.uk/thenandnow/wac_snippets). 
As a journalist Harben achieved an unusual stature for a writer of recipes. Along with Correlli Barnett and Katharine Whitehorn he wrote in the post-war 'Women's Own'. According to Harry Diamond, the sub-editor who handled his copy, his recipes were 'eagerly awaited each week by countless breathless housewives'. Once Diamond had to cut 'three or four completely superfluous words' from a Harben recipe to make the copy fit the layout, and 'an irate Mr. Harben phoned to speak to the 'stupid fucking idiot' who had ruthlessly reduced his recipe to unintelligible rubbish'. The editor consequently relieved Diamond of responsibility for the recipe column (www.geocities.com/henry_diamond). 
In 1955 Harben was appointed 'cookery ambassador extraordinary' to the government, and even sent to America to praise British cooking. (This was an era before Britain had got its bad reputation for food and cooking, a time when an American publisher could still sell copies of Samuel Chamberlain's nearly 600-page 1963 gastronomic vade-mecum, 'British Bouquet'.) His Penguin book, 'Cooking' (1960), explained the subject from what was then thought to be a scientific angle. In his last years he lived at 81 Albion Gate, on the Bayswater Road in west London. Harben died on 27 April 1970 at St Mary's Hospital, Harrow Road, Paddington, from cerebral softening due to cerebral atherosclerosis. His wife survived him. He was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 60051


Bard, Wilkie (1874-1944), music-hall performer, was born on 19 March 1874 at 19 Alderley Street, Hulme, Manchester, son of William Herbert Smith, a bookkeeper, and his wife, Marie Stetzer. He was educated in Manchester, first worked there in a cotton spinner's warehouse, and became well known as a concert singer, performing at such local venues as the Slip Inn, the Falstaff, and Liston's Bar. He made his first professional appearance on 11 February 1895 at the Grand, Manchester, as a singer of coster songs (such as ''E ain't the bloke I took him for at all'), billed as Will Gebard (from a family name). Shortly afterwards he secured a twelve-week contract for the Moss and Thornton tour, a leading music-hall circuit. 
Bard made his London debut on 6 May 1895 at Collins Music-Hall, Islington -- it seems he adopted his stage name of Wilkie Bard about this time. One of several reasons given is that his grotesque make-up resembled the accepted image of Shakespeare; it featured a high, bald forehead, with black spots above each eyebrow, and became so celebrated that P. G. Wodehouse, in his 1910 novel 'Psmith in the City', compared one of its female characters to him. Bard's earliest successes included 'All becos 'e's minding a 'ouse' and 'Our Dramatic Club', written by Frank Leo, who composed many of his most popular songs. His first pantomime engagement was at the Gaiety Theatre, Dublin (1899/1900), as the baron in 'Little Red Riding Hood'. He soon became popular as a pantomime dame, with a distinctively mellifluous voice. He married Nellie Stratton ('c'.1875-1947), a fellow music-hall performer, in 1894 and they often appeared on stage together. 
Bard formed a partnership with Will Evans, appearing in pantomime for several seasons at Drury Lane from 1908, reviving the harlequinade tradition with himself as Pantaloon and Evans as Clown. In 1912 Bard was selected to appear at the first royal command variety performance at London's Palace Theatre, performing his character study 'The Nightwatchman' but exceeding the time-limit allocated to his spot, to the consternation of the management. He recorded more than thirty songs between 1904 and 1936, including his most famous -- 'I want to sing in opera' -- and such pantomime tongue-twisters as 'She sells sea shells on the sea shore', which established his reputation. 
In 1913 Bard played the Palace Theatre, New York, but quit after a poor reception at his opening matinee. When 'Variety''s correspondent told him he shouldn't try to Americanize his act he reverted to his usual style and was an overwhelming box-office success. He could command up to $600 per week on tour in the USA and a top fee of $250 at home. According to pioneer agent George Foster, Bard 'had a grand sense of character burlesque... he always managed to make amusing observations of human eccentricities, and his method of working was all the more effective because it was quiet and never forced' (Foster, 93). The eminent music critic Neville Cardus described how Wilkie Bard, as a charwoman, came down the stage carrying a bucket of soapsuds and a cleaning cloth. On his knees he made a wide wet circle on the floor with the cloth, indicating the area to be cleaned; suddenly rising he would come before the footlights and announce by song, in a soft contralto voice, that 'I want to sing in opera', 'thus confiding in us a lofty but natural ambition' (Cardus, 29). 
When music-hall waned Bard worked in newly popular revues, directing 'The Whirl of the Town' at the London Palladium in 1915. In 1921 he spent most of the year touring South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand. He retired early but returned to the stage in Sir Oswald Stoll's 'Veterans of Variety' at the London Coliseum in 1927, where he had been a favourite in earlier times. Two of Bard's most famous sketches, 'The Nightwatchman' and 'The Cleaner', were filmed by British Sound Film Productions in 1928 but are now believed to be lost. He also took part in Lew Lake's 'Stars who Never Fail to Shine' tours from 1931 although, it seems, his mental health was beginning to decline. Bard broadcast for the BBC from its earliest days and radio producer Charles Brewer recalled how he would discuss a proposed broadcast in a quiet, dignified manner. 
In 1939 Bard appeared in 'Stars who Made the Holborn Empire Famous', along with Ada Reeve, who recalled in her autobiography that he was by then a sick man. Nevertheless, he still appeared regularly in pantomime until his death on 5 May 1944 at his home, Glengarry, Trees Road, Hughenden, Buckinghamshire. His wife found him dead in an armchair after he had been listening to the nine o'clock news on radio: he had suffered a coronary thrombosis. He was buried in Highgate cemetery, Middlesex. The 'Times' obituarist recalled that 'the picture of him standing, hands folded in front of him, leaning slightly forward, with a tolerant, attentive gaze on his face under the domed bald forehead and the eyebrows painted out and replaced with the black dots', lingered vividly in the memory, as did 'the slightly muffled, fruity quality of his speech' ('The Times'). Wilkie Bard's name has entered music-hall mythology as rhyming slang: use of the Variety Artists' Federation (later part of Equity) membership card to gain performers free admittance to matinees has been referred to as 'getting in on the Wilkie'. 


@@@@@


doc= 60056


Warner, Sir Frederick Archibald (1918-1995), diplomatist and politician, was born on 2 May 1918 at Blagdon, McKinley Road, Bournemouth, the son of Lieutenant-Commander Frederick Archibald Warner (died 1918), a British naval officer who was born in Trinidad and killed on active service a few weeks before his son's birth, and his widow, Marjorie Miller, 'nee' Winants, of New Jersey, USA, who had become a naturalized British subject in 1917. His mother subsequently remarried, and Warner acquired two younger half-brothers. Fred Warner (as he was invariably known) was educated at the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth (1932-5), and after brief periods at sea as a midshipman between 1935 and 1937 he went up to Magdalen College, Oxford, and read politics, philosophy, and economics for two years before the outbreak of the Second World War caused his recall to the navy as a sub-lieutenant in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve. He rose to the temporary acting rank of lieutenant-commander and spent the last years of the war commanding gunboats and working with British and Italian small boat missions in the Mediterranean. 
In February 1946, at the age of twenty-eight, Warner entered the diplomatic service and served in the southern department of the Foreign Office, where he was quickly identified as an officer of great promise. He was transferred to be private secretary to the minister of state, Hector McNeal, and consequently had the misfortune to work alongside Guy Burgess. Before the latter's defection to the Soviet Union, Warner was himself posted to Moscow as a first secretary between March 1950 and November 1951, and he did well there in the difficult cold war years. The news of Burgess's defection (with Donald Maclean) was a serious set-back to Warner's career. He was known to have been a friend as well as a close colleague of Burgess, and when the latter's louche lifestyle was disclosed after his defection Warner was among those who were thought either to have been tainted by it or -- at the least -- to have been dilatory in not drawing it to the attention of higher authority. Warner's own lifestyle was somewhat flamboyant: a bachelor of private means, he lived elegantly in chambers in the Albany and moved in exotic as well as distinguished social circles. He was subjected to intensive scrutiny not only by the security services but also by the press. While a question mark appeared to hover over his future, he was posted in June 1956 as head of Chancery in a distant and less than mainstream country -- Burma. 
It was much to Warner's credit that he put his heart and energies into his new job: he was reported by his superiors to have 'taken the embassy by the scruff of the neck' (private information) and he displayed efficiency, decision, and leadership. It was for him the beginning of a long affection for the Far East, and after a short spell in Athens, from September 1958 to November 1959, he was appointed head of the south-east Asia department of the Foreign Office at the time of confrontation between Malaysia and Indonesia. He continued to burn the candle at both ends, being seen on occasion coming into the Foreign Office in the early morning, straight from a nightclub and still in a dinner-jacket, to draft a lucid and forceful submission to ministers. But, possibly because he still felt insecure in the diplomatic service, he applied for adoption as a Conservative parliamentary candidate in 1963, the year in which he was appointed CMG. Since his candidature failed he remained in the service and was sent on a year's course to the Imperial Defence College, where he upset some of his military classmates by his obvious air of superiority. 
Warner's first ambassadorial appointment was to Laos in May 1965, where his handling of the increasing instability of the region won him further praise. By now the shadow over his career had been finally dispelled and -- as if to prove it -- he was appointed to the sensitive job of minister at the UK delegation to NATO in October 1967. This in turn was followed by an appointment as the UK deputy permanent representative to the United Nations in New York in September 1969. Warner took naturally and happily to the lively social scene in New York, and it was while he was there that on 29 March 1971 he astonished his friends by marrying at the age of fifty-two. His bride was Simone Georgina, daughter of Colonel Hubert Jocelyn Nangle, and divorcee of Boz de Ferranti of the armaments firm. She had a daughter from her previous marriage, and she and Warner quickly consolidated their happy marriage with the birth of two sons, in 1972 and 1974. 
Warner's last post in the diplomatic service was as ambassador to Japan from July 1972 to June 1975. He and his wife had previously spent some months at Sheffield University acquiring a very useful knowledge of the language, and Warner brought great zest to the job. He was notably successful in encouraging trade relations, and he made the embassy a cosmopolitan meeting-place for peoples of different cultures and backgrounds. If the Japanese were sometimes bewildered by his unconventional approach, they none the less admired his energy and style. His mission was crowned by a successful state visit by the queen, after which Warner was made a GCVO in 1975. He had already been knighted (KCMG) on his appointment to Tokyo. 
Warner had hoped to end his diplomatic career as ambassador in Paris, and when this was denied him he took early retirement, despite a last-minute offer of the job as UK representative to the EC. One reason for this was a genuine desire -- possibly prompted by his own fatherless childhood -- to play an active role in bringing up his young children. Warner also threw himself into a wide variety of new activities: he had for many years owned a farm in Dorset which he now took in hand; he was elected as a Conservative member of the European parliament representing Somerset; and he played an active role in Strasbourg, particularly in Far Eastern affairs, from 1979 to 1984. He later took on the chairmanship of the Wessex region of the National Trust. He also served as a non-executive director on the boards of a number of large companies with international interests, as well as being chairman of the overseas committee of the Confederation of British Industry. Warner lived latterly at Inkpen House, near Newbury, Berkshire, and in London. He died at his London home, 13A Portobello Road, Kensington, of lung cancer, on 30 September 1995. He was survived by his wife, two sons, and stepdaughter. Tall, striking, and immensely persuasive in conversation, Warner was a larger-than-life figure in the establishment worlds in which he had made his career. There was a raffishness in his manner which concealed a deeply serious character: he would have been at home in the eighteenth-century world of Charles James Fox. Warner could be a daunting figure on first acquaintance, but he won affection as well as admiration from a diverse and powerful circle of friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 60060


Dadoo, Yusuf Mohamed (1909-1983), medical practitioner and politician in South Africa, was born in Krugersdorp, Transvaal, on 5 September 1909, one of five children of Mohamed Dadoo, a merchant originally from Kholvad in Gujarat, India, and Fatima Wadee. In the Transvaal Indians could not vote or own property except within segregated areas. Dadoo's father none the less owned one of the largest stores in the central business district of Krugersdorp, thwarting the municipality's attempts to evict him by employing a legal argument that his premises were owned by a company, Dadoo Limited, and a company had no race. 
Dadoo went to school in Bree Street, Newtown, a suburb of Johannesburg. His daily train journey was marked by taunts from white youths who would derogatorily call him a 'coolie' or 'Sammy'. He was inspired at school by Indian nationalist teachers who supported the non-co-operation movement led by Mohandas Gandhi in India. Aged fourteen he participated in a protest action against the 'Class Areas Bill', which aimed to impose residential segregation upon Indians throughout South Africa. In the absence of higher education facilities for Indians in the Transvaal, between 1925 and 1927 he attended Aligarh Muslim College in India, where he attended meetings of the Indian National Congress. He returned to work in his father's shop but was restless. He wanted to study law but his father reluctantly suggested medicine instead. 
As a young medical student in London in 1929 Dadoo was easily distracted by protests against the limited attempts by the British to consider political reforms for India. Arrested in a demonstration against the Simon commission in April 1929, he was transferred by his father to study in Edinburgh, where his politicization grew. He read the works of Marx and Engels and also the biography of Jawaharlal Nehru, the Indian Congress leader who urged the unity of all the oppressed. Dadoo joined the Independent Labour Party as well as the League Against Imperialism, began addressing public meetings, and took part in a hunger march in London in 1934. At Edinburgh he also made lasting friendships with two fellow students from South Africa, Mohambry (Monty) Naicker and Goonam Naidoo. 
After gaining his medical qualifications in Edinburgh, in 1936, Dadoo returned to South Africa and established a medical practice at 47 End Street in Fordsburg, Johannesburg. He soon emerged as a leader with a devoted following among Indians. Gaining a position on the executive of the Transvaal Indian Congress (TIC), he sought to wrest control from the conservative Muslim merchants who dominated the organization during the 1930s. They favoured tactics of negotiation and moderation, while Dadoo argued for passive resistance against measures such as the 'Transvaal Asiatic Land and Trading Act' of 1939 which prohibited for three years the acquisition by Indians of new trading licences outside the Indian locations. Dadoo skilfully drew around him Indian nationalists and veterans of Mohandas Gandhi's passive resistance struggle, and crowds as large as 6000 attended meetings, among them many women. During the struggle for control of the TIC, Dadoo received death threats and narrowly escaped being stabbed at a meeting in June 1939. He and his supporters called off the planned resistance campaign scheduled for 1 August on Gandhi's advice that there was still room for negotiation between the Indian and South African governments. 
Dadoo was also elected to the national council of the Non-European United Front (NEUF), launched in 1938 by coloured intellectuals in Cape Town, and in 1939 he joined the Communist Party of South Africa (CPSA). Through these organizations he broke the mould of traditional Indian politics. His friends were communists and trade unionists like John B. Marks and Moses Kotane, and members of the Transvaal branch of the African National Congress (ANC). He became well known in black townships through the opposition of the NEUF and the Communist Party to the decision of the government of Jan Smuts to support the British war effort. Dadoo regarded it as an imperialist war and not as one for democracy, and highlighted the poverty of the black working class. In August 1940 he was fined for inciting blacks against the war, and in 1941 served a four-month prison sentence. He led the nationalist bloc of the TIC which also opposed the war and which supported the Quit India movement. When Russia joined the war in June 1941 Dadoo and others toed the Communist Party line that this was now a 'people's war'. It was a tribute to his personality and leadership that he retained support among Indian nationalists despite the turnaround on the war issue. In the early 1940s he married Ilsa Pragar, a German, with whom he had a daughter, born in 1945. 
In 1945 Dadoo won control of the TIC, having served with the president of the ANC, Dr A. B. Xuma, on the National Anti-Pass Council and participated in the campaigns against the pass laws of 1943-5. Charged along with other members of the Communist Party for inciting African workers in the miners' strike of 1946, he was sentenced in June 1946 to three months' imprisonment with hard labour. Between 1946 and 1948 he and Dr Monty Naicker, now president of the Natal Indian Congress (NIC), led the passive resistance movement against the 'Asiatic Land Tenure and Indian Representation Act' of 1946, which limited land occupation rights in Natal and the Transvaal and provided separate and limited political representation for Indians in parliament. In March 1947 Dadoo, Naicker, and Xuma -- presidents of the TIC, NIC, and ANC respectively -- signed a joint declaration of co-operation which became known as the 'doctors' pact', pledging them to work together to secure equal rights. He and Naicker went to India to raise support for the struggle, and addressed the Asian Relations conference in New Delhi. Returning to South Africa, Dadoo was sentenced to a further six months' imprisonment in February 1948: some 2000 Indians were gaoled before the passive resistance campaign was called off in June 1948. 
The National Party, which came to power in South Africa in May 1948, attempted to restrict Dadoo's travel and placed him under surveillance when he visited London in 1949. Early in 1950, as president of the South African Indian Congress (SAIC), he was banned from addressing public meetings. In July 1951 he and Yusuf Cachalia, representing the SAIC, and James Moroka, Walter Sisulu, and J. B. Marks of the ANC constituted the joint planning council, which tabled a report proposing a campaign of defiance against the apartheid laws. During the defiance campaign launched in June 1952 Dadoo defied his banning order, and received a six-month prison sentence. In August 1952 he was among twenty individuals (who also included Nelson Mandela) arrested under the 'Suppression of Communism Act' of 1950, which had forced the CPSA to disband, and was sentenced to nine months' imprisonment suspended for three years. 
In 1953 Dadoo was involved in re-establishing the Communist Party, now renamed the South African Communist Party (SACP). He served on its central committee and set up its secret cells. In 1955, while still banned from attending gatherings, he was given the highest tribute (together with Chief Albert Luthuli and Trevor Huddleston) at the Congress of the People in Kliptown, Johannesburg -- the Isitwalandwe-Seaparankoe ('the one who wears the plumes of the rare bird') award. This period of isolation and clandestine activity was hard on Dadoo, whose colleagues knew that he functioned best as a crowd-puller. His first marriage had meanwhile broken up, and in 1955 he married again. His second wife, Mariam, was a Muslim from Reunion Island with children of her own; this marriage also collapsed. 
As a result of the clampdown on political activity following the Sharpeville massacre of 21 March 1960 the SACP and SAIC decided that Dadoo would best serve the movement if he went into exile. His secret journey out of South Africa began by road to Bechuanaland, by plane to Tanganyika, and then to London, where he arrived in April 1960 and lived in exile for the rest of his life. In 1960 he married Winnie Kramer, a Jewish journalist and communist whom he had known in South Africa since 1948. They first lived in small premises provided by the Indian League but eventually settled in Muswell Hill, where their daughter was born in 1962. 
When in 1969 the ANC in exile under the leadership of Oliver Tambo opened up its membership to non-Africans, Dadoo and Joe Slovo secured positions on the revolutionary council. Their brief was to facilitate the development of Umkhonto we Siswe (the military wing of the ANC), organize training and funds for its soldiers, and implement plans for attacks on South African soil. As chairman of the SACP from 1972 Dadoo travelled to the Soviet Union and around Europe, wrote and gave speeches, and liaised with anti-apartheid movements. He warned Indian South Africans not to be seduced by separatist offerings of the National Party. He was committed to the international solidarity of communism and its foundations: the education of youth in Marxist-Leninist tracts; 'unqualified discipline', 'commitment', and 'unswerving loyalty and respect... for the CPSU [Communist Party of the Soviet Union]'; and the organization of the working class (Reddy, 'Dr Yusuf Mohamed Dadoo', 393). 
Dadoo died of cancer at the Whittington Hospital, Islington, London, on 19 September 1983, and was buried according to Muslim rites at Highgate cemetery, near the grave of Karl Marx. 'Doc' or 'Mota' ('elder brother'), as he was popularly known, was paid a high tribute by Oliver Tambo: more than simply a leader of the Indian community in South Africa, Dadoo was one of the 'foremost national leaders of our country' (Reddy, 'Dr Yusuf Mohamed Dadoo', 391). The reasons for his high standing included his sharp intellect, his charisma, his forwarding-looking speeches, and his very wide network of political colleagues among all races. Friends recalled his 'sense of humour', his 'fun loving side', his simplicity, his charm with women, his pipe-smoking, but also his passion for taking action on social and political issues (Meer, 72-3). Others have pointed to his 'internationalism'; his foresight in urging a united front against apartheid (Reddy, 'Dr Yusuf Mohamed Dadoo', 390-92); and his skill 'in mediating a seeming contradiction between Gandhism and the politics of the Communist Party of South Africa' (Raman, 27). In 1939 Gandhi's daughter-in-law Sushila explained his appeal: 'Dr Dadoo... has strength of character and other good qualities and does not seek status. He is Muslim but not sectarian. He is a communist and is counted as one of Jawaharlalji's [Nehru's] followers' (Dhupelia-Mesthrie, 252). He successfully balanced his Muslim, Indian, and African identities with his international identity as a communist. As Eskia Mphahlele wrote: 'One might say Yusuf Dadoo has a Marxist head, a Hindu heart, Mohammedan nails, and an African blood-system' (Mphahlele, 'Doctor Dadoo's dilemma'). 


@@@@@


doc= 60062


Gibbs, Olive Frances (1918-1995), local politician and political campaigner, was born on 17 February 1918 at 1-3 Christ Church Old Buildings, St Thomas's, Oxford, the daughter of Lazarus Cox, then a private in the Army Service Corps but in peacetime a letterpress printer, and his wife, Mary Ann, formerly Quarn. Her aunt delivered her. She was baptized in 1918 at St Thomas's Church and the Oxford high-church tradition was an important influence on her life. Hers was a comfortably off working-class family, with good housing and a steady income. She was frightened of her spasmodically violent father and learned from his dictatorial behaviour a lifelong considerateness and concern for the position of those like her browbeaten mother, whose family was partly of Portuguese extraction. She attended St Thomas's School, won a scholarship to Oxford high school, but preferred to hold it at Milham Ford School, where in due course she passed the school certificate in seven subjects but also set a record of thirty-seven detentions. In 1934 Mother Anna Verena, Olive's godmother, arranged a post for her in Juan-les-Pins, France, as a companion to a French girl in the hope that the change of climate would end Olive's pleurisy. Having learned good French, and in better health, she returned to Oxford in March 1936. Frustrated in her ambition to be a newspaper reporter, she then worked until October 1944 as a librarian at Oxford Central Library. She regularly attended mass at St Thomas's and was from time to time a Sunday school teacher. On 14 September 1940 she married Edmund Reginald Gibbs, son of R. W. M. Gibbs (a prominent left-wing councillor in Oxford) and his wife, Rose. Edmund Gibbs was later, after an unhappy time as a local government civil servant, company secretary to Headington (later Oxford) United, a successful chartered accountant in Oxford, and, like his wife, a prominent figure in the life of the city. The Gibbses moved in left-wing circles and causes in Oxford but without joining a political party. The births of their two sons, in 1944 and 1951, were separated by Edmund Gibbs's service in the Royal Artillery. Olive recalled that she 'hated pregnancy' (Gibbs, 110). Olive joined the Oxford City Labour Party not on the question of nuclear weapons or capital punishment, both of which she passionately opposed, but on an issue of school closures in 1952. She represented with considerable, though not total, success a group of mothers whose nursery schools were being closed by the tory council. In May 1953 she was elected councillor for West ward, which comprised a miscellany of political and class interests, and Oxford University Press and the area of Victorian artisan housing known as Jericho, in which Thomas Hardy set parts of 'Jude the Obscure'. The frosty reception which her gender and her left-wing views provoked from her fellow Labour councillors made her ever welcoming to new political figures. Worried about her children's illnesses and unnerved by the challenges of public work in Oxford, and also, she believed, suffering a delayed reaction to her father's treatment of her, she suffered a nervous breakdown in 1954. She recovered from this, partly through working politically for M. R. D. Foot in a council by-election and partly through psychiatric treatment from Dr Sam Davidson. 
Olive Gibbs's long career in local government was distinguished by two campaigns, in both of which she was successful. She and her husband led a revolt of six Labour councillors on the majority Labour group on the question of the building of a road through Christ Church meadows, one of the earliest proposals to raise the question of conservation priorities as against motor convenience in urban areas. The road was not built, and Olive was temporarily expelled from the Labour group in 1959. In the 1960s she successfully prevented the Jericho area from being demolished -- the fate that befell the similar Oxford area of St Ebbe's. Olive Gibbs was not a theoretical conservationist, but represented what became a much more general hostility to needless 'progress'; in such campaigns she was prepared to work with whatever allies she could find, regardless of the party line. She retired from the city council in 1983 and from Oxfordshire county council in 1985, having sat on the latter for twelve years and been its first Labour chair (1984-5). She was lord mayor of Oxford in 1974-5 and 1982, and in 1985-6 was lady mayoress, supporting her friend Roger Dudman, a widower. She was an energetic chair of the college of further education and a governor of Oxford Polytechnic. 
Though for family reasons she declined to stand for parliament, Olive Gibbs played some part in national politics. In 1955 she was 'upset by Nye Bevan, horribly upset' when he changed his position on the nuclear bomb (Taylor, 282). She was one of the founders of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) in 1958 and was a very active national chairwoman in 1964-5, 'popular, hardworking, enthusiastic and committed' (Taylor and Pritchard, 14). She disapproved of direct action and, when students painted CND graffiti on college walls, she personally scrubbed it out. She became a firm friend of Michael Foot, of whom she remarked that 'we shared just about everything, except a sleeping bag.' Her period in the chair coincided with the start of Wilson's Labour government; its failure to respond adequately to the demands of CND was a disappointment but not a surprise. On reflection, she concluded: 'after 1961, it was impossible to be committed both to the labour party and to CND and yet many of us attempted to do just that' (unpublished typescript). 
Despite this wider involvement, Olive Gibbs's political skills were essentially local: she astutely understood the complex class and status issues of a university and manufacturing city such as Oxford, and she knew how to get her way. In 1989 she published her autobiography up to the 1950s, a lively and candid account. A cheery but not a boisterous personality in the Labour mould, she was short and in her latter years ample, with frizzy brown hair and green-brown eyes. A heavy smoker from the 1950s, she suffered from cancer and died of carcinoma of the lung caused by tobacco, on 28 September 1995 at 95 Iffley Road, Oxford, the Gibbs's home since 1953. Her husband and their two sons, Andrew and Simon, survived her. 


@@@@@


doc= 60076


Peierls, Sir Rudolf Ernst (1907-1995), theoretical physicist, was born on 5 June 1907 in Oberschoneweide, a suburb in the south-east of Berlin, the youngest of the three children (Alfred ('b'. 1899); Annie ('b'. 1901); and Rudolf) of Heinrich Peierls (1867-1945), an electrical engineer from Breslau (WrocLaw) and managing director of a cable factory of the Allgemeine Elektrizitats-Gesellschaft (AEG), and his first wife, Elisabeth 
(Elli; 1878-1921)
, daughter of Alfred Weigert (1848-1896) and his wife, Olga Hamburger, both of Breslau. Rudolf's parents were first cousins through the Weigert line. The Peierls families were assimilated Jews; Heinrich's children were baptized Lutheran. Rudolf's primary education was at a local preparatory school; his secondary education was at the local 'Gymnasium', later named the Humboldtschule. In 1925 he passed the 'Abiturium', the high-school graduation examination, and then gained some practical experience in the AEG factory, which confirmed his inclination towards studies in theoretical physics. Rudolf's mother had died when he was fourteen years old; his father then married Else Hermann, about 1924. Rudolf and his stepmother had a good relationship but by this time he was mostly absent from the family home. 
In 1925 Peierls became a physics and mathematics student at Humboldt University, Berlin. He was critical of the physics professors' limited ability to interest students in their subjects. In 1926-7 he moved to Munich University, where Arnold Sommerfeld was enthusiastically applying the wave mechanics of Paul Dirac and Erwin Schrodinger. Peierls was especially attracted by the electron theory of metals and attended all the seminars and lectures which Sommerfeld arranged on this topic. He also met Hans Bethe, a year ahead of him, and they became lifelong friends. Since Sommerfeld was going abroad for 1927-8 Rudolf joined Werner Heisenberg at Leipzig and worked out there a hole theory to explain the negative Hall effect observed in metals having an almost full conduction band. Since Heisenberg went away for spring term 1929 Rudolf moved to work under Wolfgang Pauli, at the Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule in Zurich, where he developed his fundamental work on thermal conductivity. He was the first to recognize the importance of the Umklapp-processes on the phonon-phonon interactions at very low temperatures. It took about twenty years before techniques had developed sufficiently to test his prediction; even then it was verified only for materials which were pure, not only chemically but also isotopically. This theoretical work gained Peierls the DPhil degree from Leipzig University in 1929. 
Peierls then became Pauli's research assistant for three years, an unusually long appointment. He developed there the first band theory of electrons in a one-dimensional metal, using a weak periodic interaction to represent its effect on the lattice. In 1930 Peierls was invited to attend the annual physics congress at Odessa in August. Here he met a young physics student, Eugenia Kannegiesser (1908-1986), from Leningrad, where she was a contemporary of Lev Landau, who was already known to Peierls. Their only shared language then was English, and Eugenia's English was quite limited. He went to Leningrad in spring 1931 to give a course of lectures. During his visit they married but she could not go to Zurich with him, since she needed a passport and an exit visa before she could leave Russia. Peierls went back to Leningrad in the summer, and they left for Zurich when her documents were ready. They had four children, Gaby Ellen ('b'. 1933), Ronald Frank ('b'. 1935), Catherine 
(Kitty; 'b'. 1948)
, and Joanna ('b'. 1949). 
Peierls was awarded a Rockefeller fellowship for 1932-3, six months at Rome and six months at Cambridge. While they were in England the Nazi party gained control of Germany and they could not return. Fortunately Peierls was given a two-year fellowship by the Academic Assistance Council of Manchester. Hans Bethe was there for one year as an assistant lecturer, living with them. When Peierls and Bethe visited Cambridge, James Chadwick challenged them to provide a theoretical model for the photo-disintegration of a deuteron, whose rate he had just measured. On the train journey home they made a calculation of the process for him, assuming zero-range nuclear forces. This stimulated their interest in nuclear physics, which then became Bethe's main interest, Peierls following suit several years later. For 1935-7 Peierls accepted a two-year fellowship at the Mond Laboratory of Cambridge University, for solid state physics research. Just before they left for Cambridge, Manchester University awarded Peierls an honorary DSc degree, a remarkable testimonial. In 1937 Peierls was appointed professor of applied mathematics in Birmingham University. 
When Otto Frisch visited Peierls from Copenhagen in 1939 Frisch was already uneasy about the Nazis, and he became stranded at Birmingham when Germany occupied Denmark. One day he asked Peierls how much U235 would be needed to make a U235 bomb. Peierls estimated this to be about 1 kg, a result which astonished them. The smallness of their value resulted from including 'fast'-neutron fission of U235, which had not been considered by anyone else. They wrote an account of their calculations in March 1940, including a perceptive note about the human damage which would result if their superbomb were set off in a populated place, and sent it to higher authorities in Britain. The Peierlses took British nationality on 27 March 1940. 
The MAUD committee (the British government committee set up to examine the civil and military uses of atomic science) discussed the Frisch-Peierls memoranda, commented on them, and sent a copy to the USA about 1 June 1941. No response came from there until Oliphant, visiting the USA for other reasons, managed to convince Ernest Lawrence of their importance late in September, just before he returned to Birmingham. Lawrence then persuaded the American authorities to take it very seriously. As it happened, the American government decided on 6 December 1941 to build an atomic bomb; this was the day before the surprise attack by Japan on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. 
Peierls and Francis Simon (another refugee from Germany, at Oxford University) saw that the separation of U235 from natural uranium (mostly U238) was vital for the success of the Frisch-Peierls proposal. Peierls kept on with a variety of calculations bearing on this separation problem, almost alone -- pouring forth memoranda on uranium separation questions -- until 28 May 1941, when he gained an assistant, Klaus Fuchs (naturalized British on 18 June 1941), who gave Peierls strong support, providing him with quick and accurate theoretical calculations when necessary. Both Peierls and Simon judged gaseous diffusion (of uranium hexafluoride) to be the most efficient process for separation, although it would require a large number of stages and therefore a large plant. It was realized early on that it was not feasible to build this plant in Britain under wartime conditions. Early in 1942 Peierls and three colleagues visited the USA briefly and were made welcome; they found that their American colleagues were making great progress without them. However, there was little further UK-USA contact -- indeed it was forbidden by the US secret service -- until Roosevelt and Churchill were each made aware of this situation; their discussions then led to the Quebec agreement of August 1943. A much larger group of senior UK scientists then moved to the USA and joined the Manhattan project. Peierls became the leader of the implosion dynamics group (needed for the plutonium bomb) within the theoretical physics division, headed by Bethe, of the Los Alamos Laboratory. Peierls had demanded that Fuchs should accompany him, as his indispensable assistant. Peierls attended the Trinity test (of a plutonium bomb) at Alamogordo on 17 July 1945. In 1946 he was appointed CBE. 
After Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Peierls was free to return to England. After discussion he decided to return to Birmingham as professor of mathematical physics, where he had an independent department, strong on the research side, with some research fellowships attached. His department was housed in two wartime huts. Peierls soon put his stamp on the style of the department. The students were all placed under his supervision, generally working on problems suggested by him, but with some informal link to one of the postdoctoral members. Peierls was always a critical physicist; with new work he was well known for quickly asking searching questions. With the research students he was critical but in the end always encouraging, suggesting some new direction which could be tried, or some check which could be made, when the calculations made did not seem to accord with intuition. He was always positive and helpful in his remarks to them. Sometimes he would go to the blackboard and outline how the solution might be obtained, leaving the student to think it over, to fill in the details and to verify that the path proposed really did lead to the solution. No student was afraid of Peierls. He was very generous to many of them, not requiring his name on their published papers, even when he had proposed the topic and had made clear the method of the solution. All became conscious of being part of a common endeavour to push forward the frontiers of physics. There would often be discussion of tricky points around the daily lunch table. The atmosphere in the department was one of continual discussion -- the offices of the students were all close to each other, as well as to Peierls's office -- and the students learned of research as a way of life by following Peierls's example. Students who had gone through the department often developed their capabilities much more than they would have elsewhere. They had seen how theoretical physics could be done, following Peierls's style in the department. Peierls believed that theoretical physics was a co-operative venture in which interactions between physicists were crucial. This was the lesson he had learned in his years of wandering, going from one group to another for various reasons, to almost all the main centres of that time. 
In summer 1947 Peierls held a national conference on nuclear physics, partly to place his department on the map. In 1948 he held an international conference, which was very successful, being perhaps the earliest such conference after the war. As a result of Peierls's personal connections with the major research centres, senior physicists came from widespread countries. From its beginning the department increased rapidly in both the number and the calibre of its students and staff. 
Social links within the department were stimulated by parties organized by the Peierlses, inviting the entire department, together with their wives, at which group games were played, or there was dancing, or perhaps story-telling around the room. In the summer the parties were outdoors and the children would also take part. The atmosphere of the department was very happy, despite the crowding in it and the unavoidable noise from the corridor. One student there wrote in those early years: 'We are a happy family here and the Peierlses are father and mother to all' (private information). At Birmingham Peierls developed the major group in theoretical physics in Britain in his time. The times were anomalous, especially in the first ten years after the war. Many able students went to Birmingham because they were lacking proof of their ability in fundamental research, having worked in some rather narrow speciality during the war. Numerous older physicists chose Birmingham for their sabbatical year, and research students at other universities would choose to go to Birmingham for their final year, regarding it as a finishing school, after which they would write their PhD dissertations for their home universities. 
One characteristic of Peierls's work was that he usually started from fundamentals, rather than from the work of others. This was the case for the Frisch-Peierls memoranda. His development of the dynamics of dislocations in crystalline solids was sparked off by a question from Egon Orowan. He demonstrated from first principles, using simple steps, that the Ising model in two dimensions 'must' have a phase-transition, contrary to general opinion. His novel treatment and use of resonant states in nuclear systems also started from fundamentals. These cases and others illustrate how, in Peierls's hands, new areas of theoretical physics could grow out of simple questions and thoughts about them. That 'Peierls always starts from fundamentals' was the secret of his success and of his being one of the last of those wide-ranging universalists in physics -- those physicists who could, for example, do research in both nuclear physics theory and condensed matter theory. 
In 1950 Peierls was very shocked to learn that Fuchs had turned over to the Russians copies of almost all the calculations he had carried out during the war, and other secret documents which passed through his hands, despite his signing the 'Official Secrets Act'. At first Peierls could not believe this, but Fuchs said that there was no mistake. In the cold war era Peierls chose to resign his consultancy with the Atomic Energy Research Establishment (AERE), Harwell, when he realized that as a result of Fuchs's treachery the US Security Service mistrusted him to such a degree that they were proposing not to permit AERE to receive US classified reports. 
In 1963 the Wykeham professorship (theoretical physics) of Oxford University became free. When Peierls was asked to fill the chair he specified that there should be a department of theoretical physics to include all the theoretical physicists in Oxford, with a suitable building to house them all, and three adjoining houses were allocated to him. 
The Oxford department of theoretical physics soon became larger than that at Birmingham and it was not possible for Peierls to work with all the students. It was divided into two large groups, elementary particle physics and condensed matter physics, and two smaller groups -- astrophysics and nuclear physics. The first three were each placed under a senior researcher, while the last was under Peierls, who also took some students in solid state physics. There was much more administration to be done by Peierls in connection with the department than was the case in Birmingham. He had to serve on many internal university committees and continued on a number of external committees, on which he now represented Oxford instead of Birmingham. The Oxford department continued to grow in numbers and he had to work hard to secure more floor space to accommodate all of them. There was less departmental sociability than at Birmingham, since the colleges already generated links between students of differing subjects within the college. The parties happened less often, not all attended, and were held in the department building. Peierls kept an interest in all the work going on and attended a large fraction of the specialist seminars and most of the more general seminars and colloquia. As a result theoretical physics at Oxford gradually became more coherent, a great improvement on the past. This growth of coherence may perhaps be Peierls's greatest single contribution to Oxford in his period there. He was elected FRS in 1945, receiving the society's royal medal in 1959 and its Copley medal in 1986. He was knighted in 1968. 
Although Peierls devoted much energy to improving accommodation for the increasing department numbers, space was not made available to him until 1974, when he was about to retire; the department moved from 12 Parks Road to 1 Keble Road three years later when the rebuilding work was complete. Peierls had spent a number of summer vacations working at the University of Washington at Seattle; for his retirement he accepted an appointment to that university as a half-time professor for 1974-7. After 1977 Peierls lectured at a number of summer schools. These lectures appeared in the proceedings volume for each school; he expanded his lectures at Les Houches (1953) to book length, publishing them under the title 'Quantum Theory of Solids'. 
On his return to Birmingham in 1945 Peierls had played a leading role in forming an Atomic Scientists' Association, and was its first (acting) president. The association sought to inform the public about nuclear physics and nuclear energy, and especially the safeguards necessary in dealing with the decay properties of many nuclei. Their most effective means for this education was a travelling exhibition, known as the 'atomic train', which could stop at all towns served by railways. Later, by request, it also went abroad, and was very successful there. The association wound up in 1958 because it had achieved its purpose; also, the full members, those who had worked as professional nuclear scientists during the war, were diminishing in number. However, there was soon formed a British Pugwash Group, with Peierls as its first chairman until 1974, when he became an honorary (but active) member of its executive committee. 
Peierls attended his first International Pugwash conference in 1960, the sixth held and the first to be held in the USSR; he had met his Russian colleagues (for the first time after the war) at the Atoms for Peace conference at Geneva in 1955. He then attended the Pugwash conferences rather regularly; his ability with the Russian language was very helpful in discussions, for he could quickly clarify misunderstandings of technical translation. He became a member of its continuing committee (later named its council) in 1963, and its chairman in 1970, retiring from this post in 1974. In 1972 the twenty-second Pugwash conference was held in Oxford, when he was chairman of both International Pugwash and British Pugwash; the local arrangements were made by the latter group under his direction. In 1992 he attended the forty-second International Pugwash conference at Berlin -- his twenty-fourth and last attendance. 
Throughout this period Peierls was deeply involved in the anti-nuclear weapons movement in Britain. In 1983 the UK Coalition for a Nuclear Weapons Freeze began, which became known as FREEZE. It was unilateral, urging only that the UK should cease the production, testing, and deploying of nuclear weapons. In 1985 Peierls became a patron of FREEZE, taking part in the advertising of this drive, and in collecting signatures at Oxford, all leading up to the 'Giant Letter', which was presented to the government. Late in 1986 he was made a FREEZE director. In this FREEZE period Peierls adopted the slogan 'nuclear weapons are not battleships'; he felt that if people were able to understand this and its implications, they would give up the old 'numbers game' so frequently adopted. In the 1990s he collaborated with C. Hill, R. Pease, and J. Rotblat to produce an 80-page report from the British Pugwash Group entitled 'Does Britain Need Nuclear Weapons?', reaching the conclusion 'No', published in 1995. 
Lady Peierls died at Oxford on 25 October 1986. Sir Rudolf then travelled the world, attending seven more Pugwash conferences, giving physics seminars at universities along his way, some of which bestowed honorary DScs on him. The Institute of Physics elected him honorary fellow in 1973, awarding him the Guthrie medal in 1968 and the Paul Dirac medal and prize in 1991. He was elected to numerous foreign societies, being especially gratified by his membership of the Deutsche Akademie Leopoldina, for German-born scientists, in 1981. However, in 1993 he was overtaken by pneumonia at Rome, which required his transport back to England by air on a stretcher bed. He sold his Oxford flat and moved into the country at Oakenholt, near Farmoor, Oxfordshire, where he could be independent, but with ready help near at hand. He was almost blind and unable to read, but was still able to communicate with others by voice, most often by telephone. Kidney trouble required regular dialysis sessions for him at the Churchill Hospital, Oxford, where he died on 19 September 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 60077


Collins, Edward Treacher (1862-1932), ophthalmologist, was born at 1 Albert Terrace, Regent's Park, London, on 28 May 1862, the second son of Dr William Job Collins ('b'. 1818), a London physician; his father was of an old Warwick family, one of whom, Francis Collins, wrote Shakespeare's will, and his mother, Mary Ann Francisca, was the daughter of Edouard Treacher, of Huguenot stock. He was educated in London at University College School and at the Middlesex Hospital, received his medical diploma at the age of twenty-one, and was a house surgeon at Moorfields Eye Hospital from 1884 to 1887. He was then appointed pathological curator of the museum, and librarian, and remained in that position until 1894; he became FRCS in 1890. He also held a large number of appointments at other London hospitals while building up a private practice. Thereafter he held the post of senior surgeon in Moorfields until his retirement. 
It was during his tenure of the curatorship that Collins laid the foundations of his subsequent career. This was the period of reorganization of surgery and medicine on the basis of specialization in practice as it is known today. Collins improved and built up the specimen collection, and observations in clinical pathology and the scientific principles underlying them became his major interest. Of his many published papers, at least 150 refer to histology or pathology, indicative of his persistence in research in the subject, and of the immense energy and steady industry with which he worked. He was especially interested in the evolution of the eye and its congenital aberrations, one of which (mandibulo-facial dysostosis) was originally described by him and at first carried the name Treacher Collins syndrome, though it has since been renamed Franceschetti syndrome as its wider developmental significance has become known. Collins often attended and took part in scientific as well as clinical meetings, and it was said that very frequently his remarks in a discussion were of much greater value than the paper that gave rise to them. 
In addition to a long list of publications on ocular pathology, Collins wrote a number of influential books. Most of these dealt with medical topics, though one, 'In the Kingdom of the Shah' (1896), described his visit to Persia in 1894 to operate on the eldest son of the shah. This working holiday was also his honeymoon, as before his departure he married Hetty Emily ('b'. 1870/71), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel J. L. Herrick of Hawkes Bay, New Zealand; they had a son and a daughter. An important later publication was Collins's 'History and Traditions of the Moorfields Eye Hospital' (1929), covering the hundred years up to 1904. Biographical details given in this work of some senior members of the hospital staff, with their abilities described in the most generous terms, were suspected by others to have led to the reported excessive pride of subsequent Moorfields staff and alumni, and its perceived undesirable effects on ophthalmology in England. 
This undeserved criticism only serves to emphasize the most striking and admirable of Collins's traits: despite his eminence, he was entirely free from any greed for wealth or honours. He was an excellent teacher and took great pains to help and advance his pupils and younger colleagues in any way possible. Obituary notices state that he was without any envious thought, always willing to do anything to help a colleague, and that he never had a mean thought. His modesty was such that, when required to retire from his hospital appointment in his sixtieth year, he completed his day's clinical work and left without a word, even ahead of the due date, rather than face the fuss of a more formal farewell. His lack of ambition contrasts with his elder brother, William Job, who also became an ophthalmic surgeon; in addition William served as chairman of the London county council and as vice-chancellor of the University of London, and he was for some years a Liberal MP (for St Pancras and for Derby) and was knighted. 
In addition to many other honours Collins was awarded the Nettleship medal (1915) and was Bowman lecturer (1921) of the Ophthalmological Society of the UK (OSUK), of which he held all the offices in turn. After his death the triennial Treacher Collins prize was established in his memory. Collins served on many national and local ophthalmic teaching and registration bodies, and was active in helping to found the precursor of the Faculty of Ophthalmologists, later to become the Royal College of Ophthalmologists. He spent much time in administrative work, and was intimately involved in the organization of Moorfields Eye Hospital, including its removal to the City Road site. 
During his retirement from hospital work (from 1922 onwards) Collins played an active part in re-establishing the international congresses of ophthalmology which had been interrupted by the First World War. In recognition of his efforts he was made honorary president of the International Council of Ophthalmology, which succeeded in organizing the Thirteenth International Congress in 1929. Collins died at 16 Fitzroy Square, London, on 13 December 1932, and was buried on 17 December. After his death a memorial fund, built up by voluntary donations, was established with the aim of rebuilding the pathology department at Moorfields, to be named the Treacher Collins Pathological Institute. Despite sponsorship by the OSUK, the fund never reached the required level, and the proceeds were eventually devoted to the promotion of original work by younger members of the society. 


@@@@@


doc= 60078


Davie, Donald Alfred (1922-1995), poet and literary critic, was born on 17 July 1922 in Barnsley, Yorkshire, the son of George Davie (died 1965), a shopkeeper and deacon of the local Baptist chapel, and his wife, Alice, 'nee' Sugden (died 1968), a schoolteacher. He was educated at Holgate grammar school, Barnsley, and at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, where he won a scholarship to read English in 1940. His university education was interrupted by wartime service in the Royal Navy, which took him to Ceylon, India, Iceland, and Russia. On his return home with the navy to Plymouth in 1944 he met Doreen John ('b'. 1920), whom he married on 13 January 1945; they had two sons and a daughter. He resumed his studies at Cambridge, where he graduated in 1947 (MA, 1949) and stayed on as a research student; he was awarded his PhD in 1951. 
From 1950 until 1957 Davie was a lecturer in English at Trinity College, Dublin; he spent the academic year 1957-8 as a visiting professor at the University of California before returning to Cambridge as a lecturer and, from 1959, fellow of Gonville and Caius College. In 1964, after a second visit to the USA as a visiting lecturer at the University of Cincinnati, he joined the new University of Essex as professor of literature, and became pro-vice-chancellor a year later: it seemed an ideal opportunity to counter what he saw as the cultural insularity of Cambridge, but the student riots of 1968, and the university's tepid response to them, completed his disillusionment with English academic life. In 1968 he succeeded Yvor Winters, one of his literary mentors, as professor of English at Stanford University, California; ten years later he moved to Vanderbilt University, Tennessee, where he remained until 1988. He and Doreen then retired to the Devon village of Silverton, near Exeter. 
Donald Davie belongs to that small and distinguished company of poet-critics (such as Matthew Arnold, William Empson, and Yvor Winters) who are equally poets and critics; the restless concerns of the creative writer and the academic continually reinforce one another. His first two critical books, 'Purity of Diction in English Verse' (1952) and 'Articulate Energy' (1955), seem respectively to define and to extend the literary principles of those poets who became known as the Movement, just as his own first collection of poems, 'Brides of Reason' (1955), despite its ironic intelligence and metrical orthodoxy, already hints at impatience with the Movement's limited agenda: 'A neutral tone is nowadays preferred', he writes ('Collected Poems', 1990, 35), but the passive voice fails to endorse the preference as his own. Inclusion in Robert Conquest's influential anthology 'New Lines' (1956) brought Davie's poetry to a wider public, while his second collection, 'A Winter Talent' (1957), contains some of the outstanding English poems of the 1950s, such as the haunting 'Time passing, beloved' and the wry 'Heigh-ho on a winter afternoon': 'Yes, I have 'mellowed', as you said I would' (ibid., 74). 
But 'mellowing' was not quite Davie's style, and his literary career proved as unpredictable as his academic one. Instead of producing another conventional slim volume of verse, he now wrote 'The Forests of Lithuania' (1958), a version of Adam Mickiewicz's epic poem 'Pan Tadeusz', and a series of poems about American history, 'A Sequence for Francis Parkman' (1961); meanwhile, his 'New and Selected Poems' (1961), including the ambitious and enigmatic 'With the grain' -- a poem which, like some of his major essays, worries at the vexed question of poetry's relationships with the other arts -- appeared in the USA. His next critical work was equally unexpected, but 'The Heyday of Sir Walter Scott' (1961) views its subject, like Mickiewicz and Parkman, as an explorer of the wilderness. Davie was also already engaged in a lifelong tussle with the work of Pound; 'Ezra Pound: Poet as Sculptor' (1964) was the first of his three books on the poet (the others appeared in 1975 and 1991). Drawing on his travels both in Europe and in America, his next collection of poems, 'Events and Wisdoms' (1964), was thematically and formally his most wide-ranging so far: 'Touched by that wand of transit, / Californian, hopeful...' ('Collected Poems', 131), he playfully embraces American idioms and looks back with guarded nostalgia to his Barnsley childhood. 
In 1964 Davie could not have foreseen the unhappy conclusion of his Essex years nor the fraught circumstances of his more permanent self-exile; nor, indeed, that this difficult period would produce outstanding poetry. For 'Essex Poems' (1969) matches bleak East Anglian (and, in a postscript, Iowan) landscapes with a finely pared-down diction. When, in 'Ezra Pound in Pisa', he writes 'Excellence is sparse' ('Collected Poems', 142), it could stand as epigraph for the entire collection, as could a heartfelt couplet from the final poem, 'Or, solitude': 'The metaphysicality / Of poetry, how I need it!' (ibid., 155). But 'Essex Poems' is far from being a farewell to England: once in America, Davie became even more preoccupied with his home country, not only bombarding it with acerbic poems and articles, but publishing 'Thomas Hardy and British Poetry' (1972), in which he argued that Hardy (rather than Yeats, Eliot, or Pound) was the most influential figure in twentieth-century British poetry, and 'The Shires' (1974), an edgily reflective county-by-county sequence of poems. 
A conservative, pipe-puffing and sometimes blunt-speaking Yorkshireman, Davie might have been an incongruous figure on a 1970s, west-coast campus; but he got on well with America, as his teasingly elliptical autobiography, 'These the Companions' (1982), demonstrates, and he was an enthusiastic advocate of American poets such as Lorine Niedecker and Edward Dorn. In 1976 he returned temporarily to Cambridge to give the Clark lectures, on 'The literature of the English dissenting interest', and these were published as 'A Gathered Church' (1978): this also marked a return to the theological concerns he had touched on as long ago as 1958 in his anthology 'The Late Augustans' and which he further explored in his 'New Oxford Book of Christian Verse' (1981). He had been received into the Anglican communion in 1972, and his later poetry became increasingly Christian in its focus. Meanwhile, 'In the Stopping Train' appeared in 1977: the long, disturbing title poem analyses a divided self, the 'I who has to be punished' and 'the man going mad inside me' ('Collected Poems', 285). 'To Scorch or Freeze' (1988) is a sequence of fragmented psalms, to which the ten-part meditation 'Our father' in the posthumously published 'Poems and Melodramas' (1996) forms a coda; his 'Penguin Classics' edition of 'The Psalms in English' also appeared in 1996. 
Although Davie published no entirely new full-length critical books after 'A Gathered Church', he remained a prolific, often controversial, essayist and reviewer. Many of his occasional pieces were collected in 'The Poet in the Imaginary Museum' (1977) and 'Trying to Explain' (1979), and in the late 1980s he began to reorganize his shorter critical pieces into a series of thematic volumes, starting with 'Under Briggflatts: a History of Poetry in Great Britain, 1960-1988' (1989). The project continued after his death with volumes edited by his widow and Clive Wilmer. Donald Davie died of cancer at the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital in Exeter on 18 September 1995; he was buried on 22 September in the churchyard of St Mary the Virgin, Silverton. 


@@@@@


doc= 60088


Edwards, Joseph (1814-1882), sculptor, was born on 5 March 1814 at Ynysgau, Merthyr Tudful, Glamorgan, the son of John Edwards, a stonecutter. Joseph assisted his father in his business, showing exceptional ability from an early age. He had a limited education at local charity schools. At seventeen Joseph sought to widen his horizons by walking through south and west Wales, spending nearly two years in Swansea where he was employed as a mason. At twenty-one, in 1835, he went to London carrying an introduction to the sculptor William Behnes who, after some hesitation, employed him. He stayed with Behnes until 1838, during which time he attended the Royal Academy Schools, winning the silver medal for best model from the antique, and exhibiting for the first time. He entered the studio of Patrick Macdowell while continuing his studies at the Royal Academy, where he won a second silver medal in 1839. By this time he was gaining commissions for portrait busts and memorials in his own right, especially from patrons connected with south Wales. He carved the monument to Henry Charles Somerset, sixth duke of Beaufort, and in 1840 he made a bust of Ivor Bertie Guest, the first of several commissions from Merthyr industrialists. 
In 1843 Edwards carved 'The Last Dream' (exh. RA, 1844, as 'Part of a monument at North Othrington church to the late Miss Hutton of Sowber Hill, North Allerton'; North Otterington church, Yorkshire), regarded as his early masterpiece, and John Gibson interested himself in his compatriot's work on a visit to London. Welsh intellectuals became increasingly aware of his career. Edwards was perceived to demonstrate the potential for national progress in Wales, having risen by his own efforts from humble origins to find a place in the English art world. Like Gibson, he was frequently cited in the mid-nineteenth century as an example for the young to follow. In 1855, at the Royal London Eisteddfod, he became the first Welsh artist to have a solo exhibition of his works, and in the 1860s and 1870s he moved among the London Welsh intelligentsia who exercised a strong influence on national development. 
Edwards was patronized by notable establishment figures. His marble relief 'Religion Consoling Justice' (1853; Dingestow, Monmouthshire) formed part of the memorial to Justice Sir John Bernard Bosanquet, and in 1854 and 1856 he was again commissioned by the Beaufort family. In 1859 he met George Virtue, whose magazine, the 'Art Journal', promoted his work, publishing engravings on several occasions. Virtue also made use of a work by Edwards for the headpiece of his 'Girls Own Paper'. In 1870 the sculptor was commissioned to execute the memorial to the publisher at Walton-on-Thames cemetery. 
Edwards was both a meticulous craftsman and painstaking in his artistic conceptions, which were of a mystical though fundamentally Christian nature. His 'Religion', exhibited as a plaster at the International Exhibition of 1862, became his only large-scale public sculpture in his native country, erected in marble at Cefncoedycymer cemetery ten years later (a second version is at Highgate cemetery, London). His high seriousness and dedication to art came at the expense of business considerations and he was frequently financially embarrassed. Probably for this reason, in 1846 Edwards began to work for Matthew Noble in a role which, it is clear, far exceeded that of the normal assistant. Among Edwards's papers is a list of some forty major pieces attributed to the English sculptor on which he worked at every stage from conception to completion, including the famous Wellington memorial of 1856 in Manchester. He became known in the art world as Noble's 'ghost', entering his studio at the end of the day to work overnight, and on Sundays. On Noble's death in 1876, Edwards completed his outstanding works, for which he received minimal recompense. In 1881 Thomas Woolner, who took a dim view of Noble's practice, made application on Edwards's behalf for a Turner bequest. The Welsh sculptor was able to benefit from only one payment, since he died, unmarried, on 9 January 1882 at his home, 40 Roberts Street, Hampstead Road, London. He was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 60090


Groom, John Alfred (1845-1919), founder of the John Grooms charity for disabled children, was born at 6 North Street, Clerkenwell, London, on 15 August 1845, the third son of George Paul Groom (1819/20-1866), a copperplate printer, and his wife, Sarah Maria, 'nee' Wigton (1820/21-1902). After leaving school he became an errand-boy, but was later apprenticed in an engine-turning business, where he learned the trade of silver engraving. At twenty-one he finished his apprenticeship and set up his own engraving business, with a machine shop in a glass-fronted shed in the garden of his house in Sekforde Street, Clerkenwell. On his father's death, leaving a family of five boys and one girl to be brought up by their mother, John Groom became the effective leader. The Grooms were regular churchgoers, and from the age of sixteen John taught at a Sunday school. With a friend who was a City of London commissioner he visited homes in the slum districts, an experience which intensified his determination to help those most in need. 
Soon after setting up his own business Groom was asked to become superintendent of a nearby mission hall. This voluntary post gave full scope to his philanthropic instincts, and while his brothers helped to run the engraving business he put much of his energy and money into the mission work. The mission hall enabled him to help the blind and disabled girls whom he saw every day on the streets of the capital selling flowers and watercress to passers-by. Their work was both seasonal and dependent upon good weather, as fewer flowers were sold on dull days. If they did not make enough money they would often sleep out at night, fearful of returning home. Calling on family and friends to help, Groom hired a large meeting room near Covent Garden. There he founded, in 1866, the Watercress and Flower Girls' Christian Mission, commonly known in its early days as 'John Groom's Crippleage'. 
The mission became a centre where the girls could get a free mug of cocoa early in the mornings. Twice weekly there was a hot dinner, for which they paid a nominal halfpenny. They were encouraged to wash, make themselves tidy, and mend their clothes, while Groom read 'Bible' stories. He also encouraged them to attend one of the three Sunday schools which he had started in different parts of the capital. The mission was given a powerful boost when the earl of Shaftesbury offered to become its president and to use his many contacts to help raise funds. Shaftesbury had spotted Groom going about his work in the poorer districts, where he was a familiar figure in his top hat and frock coat, and they became close friends. 
Groom married, on 5 March 1868, Sarah (1849/50-1906), the daughter of George John Farrington, a coachman. They had three sons and a daughter. His wife, 'a very practical Christian' (Martin, 8), helped in the mission work. After her death he married, on 12 October 1908, Ada Wood ('b'. 1877/8), a hospital nurse, daughter of Samuel Wood, contractor. She survived him. 
Groom wanted above all else to give the blind and disabled girls a degree of independence, but while some were found work in domestic service most remained on the street. He saw a long-term solution in the manufacture of handmade flowers, which were then becoming popular. The mission hall was converted into a daytime factory, and a flower-making business was begun. Groom was a 'practical man with no use for slipshod amateurism', and he mastered the trade himself ('The Times', 21 Feb 1966). Under his guidance the venture soon took off and he turned his attention full-time to flower making. His brothers also helped to work the machines that stamped the petals out of stiffened 'sateen': they were then coloured and shaped by the girls, and worked around stems made of wire wrapped in green paper. The girls became highly skilled at all kinds of flower, even orchids. 
In 1894 the mission moved to larger premises at Woodbridge Chapel, close to Sekforde Street, and the flowers were by now sold wholesale to private houses and businesses. There were exhibitions in town halls of flowers and flower making, and in 1906 the girls were invited to decorate the Guildhall for the lord mayor's banquet, a highly praised piece of work. They later produced 30,000 blooms for a banquet in honour of the king and queen of Norway. Queen Alexandra also supported the mission, and in 1912 she ordered thousands of roses which were sold on the inaugural Queen Alexandra rose day, 26 June 1912, when nearly $18,000 was collected for charitable causes. 
From the beginning the girls were paid a wage and given accommodation in houses in Sekforde Street, close to their work, which were rented with funds raised by an appeal. House-mothers were employed to look after them, and in this way the first 'John Grooms home' was established -- an early step towards the provision of specialist housing for the disabled. In 1890 Groom got the backing of the mission committee and launched an appeal for funds with which to open an orphanage in Clacton-on-Sea, Essex. Soon there were six homes -- each named after a flower -- housing 100 blind and disabled girls from the age of two to twelve. When old enough the girls went to local schools and then into domestic service, or else joined the flower making in London. By 1913 there were nearly 260 girls involved in the flower making, all of them blind or disabled, and earning between 10's'. and 15's'. a week. 
Groom managed to balance the demands of his charity with a happy family life. He was a keen supporter of Chelsea Football Club and went to home games, when he would swap his trademark top hat for a flat cap. He continued as superintendent and secretary of the mission until the year before his death, when he retired in failing health. In his last year he lived at the orphanage in Clacton, where he died on 27 December 1919. He was buried in Highgate cemetery. His eldest son, Alfred, took over the mission work, and in 1932 the flower making occupied a large site at Edgware, with specialist homes around a purpose-built factory. As the demand for artificial flowers declined the range of activities increased, and disabled boys as well as girls were admitted, but the emphasis remained on their attaining a degree of independence. More than a century after its foundation the 'John Grooms charity' was still providing employment and homes for disabled people. 


@@@@@


doc= 60091


McCluskie, Samuel Joseph (1932-1995), trade unionist, was born into a Roman Catholic family at 97 St Andrew Street, Leith, on 11 August 1932, son of James McCluskie, riveter and later barman, and his wife, Agnes McHenry. Sent to the local St Mary's primary school and to Holy Cross Academy, Edinburgh, he left without academic qualifications. 'I played truant because I hated school', he explained. 'We received corporal punishment for truancy so I decided the only way to avoid punishment was not to go back to school at all' ('The Independent', 18 Sept 1995). He began an apprenticeship with George Gibson of Leith, and worked in trawler engine rooms before doing his national service with the army (the navy found him 'too fat') and going to Korea. On demobilization, he spent a year 'mucking about in Japan' ('Daily Telegraph', 18 Sept 1995) -- a formative experience which bred a passionate belief in workers' co-operation, and co-operation with well-intentioned employers. He returned home to nine months' unemployment, before joining the Union Castle Line in 1955 as a ship's steward, soon becoming ship's chef instead. His travels were a political education: South African apartheid, Latin American right-wing dictatorships, and eastern bloc left-wing ones all earned his suspicion and dislike. On 29 September 1961 he married Alice Lowrie Fletcher, 'nee' Potter ('b'. 1925/6), a widowed bonded warehouse worker. They had a daughter and two sons, one of whom died young. 
McCluskie was first spotted by the National Union of Seamen (NUS) in 1960 when he was involved in an unofficial strike. He was persuaded to become a branch delegate in 1963 after complaining about an increase in union dues, and in 1964 he became a land-based full-time official, living in Bo'ness, West Lothian, and representing Grangemouth and the east coast of Scotland. He spent some years as a branch secretary in ports around the country, from Plymouth, to Liverpool (where he consolidated his position during the strike of 1966), to Hull (where he spotted the young John Prescott), before arriving at Maritime House, Clapham, the union's headquarters, as a national organizer in 1969. Supported by Catholic moderates and soft left Tribunites, he made an early bid for the general secretaryship of the union in 1974, but was beaten by the hard left candidate, Jim Slater. He became assistant general secretary in 1976. 
Baulked of the job he wanted, McCluskie threw himself into Labour Party politics, and won a seat on the party's national executive committee in the same year, which he kept until his death, also serving as treasurer (1984-92). He was party chairman in 1983 at the nadir of the Labour Party's fortunes, and chaired the party conference in Brighton that year. Bullying, cajoling, charming the delegates by turn, with all the skills accumulated during interminable rough trade-union meetings, McCluskie played an important part in bringing the party back from the edge of oblivion. He was an authentic working-class leader, whose style was breezy, blunt, and unmalicious, although he could be blazingly angry, whereupon his language became both picturesque and unprintable. 
In 1986 McCluskie achieved his old ambition, and was elected general secretary of the NUS. 'Sam the Man' was a skilled fixer and classic operator in 'smoke-filled rooms'; he was viewed by employers and arbitrators as a moderate, a man with whom business could be done, despite his public stance of unbending socialism and contempt for shipowners. Behind the scenes he sought to avoid confrontation with P. & O. in 1988, but when the strike began, he took a high-profile role. The protracted and increasingly bitter strike began after 2000 members of the NUS in Belfast and Dover rejected new contracts and were served with dismissal notices. The British merchant shipping industry was in trouble, and the P. & O. chairman, Sir Jeffrey Stirling (a friend of the prime minister, Margaret Thatcher), took advantage of the anti-union legislation of recent years to force a confrontation with the NUS. When McCluskie announced a ballot of his members for a national strike in support of the sacked men, a High Court judge ruled that the union's assets could be seized. McCluskie insisted on holding the ballot, a strike was called, and in May 1988 the union was fined heavily. The union's assets were sequestered, and it was evicted from Maritime House: McCluskie then conducted the strike from the Prince of Wales pub (which he called 'our annexe') opposite Maritime House. In July the threat of a second, heavier fine forced the NUS to withdraw support from its members' main picket at Dover, and the strike collapsed. Within two years, the financial state of the NUS and dwindling membership led the union into a merger with the National Union of Railwaymen. McCluskie served as executive officer of the amalgamated Rail, Maritime and Transport Union for a year (1990-91) before he retired quietly, having suffered poor health for some time. He died from cancer in St Columba's Hospice, Edinburgh, on 15 September 1995, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 60092


Clark, Sir (John) Grahame Douglas (1907-1995), archaeologist and prehistorian, was born on 28 July 1907 at 5 Scotts Avenue, Shortlands, Beckenham, in Kent, the elder son of Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Douglas Clark, a stock jobber, and his wife, Maude Ethel Grahame Shaw. He was educated at Marlborough College, where his early interest in prehistory was soon fuelled by the rich archaeological monuments of the Wiltshire downs, and where he published his first articles on prehistoric flint implements in the reports of the school natural history society between 1923 and 1926. From Marlborough he went on in 1926 to Peterhouse, Cambridge, where he studied history before transferring to the newly created archaeology and anthropology tripos, and secured a first-class degree in 1930. He went on to take a PhD degree, under the supervision of Miles Burkitt, on the mesolithic industries of Britain. He became an assistant lecturer in the faculty of archaeology and anthropology in 1935, a full university lecturer in 1946, and eventually, on the retirement of Dorothy Garrod in 1952, the Disney professor of archaeology, a position he held until his own retirement in 1974. Clark had been elected a bye-fellow at Peterhouse in 1933 and a full fellow in 1950, and from 1973 to 1980 he served as master of the college. On 18 July 1936 he married Gwladys Maud (Mollie) White, herself an archaeologist with the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Wales, and a source of both personal and professional support and inspiration throughout his life. They had two sons and one daughter. 
The impact of Grahame Clark on the development of British and indeed world prehistory was profound on several different levels. In the organization of the discipline he was one of the leading figures in the creation of the influential fenland research committee in 1932, and then in 1935 was largely responsible for transforming the Prehistoric Society of East Anglia into a fully national society for prehistory. He edited the 'Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society' from 1935 to 1970 and was president of the society from 1958 to 1962. Following his war service in aerial reconnaissance, his headship of the department of archaeology at Cambridge was notable above all for the string of distinguished undergraduates and research students who subsequently went off to major academic positions and research careers in various parts of Africa, Australia, New Zealand, North America, and elsewhere, as well as in Britain itself. He chaired the archaeology section of the British Academy (to which he was elected in 1951) from 1974 to 1978, and was at various times a member of the Ancient Monuments Board, the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments (England), and many other academic and management committees. Possibly his most significant achievement was his central role in creating (through the combined efforts of the British Academy and the Royal Society) the science-based archaeology committee of the Science Research Council in 1975, a committee which provided a major impetus, as well as substantial funding, for the development of archaeological science research in Britain, and for which he himself served as the first chairman. He was equally influential in creating in 1966 the British Academy major research project into the early history of agriculture, which, under the direction of Eric Higgs, placed Cambridge in the forefront of international research into the origins of farming communities. 
Clark's contributions to the study of European and world prehistory are hard to overestimate. His initial achievement was to place for the first time the study of the mesolithic (that is, immediately pre-farming) period in Britain onto a proper footing -- mainly through the publication of 'The Mesolithic Age in Britain' (based on his own doctoral research) in 1932. He went on to provide a more comprehensive and very differently structured synthesis of the Scandinavian mesolithic in 'The Mesolithic Settlement of Northern Europe' in 1936. In the interval between publishing these two books Clark had been greatly inspired by the potential contributions of the natural sciences to archaeology, reflected in his involvement in the fenland research committee and the associated excavations at Shippea Hill and his close contacts with Harry Godwin (later professor of botany at Cambridge) and the recently developed technique of pollen analysis as a means of both the relative dating of archaeological sites within a climatic framework and the reconstruction of their environmental setting. His close contacts with Scandinavian prehistory had opened his eyes to the immense potential of waterlogged sites as a source of organic (especially bone and wood) artefacts and their associated palaeoenvironmental evidence, and this culminated between 1949 and 1951 in his classic excavations at the early mesolithic lakeside settlement of Star Carr in Yorkshire, published promptly as a handsome monograph by Cambridge University Press in 1954. 
The same influences also contributed to Clark's major turn of interest towards the specifically economic and social, as opposed to typological and chronological, aspects of prehistory -- an approach also fostered by his contacts with Michael Postan and other economic historians at Peterhouse. His book 'Prehistoric Europe: the Economic Basis', published in 1952 and based on his Munro lectures at Edinburgh University in 1949, is generally regarded as Clark's greatest academic achievement, and displayed an impressive command not only of the relevant archaeological data across a broad range of subjects and periods but also a wide range of comparative ethnographic and ethnohistorical material. It is now clear that much of this work in archaeological science and related economic and ecological studies underlay much of the development of the so-called new archaeology of the 1960s and 1970s, skilfully developed in Britain by two of Clark's own students, Colin Renfrew and David Clarke. 
Clark's other outstanding achievement was to champion world prehistory as a truly global academic enterprise, which was essential to a proper understanding of both the origins and the present condition of mankind. Supported by his own extensive travels and his massive command of the international literature, he published in 1961 the initial version of 'World Prehistory: an Outline'. This was further updated in 1969 as 'World Prehistory: a New Outline', and again in 1977 (after further travelling in Australia, New Zealand, Taiwan, the Philippines, North America, and elsewhere) as 'World Prehistory in New Perspective', and was eventually translated into over a dozen languages, including Korean and Serbo-Croat. While no work on this scale could be without occasional errors, it represented a breathtaking achievement in synthesis which no one subsequently has attempted to match. In all he published more than twenty books, as well as numerous articles and reviews. 
Clark's contributions to scholarship were recognized in many different ways. He held three honorary doctorates and was a member of numerous foreign academies of humanities and science; he was also awarded several medals. He held visiting appointments at the universities of Harvard, Berkeley, Uppsala, and Otago, and at the Australian National University. The greatest honour perhaps was the award of the Erasmus prize by the Praemium Erasmianum Foundation of the Netherlands in 1990. With characteristic generosity he donated the proceeds of this prize to the Prehistoric Society, to establish an annual Europa prize and associated lecture by leading European prehistorians. He also endowed a biennial medal for prehistory, administered by the British Academy. Appointed CBE in 1971 and knighted in 1992, Clark died at his home, 36 Millington Road, Cambridge, on 12 September 1995. 
Clark was a tall, impressive figure, who commanded respect in his chairing of meetings and in his mastership of Peterhouse by his rapid and balanced grasp of issues and the clarity of his thinking. He was by temperament rather reserved and quietly spoken, and he certainly never attempted to join the public arena of television and media presentations in the way embraced by some of his contemporaries, such as Glyn Daniel or Sir Mortimer Wheeler. Politically he was some way to the right of centre, an inclination perhaps reflected in one of his later books, 'Symbols of Excellence: Precious Materials as Expressions of Status' (1986). He was above all a totally committed and dedicated scholar, who put his research and writing commitments at the top of his agenda and was unfailingly helpful and generous to others, whether colleagues or students, who shared the same passions. He was also something of an art connoisseur, with special interests in modern art and early oriental ceramics, of which he built up a substantial personal collection. Together with gardening, and sailing from his country home in Aldeburgh, these occupied some of the few moments in life which were not devoted, passionately and with great effect, to the pursuit of prehistory. 


@@@@@


doc= 60095


Hide, Mary Edith (1913-1995), cricketer and farmer, was born in Shanghai, China, on 24 October 1913, the elder of two children of Arthur Hide and his wife, Edith, 'nee' Jansen. Her father ran a business in China and she was four years old when the family returned to England. At her local school in Haslemere, Surrey, a games mistress instilled an enthusiasm for cricket. Hide moved on to Wycombe Abbey School and then became the first woman to gain a diploma in agriculture at Reading University. For most of her career she combined playing cricket with working on and then managing the 200 acre family farm at Haslemere. 
Hide was the epitome of women's cricket. She played in the very first test match, for England against Australia in Brisbane in 1934, and took over the captaincy of her country in 1937. During the next seventeen years she became England's most successful captain and when she was laid to rest at the age of eighty-one it was as a universally revered figure. Tall and calm, Hide was a masculine type of character. She led from the front and expected nothing less than total commitment from her teams. Some did not find her sufficiently encouraging but there was always total respect for a colleague who set high standards and knew what she was doing. 
A classic right-hand bat, Hide defied her parents by taking her place in the 1934-5 touring team to Australia and New Zealand. When she planned to return for the 1939 tour they insisted she should not 'go gallivanting' again. In the event the Second World War intervened, the tour was cancelled, and Hide accepted full responsibility for the upkeep of the family farm for four years. Hide's first innings on that pioneering 1934-5 tour was a century, against Western Australia, and she recorded the first of her two test centuries when England moved on to Christchurch in New Zealand. Played in February 1935 it was New Zealand's first test match and Hide (110) and Betty Snowball (189) put on 235 runs for the second wicket in only 142 minutes. This was of course a world record and it remained the only record of those trailblazing days to survive to the end of the twentieth century. Hide was twenty-one when she undertook that tour and quickly emerged as a young player with a great future. Not only did she contribute steady scores, but her bowling success was also substantial. She delivered off spin but, as captain, did not make the full use of her own talent. A return of thirty-six international wickets, at an average of 15.25 runs, included at least two test winning performances. 
When 1937 came around and it was time for Australia to embark on the return tour of England, Hide was a natural choice to lead her country. Her philosophy drew the crowds and 5000 turned up for the first test at Northampton. Hide's main objective was to try and play bright, attractive cricket, and obtain a definite result. She was not afraid of defeat and as captain of England in all home and overseas tour years from 1937 to 1954, eleven test matches in all, she won four times. Only England's original captain, Betty Archdale, had a better win ratio, three out of four played. No other England captain has, however, won more matches than Hide, despite, as the years ticked by and the game progressed, the fact that many more matches were played. 
Hide was delighted with the attention women's cricket received during her years as captain. Looking back on the 1949 tour to Australia she recalled what a thrill it was playing on such grounds as Sydney, the Adelaide Oval, and the Western Australia Cricket Association ground in Perth: all test match venues today. The third test in Sydney was especially memorable. Amid a glut of runs Hide scored 63 and 124 not out, after which her portrait was hung in the pavilion. This match was also the first time that women had been allowed to use the men's dressing rooms in the main pavilion. 
As befitted her pioneering instinct Hide was also one of the first two women to enter another holy of cricketing holies, Lord's. Along with Amy Bull, Hide was invited by the Marylebone Cricket Club, then the game's governing body and based at St John's Wood in London, to join an MCC committee and discuss the future of cricket. Hide had been retired over twenty years when women were first allowed to play at Lord's: a one-day international between England and Australia in 1976. It took another twenty-three years and much public debate before women were accepted as members of the MCC. 
Hide's last test match was against New Zealand at the Oval in London in 1954. That match was drawn, but England had won the first test and thus the series was theirs. Hide finished with a test batting average of 36.33, her highest score in an aggregate of 872 runs being her 124 not out at the Sydney cricket ground. 
As well as captaining England, Hide turned out for her local club and Surrey, and large crowds flocked to Mitcham Green whenever she was playing. She was totally committed to cricket and on her retirement from active service became a selector, manager, and administrator for both Surrey and England. She stepped in as president of the Women's Cricket Association when Mary Duggan died on the eve of the 1973 world cup. It was the biggest undertaking in the history of women's cricket. England had invited six teams to contest the very first world cup, for men or women. England won and Hide was, of course, delighted. 
As well as playing lacrosse for England, Hide was, for many years, secretary of the Peper Harow Park fly-fishers club. On her death one member remarked that 'the mark Molly Hide left on the river-bank is indelible' ('The Independent', 16 Sept 1995). The same could certainly be said of cricket. Shortly before her death she handed over her England blazer and badges to the Women's Cricket Association archivist for safekeeping. She was always extremely proud of her contribution to the history of women's cricket. She died, unmarried, on 10 September 1995, at Clare Park, Crondall, Hampshire, of cancer. Her remains were cremated, and her memorial service, at St Bartholomew, Haslemere, on what would have been her eighty-second birthday -- 24 October 1995 -- was overflowing with those wishing to pay tribute to a sporting legend. 


@@@@@


doc= 60096


Showering, Francis Edwin (1912-1995), drinks manufacturer, was born on 10 July 1912 at The Ship inn, Kilver Street, Shepton Mallet, Somerset, one of the four sons of Albert Edward Showering, an innkeeper and brewer, and his wife, Ethel May 'nee' Dyke. He was educated at Shepton Mallet grammar school and then spent two years in Bristol training as a chemist before (like his three brothers, Arthur, Herbert, and Ralph) he joined the family brewing business, Showerings Ltd, which had been brewing beer and making cider in Shepton Mallet since the early nineteenth century. On 25 August 1934 he married Hilda Florence Foote (1911/12-1980), the daughter of James Henry Foote, a cheese factor, of Shepton Mallet. There were no children of the marriage. 
Showerings Ltd was a small local business which found it increasingly difficult to compete with the large national manufacturers. After the Second World War, Showering, by then managing director, turned his attention to perry, made from pear juice, which, unlike cider, had never been made on a large scale because of problems with the control of fermentation and the prevention of deposits and cloudiness. He began to research new methods of fermentation, and in 1946 developed a low-alcohol sparkling drink made from pear juice, which was given the name Babycham. This sparkling perry, attractively packaged in small bottles with gold foil round the top, was launched in the west country in the early 1950s and began to be distributed nationally in 1953, accompanied by skilful advertising. Babycham was targeted mainly at young women, as a drink they could order in pubs, served in a saucer-shaped champagne glass; it was marketed as 'the genuine champagne perry sparkling in its own glamorous glass', with the slogan 'I'd love a Babycham' and the brand symbol of a small blue and yellow Chinese water deer. In 1955 it was the first alcoholic drink to be advertised on television. An instant success, Babycham was in short supply to begin with, as production could not keep up with demand. Many of the old perry pear orchards of the west midlands had been neglected or grubbed up, so Showerings bought farms in Somerset, not traditional perry-growing country, and planted new pear orchards on them to supply the Shepton Mallet factory. By 1966 this was producing 108,000 bottles an hour. Factories were built in Ireland and Belgium, as Showerings managed to keep imitators at bay in a series of court cases and resisted the objections of the French champagne houses to the description of Babycham as 'champagne perry'. 
Following the success of Babycham, Showerings became a public company in 1959 and went on to acquire other drinks manufacturing firms, including William Gaymer, Vine Products, Whiteways, Britvic fruit juices, and, in 1966, Harveys of Bristol. In 1968 Showerings was sold to Allied Breweries for $108 million, and Showering became a director of the merged company. Showering's nephew Sir Keith Stanley Showering (1930-1982) was chairman and chief executive of Allied Breweries (which became Allied-Lyons in 1979) from 1975 until his sudden death in 1982, when Showering became vice-chairman. Showering was appointed CBE in 1982. A keen sailor and a first-class shot, he was a generous local benefactor and financed the modern development of the centre of Shepton Mallet. His first wife having died in 1980, he married, on 7 October 1981, his former secretary, Rita Matthewman ('b'. 1928/9), the daughter of Ernest Matthewman, an army officer. 
After an unsuccessful attempt to buy back Showerings in 1991, when Allied-Lyons decided to sell it, Showering, together with the four sons of Sir Keith Showering, formed a new drinks company, Brothers Drinks, and invented a new drink, Straight 8. He remained chairman of Brothers Drinks until his death on 5 September 1995, of a heart attack, at his home, Silton Lodge, Silton, Gillingham, Dorset. He was buried on 13 September at the parish church in Shepton Mallet. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 60100


Adshead, (Sylvia) Mary (1904-1995), mural painter and designer, was born on 15 February 1904 at 46 Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury, London, the only child of Stanley Davenport Adshead (1868-1946), architect and academic, and Mary Annie (1874-1960), 'nee' Blackie, teacher and housewife, who both had considerable influence on her career and early success. A delicate child, she was educated initially at home by her mother. From 1910 until 1913 the family spent part of each year in Liverpool, where her father was professor of town planning. In 1914 they moved to Mortlake and she attended Putney high school from 1916 to 1919, after which she spent six months at a Paris 'lycee'. Her father's position as a professor at London University enabled her to receive a concessionary place at the Slade School of Fine Art at the early age of sixteen; there she caught the final years of Henry Tonks's famously misogynist regime. Unusually, he took a particular interest in her work, allowing her to pursue what he called her 'tapestry style', a witty blend of sophistication and naivety, and turn her back on the strict academic approach, then 'de rigueur' in art schools. Her ability to marshal elegant designs on a grand scale made her a natural mural painter. In 1924 Tonks was responsible for arranging her first mural commission, 'The Joys of the Country', in collaboration with a fellow student, Rex Whistler, for the memorial hall of the Highways Boys' Club in Shadwell. It attracted the attention of architects and led to many further commissions for her, including a large mural, 'The Housing of the People', at the British Empire Exhibition in 1924 at Wembley and a mural on desert island life for the dining-room of Charles Reilly, professor of architecture at Liverpool University, which was exhibited at the Royal Institute of British Architects when she was just twenty-two. (It is now owned by Liverpool University Art Gallery.) 
Occasionally commissions for the cultivated rich went awry. In 1928 Mary Adshead executed a series of panels for Lord Beaverbrook's dining-room at Newmarket evoking the spirit of the town's fair and horse races and peopling them with likenesses of his friends. The project foundered when Lady Diana Cooper, a fashionable beauty depicted in one of the panels, persuaded him that, given his quarrelsome nature, it was unwise to immortalize a group of people with whom he was bound to fall out. Beaverbrook returned the panels with a two-thirds rejection fee. (The work was reassembled for exhibition at Peter Jones department store in 1930 before being rolled up and stored. Later all but three panels were destroyed by fire.) 
On 30 April 1929 Mary married Stephen Bone (1904-1958), son of the artist Sir Muirhead Bone, and in that year she moved from her parents' house at 2 Chester Gate to 9 Knightsbridge, London. Although they had been students together at the Slade, they hardly knew each other until later. Both unusually tall, they made a striking couple. In the early years of their marriage they made tours through Europe, sketching and painting. In 1930 she had her first solo exhibition at the Goupil Gallery and was elected to the New English Art Club. Commissions for murals and designs flowed in, but the birth of the first of their three children, Quentin, in 1931 inevitably brought distractions. In that year they moved to 43 Haverstock Hill, Hampstead. She was an immensely practical woman and a stalwart in the marriage. In 1933 another son, Sylvester, was born, and in 1937 a daughter, Christina. Also in 1937 she exhibited at the Redfern Gallery, London, and they moved up the hill to no. 140. At the outbreak of war she moved the family to The Barn, Downton, Hampshire, and in 1940 to 26 Portland Place, Leamington Spa, where Stephen was in the camouflage organization. After the war they moved back to 140 Haverstock Hill, where she lived for the rest of her life. She worked on three illustrated children's books with Stephen (1936, 1942, and 1953) and illustrated 'Bonfires and Broomsticks' by Mary Norton in 1948; from 1949 she also designed stamps. However, her career was underpinned by a constant flow of mural commissions. In 1953 she became the secretary of the Society of Mural Painters. 
Stephen's tragic premature death from cancer in 1958 in some ways released a new wave of energy in Mary. She travelled in the United States and Europe and studied mosaic decoration in Ravenna and Sicily. Though she had three further solo exhibitions in 1971, 1979, and 1986 (a retrospective at Sally Hunter Fine Art, London), she also exhibited with Stephen's work in 1974, 1980, and 1989. Lameness caused by painting off ladders hampered her work and life in later years but she remained purposefully active to the end. She died at home of heart failure on 3 September 1995 and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 11 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 60103


Coleman, Donald Cuthbert (1920-1995), economic historian, was born on 21 January 1920 at Martlesham, Long Lane, Finchley, Middlesex, the son of Hugh Augustus Coleman, civil servant, and his wife, Marian Stella Agnes, 'nee' Cuthbert. Educated at Haberdashers' Aske's School, he left in 1939 to enter the London insurance industry. He served in the Royal Artillery from 1941 to 1946, seeing service in the Mediterranean and rising to the rank of major. He then entered the London School of Economics (LSE) and was awarded his PhD for a thesis on seventeenth-century Kent. This research served as a bridgehead for other studies and for his first book, 'The British Paper Industry, 1495-1860' (1958). It also set the pattern of work, using primary sources (helped here by excise and customs records) and following the evolution of an industry over the long run, marking transformations of materials, technology, and markets. His next book, 'Sir John Banks, Baronet and Businessman: a Study of Business, Politics and Society in Later Stuart England' (1963), closed in to focus on the importance of kinship in business. The relations between industry and the state, and between merchants and government in policy matters, were always central to his interests. 
Recognition of Coleman's scholarship led to his appointment in 1951 to a new lectureship in industrial history at LSE, and after spending the academic year 1957-8 in the USA, at Yale, he rose to a readership in 1958. He married on 5 February 1954 Jessie Annie Matilda (Ann) Child, 'nee' Stevens, a divorcee ten years his senior. His appointment as historian of Courtaulds brought links with the Pasold fund for textile history and in 1969, with the publication of the first two volumes of 'Courtaulds: an Economic and Social History', came a personal chair at LSE. His academic standing was considerably enhanced by his joint editorship of the 'Economic History Review' from 1967 to 1973. He was a notably firm, even authoritarian, editor, whose judgements markedly increased the status of the 'Economic History Review' as it expanded from three to four issues annually. 
The concept of proto-industrialization which gathered momentum during the 1970s was being proposed by some scholars as a universal stage in the historical process. This was not to Coleman's liking; he profoundly distrusted such all-embracing methodologies, whether from the left or the right of the political spectrum, and preferred 'middle-order' theorizing from an empirical foundation. He challenged its claims on the grounds of chronology and universality in an article whose title, 'Proto-industrialisation: a concept too many', characteristically did not end in a question mark ('Economic History Review', 2nd ser., 36, 1983, 435-48). He was concerned with the origins of the industrial revolution in England; in 'The Economy of England, 1450-1750' (1977) he examined the ways in which political, social, intellectual, agrarian, commercial, and industrial change in England had diverged from the situation in other European countries, so that industrialization began in England in the eighteenth century, rather than elsewhere. Many of his numerous papers examined aspects of this process in greater depth. 
With his long view of industry Coleman also entered the debate over failings in the British economy after 1850. His principal contribution was 'Gentlemen and players' ('Economic History Review', 2nd ser., 26, 1973, 92-116). The industrial revolution had been driven by 'those who were not gentlemen' but subsequently business and industrial leaders succumbed to the values of the older elite and 'too many of the revolutionaries became too busy becoming gentlemen'. Thus a fatal link was forged between the 'educated amateur' and the 'practical man' which excluded professionalization for the elite with dire consequences. 
Coleman was intensely interested in the practical and financial world of his day and sympathetic in principle to those who made it work. He admired achievement and success attained through hard work, commitment, intelligence, and insight. That he was able to overcome the potential conflicts of interest between his role as adviser to firms about their history, and that of the independent and objective academic, and to win the respect, if not always the affection, of both parties, testifies to his strength of character. 
The qualities Coleman admired in others were also his own; he disliked privilege and pomposity -- whether social, political, or academic -- and was liable to speak out against pretentiousness, with a lack of reticence that any friends had to accept. His own beliefs were sometimes less prominent than his castigations of false nostrums offered by others. He opposed any lowering of professional standards, and this opposition, coupled with a long memory, made his views forthright and often acerbic. Yet the standards he expected of others were also those he applied to himself, and he earned the unremitting affection and loyalty of his research students. 
With work at LSE and life in London losing their attractions in difficult years, Coleman's move in 1971 to a chair in Cambridge and a professorial fellowship at Pembroke College brought him new personal and professional satisfaction. He was elected FBA in 1972. Life at Over Hall, Cavendish, Suffolk, in his spacious old vicarage and handsome garden, became increasingly congenial. He mellowed, became more relaxed with his visitors, devoted in caring for his wife as she became more frail, and generous even in his judgement of the failings of others. 
With undergraduate teaching becoming more tedious and lecturing a painful duty which he saw no need to endure further, Coleman retired from the chair in 1981, keeping his fellowship. His great delight now was to work in his upstairs study at Cavendish, encompassed by his library. His academic priority was to write, while responding to invitations to help and advise. His own commitment to the Pasold fund continued until two years before his death: he was its governor from 1977 and chairman from 1985 to 1993. He died at the Evelyn Hospital, Cambridge, after a long and painful illness, the result of cancer, on 3 September 1995. His wife survived him, dying several years later. 


@@@@@


doc= 60105


Benjamin, (Thomas) Brooke (1929-1995), mathematician and physicist, was born on 15 April 1929 at 5 The Laund, Wallasey, Cheshire, the eldest of the three children of Thomas Joseph Benjamin (1884-1960), solicitor and high-court registrar, and his wife, Ethel Mary (1900-1975), daughter of Henry Brooke, engineer, of Meols, the Wirral, Cheshire, and Mary Meadows, granddaughter of Sir William Brown. His father, who served with distinction in the First World War, was energetic but strict, and his mother more sympathetic and artistic; she was a good amateur pianist. At home and at his local primary school in Wallasey, which he attended between the ages of five and seven, Benjamin was early recognized as being exceptionally intelligent. When he was eight he was sent away, as was customary, to a preparatory boarding-school, where he was very unhappy though he shone scholastically. In 1939 he enrolled at Wallasey grammar school but, owing to the wartime bombing of Merseyside, the family moved to Mold, in north Wales, where the children attended the Alun county school. Among his hobbies at this time was constructing radio sets. In 1943 the family returned to Wallasey, where Benjamin became ill and was diagnosed with diabetes. His school years were spent partly at home, where school work was brought to him by his companions. He developed musically, saving up to buy a second-hand violin and writing a number of musical compositions, notably a string quartet (1948) and a piano quintet performed at a concert in Wallasey when he was sixteen. Despite his irregular school attendance he was strongly recommended by the discerning headmaster, Mr Allen, for a place at Liverpool University, to which he was admitted in 1947; he graduated BEng with first-class honours in 1950. He was active in the Liverpool University Music Society and conducted numerous performances in Liverpool and elsewhere, frequently of his own compositions. He helped to found the Liverpool Mozart Orchestra, and regularly conducted it. By this time he had also developed a strong social and political awareness, and spoke often in public as a pacifist and independent. 
Faced with a decision between music and science as a profession, Benjamin chose science. In 1951 he was granted a Rotary foundation fellowship to study electronics at Yale University, where he gained an MEng in 1952. At the death of George VI he gave a local broadcast which won public praise. While at Yale he was approached by a medical researcher who instructed him how to inject himself with insulin in the precise amounts needed to counterbalance and widen his food intake. This treatment considerably improved his health and energy. After a short visit to the University of California, Berkeley, he befriended a Norwegian sea captain and returned to England on a cargo vessel via Manila and Singapore. He was accepted as a research student at King's College, Cambridge, in October 1952. There, with A. M. Binnie FRS, he devised ingenious and accurate new experiments to study cavitation in fluid flow. He also took a leading part in the musical activities of the college. In 1955 he was elected to a research fellowship at King's, which was subsequently twice renewed. In 1958 he was appointed assistant director of research jointly in the engineering department and in the department of applied mathematics and theoretical physics (DAMTP). An important development was when, unable to obtain other experimental facilities, and believing strongly that experiment and theory should go hand-in-hand, he turned to G. K. Batchelor, then head of the DAMTP, whom he persuaded to convert the basement at the department into a fluid mechanics laboratory. Among the significant experiments done there was Benjamin's discovery, together with his student J. E. Feir, of the essential instability of a regular train of water waves when the water depth exceeds a certain critical value. The analysis of this phenomenon, done by Benjamin, has much wider implications in physics, and has become known as the Benjamin-Feir instability. 
While at Cambridge Benjamin published many other penetrating researches of a similar kind, having especially to do with the instabilities of different types of fluid motions. In 1967 he was promoted to a readership in hydrodynamics. On 9 July 1956 he married Helen Gilda-Marie Rakower Ginsburg ('b'. 1927), an American and a graduate of Stanford University, who had met him during his visit to Berkeley in 1952 and followed him to England. They had three children: Lesley, Joanna, and Peter. By 1970 the marriage had broken down and it was dissolved in 1974. 
During the latter part of his time at Cambridge Benjamin became convinced that in order to understand certain fluid instabilities, particularly the annular flow between rotating cylinders, studied experimentally by G. I. Taylor, and the phenomenon of vortex breakdown behind the wings of aircraft, it was necessary to master the French school of nonlinear analysis, to which he accordingly devoted much attention. As a result of his studies he wrote a series of seminal papers in which he made theoretical predictions that were later confirmed by experiment. In 1970 Benjamin was appointed to a professorship at the University of Essex, where he set up the Fluid Mechanics Research Institute. Its explicit objective was to promote collaboration between mathematicians and experimentalists in fluid mechanics research. In this it was outstandingly successful, publishing over ninety research reports and attracting able visitors, especially mathematicians, from overseas. Benjamin also played a moderating role in the student unrest at the University of Essex in 1974, giving good and sympathetic advice to the students and even visiting them in gaol. In order to avoid violence during a student demonstration he marched at their head. While at Essex he met his second wife, Natalia Marie-Therese Court ('b'. 1944), whom he married on 25 February 1978. The marriage was supremely happy. A daughter, Victoria, was born in 1982. 
Lacking ongoing support for his laboratory at Essex University, in 1978 Benjamin applied for and was subsequently appointed to the Sedleian chair of natural philosophy at Oxford, with a fellowship at Queen's College. He occupied the chair from 1980 until his death from lung cancer in 1995. During that time he held an appointment as adjunct professor at Pennsylvania State University, which he visited annually and which held a conference in honour of his sixtieth birthday in April 1989. At Oxford he had at first to do experiments in his own house, but later when he was joined by T. Mullin from London University he was granted facilities in the physics department. Ever concerned for students, he argued publicly for an overhaul of the system of degrees, supporting the option of a general degree, carrying equal prestige, for those students not intending to pursue an academic career. He also led a campaign against the Conservative government's policy towards the universities, which in his view tended to harm them and to underestimate their contribution to the country's economy. To this end he founded the National Conference of University Professors and was its first president. He supported the International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste for its work for third-world young scientists. 
Benjamin received many honours, including the Lewis F. Moody award from the American Society of Civil Engineers in 1966, and election to the Royal Society of London (1966), where he was twice a member of council and in 1992 gave the Bakerian lecture, entitled 'The mystery of vortex breakdown'. In 1969 he was awarded the William Hopkins prize of the Cambridge Philosophical Society. In 1993 he was elected a foreign member of the French Academy of Sciences. He received honorary degrees from the universities of Liverpool, Bath, and Brunel. 
Benjamin, known to his friends as Brooke, was tall, modest, and always polite. Among his colleagues he inspired great admiration, affection, and loyalty. With a quiet sense of humour, he was inwardly sensitive and imaginative. In his later years he took to writing poetry to express his inner reactions to everyday occurrences. He never sought publication, though his poems can be moving and show both imagination and originality of form. He was justifiably proud that despite taking a leading part in many activities he made no known enemies. He died on 16 August 1995 at Oxford, survived by his wife, Natalia, their daughter, Victoria, and the three children of his first marriage, and was cremated at Oxford crematorium on 23 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 60107


Broadhurst, Sir Harry (1905-1995), air force officer, was born on 28 October 1905 at 4 Warrant Officers' Quarters, Blackdown Barracks, Frimley, Surrey, the son of Colour Sergeant Henry Broadhurst, South Lancashire regiment, and his wife, Amelia Louisa, 'nee' Patterson. 
Educated at Portsmouth grammar school (1915-22), Harry Broadhurst was initially an articled pupil to a surveyor. He also served in the Territorial Army, with the Hampshire heavy brigade, from May 1925 to October 1926 when he was seconded to the RAF on appointment to a short service commission. He did his flying training with 11 squadron, gaining his wings in August 1927 and continuing to serve with the squadron, which was sent to India in 1928. Equipped with Wapitis and then Harts, it had a peace-keeping role on the north-west frontier. 
On 19 October 1929 he married Doris Kathleen French at St Thomas's Cathedral, Bombay, and in the 1931 birthday honours was mentioned in dispatches. Later that year he was posted back to the UK, to join 41 fighter squadron, newly equipped with Bristol Bulldogs. He came top in the annual air firing competitions and at the 1932-3 Hendon air displays performed solo aerobatics. 
During 1933 Broadhurst started training as a flying-boat pilot, but was removed from the course and sent to another Bulldog squadron, 19. Ten months later he was posted overseas again -- to 4 flying training school, Isma'iliyyah, Egypt, as chief ground instructor from November 1936 (having been awarded a permanent commission) to July 1937. By now a squadron leader, he had been awarded the AFC in the 1937 new year honours. Then for four months he served at headquarters 2 bomber group, and in 1938 completed the staff college course. At the end of that year he was posted to command 111 fighter squadron, which had been the first to be equipped with Hawker Hurricanes. 
Broadhurst, who was known as Broady, earned his reputation as a fighter leader early in the Second World War, at squadron, group, and station level. Awarded the DFC in January 1940, he was on the staff of 11 group, served with the British expeditionary force air component in France, then successively commanded Coltishall, Wittering, and Hornchurch during the battle of Britain. From March 1941, when he was mentioned in dispatches, to July when he was awarded the DSO (with bar in December), to September 1942 when he received a bar to his DFC, his outstanding courage, leadership, and skill were recognized. 
In October 1942 Broadhurst was posted to air headquarters, western desert, initially as senior air staff officer with the acting rank of air vice-marshal. Then on 1 February 1943, when the Eighth Army was about to enter Tunisia, he succeeded Air Vice-Marshal 'Maori' Coningham in command of the desert air force. When the Eighth Army was halted at the Mareth line in March 1943 it was Broadhurst's brilliant handling of his fighter bombers in low-level attacks which broke axis resistance and earned him the epithet 'another commander in the Coningham manner: bold, original, creative'. 
Broadhurst continued as air officer commanding the desert air force during the allied invasions of Sicily and Italy, then was posted back to the UK to participate in planning for operation Overlord, the landings in Normandy. As air officer commanding 83 group he set up his headquarters there four days after D-day (6 June), side by side with that of his army opposite number, Lieutenant-General Miles Dempsey, who commanded the British Second Army. 
Broadhurst's squadrons of ground-attack fighters, equipped with the formidable rocket-firing Typhoons, played a crucial role in supporting the Second Army's advance; and when the Luftwaffe introduced Me 262 jet fighters with their speed and height advantages, he countered them by means of standing patrols near their airfields. In April 1944 he was honoured by the Americans with the Legion of Merit, and in August was made CB; then in July 1945 he became 'Sir Harry' with the KBE, and in the 1946 new year honours was mentioned in dispatches. His first marriage having been dissolved in 1945, he married on 13 May 1946 Jean Elizabeth Townley (1914-2001). 
Broadhurst's wartime reputation as a successful air commander led to increasingly senior appointments during the cold war period: as air officer administration, Fighter Command (1945-6) and air officer commanding, 61 (eastern reserve) group (1946-8). In 1949 he took the Imperial Defence College course and the following year was posted to the British air forces of occupation (BAFO) as senior air staff officer. This appointment continued into 1952 when BAFO was renamed second Tactical Air Force -- of which, after a spell as assistant chief of the air staff (operations), he was made commander-in-chief in December 1953. 
Broadhurst returned to the UK in January 1956 to be air officer commanding-in-chief, Bomber Command, which was re-equipping with V-bombers and atomic weapons, assuming command shortly before the Avro Vulcan entered service. In one of these delta-winged aircraft he led Tasman flight, a most successful visit to Australia and New Zealand, in September 1956. While returning to London's Heathrow airport for a VIP reception on 1 October, Broadhurst was flying as co-pilot when, in poor visibility, the Vulcan struck the ground about 700 yards short of the runway. Its undercarriage was torn off and its trailing-edge control surfaces damaged. The captain, Squadron Leader D. R. Howard, applied full power: the aircraft climbed steeply but he found it to be uncontrollable so gave the order to eject. He and Broadhurst did so; the Vulcan stalled and crashed, killing the three rear-crew members and an Avro technical representative. 
Broadhurst re-energized Bomber Command, bringing it into the jet age and introducing a fighter-type mentality: he served there until May 1959 when he took up his last appointment, as commander, allied air forces, central Europe. An air chief marshal from February 1957, he was placed on the retired list in March 1961, then joined A. V. Roe & Co. Ltd -- makers of the Vulcan and the Blue Steel stand-off bomb -- as managing director. He was also a director of Hawker Siddeley Aviation (1961-76), and a director of the Hawker Siddeley Group (1968-76), and president of the Society of British Aerospace Companies (1974-5). He finally retired in 1976, his buccaneering spirit finding an outlet in sailing his 7 ton Bermuda cutter from Chichester harbour near his home at Birdham, Sussex. 
Broadhurst personified the fighting spirit of the RAF, serving with distinction in the battle of Britain, the Mediterranean campaigns, the liberation of Europe, and in high commands during the cold war. He died at Westhampnett Nursing Home, Chichester, on 29 August 1995 in his ninetieth year. His second wife, Jean Elizabeth, survived him by six years: she died in a Chichester nursing home on 21 October 2001. 


@@@@@


doc= 60108


Carey, John Joseph (1919-1995), footballer and football manager, was born on 23 February 1919 at 4 Adelaide Place, Lower Baggot Street, Dublin, the son of John Carey, van driver, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Byrne. He left Ireland at the age of seventeen when he was transferred by his Dublin club, St James's Gate, to Manchester United for a sum of $200. In his first full season at Old Trafford, in 1937-8, he played at inside forward and was part of the successful team that won promotion to the first division that year. In the same season he won his first international cap for the Irish team. He played for Manchester United during the first three seasons of the Second World War, in regional football leagues, but his career was interrupted in 1943 when he took the decision to join the British army. As a citizen of Eire, Carey had the choice of not joining up, but argued that the country that gave him his living was worth fighting for. He served in the Queen's Royal Hussars and took part in the campaigns in the Middle East and Italy. While in the army he regularly coached and played in service teams. 
At the end of the war Carey returned to Manchester United and was promoted to club captain by the new team manager, Matt Busby. By then he had played for the club in every position with the exception of outside left, including goalkeeper; Busby utilized him as a right back. Carey excelled, and marshalled a successful Manchester United team as captain. Between the 1946/7 and 1950/51 seasons, Manchester United finished runners-up in the league four times. The title was finally clinched in the 1951/2 season. In 1948 Carey achieved the pinnacle reserved for a select few players in the domestic game by leading his team to victory in the FA cup final. After defeating Stanley Matthews's Blackpool he was able to climb the steps at Wembley and receive the cherished trophy. In 1949 he was elected footballer of the year, and in 1950 sportsman of the year. 
In addition to his successful domestic career Carey also resumed international appearances after the war. He captained the Republic of Ireland to a 2-0 victory over England at Goodison Park in 1949, thereby inflicting the first ever defeat on an England team in a full international fixture played on home soil. As a result of his military service, and the ongoing disputes between the two football associations in Ireland over player selection, Carey also qualified to play for Northern Ireland after 1945. He took the opportunity, and played for both Northern Ireland and the republic in the four years following the war. He was one of thirty-two players to be capped by both countries, winning nine caps for Northern Ireland and twenty-nine for the republic. In the space of three days in 1948 he played for both Irish teams, each time against England. His standing within international football was celebrated in 1947 when he was chosen as the captain of a Rest of Europe team against England. 
In 1953 Carey finally retired as a player. Although offered a coaching post under Busby at Old Trafford, he elected to move into management. His first club was second-division Blackburn Rovers. After four successful years of development, Blackburn finally achieved promotion to the first division in 1958. In the close season Carey chose to move on, and took the management post at Everton. He rebuilt a moribund team and directed them to a credible fifth place in the league by the close of the 1961 season. Such steady progress was not enough for the Everton chairman, John Moores, and Moores sacked Carey in the back of a London taxi 'en route' for the Football League annual meeting. Carey then moved to Leyton Orient, and he led the London team to the first division for the first time in their history in his first season there. In 1963, following Leyton Orient's relegation, he moved on to Nottingham Forest. In 1966/7 he had his most successful season as a manager, and led his team to second place in the first division and a place in the FA cup semi-finals. The 1968/9 season was a disaster and Carey was sacked in December 1968 at a point when Nottingham Forest were still waiting for their first home win of the season. He moved back to Blackburn in the 1969/70 season in an administrative capacity, but by 1970 had been reinstalled as team manager. The team was unsuccessful, and was relegated to the third division in 1971. This was Carey's last management job. 
In 1971 Carey began work for a textile company, and then moved on to the treasurer's office of Trafford borough council, where he remained until his retirement in 1984. He returned to Old Trafford in the 1970s as a scout working for Tommy Docherty, and he retained his contacts with Manchester United until his death, which took place at Macclesfield District General Hospital, Macclesfield, Cheshire, on 23 August 1995. He was survived by his wife, Margaret. 


@@@@@


doc= 60110


Giles, Ronald (1916-1995), cartoonist, was born on 29 September 1916, at 413 City Road, near the Angel, Islington, London, the youngest son (there was a younger daughter) of Albert Edward Giles ('b'. 1881/2), tobacconist, 'a conscientious, decent and much-liked man' (Tory, 'A Life', 28), and his wife, Emma Edith, 'nee' Clarke ('b'. 1886/7), dressmaker. His paternal grandfather was Alfred Edmund 'Farmer' Giles of Newmarket, Suffolk, a jockey who had ridden for Edward VII. His mother came from a Norfolk farming family. Giles's birth certificate registered him as Ronald. Known as Carl -- because his childhood haircut echoed that of the actor Boris Karloff -- the extrovert, already bespectacled Giles was educated at Barnsbury Park School, where his mischief was restrained by the sarcastic, skeletal Mr Chalk, a teacher who, as Chalky, later became one of his most enduring cartoon creations. On leaving school, aged about fourteen, Giles began work first as an office boy for 10's'. a week and then as an animator at Superads in Charing Cross Road, London. Between 1930 and 1935 at Alexander Korda's studios in Elstree he was a principal animator, under the artist Anthony Gross, on 'The Fox Hunt', the first British animated colour cartoon with sound. He also helped to animate versions of Roland Davies's 'Sunday Express' strip 'Come on Steve' (Steve was an amiable carthorse). Later, during the Second World War he helped to animate cartoons for the Ministry of Information. 
In 1937, following the death of his brother Bert, Giles returned to London. There, at twenty-one, he joined the left-wing 'Reynolds News', for which, without any specific art training, he drew cartoons, illustrations and 'Young Ernie', a strip. The 'Sunday Express' editor John Gordon attempted to entice the reluctant artist -- 'I would be very unhappy if I changed' (Gordon) -- to his richer, then hugely successful, right-wing paper whose owner, Lord Beaverbrook, had recognized Giles's burgeoning genius. Eventually hooked, Giles was indeed briefly miserable, but when readers began expressing their enthusiasm for his work his confidence and enthusiasm returned. 
On 14 March 1942, at St John's Church, East Finchley, Giles married (Sylvia) Joan Agnes Clarke (1918-1994), his first cousin and childhood sweetheart. They had no children. She was a charming, practical woman of long but not unlimited patience. The couple moved from Islington to Edgware to Ipswich. Just after the war Giles bought Hillbrow Farm, a gloomy seventeenth-century farmhouse, soon to be brightly transformed, in the village of Witnesham, Suffolk. This was to be their permanent home. 
Giles's first drawing for the 'Sunday Express' was published on 3 October 1943. Later that month he became not only deputy cartoonist to Sidney Strube on the 'Daily Express' but also, perhaps surprisingly, the paper's war correspondent. Captain Giles, as he temporarily became, was an unmilitary figure, classified unfit for military service because of partial deafness caused some years before when, in a near fatal accident, his Panther 600 motorcycle had collided with an oncoming truck. Giles admired the First World War cartoons of Captain Bruce Bairnsfather, the creator of popular cartoons based on firsthand front-line experiences. With perky optimism Giles also drew on firsthand experience, a distillation which 'epitomised the spirit of the hour' (Tory, 'The Ultimate Giles', 64). In the aftermath of war Giles drew the grim interior of Fort Breendouk punishment camp, near Antwerp. The dark, uncharacteristic sketches are examples of unvarnished, visual reporting which at the artist's request were not published until 1994. In spite of editorial requests Giles could not bring himself to record the horrors of Belsen. He witnessed scenes which affected him profoundly for the rest of his life, and was brought to a deeper maturity. Although less meaningful to later generations, Giles's wartime cartoons were among his funniest, particularly his 'GI Joes', for whom in real life he had a strong (and reciprocated) affection. 
Strube left the 'Daily Express' in 1948. Thereafter Giles, dealing with social subjects, alternated with the young right-wing political cartoonist Michael Cummings. During the fifties Giles's work grew in strength. Here was artist, architect, and jokester who drew, among many excellent things, landscapes -- particularly snow scenes -- of a high and, for his fellow cartoonists, enviable order. Panoramic settings filled with accurate detail of place, people, and atmosphere brought new qualities and a wider vision to British cartooning, influencing his contemporaries including Jak 
(Raymond Jackson; 1927-1997)
and Mac 
(Stanley McMurtry; 'b'. 1936)
. Giles fits comfortably into a tradition stretching from Rowlandson to Dicky Doyle. He was also influenced by Pont 
(Graham Laidler; 1908-1940)
, whose famous series in 'Punch', 'The British character', was based on upper middle-class types, benignly but unerringly observed. In his short life Pont was always the amused spectator rather than angry satirist, an attitude Giles took to heart. The artist's most-loved creation, the Giles family, made its first appearance in the 'Sunday Express' on 5 August 1945. The family's common humanity -- children's mischief, for example, is not limited by class -- had a wide social appeal. For four decades Mother, Father, young Ernie, daughter Ann and her terrible twins, bookworm George (Sartre and Orwell) and his sniffling, aspirin-riddled wife Vera and their son, George junior, Ann's younger sisters Bridget and Susan, their Airedale Butch (and a permanent visitor, young Stinker with his ever present camera and wet-mop haircut) were dominated by their granite-tough, invincible Grandma, who invariably wore ankle-length black bombazine and an alarming frown. She clutched a parrot-knobbed brolly and a padlocked handbag, both of which could be used as weapons if needed. Grandma, among other things, was irascible, pugnacious, fearless, bloody-minded, a 'small c' conservative socialist, outrageous yet patriotic, anarchic and somehow endearing. Friends noted Giles's spiritual resemblance to his creation, a likeness later compounded in photographs taken in his later years revealing a facial resemblance both touching and quietly comic. The family remained unaltered for forty years: the kids did not grow up and Grandma and the others did not grow older. Instead, the world changed around them while they observed and reacted to it. 
The making of three large cartoons a week, taking from eight to ten hours each, required a self-discipline not always manifest in Giles's life. They were drawn in a large studio suite in Ipswich and when finished were forwarded, often late, by train to London or by taxi if the trains were not running or by helicopter if the weather put both beyond reach. Deadlines were held in contempt, an attitude which did not endear Giles to the frantic newspaper staff trying to put the paper to bed. 
Joan Giles once admitted that marriage to this complex, contradictory man was like having 'at least five husbands': the cartoonist, the engineer, the designer and builder, the pig-breeder, and the car enthusiast. She added, 'All my husbands have one thing in common -- fairly regular lapses into vagrancy' (J. Giles, 1955). With fame and a much-increased income he was able to indulge himself. For a time he motored, mostly around the UK, in a huge mobile studio-cum-caravan which he designed and built himself. He bought and raced a Jaguar XK120 at Silverstone in 1952; he owned a Bentley Mulsanne, a Range Rover, a Land Rover, and a much-loved Nicholson 38 yacht. Although shamelessly hedonistic -- a man's man, and apparently irresistible to women -- his warmth and humour were often overwhelmed by an abrasive grumpiness. 'A sometimes dark and snarling beast' (Tory, 'A Life', 36) seemed to lurk behind these sudden, surprising, often unwarranted outbursts of irascibility. He was severely critical of authority and authoritarian figures -- of anything or anyone who hampered him in his pursuits. Generous by nature, Giles nevertheless had difficulty in expressing the compassion which formed the bedrock of his nature and which came across so clearly in his cartoons. A genuinely modest man, Giles avoided talking about himself or his work, which he believed spoke for itself. He was a left-winger who bought expensive grown-up toys, smoked huge cigars, yet never abandoned his roots -- to which he returned often and noisily, travelling from pub to pub to do so. His friendships ranged from the many eccentrics, acquaintances, and drinking companions near home to Prince Philip, Prince Charles -- the royal family owns a large collection of Giles originals -- and Max Aitken (Lord Beaverbrook's son) away from it. He enjoyed the company of the famous and successful if they were honestly forthright in their views and could share his love of horses, cars, and sailing. 
Giles drew more than 7000 cartoons for the 'Daily Express' and 'Sunday Express' and a Giles annual appeared every year from 1946. It was on the covers of his annuals, and in the ornate, coloured Christmas cards he drew for his favourite charity, the Royal National Lifeboat Institution (RNLI) -- of which he was made president for life -- and for the Royal National Institute for the Blind that he was able to produce comic masterpieces in which he returned to the pleasures of drawing at a more leisurely pace than newspaper deadlines allowed him, with accurate detail and superbly composed crowd scenes. Of Giles's entire output it has been said: 'For the historian of the second half of the 20th century his work will be indispensable' (L. Lambourne, 'Giles: Mirror of an Age', 1993, exhibition catalogue). 
During his last decade Giles suffered seriously from encroaching physical disabilities. Weakening eyesight, increasing deafness, and worsening blood circulation, the latter brought on by heavy smoking, inevitably affected his work, although Giles at his weakest was better than many cartoonists at their best. He was treated to typical Fleet Street insensitivity in his final months with the 'Express', and in 1989, after forty-seven years, he quit with a succinct: 'I just thought, sod this.' In the following year further problems with his circulation resulted in both legs being amputated just below the knee. 
Giles was appointed OBE in 1959. He was a founder member in 1966, and later president, of the British Cartoonists' Association (BCA); in 1990 he was awarded a senior fellowship of the Royal College of Art, and in 1993 a large retrospective exhibition was organized by the Cartoon Art Trust (CAT): collections of his work are held by the trust, and at the Cartoon Study Centre at the University of Kent. When guest of honour at a luncheon at London's Garrick Club on 24 March 1993, given by the BCA to honour his fifty years in the business, Giles, in his wheelchair -- attended always by his 'minder' Big Louis -- chatted amiably throughout the meal. His afflictions were never mentioned, except once, when he gazed at his then less than flexible fingers and said, 'I hope I can begin to draw again'. His words were spoken wistfully and without self-pity and were painful to hear. At the end of the meal the chairman rose to speak but Giles interrupted. 'Forget the speeches', he said. 'Let's go to the pub'. 
At seventy-eight Carl Giles -- who had given (and taken) so much pleasure in his lifetime, an active man living a physically diminished life -- was grief-stricken when his wife Joan died on Christmas day 1994. In spite of the consolation offered by his many friends Giles died eight months later at Ipswich Hospital on 27 August 1995. His funeral was held at Tuddenham church, Suffolk, and there was a memorial service in London at St Bride's, Fleet Street. A statue of Grandma, Vera, and Butch the dog was unveiled in Ipswich in 1993, while at Felixstowe the support and rescue boat 'Grandma' was launched in May 1999. 


@@@@@


doc= 60112


Allen, Walter Ernest (1911-1995), novelist and literary scholar, was born on 23 February 1911 at Aston, Birmingham, the youngest of the four children, all sons, of Charles Henry Allen ('fl'. 1870-1950), silversmith's designer, and his wife, Annie Maria Thomas. His father's family came from the Staffordshire Black Country and his mother's from Wales, but he did not know either of his grandfathers, who died before he was born. Allen grew up in a working-class home in Birmingham; his father, a skilled craftsman, was a man with wide interests who encouraged his son's aspirations, despite material hardships. Allen was a clever child with a gift for writing, who won scholarships to King Edward's Grammar School, Aston, and subsequently to Birmingham University, where he read English. He graduated in 1932 at a time of high unemployment, but scraped a living by contributing articles, stories, and reviews to the several newspapers then published in Birmingham. He also wrote radio scripts for the midland region of the BBC, laying the foundations of his later career as a broadcaster. 
Allen became a close friend of Louis MacNeice, then a young lecturer in classics at Birmingham University, and came to know W. H. Auden and Henry Green and local writers such as John Hampson, Peter Chamberlain, and Leslie Halward. In 1935 Allen's horizons were broadened when he went to the United States as a visiting lecturer at the summer session of the University of Iowa. As a young man, his father had spent some months in America in an unsuccessful attempt at emigration, and he fascinated his son with accounts of the country. Allen continued this fascination throughout his own life; he came to know the United States well and was never able to regard it as 'abroad'. Back in Birmingham he returned to journalistic work, this time as part of a two-man news agency. But he had higher literary ambitions; he wrote a novel which remained unpublished (the typescript is in his papers at Birmingham University Library), but his next novel, 'Innocence is Drowned' (1938), was accepted for publication by Michael Joseph. On the strength of this success, Allen moved to London to become a man of letters. He managed narrowly to survive by writing book reviews and reports for publishers, and making summaries of novels for an American film company, which he described as the lowest form of literary life. 

'Innocence is Drowned' attracted some respectful reviews when it appeared but sold few copies. It, and its successors, 'Blind Man's Ditch' (1939) and 'Living Space' (1940), draw on Allen's experience of working-class life in Birmingham and his own hopes and disappointments as a socially mobile scholarship boy. They also show his interest in literary form, in the careful development of narrative and the treatment of time. In 'Blind Man's Ditch' Allen seems to be presenting his young self as the precocious schoolboy Arnold Hipkiss: 'an undersized boy with solemn horn spectacles, like a wise owl' (W. Allen, 'Blind Man's Ditch', 1939, 218) -- '[t]here wasn't any subject that he could not write about' (ibid., 226). 
Allen spent the war years as a technical writer in armaments factories, first in Bristol and then in his native Birmingham. On 8 April 1944, after a three-week courtship, he married Peggy Yorke Joy ('b'. 1915), a physiotherapist serving with the Red Cross; he wrote 'Marrying her was far and away the wisest thing I have ever done' (Allen, 146). They had four children. During the war years Allen contributed regular literary essays to the widely read periodical 'Penguin New Writing'. As he ruefully acknowledged, they made him known as a critic rather than as a novelist; modestly, he preferred to describe himself as a literary journalist. At the end of the war Allen and his wife returned to London and he picked up the threads of his literary career. He made an adequate but precarious living as a freelance writer, reviewer, and publisher's adviser; his most regular work was as a radio broadcaster on literary and cultural topics. Between 1948 and 1960 Allen and his family lived first in Kent, on Romney Marsh, and then in Devon before he returned to London, where he lived for the rest of his life. During those years he published a succession of books on the novel and novelists, including studies of George Eliot and Arnold Bennett. Allen's most enduring and best-known book is 'The English Novel' (1954), which provides a lucid, well-informed, and critically perceptive history of the subject from Bunyan to Lawrence and Joyce. 
Allen continued to write novels himself, and 'All in a Lifetime' (1959) has been generally admired; in this novel Allen returns to working-class Birmingham and traces the life and times of his father, from the 1870s to the 1950s. Between 1959 and 1961 he acted first as assistant literary editor and then as literary editor of the 'New Statesman'. Looking back on his career, Allen recognized that his traditional kind of literary journalist was being replaced by critics based in universities. He made his own forays into the academic world as a visiting professor in North American colleges and universities and came to think of himself as a 'transatlantic man'. His survey of British and American fiction from the 1920s to the 1960s, 'Tradition and Dream', was published in 1964. Allen entered the academy full-time in 1967 when he was appointed founding professor of English at the New University of Ulster, where he served until he retired in 1973. 
In 1975 Allen was physically disabled by a severe stroke, but his mental powers were unaffected and he continued to write. His memoir of his literary life, 'As I Walked Down New Grub Street' (1981), is light-hearted and informative. In 1989 he published his last novel, 'Accosting Profiles', more than fifty years after his first; it draws on his experience of British and American universities. 
Walter Allen died at his home, 4B Alwyne Road, London, on 28 February 1995 of bronchopneumonia and cerebrovascular accident. His funeral and cremation took place at Golders Green crematorium early in March 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 60118


Adrian, Richard Hume, second Baron Adrian (1927-1995), physiologist, was born on 16 October 1927 in Grange Road, Cambridge, the only son and youngest of the three children of Edgar Douglas Adrian, first Baron Adrian (1889-1977), physiologist, and his wife, Hester Agnes Adrian, daughter of Hume Chancellor Pinsent, a solicitor in Birmingham, and his wife Ellen Frances Pinsent. On his father's side he was descended from an earlier Richard Adrian, a Huguenot refugee who had fled to England after the massacre of St Bartholomew in 1572; the line of descent also includes a surgeon who attended Sir Philip Sidney after the battle of Zutphen, clerics, a silk weaver, and three generations of civil servants. Hester Pinsent's family was related on her father's side to the philosopher David Hume; both she and her mother were created DBE for their work on mental health. 
At the age of eight Adrian went to King's College School, Cambridge, but early in the Second World War he and his twin sister, Jennet, were sent to the USA to live with the family of Detlev Bronk, who had worked with Adrian's father in Cambridge and who was at that time director of the Johnson Foundation in Philadelphia. There Adrian spent three years at Swarthmore high school. He was, though, anxious to return to England as soon as possible and, after graduating from high school and spending one semester at Swarthmore College, he went home in late 1943 to join Westminster School, still evacuated to Herefordshire. In January 1945 he entered Cambridge as an undergraduate at Trinity College, reading for the natural sciences tripos and choosing subjects appropriate for medicine. 
As an undergraduate Adrian was greatly influenced by Alan Hodgkin, who had just returned from his wartime work on radar and, with Andrew Huxley, was resuming work on the mechanism of message transmission along nerves -- work which had been halted at a most promising stage by Hitler's invasion of Poland in 1939. In his third year Adrian took the advanced course in physiology, completed his double first, and decided that he wanted to be a physiologist. At that time it was still conventional for physiologists to be medically qualified, and in 1948 he went to University College Hospital, London, to take the clinical course. He said later that he was glad to have done so, and that it taught him many things, especially about people, that he would not otherwise have learned. One of these things was that he did not enjoy clinical work; he completed his medical qualifications without the full year of house jobs that later became a prerequisite for registration. By this time the war had been over for six years, but having been exempt from military service during his medical training Adrian was now drafted into the Royal Army Medical Corps and sent to the chemical defence experimental establishment at Porton Down. There he worked on protective measures against mustard gas and nerve gases, and on more theoretically interesting questions about the actions of nerve gases particularly at synapses. 
Released from the army early in 1954, Adrian spent four months 'in an extended journey in the Middle East (Turkey, Iraq, Jordan, Syria, the Lebanon) mostly with an archaeological interest -- inevitably with a growing interest in the unsettled politics of the region' (Adrian, 1993). This was the start of an important facet of his life. At archaeological digs he seems to have been a useful visitor. The archaeologist David Oates described the impression that Adrian made on a party of visiting German archaeologists by his skill with an esoteric piece of surveying equipment with which the visitors were unfamiliar -- a skill he had acquired the previous day. 
In the autumn of 1954 Adrian returned to Cambridge to begin work as a research student in the physiological laboratory, under the supervision of Alan Hodgkin. Within two years he had discovered a major source of error in the standard method of using microelectrodes to determine the voltage difference across cell membranes, and had shown how such errors could be avoided. The fundamental problem that he was preparing to tackle, and to whose solution over the next thirty years he was to make a massive contribution, is called by physiologists the problem of excitation-contraction coupling. It is to understand how the spread of excitation along the surface of a muscle fibre activates the contractile machinery that forms the bulk of the fibre. By the mid-1950s Hodgkin and Huxley had shown that transmission along nerve fibres is fully explained by sequential changes in the selective permeability of the surface membrane to sodium ions and potassium ions -- changes caused by the peculiar responses of the relevant ion channels to changes in voltage. There was good evidence that spread of excitation along a muscle fibre was essentially similar. 
The mid-1950s also led to major advances in understanding of the contractile machinery. In muscle the two main proteins form interdigitating sliding rods, whose overlap increases in the presence of adenosine triphosphate and calcium ions. Since adenosine triphosphate is always present but the concentration of calcium ions is very low in the resting fibre, it seemed likely that excitation-contraction coupling involved the release of calcium ions deep within the fibre. The crucial question was: how do the changes at the surface membrane trigger this release? 
The work of microscopists had shown that the fibres of skeletal muscle possess two systems of tubules -- transverse tubules, running at right angles to the fibre surface and opening onto that surface, and longitudinal tubules forming a closed network within the fibre, and expanding into little 'cisterns' where they abut on the transverse tubules. The fluid in the cisterns is rich in calcium ions, and one possibility was that passive spread of electrical current from the surface of the fibre down the transverse tubules somehow released calcium from the cisterns. By a long series of ingenious experiments and careful mathematical analysis, however, Adrian and his colleagues showed that passive spread of current could not explain the observed behaviour, and that a mechanism very similar to that responsible for the conduction of an impulse along the surface of the fibre must be responsible for conducting an impulse along the membranes of the transverse tubules into the depths of the fibre. They also found evidence for the movements of charged particles at the junction between the transverse and longitudinal tubules -- movements that they suspected were involved in triggering the release of calcium ions. Later work has confirmed their suspicions and suggests that molecules of two kinds interact. One acts as a sensor that changes shape in response to a change of voltage across the membrane of the transverse tubule; the other forms a channel in the membrane of the adjacent cistern -- a channel that is opened by the change in shape of the sensor. 
Although most of Adrian's work was concerned with the behaviour of normal muscle, he and his colleagues were also interested in the rare inherited disease myotonia congenita, first described in humans more than a century ago but also found in goats. The characteristic feature of this disease is that contraction of a muscle tends to persist after the cessation of voluntary effort. A human patient cannot relax his grip; a startled goat tends to fall over. Four myotonic goats were dispatched from Cincinnati, and the work nearly foundered at an early stage when they arrived at London airport without any papers. It was, the customs man explained on the telephone, against the rule for animals to be disembarked without proper papers, and the goats would have to be shot. Eventually, however, Adrian persuaded him that though the goats could not properly be disembarked there could be no objection to their being 'disemplaned'. A detailed analysis of the electrical properties of the muscles of these goats showed that the accumulation of potassium ions in the transverse tubules, coupled with the (known) abnormally low chloride permeability of the surface membrane of the muscle fibres, could account for the continued excitation of the muscle after excitation through the nerve had stopped. It became reasonable to assume that a similar explanation accounted for the symptoms in human patients. 
Adrian was elected to a research fellowship at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1955, and to a teaching fellowship and university demonstratorship in the following year. A university lectureship followed in 1961, a readership (in experimental biophysics) in 1968, and (following Adrian's election to the fellowship of the Royal Society in 1977) an 'ad hominem' professorship in cell physiology in 1978, the year he was also awarded the Cambridge MD degree on the basis of published work; he had been given an honorary doctorate by the University of Poitiers in the previous year. 
Adrian enjoyed his time at Corpus Christi and made lasting friendships there. It was at a dinner given by the master, the physicist Sir George Thomson, that he met a striking young Newnham research student, Lucy Caroe ('b'. 1935), daughter of the architect Alban Douglas Rendall Caroe and granddaughter of Sir William Bragg, and on 1 April 1967 she became his wife. The college still reflected some of the conservatism of the twenty-five-year reign of the previous master, Sir William Spens. During a period as dean of college Adrian sometimes found it necessary to protect lively undergraduates from crusty dons, and it was probably this that later gave him the reputation of having been something of a 'young Turk'. In 1961 he accepted an invitation to become tutor for natural sciences at the newly founded Churchill College, Cambridge, and he remained a fellow of Churchill for the next twenty years, becoming an honorary fellow in 1985. 
In 1981 Adrian was elected master of Pembroke College -- an unusual appointment, for he was not a Pembroke man. A contentious problem needing urgent attention was the admission of women, and it is a measure of Adrian's skill as master that by June 1982 the college had agreed to their admission, and that this agreement had been reached with only seven votes cast against and with no ill feeling. During the eleven years of Adrian's mastership the academic standing of the college rose, the number of graduate students doubled, undergraduate accommodation was increased, stonework was cleaned, and for two years the boat club even went 'head of the river'. The college continued to be a very friendly society; the master, though an agnostic, willingly and admirably performed his duties in chapel; and Lucy Adrian was an excellent hostess in the master's lodge while continuing her work as a fellow of Newnham. 
At the time Adrian was master of Pembroke, the vice-chancellor of the university held office for only two years and was chosen from among the heads of the colleges. In 1985 Adrian was an obvious choice. He had succeeded his father in the House of Lords in 1977, like him choosing to sit on the cross-benches. In 1979 he became a founder member of the House of Lords select committee on science and technology, and by 1985 he was also a member of the Home Office committee on animal experiments, a trustee of the British Museum and of the Natural History Museum, a member of the British Library board, chairman of the governing body of the Agricultural and Food Research Council's Animal Virus Research Institute, and a member of the governing bodies of Imperial College and of Westminster School. He had also been an extremely influential member of the House of Lords select committee on the 'Laboratory Animals Protection Bill', had served on the council of the Royal Society and on the Medical Research Council's neurosciences board, and had represented Cambridge University on the General Medical Council. 
As vice-chancellor Adrian was independent, conscientious, and well-informed. He was an excellent chairman, invariably courteous and fair, saying rather little but always effectively, and ready to oppose pressure groups if he felt they were not pursuing useful policies. His main anxieties were eloquently summarized in his annual addresses, which he wrote himself, being one of the last vice-chancellors to do so. His first concern was the financial stringency caused by the decrease in real terms of the government grant; and his second was the increasingly dirigiste attitude to individual universities of the government, the University Grants Committee (UGC), and the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals: 'It used to be said that the UGC was a characteristic British device for insulating universities from Government. We delude ourselves if we continue in that belief' (Adrian, 1986). Adrian felt strongly that universities would remain independent only if they could raise a much greater fraction of their funds from non-government sources, and while he was vice-chancellor two major steps were taken towards this aim. A development office was set up, and a company was created through which the university could profit from commercial developments arising from research in its various departments. In addition, five new professorships were established, four of them with the help of new benefactions, and the first interdisciplinary research centre (in superconductivity) was started. The administrative machinery at the core of the university was also strengthened: the comatose long-term planning committee was reconstituted under the chairmanship of the vice-chancellor, and a small vice-chancellor's advisory group was formed. Adrian's main contribution to opposing the government's dirigiste tendency, though, came not during his vice-chancellorship but two years later, during the House of Lords' discussion of the 'Education Reform Act' of 1988, when he played an important part in limiting the government's powers to interfere in the academic work of the universities. 
During his period as vice-chancellor Adrian sometimes expressed hopes of getting back to work in the laboratory. Instead, however, his administrative roles multiplied: he was president of the Research Defence Society, trustee of the Daiwa Anglo-Japanese Foundation, member of the council of management of the Baring Foundation, British representative on the Council of Scientists' Human Frontier Science Program Organization. In 1990 he took a year's sabbatical leave from the university to become prime warden of the Goldsmiths' Company, and in 1992, approaching the age of sixty-five, he retired from both his professorship and the mastership of Pembroke. In 1993 he was appointed deputy lieutenant of Cambridgeshire. In that year he and Lucy were to visit Melbourne, where he had been invited to lecture, but he became ill with an abdominal cancer, from which he died at the Evelyn Hospital, Cambridge, on 4 April 1995. He was buried on 11 April in the churchyard of St Margaret's Church, Cley-next-the-Sea, Norfolk. A memorial service was held at the church of Great St Mary, Cambridge, on 24 June 1995. There were no children of his marriage, and the peerage became extinct on his death. 
It is easier to say what Adrian achieved than what sort of person he was. The portrait by Daphne Todd in the hall at Pembroke is a good likeness but it portrays him as austere and patrician, and he was rarely either. Tall, handsome, and distinguished-looking, with an invariably courteous manner and wide general interests ranging from archaeology and Middle Eastern politics to joinery and English silver, he was genuinely diffident about his own remarkable achievements. And though he confessed to having enjoyed climbing, sailing, skiing, and 'driving fast cars fast', he insisted that 'in none of these was I any better than average' (Adrian, 1981). He was an entertaining companion, with an excellent dry sense of humour. Speaking as prime warden in the gilded magnificence of the newly refurbished Goldsmiths' Hall, he explained to the decorated diners how glad the company was to be back in its own premises: 'Be it ever so humble, there's no place like home'. And going through old correspondence, he found copies of a letter written by his father to Lucy's parents at the time of her engagement to Richard. 'There were', he said, 'three drafts, each warmer and more spontaneous than the last'. The strength of Adrian's character is perhaps most clearly shown in a long letter to a friend and former colleague, written as he lay dying of cancer. It is devoid of self-pity, concerned for Lucy, detachedly accurate in the clinical aspects, and gently amusing in discussing day-to-day events. 


@@@@@


doc= 60119


Wycombe, W. of (fl. c.1275), music copyist and Benedictine monk, is of unknown origins. He became a monk of Reading Abbey, and inscriptions in two Reading manuscripts testify that he wrote music, but unfortunately nothing that is extant can unequivocally be ascribed to him. Wycombe describes himself, in a statement he wrote with a metal stylus at the end of Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Bodley 125 (fols. 98'v'-99), as the precentor (the monk exercising overall control over the performance of services) at Leominster Priory, Herefordshire, a cell of Reading Abbey, where he stayed for four years. During this time he says he copied numerous manuscripts, musical and non-musical. He makes it clear that the work burdened him considerably, 'though it might have appeared small', and generally gives the impression that his time at Leominster -- used by Reading as something of a dumping ground for troublesome monks -- was spent there under sufferance. The antepenultimate paragraph mentions a 'Historia' of St Margaret by Brother Hugh of Wycombe and states that 'notam cantus' 'W.' 'ipse imposuit' ('W. himself provided the notation of the chant'). Wycombe's wording here is clearly designed to establish him firmly as the composer of what probably took the form of a rhymed office. It is noticeably different from his more common construction 'scripsit eciam' ('he also wrote') by which he describes, in the paragraph which follows, his copying of two rolls containing polyphonic music. In fact, two such rolls survive: Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Rawlinson C 400*, and the recently discovered Oxford, Bodleian, MS Lat. liturg. b. 19, both from the vicinity of Reading, though probably not the abbey. As Wycombe is not slow in establishing his status as a composer, his milder wording for the rolls suggests that he merely copied, rather than composed, this music, if indeed these be the rolls he mentions. 
The name 'W. de Wic.' also occurs in the index of a book, now lost, belonging to W. of Winchester, another monk of Reading and Leominster in the years on either side of 1300. This index was copied on the last folios (160'v'-161) of British Library, MS Harley 978, for whose main corpus obits and other palaeographical evidence certainly indicate Reading provenance. After the first eight items of the index is written 'postea responsoria' 'W. de Wicumbe'; following a small gap over forty Alleluia settings are listed (the Alleluia being a responsorial chant), forming a complete cycle. It is reasonable to assume that the statement 'there follow responsories of W. de Wycombe' refers either to the cycle of Alleluias subsequent to the first eight items, or else to a lacuna in the index, indicating that Wycombe's responsories are missing at this point. Several titles among the Alleluia settings come close to matching compositions in the so-called Worcester fragments. While the idea that some of Wycombe's compositions survive is seductive, the connections between Reading and Worcester have possibly been overstated and should be treated with caution. 
Wycombe has also been suggested as the composer of the famous canon 'Sumer is icumen in', which occurs in the first fascicle of MS Harley 978. However, this fascicle is ruled to a size of written block different from that of the rest of the volume, and has been cut down from its original size. This raises doubts as to its original provenance, hence also to indisputable Reading origins for the 'Sumer' canon, and thus to any connection with Wycombe. In any case, there were presumably many other composers active at Reading. 


@@@@@


doc= 60120


Pickenham, Osbert (fl. 1350), prior of the Carmelite convent, London, and theologian, presumably took his name from either North or South Pickenham, south-east of Swaffham, in Norfolk. Little is known about his life. John Bale, in his earliest notebooks, records that Pickenham entered the Carmelite order at either Burnham Norton or Bishop's Lynn, Norfolk, but later opted for the latter, and later historians have followed him. Pickenham's surname varies in early manuscripts, often occurring as Anglicus, but also as Beaufo or Berford. Hence he may be the Olerico Beaufo who, with another Carmelite, Geoffrey Alienand, was given permission on 11 February 1355 to hear confessions in the diocese of Lincoln. Pickenham and Alienand certainly appear to have been contemporaries at Oxford, since their 'Introitus ad Bibliam' (theology lectures) appear together in some manuscripts. Opinions differ as to when Pickenham was at Oxford; earlier authors, following Bale, suggest 1320 or 1330, but more recently a date about 1358 has been proposed. However, the noted Carmelite theologian John Baconthorpe (died 1346) was at Oxford in the early 1340s, and Pickenham seems to have attended his lectures, since he refers to Baconthorpe in his writings -- the only Carmelite cited. Similarly most of the doctors with whom Pickenham disputed -- men like Thomas Bradwardine (died 1349), Thomas Buckingham (died 1349), William Heytesbury (died 1373), and John Trevaur -- incepted in the late 1340s. The single exception is Nicholas Aston, who incepted in 1358. Consequently if the identification with Olerico Beaufo is correct, then it can be assumed that Pickenham gained his doctorate about 1346-50. 
Bale and Leland claim that Pickenham incepted at Paris, but the mid-fourteenth-century writer Jean Trisse does not list him among the Carmelites in his list of early doctors there, and the theologians with whom he disputed were all from Oxford. However, references to Paris and Rome in his writings may indicate that he visited the continent in furtherance of his studies. The fact that, out of eight surviving fourteenth-century manuscripts containing his writings, four originated in Italy and two in France, lends support to this possibility. However, Pickenham's later years were spent in London, where he was prior and taught in the Carmelite 'studium generale'. Leland saw his tomb there, with a French inscription, but neither he nor Bale knew when Pickenham died. 
The surviving manuscripts contain twenty theological questions attributed to Pickenham, and Bartolomeo Xiberta concluded that the first eight consist of Pickenham's lectures on the 'Sentences', while the ninth is his 'Introitus ad Bibliam'. Of the rest, one question is by Richard Kilvington (died 1361), while a second 'Introitus ad Bibliam' is by Pickenham's companion, Geoffrey Alienand. Xiberta judged that the rest were mostly by Pickenham's fellow theologians at Oxford, but Leonard Kennedy, who edited the eighteenth, argues from its style and citations that this, too, is by Pickenham. Bale attributes further titles to Pickenham, namely 'Determinationes theologie' (in reality the eleven questions following his lectures on the 'Sentences') and 'Super 4 libros sentenciarum' (which Bale saw in Rheims), both with incipit, and four others without incipit -- 'De clara Dei visione', 'Postillas Bibliorum', 'Sermones varios', and 'Super Marie conceptione'; the last should be attributed to Osbert de Clare (died 'c'.1160). 
In his theology Pickenham focuses, like many writers of his period, on cognition, the beatific vision, and free will. He argues that acts of the intellect are distinct from the intellect itself but, as against Thomas Aquinas, he denies that there are intelligible species (in the sense of images or ideas) because physical objects cannot affect an incorporeal object. For Pickenham, God himself is the efficient cause of human understanding. His treatment of pain illustrates Pickenham's extreme Platonism -- he claims that a wound in the body is the occasion for pain, but does not cause it, for the physical cannot affect the intellectual soul. For Pickenham, it is God who acts on the soul. A provocative thinker, although not one always easily understood, Pickenham was entitled the 'venerable master' by the late fourteenth-century Carmelite Michele Aiguani, and his questions were frequently cited by the succeeding generation of Carmelite theologians. 


@@@@@


doc= 60121


Mary (1278-c.1332), princess and Benedictine nun, was born at Woodstock, Oxfordshire, on 11 or 12 March 1278, the sixth daughter of Edward I (1239-1307) and Eleanor of Castile (1241-1290). Joan, countess of Hertford and Gloucester was her sister. She took the veil at Amesbury Priory, Wiltshire, in 1285 at the insistence of her grandmother, Eleanor of Provence, who resided there, and to the annoyance of her mother. As a daughter house of Fontevrault, the burial place of the Angevin kings, Amesbury had a strong connection with the English royal house. Although a nun, Mary enjoyed a lifestyle appropriate to her rank. She was granted $100 p.a. for life in 1285, and this was doubled after the death of her grandmother in 1291. In 1292 she was granted forty oaks a year from royal forests, and twenty tuns of wine from Southampton. Plans that she should go to Fontevrault on Eleanor of Provence's death were cancelled, probably at Edward I's insistence. 
Mary was not confined to a cloistered life at Amesbury. Accounts testify to her frequent presence at court. In 1293 she spent some time with her brother Edward. In 1297 she was at court for five weeks, making her farewells to her sister Elizabeth who was about to go to join her husband in Holland. In 1302 her financial provision was changed; she received a number of manors and the borough of Wilton in place of the $200 p.a., to hold as long as she remained in England. Her income, however, proved insufficient for her needs. By 1305 she was substantially in debt, and the escheator south of the Trent was ordered to pay her $200 so that she could pay off her creditors. She had an extravagant entourage; one account shows that she came to court with twenty-four horses to transport her household, while gambling at dice must have added to her costs. After her death, John de Warenne, earl of Surrey (1286-1347), arguing for a divorce, claimed to have had an affair with Mary. While her presence at court makes this possible, there is no corroboration for the story. 

Edward II continued his father's support of his sister Mary, and she continued to visit court regularly. She also went on frequent pilgrimages. A request from Edward in 1317 that she should conduct a visitation of the English daughter houses of Fontevrault was unsuccessful; although her high birth gave her some influence within the order, she never obtained significant office. She did, however, have custody of several young aristocratic nuns at Amesbury. Her cultural interests are testified to by Nicholas Trevet's dedication of his chronicle to her. She died about 1332 and was buried at Amesbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 60122


Hornby, John (fl. 1350-1375), Carmelite friar, and religious controversialist, entered the Carmelite order at Boston, Lincolnshire, and then studied at York, where he was ordained acolyte on 18 September 1350, subdeacon on 18 December 1350, deacon on 11 June 1351, and priest on 24 September 1351. He incepted as a doctor of theology at Cambridge, where he was regent master of theology in 1374. At that period, the increasing influence of the Carmelite order, and its claim to have been founded by the prophet Elijah, were leading to criticism from the other mendicant orders. In Cambridge a fierce attack on the order was led by a Dominican, John Stokes, who, apart from denying its 'Old Testament' origins, asserted that the Carmelites had never been fully confirmed by the church, and that their title, Brothers of the Virgin Mary, referred not to the Blessed Virgin but to Mary of Egypt, a converted prostitute. Hornby defended his order in a public debate before the chancellor, John Donewych, and the assembled doctors of the university. Armed with copies of papal privileges and other documents, Hornby answered Stokes's attacks with such effect that the chancellor issued a solemn decree in favour of the Carmelites in the church of Little St Mary's on 23 February 1375. 
Hornby's 'Determinaciones ac conclusiones' survive in a single copy, dated 1439 (Bodl. Oxf., MS e Museo 86, fols. 176-211). There are some repetitions and lacunae in this text, which suggest that it may have been based upon Hornby's own preparatory notes for the debate. The text has never been printed although its contents are discussed in detail by J. P. H. Clark. Hornby's arguments bear witness to the fierce determination of the Carmelites to assert their 'Old Testament' origins, and the difficulties they experienced in justifying their historical pretensions. The only other surviving work by Hornby is part of a sermon on the Carmelite order, preached 'to the people' following the debate. It has been edited by Clark. Bale records some lectures on theology with incipit by Hornby, but other attributions by him and later authors are spurious. 
Of Hornby's later career nothing is known except that it is claimed that he died in his home convent of Boston, where he was buried. His fame rests almost exclusively on his defence at Cambridge, and news of his success spread rapidly. The text of the university decree (printed in the 'Speculum Carmelitanum', ed. J. B. de Cathaneis, Venice, 1507, fols. 80'v'-81'v') was frequently quoted in other works defending the order. 


@@@@@


doc= 60123


Livingston, Thomas (1390/91-1460), titular bishop of Dunkeld and diplomat, was the illegitimate son of (almost certainly) a member of the baronial family of Livingston of Callendar in Stirlingshire, possibly Sir John Livingston (died 1402). He was among the first graduates of St Andrews University (MA, 1415) and subsequently taught in the arts faculty there. Having become a Cistercian monk, he was elected abbot of Newbattle before 10 June 1422, but his claim was pre-empted at the papal court by a rival. He then went to Cologne University, matriculating in 1423 to pursue the theological studies on which he had already embarked. At Cologne he probably met Nikolaus von Kues (Cusanus), who matriculated there in 1425, the year of Livingston's inception as master of theology. On 28 July 1430 Livingston, still a monk of Newbattle and now a priest, sought papal dispensation to hold abbatial office despite his defect of birth. He was abbot of Dundrennan by 14 November 1432, when he was incorporated at the Council of Basel. Thus began an active career in the council, to which Livingston remained committed until its dissolution in 1449. Much of his early activity concerned Scottish affairs. His advice contributed to James I's decision in the summer of 1433 to send representatives to Basel, and he was part of the Scottish delegation whose other members were incorporated on 8 February 1434. When the king's ecclesiastical policies were vehemently attacked by William Croyser, archdeacon of Teviotdale, as spokesman for Pope Eugenius IV, Livingston was one of James's principal defenders. In the spring of 1436 he helped to negotiate a partial resolution of the conflict, followed by the pope's decision in July to send a legate to Scotland. 
Livingston, however, also participated in the council's wider concerns, above all the issue of whether supreme authority within the church derived from the council or from the pope. At the most critical stage in conciliar relations with Eugenius -- culminating in the pope's deposition -- he emerged as a figure of real prominence at Basel. He seems to have been absent, perhaps in Scotland, for six months or so after September 1437 (maybe in response to the murder of James I early that year); but from the spring of 1438 he was fully involved in events in Basel and, elsewhere, in defending the council's proceedings. On 18 June 1439, with the archdeacon of Metz, Livingston delivered the five-hour report on the charges against Eugenius which preceded his deposition a week later. Livingston was one of the council's ambassadors at the imperial diet in Mainz in August and spoke in defence of the deposition. In the autumn he was among the electors appointed by the council to choose a new pope and a member of the embassy to invite Amadeus, duke of Savoy, to accept election as Felix V. The year 1440 saw Livingston actively promoting Felix's claims at episcopal synods in Bourges and in Cologne. His reward for these efforts was provision by Felix V, on 29 November 1440, to the see of Dunkeld. Though he never had effective possession as bishop, this gave Livingston a foothold in the Scottish church at a time when, during the minority of James II, his family played a leading if controversial part in a political situation in which conflict over papal allegiance was a significant element. The conciliar cause was essentially lost by the spring of 1443, but the death of Eugenius IV in February 1447 rekindled hopes. This was the context of Livingston's legatine mission to Scotland that spring on Felix's behalf, armed with powers to effect a reconciliation which (the event proved) had to await the anti-pope's resignation in 1449. 
Meanwhile Livingston continued his activity in Basel and, more importantly, elsewhere on behalf of the council and of Felix. He was a member of the conciliar delegation at the imperial diet in Frankfurt am Main in the summer of 1442. In February 1446 he was one of two Basel representatives in Vienna, vainly urging Emperor Friedrich III to summon the council of the German church proposed eight months before. When the healing of the schism was at last in sight, Livingston took part in meetings for that purpose in Lyons between August and December 1447. 
For some years after the council ended Livingston worked closely with Nikolaus von Kues, now a cardinal. He accompanied Kues on his important mission to promote church reform in Germany and the Netherlands between January 1451 and April 1452. Monastic renewal, in which Livingston had already been concerned at Basel, had a substantial place in this mission. By the mid-1450s he had returned to Scotland. Still 'bishop in the universal church' (a term of art indicating that he was a bishop without a see or diocese) and confessor and counsellor to James II, he had no episcopal income and depended on provision, sometimes contested, to various benefices, the last being the abbacy of Coupar Angus 'in commendam'. He died in the summer of 1460, blind and in his seventieth year. 
Livingston, though much of his career lay outside Scotland, was clearly one of the outstanding Scottish churchmen of his generation. His sermons and other addresses, preserved in a dozen manuscripts, employ a pervasively scriptural rhetoric which is more heavily indebted to the 'Old Testament' prophets than to the books of the 'New Testament', other than the 'Apocalypse'. What is expounded is not so much a closely argued ecclesiology as a prophetic vision of the church beset by its enemies -- and above all by the heretical enemy within. At the same time this vision is inseparable from a theology of the church in which 'unfailing authority to teach' ('indefectibile magisterium') is ascribed to a general council representing the whole body of the faithful. The council's authority is, however, judicial as well as doctrinal, and its sentence binds every member of the church, including the pope. This conciliarist doctrine contributed to a tradition of considerable importance for later Scottish thinking, a point exemplified in the work of John Ireland and John Mair. 


@@@@@


doc= 60124


Louth, William of (c.1240-1298), administrator and bishop of Ely, was presumably born at Louth in Lincolnshire, probably 'c'.1240, judging by the chronology of his career. His parentage is unknown, but besides his early benefices in the diocese, which are not significant in themselves, there are some slight indications of a connection with the county. His appellation of master in the chancery rolls implies that he completed a course of study at a university before he entered the royal service, as one of an increasing number of graduates there. 
Louth probably became a royal clerk in the last years of Henry III's reign. He went to Rome in the spring of 1272, and, although there is no record of his journey, his companion Hugh Warwick, who appointed an attorney, seems to have been subordinate to him. As Louth's earliest known preferment came in 1277, it is likely that he was sent on a mission rather than travelling to seek his own fortune. He was described as clerk of the royal household in 1275, but was cofferer of the wardrobe during the keepership of Thomas (I) Bek from 1274 to 1280. Bek, a doctor of civil law and chancellor of the University of Oxford in 1270, was the son of the lord of Eresby in Lincolnshire. Louth, who had some private transactions in the county during the same decade, may have owed something to local patronage. 
The wardrobe was in origin the storehouse and safe deposit of the royal household in the same sense as the chamber was the king's bedroom. It became the household's accounting office, just as the exchequer became the accounting office of the treasury. Louth joined it at a significant time, when the wardrobe was emerging as a compact and efficient office, staffed by men of wide and varied experience who were closely in touch with the king. Under Edward I it was made to function both as a second chancery and a second treasury, and had to deal with an endless variety of administrative demands. In the course of any year Louth had to collect and dispense cash, negotiate and record credits of all kinds, and discharge commissions at home and abroad of widely varying delicacy. In the spring of 1283 he held a commission to raise loans for the Welsh expedition from foreign merchants, at his own discretion, and was equipped with sealed letters of credit for the lenders. All those matters were more or less urgent, and maintaining royal credit was not made easier by repeated application. None of the additional duties facilitated the day-to-day routines of the office, and many were deleterious to them. Diplomatic and other extraneous business, such as the negotiation of loans, or exercise of patronage upon some particular instruction, complicated the accounts as well as consuming time, in a period when the wardrobe's annual turnover was $44,000 as against $24,000 under Bek, and the exchequer was providing rather less than half the wardrobe's income. 
The most significant episode in Louth's career was probably the work that fell to him in 1278-80 when Edward built a castle and a new town at Rhuddlan in the county of Flint, which served as a major base in the second Welsh war in 1282-3. The project involved extensive surveying and civil engineering, the co-ordination of labour and supplies on a large scale, and eventually the settlement of the town. Louth was involved at every level with its organization and finance. He was rewarded with prebends at Beverley and Lincoln in 1279, and succeeded Bek as keeper of the wardrobe on 20 November 1280. In the spring of that year he was appointed with the chief justice of Chester to oversee the settlement of the remaining plots at Rhuddlan. 
In the 1280s Louth spent some time abroad, chiefly in Gascony, both with and without the king. Early in 1283 he became dean of the collegiate church of St Martin's-le-Grand, London, a preferment more imposing in style than in substance, which was reinforced within a year by the archdeaconry of Durham. On that occasion he received a papal licence to hold his benefices for up to five years without taking holy orders. He then spent the autumn abroad, and in 1286 went to Gascony with the king, after which he had letters of protection and attorney, renewed on various occasions until the autumn of 1289. 
Louth was elected bishop of Ely on 12 May 1290 and was finally constrained to take orders. He was consecrated and enthroned on 1 October following. Walter Langton, later treasurer, succeeded him at the wardrobe, but Louth continued to render accounts for several years. In 1291 he was appointed to a commission to determine the dispute in the Welsh march which led to the imprisonment of the earls of Gloucester and Hereford, Gilbert de Clare and Humphrey (VI) de Bohun. In the remaining years of his life he probably gave as much attention to public affairs in London and abroad as to those of his diocese. The chapel of St Etheldreda, Ely Place, the last remnant of Ely House, is probably his work. 
Louth died on either 25 or 27 March 1298, and was buried in the south choir aisle at Ely. Only the canopy of his tomb survives, but its design and sculpture has a close affinity with the monument to Edmund (Crouchback), first earl of Lancaster, in Westminster Abbey. It is almost certainly a product of the royal workshops: a last recognition by the king of Louth's faithful service. The executors of Louth's will included Richard of Gravesend (died 1303), bishop of London, and Walter Langton. All that is known of his next of kin is that his heir was a nephew, William Tuchet. 


@@@@@


doc= 60125


Fryon, Etienne (fl. 1462-1501), diplomat and spy, was a Burgundian whose precise origin and education remain obscure. By 1462 he was practising as a 'procureur' of the 'grand conseil' of Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy, and by 1466 was a ducal secretary. He moved to the service of Burgundy's ally, Charles, duke of Guyenne, until Charles's death in 1472, whereupon he returned to the Burgundian secretariat and served until 1480 without obtaining senior rank. 
On the death of Duke Charles the Bold in 1477 Louis XI of France had overrun Burgundy's southern heartlands, and the Duchess Marie, Charles's daughter, required Edward IV's military support if she was to defend Burgundian territories in the Netherlands and north-east France against Louis's encroachments. In 1480 Edward's sister Margaret, dowager duchess of Burgundy, led an embassy to England which offered a marriage alliance between Mary's infant heir, Philip, and Edward's daughter Anne. Fryon accompanied Jean Gros, treasurer of the Golden Fleece, on a preparatory mission and then on Margaret's embassy. Margaret, observing that the office of French secretary to Edward was effectively vacant, apparently recommended Fryon for this position. He was appointed on 26 September; yet within a month he was sending back to Gros a detailed intelligence letter disclosing information about England's parallel negotiations with Louis, scarcely compatible with his new official responsibilities. 
Nevertheless Fryon's ability was valued by his English employers. In 1482 he was sent on a mission to Francois (II), duke of Brittany, and he was reappointed to his position by Richard III and Henry VII. In 1486 he was granted a valuable property in the parish of St Giles Cripplegate, London, confiscated from Humphrey Stafford after his rebellion. In December 1488, now described as a councillor, he was an envoy to Charles VIII of France, in the company of Christopher Urswick and Thomas Ward. Henry sent him again in September 1489, with Sir John Risley and Chester herald; but this time he took the opportunity to defect to French service. 
Late in 1491 Charles VIII sent Fryon to Cork to meet the leaders of the Yorkist conspiracy forming around Perkin Warbeck, who had recently assumed the identity of Richard, duke of York, and to invite Warbeck to take up residence at the French court. Warbeck was in fact the son of a boatman from Tournai. Whatever he had already learned, in Portugal, of the Yorkist court from Duarte Brandao (who had taken English nationality and served Edward IV as Sir Edward Brampton), he doubtless derived from Fryon in 1492 much of the inside knowledge he required to become a convincing impersonator. But in November 1492 Charles VIII came to terms with Henry VII at the treaty of Etaples and could no longer harbour Warbeck at court; so he secretly passed him to the custody of Margaret of York in Flanders. 
Fryon was assumed by Sir Francis Bacon to have continued after this as Warbeck's 'principal counsellor' ('Works of Francis Bacon', 6.138), but the evidence is lacking. He failed to gain entrance to the Paris 'chambre des comptes' and in 1501 suffered imprisonment at the hands of the 'prevot' of Paris; but he was released on appeal. He was active as a 'procureur' in the 'parlement' of Paris probably as late as 1509. 
The circumstances of Fryon's appointment in 1480 and the nature of his intelligence about the diplomatic activity of the Archduke Maximilian, as well as Louis XI, imply that he was then a member of Margaret of York's circle. If this allegiance continued, it would support the story of Henry VII's propagandist Bernard Andre that Margaret was the instigator of Warbeck's conspiracy -- with Fryon as her agent -- as well as his principal backer after 1492. But ostensibly Fryon cut his links with Burgundy and with Margaret. His defection to France must be seen in the context of those of more senior Burgundian officials in the 1480s, including Jean Gros and Guillaume de Rochefort; equally, his intelligence activity appears symptomatic of an era in international relations when 'diplomat' and 'spy' were regarded as opposite sides of the same coin. Nevertheless, Bacon's sketch of Fryon as 'an active man, but turbulent and discontented' ('Works of Francis Bacon', 6.137) remains entirely apposite. 


@@@@@


doc= 60126


Herman Stern, Baron de Stern in the Portuguese nobility (1815-1887). They were born at Frankfurt, two of the twelve children of Jacob Samuel H. Stern (1780-1833), an eminent Frankfurt wine merchant, and his wife, Theresia (died 1850). Jacob's sister, Caroline ('b'. 1782), had married Baron Salomon de Rothschild (1774-1855) of Vienna in 1800, a brother of Nathan Meyer Rothschild, founder of the eponymous London merchant bank. 
Jacob Stern, who established his merchanting business in 1807, emulated the Rothschild family's successful formula by dispersing his sons to European banking centres, thereby forming a network of family houses centred on Frankfurt and working together for a common good. Two of his sons, Abraham and Leopold, settled in Paris, and a third in Berlin, while David moved to London about 1833 and seems to have been joined by Herman in the 1840s. The Sterns' Frankfurt business was of major importance, and was later closely allied with Deutsche Bank and favoured by Bismarck. 
In London, David and Herman Stern swiftly emerged as successful merchant bankers, specializing in the provision of long-term finance in the form of bond issues and company promotions. At an early date their position was consolidated through marriage to the daughters and heirs of Aaron Asher Goldsmid (1835-1861), a senior partner in the wealthy bullion brokers Mocatta and Goldsmid. David married Sophia Goldsmid (died 1900) in London in 1841 and Herman married her sister Julia (died 1899) in 1845. Each marriage produced two sons and two daughters. 
The firm of Stern Brothers undertook its first public bond issue in 1863, when $2.5 million worth of bonds were marketed for the kingdom of Portugal. The Sterns went on to make their name in Portuguese finance, but their clients also included the kingdoms of Italy and Spain, the Argentine and Peruvian republics, and the Danubian principalities. Few of these borrowers enjoyed the highest standing in the bond markets. 'The Economist' labelled the Peruvian transaction 'very doubtful' (23 March 1872), while many issues were made at ruinously low prices for the issuers. Essential to the Sterns' success was their ability to distribute bonds in continental markets; of the $2.5 million issued for Portugal in 1863, for example, only half was sold in London. 
In Europe the Sterns' other interests included 'a number of mortgage companies which were reaping the first fruits of city development' (Jenks, 270), while money was also made from 'the company mania which culminated in the failure of Overend & Gurney' in 1866 ('Bankers' Magazine', 1047). With a handful of similar houses, Sterns formed the International Financial Society in 1863 so as to be in a stronger position to win financial business in Europe. 
Profit and prestige accumulated: a grateful king of Portugal created Herman a baron in 1864 and David a viscount five years later, when they introduced the prefix de to their surname. The financial strength of the house was evident after their deaths in the firm's $250,000 contribution to the fund which guaranteed a Bank of England loan to Barings at the time of the Baring crisis. This far exceeded the sums offered by such leading houses as Hambros, Brown Shipley, Huths, and Schroders. David de Stern died on 19 January 1877 at 22 Queen's Gate, Hyde Park, London. His brother Herman survived for another decade, dying on 20 October 1887 at 4 Hyde Park Gate, London. He was buried at Kingsbury Road Jewish cemetery, Dalston. David's estate was assessed for probate at under $1 million, while Herman left $3.5 million -- one of the wealthiest estates of Victorian Britain. It included Horace Walpole's Gothic mansion at Strawberry Hill, which Herman had acquired in 1883. Yet the Stern brothers never won acceptance by the City's elite. 'He was a prominent, but hardly an eminent, financier', was the 'Bankers' Magazine''s lofty judgement on Herman (p. 1047). 
David and Herman were directors of the Imperial Bank Ltd, a London joint-stock bank established in 1862; while Herman also held directorships in the Bank of Rumania, the London Financial Society, the London and San Francisco Bank, and the East London Waterworks. In the main they both steered well clear of British political life and neither contributed to major City institutions; but close identification with their Jewish roots resulted in generous support of the Jewish community. In particular, Herman participated in the direction of the Anglo-Jewish Association and also the Jews' Free School in London's Spitalfields. 
The founders of the firm were succeeded at Stern Brothers by three of their sons and a nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 60127


Sydney James Stern, Baron Wandsworth (1844-1912), was the elder son of David Stern, but 'soon retired' ('Jewish Chronicle', 16 Feb 1912, 10). He did not marry. Notwithstanding his 'retiring and reticent disposition' (ibid.) he sat in the Commons as a Liberal from 1891 until he was created Baron Wandsworth in 1895, having generously subscribed to party funds. He died on 10 February 1912 at 10 Great Stanhope Street, London. His estate was valued for probate at over $1.5 million. He was buried at Kingsbury Road Jewish cemetery, Dalston. 
The career of Herman's son 


@@@@@


doc= 60128


Herbert Stern, first Baron Michelham (1851-1919), runs in parallel. Born on 28 September 1851, he married Aimee Geraldine Bradshaw (died 1927) in 1899. He was admitted to Stern Brothers' partnership when young but withdrew about 1910, apparently on account of a rift with his juniors. He then established Herbert Stern & Co., merchant bankers of London and Paris, but 'this was concerned rather with his own operations than with any general business' ('The Times', 8 Jan 1919, 9c). His elevation to a barony in 1905 was greeted with uproar. 'Money', said the 'Saturday Review', 'was at the root of it' (Camplin, 125). He was created KCVO in 1912 and presented to the nation the quadriga which surmounts the arch on Constitution Hill. Herbert died at 26 Prince's Gate, London, on 7 January 1919, leaving an estate valued at $2 million. Buried at Kingsbury Road Jewish cemetery, Dalston, he was succeeded as Lord Michelham by his only child, Herman Alfred (1900-1984), on whose death the barony became extinct. 
The other important partner in these years, who succeeded Herman as senior until 1901, is more obscure. He was 


@@@@@


doc= 60129


James Julius Stern (1835-1901), born on 30 June 1835. He was the son of Julius Stern of Frankfurt and Berlin, nephew of David and Herman. He resided in London from about 1860, and married in 1871 Lucy Leah Biedermann of Vienna, whose sister was married to Henry Bischoffsheim of the London merchant bankers Bischoffsheim and Goldschmidt. They had three sons, including Sir Frederick Claude Stern, horticulturist, and Sir Albert Gerald Stern, banker and pioneer of tank construction, and two daughters. He died at 25 Prince's Gate, London, on 5 January 1901, and was survived by his wife. James Julius also left over $1 million. He was buried in the Hendon cemetery of the West London Synagogue. 
On Herbert's withdrawal in 1910, it fell to 


@@@@@


doc= 60130


Macpherson, Lachlan (b. c.1723, d. in or before 1780), Gaelic poet and musician, was the only son of John Macpherson (died 1784?), tacksman, and his wife, Jean, daughter of Lachlan Mackintosh of Macintosh. He was the tacksman of Strathmashie, which is located near the village of Laggan in Badenoch, Inverness-shire. He took the field with his father in the Jacobite rising of 1745 and accompanied the clan chief, Ewen Macpherson of Cluny, as far as Derby. He married Mary, daughter of Archibald Butter of Pitlochry, and they had two sons and two daughters. 
Lachlan Macpherson's kinsman James Macpherson published 'Fragments of Ancient Poetry Collected in the Highlands of Scotland' in June 1760. James then set off in the autumn of the same year on the journey through the highlands that led to the publication of 'Fingal' (1761) and 'Temora' (1763), purportedly based upon the work of Fingal's son Ossian. In 1805 a report was produced by a committee of the Highland Society of Scotland appointed to inquire into the nature and authenticity of James's poetry. The report includes a letter from Lachlan (appendix, pp. 8-9) saying that he accompanied James during parts of his journey and assisted him in collecting most of the poetry from oral tradition and old manuscripts. Although he travelled with James only on the mainland, Lachlan's reputation as a Gaelic poet, together with his agreeable and polished manners, ensured that they were made welcome in the remoter parts of the highlands. He provided moral support and subsequently helped to prepare material for publication by deciphering ancient scripts, piecing fragments together, and transcribing them in roman characters. 
Lachlan Macpherson's involvement with James Macpherson's later poems has been much discussed. Derick Thomson in his essay of 1998 refers to a letter dated 12 March 1799 from Andrew Gallie, minister in the parish of Laggan from 1758 to 1774, to Charles Macintosh, an Edinburgh solicitor. In this letter, printed in the committee's report (pp. 30-37), Gallie describes how he saw James and 'a friend who was at the time with Mr Macpherson and me' working at translations of the retrieved poetry: 'With much labour I have recovered some scattered parts of the translation made at my fire-side, I should rather say of the original translated there, and I communicate to you a few stanzas, taken from the manuscript'. There follow sixteen lines of Gaelic verse. Thomson comments that although these scan decently enough, they are not at all in the style of the ballads. He considers that they correspond closely to a passage in 'Fingal' and have strong resemblances to a passage in the Gaelic version of the poem. The committee asked Gallie who James's friend was and printed his reply of 4 March 1801 (pp. 39-43). Gallie said that the friend was 'alas! no more. His name was Lachlane Macpherson of Strathmashy. He died in the 1767.' It has also been said that after Lachlan's death a paper was found in his handwriting containing a Gaelic version of a poem in the seventh book of 'Temora'. 
Macpherson did not regard himself as a poet by profession, but rather as a typical tacksman who wrote for his own amusement and that of his friends. He is said to have sat in the porch of his house entertaining everyone with his violin and witty rhymes in the manner of village bards. In later times, on clipping days, his quips and songs were recalled amid general merriment. Over a dozen of his songs survive, many having appeared in Gaelic and in translation in 'The Poetry of Badenoch' by Thomas Sinton (1906). One praises the fellowship of whisky; another recounts how Lachlan and his retainers went to the great wood of Loch Laggan to fetch timber for a house. The raft that they built to float the cabers home glided off, carrying one of the men with it. Lachlan sings of the ensuing noise and merriment. The landlord of the stage-house at Dunkeld offended him in some way. Revenge is taken in song by sending an army of mice to ruin the landlord by eating him out of house and home. In 'The White Wedding' he celebrates the marriage of an elderly couple at which all the guests were grey-haired. The old folk rejoice in a gently satirical epithalamium. Others songs are on the theme of hunting and satirize the jingling greed for riches. Perhaps the most serious song laments the death of his clan chieftain, Macpherson of Cluny. 
Patrick Macgregor quotes a memorandum written by a Bishop Alexander Macdonell 'shortly before his death'. The author of this memorandum was probably Alexander Macdonald (1755-1837), a Gaelic scholar who was a priest in Perthshire and at a Gaelic chapel in Edinburgh. Macdonald says that all those best acquainted with both James and Lachlan believed that James was not as capable of doing justice to translation from the Gaelic as Lachlan, 'but that gentleman did not live to see the work finished or revised, which is supposed to be the cause of so many mistakes' (Macgregor, 39-40). 'Fingal' and 'Temora' were published together by James in 1765 as 'The Works of Ossian'. Andrew Gallie says that Lachlan Macpherson died in 1767, and John Mackenzie, in 'Sar-obair nam bard Gaelach' (1841), that he died 'in the latter end of the 18th century' (pp. 260-63). This is what may have led later writers to say that he lived into the last decade of the century. Derick Thomson in 'Gaelic Poetry in the Eighteenth Century' (1993) and in 'Companion to Gaelic Scotland' (1994) suggests a date of 'c'.1795. However, letters from Macpherson's father and elder son, Alexander, from 1783 and 1780 respectively, which deal with family matters but make no mention of Lachlan, suggest that he had died some time before then (Macpherson of Cluny MSS, NL Scot.). 


@@@@@


doc= 60131


Reeves, John Morris (1909-1978), poet and educationist, was born on 1 July 1909 at 7 Hamilton Road, Wealdstone, Harrow on the Hill, Middlesex, the elder son of Albert John Reeves, company secretary, and his wife, Ethel Mary, 'nee' Blench. He was educated at Nevill House, Eastbourne, and then from 1923 to 1928 at the recently founded Stowe School. His open scholarship at Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1928 was the first Oxbridge scholarship won by a pupil at Stowe. At Cambridge he read English, taking a second class (division one) in both parts of the tripos, and as an undergraduate he collaborated with Jacob Bronowski to found and edit the influential literary magazine 'Experiment', to which the poet William Empson contributed. Graduating in 1931, in 1933 he embarked on a teaching career. His first post, at Holloway School, was terminated in 1935 on grounds of poor eyesight, a progressive disability that finally compelled him to retire from teaching. On 4 April 1936 he married Mary (1909/10-1966), the daughter of Edward Douglas Phillips, at the parish church of St Peter, Bayswater, in London. At that time Reeves was resident at 54 Lyndhurst Road, Chichester. The couple had one son and two daughters. 
James Reeves was a prolific writer: in the course of his career he wrote or edited over a hundred books. After his retirement from teaching in schools and colleges of education in 1952, he turned to full-time freelance writing. His poetry for both adults and children, the first collected in 'Collected Poems, 1929-74', and the second in 'Complete Poems for Children' (1973), is generally regarded as his most important work. However, he also contributed significantly to new methods of teaching and presenting poetry to children, first during his own teaching career, and later, after his retirement, through such books as 'Teaching Poetry' (1958), 'Understanding Poetry' (1965), and (with Martin Seymour-Smith) 'Inside Poetry' (1970). His work as teacher and creative writer was integrated in his study 'How to Write Poems for Children' (1971). Reeves was a versatile and imaginative anthologist, and also produced many volumes of retold traditional stories for children. In 1951 he was appointed general editor of William Heinemann's 'Poetry Bookshelf' series, and in 1960 general editor of Unicorn Books. His career as a children's poet, now regarded as perhaps the most important part of his achievement, began in 1950, relatively late in life and only a short time before his retirement from teaching, with the publication of 'The Wandering Moon'. Much of his work for children was illustrated by Edward Ardizzone, with whom he developed a highly successful collaborative partnership. In 1958 he returned to Cambridge for a short time, in order to research his important book on English folk-songs, 'The Idiom of the People'. He became a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. 
Reeves was a friendly and generous man, but intolerant of pretentiousness and falsity, at which he could direct a mordantly satiric intelligence. In some respects he felt out of tune with the modern world, distrusting what he believed to be the distancing effect on individual experience brought about by the media. He complained of the 'nightmare of sensationalism, violence, hysteria and threatened destruction' ('Introduction' to 'Collected Poems, 1929-1959', 19) to which constant second-hand news subjected the individual sensibility, and felt that privacy was threatened in the modern world. Himself a private man, he was nevertheless a natural teacher, held in much admiration and affection by his students. 
Having been resident for some time at Danesbury House, Chalfont St Giles, Buckinghamshire, Reeves moved in 1962 to Flints, Rotten Row, Lewes, Sussex, where he spent the rest of his life. Mary Reeves died in 1966. Reeves himself died suddenly of heart failure on 1 May 1978 at his home, and his funeral took place at St Anne's Church, Lewes, on 8 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 60132


Hastings family (per. 1759-1907), farmers, were tenant farmers from 1759 to 1907 on the Holkham estate belonging to the Coke family of Norfolk, who were created earls of Leicester in 1837. Their farming activities were representative of the progressive tenants of the large Norfolk farms which made the estate famous for its part in promoting agricultural improvements. 
The first member of the family to lease land on the estate was Thomas Hastings (1729-1804), who took over Hall Farm, Longham, in 1759. In 1776 he was paying $225 per annum in rent for 'Hall Farm, Brakelands and sheep walk'. This entry in the Holkham audit book suggests that at this date part of the farm was still open heath and intermittently ploughed breck. 

John Sutton Hastings (1790-1869), another member of the family, who was born at Longham on 4 December 1790, held the farm from 1816. An enclosure act for Longham parish had been passed in 1813, when the common was enclosed and the fields rearranged to form a compact farm of the large rectangular fields so typical of the Holkham estate. Although these improvements were initiated by the landlord, much of the work was done by the tenants, who were responsible for claying newly enclosed land, planting new hedges, and grubbing up and levelling old hedgerow banks. 
A detailed investigation of the estate in 1816 included a brief vignette about Hall Farm. 'Much money has been expended upon the improvement of the farm with a 'very' far distant prospect of a return', it reported; 'A very large sum is still required to complete the present improvements.' The rent of this 580 acre farm was $600, which the agent considered 'high'. Mr Hastings was described as 'a zealous and industrious tenant heart-broken by his present undertaking'. However, a note was added to this description by the agent, Francis Blaikie, saying, 'Mr Coke has promised to take him by the hand' (Blaikie, report, 1816, Holkham Hall). This probably involved financial assistance and in 1822 the rent was reduced to $400. 
After the recession of the early 1820s, agricultural fortunes improved and John Sutton Hastings was at the forefront of progress. By 1845 he was a member of the Royal Agricultural Society of England and in 1843 he responded to a farming questionnaire circulated by R. N. Bacon of the 'Norwich Mercury' in order to obtain information for his book on the agriculture of Norfolk. By this time the farm was farmed on a four-course rotation (although Hastings believed that there were some circumstances in which two grain crops could be grown in succession). Hastings fed half his turnips to the sheep in the field, but he also bought oil cake and malt dust as feed. He drilled his seeds rather than sowing or dibbling them by hand, and he altered the standard implements to suit his purposes. He did try new methods, 'but generally went back to the old' (Norfolk RO, Bacon MS). His belief in the scientific basis of the high-input, high-output system of 'high farming' was illustrated by his optimistic closing comment, so different from the sentiments expressed in 1816, that 'production will increase as knowledge itself increases' (ibid.). 
Hastings was married, first, to Barbara Anne (1786/7-1847), with whom, between about 1816 and 1823, he had three daughters and a son. In 1851 his nephew, John Henry Hastings, who was farm manager, and his unmarried daughter Charlotte were living with him at Longham. He married, on 23 September 1852, his second wife, the botanical artist Sarah Ann Drake (1803-1857); after her death he married, in October 1858, her friend Anne Lindley ('b'. 1800/01), sister of the botanist John Lindley. During this period the farm continued to be well farmed and stocked. Large numbers of animals were kept and in 1864 the possibility of using modern fertilizers meant that John Sutton Hastings was given permission to depart from the terms of his lease and grow two crops of corn in succession (Holkham Hall, letter books). 
Active in the community, John Sutton Hastings was instrumental in organizing the building of Longham School in 1859 and the restoration of the church in 1867, with much of the finance being provided by the Holkham estate. Hastings himself built 'a double cottage for two married couples or four widows not under the age of 60 years' (White, 403). His interest in parish affairs was recorded on his monument in Longham church, which stated that 'during more than half a century he was a steady friend and benefactor of this parish'. He died at Longham on 9 July 1869. John Hastings (1820/21-1884), his son, baptized at Longham on 4 February 1821, took over the farm on his father's death. In 1851 he had Woodhouse farm, in the neighbouring parish of Gressenhall, and married, at East Dereham on 9 January 1851, Mary Alice (1826-1891), daughter of William Hunt. They had at least four daughters and four sons. Hastings died at Hall Farm, Longham, on 31 December 1884, and was survived by his wife. 
The general decline in farming fortunes as cereal prices collapsed during the 1870s meant that, in spite of the large number of cattle kept on the farm, profits fell and the rent was unpaid in 1883. The previous year the estate had been informed that the family intended to quit. Following the death of his father, John Hastings (1853-1907), born at Gressenhall on 17 December 1853, took over the farm, but was never able to make the levels of profit typical of the middle of the century. Rents were reduced from a peak of $1013 in the 1870s to $700 in 1885, $600 in 1887, and $477 in 1895. On four separate occasions between 1882 and 1895 John Hastings handed in notice that he intended to quit. In 1892 he married Helen ('b'. 1859), daughter of Edward Kendrick, farmer, of Weeford, Staffordshire, with whom he had at least two sons and one daughter. The family finally left the farm after he died at Longham on 10 May 1907. By this time the farm was running relatively smoothly as John had developed a business breeding horses for hackney carriages, which was more likely to remain profitable than conventional farming. 
This mid-Norfolk family, renting the same farm from a famous estate for more than 150 years, illustrates the reaction of intelligent farmers of capital to the changes in agricultural practice and fortunes over the periods of the 'agricultural revolution', 'high farming', and the 'great depression'. 


@@@@@


doc= 60133


Hastings family (per. 1759-1907), farmers, were tenant farmers from 1759 to 1907 on the Holkham estate belonging to the Coke family of Norfolk, who were created earls of Leicester in 1837. Their farming activities were representative of the progressive tenants of the large Norfolk farms which made the estate famous for its part in promoting agricultural improvements. 
The first member of the family to lease land on the estate was Thomas Hastings (1729-1804), who took over Hall Farm, Longham, in 1759. In 1776 he was paying $225 per annum in rent for 'Hall Farm, Brakelands and sheep walk'. This entry in the Holkham audit book suggests that at this date part of the farm was still open heath and intermittently ploughed breck. 

John Sutton Hastings (1790-1869), another member of the family, who was born at Longham on 4 December 1790, held the farm from 1816. An enclosure act for Longham parish had been passed in 1813, when the common was enclosed and the fields rearranged to form a compact farm of the large rectangular fields so typical of the Holkham estate. Although these improvements were initiated by the landlord, much of the work was done by the tenants, who were responsible for claying newly enclosed land, planting new hedges, and grubbing up and levelling old hedgerow banks. 
A detailed investigation of the estate in 1816 included a brief vignette about Hall Farm. 'Much money has been expended upon the improvement of the farm with a 'very' far distant prospect of a return', it reported; 'A very large sum is still required to complete the present improvements.' The rent of this 580 acre farm was $600, which the agent considered 'high'. Mr Hastings was described as 'a zealous and industrious tenant heart-broken by his present undertaking'. However, a note was added to this description by the agent, Francis Blaikie, saying, 'Mr Coke has promised to take him by the hand' (Blaikie, report, 1816, Holkham Hall). This probably involved financial assistance and in 1822 the rent was reduced to $400. 
After the recession of the early 1820s, agricultural fortunes improved and John Sutton Hastings was at the forefront of progress. By 1845 he was a member of the Royal Agricultural Society of England and in 1843 he responded to a farming questionnaire circulated by R. N. Bacon of the 'Norwich Mercury' in order to obtain information for his book on the agriculture of Norfolk. By this time the farm was farmed on a four-course rotation (although Hastings believed that there were some circumstances in which two grain crops could be grown in succession). Hastings fed half his turnips to the sheep in the field, but he also bought oil cake and malt dust as feed. He drilled his seeds rather than sowing or dibbling them by hand, and he altered the standard implements to suit his purposes. He did try new methods, 'but generally went back to the old' (Norfolk RO, Bacon MS). His belief in the scientific basis of the high-input, high-output system of 'high farming' was illustrated by his optimistic closing comment, so different from the sentiments expressed in 1816, that 'production will increase as knowledge itself increases' (ibid.). 
Hastings was married, first, to Barbara Anne (1786/7-1847), with whom, between about 1816 and 1823, he had three daughters and a son. In 1851 his nephew, John Henry Hastings, who was farm manager, and his unmarried daughter Charlotte were living with him at Longham. He married, on 23 September 1852, his second wife, the botanical artist Sarah Ann Drake (1803-1857); after her death he married, in October 1858, her friend Anne Lindley ('b'. 1800/01), sister of the botanist John Lindley. During this period the farm continued to be well farmed and stocked. Large numbers of animals were kept and in 1864 the possibility of using modern fertilizers meant that John Sutton Hastings was given permission to depart from the terms of his lease and grow two crops of corn in succession (Holkham Hall, letter books). 
Active in the community, John Sutton Hastings was instrumental in organizing the building of Longham School in 1859 and the restoration of the church in 1867, with much of the finance being provided by the Holkham estate. Hastings himself built 'a double cottage for two married couples or four widows not under the age of 60 years' (White, 403). His interest in parish affairs was recorded on his monument in Longham church, which stated that 'during more than half a century he was a steady friend and benefactor of this parish'. He died at Longham on 9 July 1869. John Hastings (1820/21-1884), his son, baptized at Longham on 4 February 1821, took over the farm on his father's death. In 1851 he had Woodhouse farm, in the neighbouring parish of Gressenhall, and married, at East Dereham on 9 January 1851, Mary Alice (1826-1891), daughter of William Hunt. They had at least four daughters and four sons. Hastings died at Hall Farm, Longham, on 31 December 1884, and was survived by his wife. 
The general decline in farming fortunes as cereal prices collapsed during the 1870s meant that, in spite of the large number of cattle kept on the farm, profits fell and the rent was unpaid in 1883. The previous year the estate had been informed that the family intended to quit. Following the death of his father, John Hastings (1853-1907), born at Gressenhall on 17 December 1853, took over the farm, but was never able to make the levels of profit typical of the middle of the century. Rents were reduced from a peak of $1013 in the 1870s to $700 in 1885, $600 in 1887, and $477 in 1895. On four separate occasions between 1882 and 1895 John Hastings handed in notice that he intended to quit. In 1892 he married Helen ('b'. 1859), daughter of Edward Kendrick, farmer, of Weeford, Staffordshire, with whom he had at least two sons and one daughter. The family finally left the farm after he died at Longham on 10 May 1907. By this time the farm was running relatively smoothly as John had developed a business breeding horses for hackney carriages, which was more likely to remain profitable than conventional farming. 
This mid-Norfolk family, renting the same farm from a famous estate for more than 150 years, illustrates the reaction of intelligent farmers of capital to the changes in agricultural practice and fortunes over the periods of the 'agricultural revolution', 'high farming', and the 'great depression'. 


@@@@@


doc= 60134


Hastings family (per. 1759-1907), farmers, were tenant farmers from 1759 to 1907 on the Holkham estate belonging to the Coke family of Norfolk, who were created earls of Leicester in 1837. Their farming activities were representative of the progressive tenants of the large Norfolk farms which made the estate famous for its part in promoting agricultural improvements. 
The first member of the family to lease land on the estate was Thomas Hastings (1729-1804), who took over Hall Farm, Longham, in 1759. In 1776 he was paying $225 per annum in rent for 'Hall Farm, Brakelands and sheep walk'. This entry in the Holkham audit book suggests that at this date part of the farm was still open heath and intermittently ploughed breck. 

John Sutton Hastings (1790-1869), another member of the family, who was born at Longham on 4 December 1790, held the farm from 1816. An enclosure act for Longham parish had been passed in 1813, when the common was enclosed and the fields rearranged to form a compact farm of the large rectangular fields so typical of the Holkham estate. Although these improvements were initiated by the landlord, much of the work was done by the tenants, who were responsible for claying newly enclosed land, planting new hedges, and grubbing up and levelling old hedgerow banks. 
A detailed investigation of the estate in 1816 included a brief vignette about Hall Farm. 'Much money has been expended upon the improvement of the farm with a 'very' far distant prospect of a return', it reported; 'A very large sum is still required to complete the present improvements.' The rent of this 580 acre farm was $600, which the agent considered 'high'. Mr Hastings was described as 'a zealous and industrious tenant heart-broken by his present undertaking'. However, a note was added to this description by the agent, Francis Blaikie, saying, 'Mr Coke has promised to take him by the hand' (Blaikie, report, 1816, Holkham Hall). This probably involved financial assistance and in 1822 the rent was reduced to $400. 
After the recession of the early 1820s, agricultural fortunes improved and John Sutton Hastings was at the forefront of progress. By 1845 he was a member of the Royal Agricultural Society of England and in 1843 he responded to a farming questionnaire circulated by R. N. Bacon of the 'Norwich Mercury' in order to obtain information for his book on the agriculture of Norfolk. By this time the farm was farmed on a four-course rotation (although Hastings believed that there were some circumstances in which two grain crops could be grown in succession). Hastings fed half his turnips to the sheep in the field, but he also bought oil cake and malt dust as feed. He drilled his seeds rather than sowing or dibbling them by hand, and he altered the standard implements to suit his purposes. He did try new methods, 'but generally went back to the old' (Norfolk RO, Bacon MS). His belief in the scientific basis of the high-input, high-output system of 'high farming' was illustrated by his optimistic closing comment, so different from the sentiments expressed in 1816, that 'production will increase as knowledge itself increases' (ibid.). 
Hastings was married, first, to Barbara Anne (1786/7-1847), with whom, between about 1816 and 1823, he had three daughters and a son. In 1851 his nephew, John Henry Hastings, who was farm manager, and his unmarried daughter Charlotte were living with him at Longham. He married, on 23 September 1852, his second wife, the botanical artist Sarah Ann Drake (1803-1857); after her death he married, in October 1858, her friend Anne Lindley ('b'. 1800/01), sister of the botanist John Lindley. During this period the farm continued to be well farmed and stocked. Large numbers of animals were kept and in 1864 the possibility of using modern fertilizers meant that John Sutton Hastings was given permission to depart from the terms of his lease and grow two crops of corn in succession (Holkham Hall, letter books). 
Active in the community, John Sutton Hastings was instrumental in organizing the building of Longham School in 1859 and the restoration of the church in 1867, with much of the finance being provided by the Holkham estate. Hastings himself built 'a double cottage for two married couples or four widows not under the age of 60 years' (White, 403). His interest in parish affairs was recorded on his monument in Longham church, which stated that 'during more than half a century he was a steady friend and benefactor of this parish'. He died at Longham on 9 July 1869. John Hastings (1820/21-1884), his son, baptized at Longham on 4 February 1821, took over the farm on his father's death. In 1851 he had Woodhouse farm, in the neighbouring parish of Gressenhall, and married, at East Dereham on 9 January 1851, Mary Alice (1826-1891), daughter of William Hunt. They had at least four daughters and four sons. Hastings died at Hall Farm, Longham, on 31 December 1884, and was survived by his wife. 
The general decline in farming fortunes as cereal prices collapsed during the 1870s meant that, in spite of the large number of cattle kept on the farm, profits fell and the rent was unpaid in 1883. The previous year the estate had been informed that the family intended to quit. Following the death of his father, John Hastings (1853-1907), born at Gressenhall on 17 December 1853, took over the farm, but was never able to make the levels of profit typical of the middle of the century. Rents were reduced from a peak of $1013 in the 1870s to $700 in 1885, $600 in 1887, and $477 in 1895. On four separate occasions between 1882 and 1895 John Hastings handed in notice that he intended to quit. In 1892 he married Helen ('b'. 1859), daughter of Edward Kendrick, farmer, of Weeford, Staffordshire, with whom he had at least two sons and one daughter. The family finally left the farm after he died at Longham on 10 May 1907. By this time the farm was running relatively smoothly as John had developed a business breeding horses for hackney carriages, which was more likely to remain profitable than conventional farming. 
This mid-Norfolk family, renting the same farm from a famous estate for more than 150 years, illustrates the reaction of intelligent farmers of capital to the changes in agricultural practice and fortunes over the periods of the 'agricultural revolution', 'high farming', and the 'great depression'. 


@@@@@


doc= 60135


Margaret Farren (d. 1804), actress, the sister of the countess of Derby. She was the daughter of George Farren, a surgeon and apothecary in Cork, and his wife, whose father was a Liverpool publican and brewer named Wright. Both George Farren and his wife acted. Margaret Farren had been seen at an early age in London, having played at the Haymarket on 18 June 1777, under the name Peggy Farren, Titania in 'The Fairy Tale', a two-act adaptation of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream'. She joined Wilkinson in 1782, left him to act in Scotland and Ireland, and rejoined him in 1786. In that year she appeared with Knight in York, where she was a favourite. Soon after her marriage she made her first appearance in Bath as Miss Peggy in 'The Country Girl' to her husband's Sparkish. In the course of the same season Knight acted thirty characters, among which Touchstone, Trappanti, Claudio in 'Measure for Measure', Trim in 'The Funeral', Sir Charles Racket, and Pendragon may be mentioned. In Bath, as at Bristol, which was under the same management, he played during the nine years of his engagement an endless variety of comic parts -- Charles Surface, Antonio in 'Follies of a Day', the Clown in 'All's Well that Ends Well', Mercutio, Duretete, Goldfinch, Dromio of Ephesus, Pistol, and Autolycus being among the most easily recognizable. 


@@@@@


doc= 60141


Troup, Sir Charles Edward (1857-1941), civil servant, was born on 27 March 1857 at Bogie Street, Huntly, Aberdeenshire, the eldest son of the Revd Robert Troup, minister of the Independent church, and his wife, Margaret ('nee' Macdonald). He was educated at a parish school, at Aberdeen University, whence he graduated MA with a first-class degree in mental philosophy, and at Oxford University, where he matriculated as an exhibitioner at Balliol College in January 1880, and graduated BA in 1883. In his final year at Oxford he won the Cobden prize of $20 and a silver medal for an essay entitled 'In what respects on purely economic grounds is the further application of a free trade policy required in the legislation of this country'. In 1884 this was published as 'Future of Free Trade'. 
Troup joined the Home Office as a junior clerk in the criminal department in October 1880. He was the first such recruit to be selected through open competition. Though he soon assumed responsibility within the department, his promotion was at first slow. Not until 1886 was he appointed senior clerk, even though he had for some time been performing the duties of a senior clerk. In 1887 he joined the newly created parliamentary branch within the general department, and became responsible for monitoring and evaluating parliamentary bills relating to Home Office business. Troup was called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1888 and though he never practised law, he developed a 'passion' for the legal work of the Home Office (Petrow, 29). As editor of the judicial statistics of England and Wales between 1893 and 1904, he did much to reform the collation and analysis of Home Office statistics. Under his influence the judicial statistics changed from being among the worst in Europe to among the best. In 1893-4 he chaired a Home Office committee on the identification of habitual criminals, which recommended using photographs, fingerprints, and anthropometric data to assist the identification of convicts and repeat offenders. In 1896 he became principal clerk in the new industrial and parliamentary department. As such, he was responsible for factories and workshops, mines and quarries, and a substantial statistics sub-branch. 
Shortly after his promotion Troup married, on 2 January 1897, Winifred Louisa Macdonald, youngest daughter of the poet and novelist Dr George Macdonald and a relative of Troup's mother. They had no children. In 1902 he chaired the departmental committee on cremation that drafted regulations under the 'Cremation Act'. In the following year he was appointed assistant under-secretary, in which position he was responsible for police and criminal work. He took a special interest in these aspects of Home Office business while permanent under-secretary between 1908 and 1922. He played an important part in settling the police strikes of 1918-19; when serious unrest within the metropolitan force developed during August 1918, however, he was absent from the Home Office on a walking holiday in Berkshire. In a display either of the 'ultra-calm' for which he was renowned, or of folly bordering on the negligent, he ignored repeated pleas to return to London to take charge, and returned only on 30 August, by which time the strike was almost solid. As permanent under-secretary he sat on two royal commissions. During the First World War, Troup had important responsibilities on the home front, and was on the departmental committee responsible for enforcing regulations under the 'Defence of the Realm Act'. He was made CB (civil) in 1897, KCB in 1909, and KCVO in 1918. The University of Aberdeen awarded him an honorary LLD in 1912. 
Troup, a man of 'rugged Scottish countenance' (Butler, 110), was 'probably the most capable' of those who joined the Home Office with the advent of competitive entry (Pellew, 42). A contemporary praised him as a 'selfless worker' whose minutes were 'models of exactitude, lucidity, and precision' (Redmayne, 139). Efficient, intellectually able, and personally confident, Troup was a civil servant of 'manifold talents' (Radzinowicz and Hood, 106). As Troup's obituary in 'The Times' (26 September 1941) pointed out, he was a civil servant 'of exceptional character and ability, to whom the public of his day owed much and of whom, largely through his own modesty, it knew little'. Given the unrest from suffragettes and militant trade unionism, the Home Office, never an easy department to handle, went through a period of special difficulty while Troup was permanent under-secretary. His influence was crucial in extending Home Office authority over local police authorities and in co-ordinating police powers to cope with industrial unrest. In December 1919 he shrewdly told General McCready that in the next strike special constables would be appointed, so that the military could be held in reserve, commenting that 'the one thing to avoid is the appearance of setting labour and the middle classes against one another' (Morgan, 94). He had scant respect for the idle time-servers who dominated the Home Office clerkships at the time of his appointment. Unlike this older generation of clerks, all too ready to shirk responsibility, he was eager to expand the Home Office's responsibilities and workload and to take on burdensome and complex work. He also recognized the importance of the personal touch, maintaining close contact with his staff and scrupulous in keeping their work up to standard. His one possible flaw as a civil servant was a certain narrowness of vision -- related, perhaps, to his inexperience outside the world of bureaucracy. 
After he retired from the civil service, Troup published a respected volume on the Home Office in the 'Whitehall' series (1925). He found a new career as treasurer of King's College, London (1922-39), and served on several public bodies, chairing the tribunal on the Royal Irish Constabulary (1922-3), the Safety in Mines Research Board (1923-39), and the Ministry of Pensions' special grants committee (1929-38). He died from arterio-sclerosis at his home, 13 Addison Road, Kensington, London, on 8 July 1941 and was cremated at Golders Green on 10 July. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 60144


Mercer, Mabel (1900-1984), cabaret singer, was born on 3 February 1900 at 30 James Street, Burton upon Trent, the daughter of Emily Mabel Wadham ('b'. 1879), variety artiste, who was the daughter of the painter Benjamin Braffet Wadham. Her father was an African-American musician whose identity is not established; his name may have been Mercer, but this is not verifiable. She was raised by her grandmother and educated (1907-14) at a convent school at Blackley, Manchester. 
Mabel Wadham began her stage career dancing with the Romany Five, the family act of her aunt Rhoda King. When the act broke up about 1916, she joined a dance troupe and came to the notice of Nannette Horton Boucher, daughter of the pioneer African nationalist Africanus Horton, who took her into her household; there she associated for the first time with others of African descent. Consequently some contemporaries from this era recalled her as Mabel Boucher. In 1917-19 she toured with the show 'Coloured Society' as a dancer and pianist. In mid-1920, when she appeared in London with the Southern Syncopated Orchestra, she was still billed as Mabel Wadham, but in the early 1920s she worked intermittently in an act called Kay and Mercer, travelling to Belgium and Luxembourg. She had a relationship at this time with Robert Williams, part of an African-American act known as Williams and Taylor, who worked in revue with Kay and Mercer. 
Mercer appeared in Paris in 1924-5 at Le Grand Duc and Chez Florence; and then as a chorus girl in 'Blackbirds of 1926' in Paris and London and with the African-American bandleader Sam Wooding. She had a small part in 'Show Boat' at the Drury Lane Theatre, London, in 1928. In 1931 she was working at Chez Florence with the band of her then-partner, the African-American drummer Harvey White ('b'. 1896), when she joined Ada Smith (known as Bricktop) in the management of her new club. Mabel Mercer began singing at the tables, soon becoming a Parisian institution and a favourite with British and American visitors, including royalty. In 1936 she appeared in the British film 'Everything is Rhythm'. In February-March 1938 she appeared in Amsterdam with the band of the African-American jazz violinist Eddie South. Although in this period she frequently worked with jazz artistes, she was never herself a jazz singer. 
Mabel Mercer moved to the United States in October 1938 for a six-month engagement at the Ruban Bleu Club in New York and was reunited with her mother, recently married to an American. In 1940 she went to the Bahamas for a holiday, but stayed on professionally after finding she would not be readmitted to the USA. Mabel Mercer reportedly performed frequently at private functions for the duke and duchess of Windsor. During 1941 she married Kelsey Pharr, a member of the Delta Rhythm Boys, a vocal group, in order to secure readmission to the USA. Although she never lived with her husband, who was openly homosexual, they remained married until he died in 1964. In New York Mercer worked again at the Ruban Bleu, then briefly at a new club called Bricktop's with Ada Smith. Through a relationship with the pianist Cyril F. (Cy) Walter, she secured a residency at the club Tony's at 59 West 52nd Street, which continued for seven years. She moved in 1949 to the Byline Room at 137 East 52nd Street, and with the club in 1955 to a new location on West 56th Street. When this engagement ended in summer 1958, she moved to the RSVP Room. 
During the 1950s Mabel Mercer's singing gained wider currency through a series of LP albums for the Atlantic label, including 'Sings Cole Porter' (Atlantic 1213) and 'Once in a Blue Moon' (Atlantic 1301), on which she performs songs from the standard repertory of American popular song of the pre-rock era. She became a US citizen in 1952. For much of the 1960s she worked only intermittently, making some of her appearances outside New York. An engagement at the St Regis Hotel in 1972 fuelled a return to prominence. In 1977 Mercer revisited Europe, where she appeared at the Playboy Club, London, and made a BBC television series, 'Miss Mercer in Mayfair'. Despite failing health, she continued working until hospitalized with angina in January 1984. She died in Pittsfield, Massachusetts, on 20 April 1984, survived by Harry Beard, a manager, her companion from the late forties. Whitney Balliett said that her singing 'lay somewhere between the concert hall and jazz. She had a rich, low mezzo-soprano and considerable range' (Balliett, 'Profiles', 55). 


@@@@@


doc= 60150


Beornred (d. 797), archbishop of Sens and abbot of Echternach, went from Northumbria to the continent at an unknown date and was made abbot of the monastery of Echternach in 775, in succession to the second abbot, Albert. He was a relative both of Echternach's founder, Willibrord, and of Alcuin, who wrote his prose and verse lives of Willibrord for Beornred. The numerous surviving charters from Echternach provide most of the reliable dates for Beornred's life. 
Beornred preceded Alcuin to the continent and, to judge from a letter-poem that probably dates from Alcuin's first visit there in the late 770s, had established himself as part of the court circle of the Frankish king Charlemagne by that time. There survive two poems by Alcuin addressed to Beornred (to whom he gave the pseudonym Samuel) and two letters, one accompanying the lives of Willibrord, the other asking if Beornred had had copied Alcuin's book of excerpts from John's gospel. Beornred played host at Echternach to another Anglo-Saxon, Willehad, at some point between 'c'.782 and 'c'.784, when the latter was forced to interrupt his missionary work among the Saxons by their revolt against Frankish overlordship. 
In 785 or 786 Beornred was consecrated to the diocese of Sens, though he also retained the abbacy of Echternach until his death. Although a number of his predecessors had been archbishops, Sens's metropolitan status at this time was still unclear. Beornred appears in the sources variously as bishop and archbishop. He was certainly an ecclesiastic of some standing. A letter of 790 or 791 from Pope Hadrian I to Charlemagne reveals that Beornred had travelled to Rome, together with Rado, abbot of St Vaast, as a 'missus' (envoy) of Charlemagne. He and Rado doubtless conveyed the questions which Hadrian's letter answered, chiefly concerning the condition of the Italian church. Beornred died in 797 and was succeeded in his bishopric by Ragembert, and at Echternach by Ado. He was buried in the monastery of St Pierre-le-Vif, Sens. 


@@@@@


doc= 60151


Ewart, Gavin Buchanan (1916-1995), poet, was born on 4 February 1916 at 25 Norfolk Crescent, London, the first of three children of George Arthur Ewart (1886-1942), gynaecologist, and his wife, Dorothy Hannah, 'nee' Turner (1889-1979). George Ewart was the son of James Cossar Ewart FRS (1851-1933), Darwinist and regius professor of natural history at Edinburgh University. Gavin Ewart went to Wellesley House, a preparatory school in Broadstairs, Kent, from 1924 to 1929, and from there to Wellington College, Crowthorne, Berkshire, where he stayed until 1933. 
Already Ewart had begun to write poetry; by the age of fourteen he had written several short plays and he contributed poetry to the Wellington 'Year Book', and also 'Out of Bounds', the magazine edited by his Wellington contemporaries Esmond and Giles Romilly; the magazine attacked the public schools as a breeding-ground of (in the Romillys' words) 'Reaction, Militarism and Fascism' (Philip Toynbee, 'Friends Apart', 1954, 15). 'Out of Bounds' published Ewart's fourteen-verse poem 'The Fourth of May', written in the summer of 1934, with the opening lines: '
My dear old school goes back today, 

Fumbling for tips and 'Goodbye, old boy,' 

Shall we give it a cheer? 

Let us pray for its members, past and present, 

Let us remember how unpleasant 

Most of them were. 

' His pungent and sarcastic farewell to Wellington included a daring reference to masturbation: '
So we were onanists; beds at night 

Used to respond with continual slight 

Creaks of their springs 

' at the time an unmentionable subject; Ewart's poem so scandalized his housemaster that he wrote to say it would not be a good thing for Ewart to visit the school for at least three years. 
The youthful Ewart had thus staked out some of the territory he would exploit in later years. But this he had already done with the poem that represented his first adult success, 'Phallus in Wonderland', written shortly after his seventeenth birthday, which Geoffrey Grigson published in 'New Verse'. The poem was much influenced by T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound; considering it immature, Ewart omitted it from his first published collection, 'Poems and Songs' (1939), but he included it in his 'Collected Poems, 1933-1980' (1980). 
In 1934 Ewart went up to Christ's College, Cambridge, as an exhibitioner to read classics, but changed to English at the end of his first year, becoming a pupil of F. R. Leavis. He was literary editor of 'Granta' for the year 1936-7 and he went down in 1938 with a second in finals, hoping to follow the profession of poet; to earn a living, he did secretarial work for various authors and worked as a salesman for a firm of fine art publishers. His larger ambition seemed closer to fulfilment when the Fortune Press, under the notorious R. A. Caton, published 'Poems and Songs' in 1939. The most noticeable influence this time was that of W. H. Auden, whom he always considered the greatest English-language poet of the twentieth century; however, the best-known poem in the book is probably the squib 'Miss Twye', a ribald quatrain anticipating Ewart's later light verse. 
War service stalled Ewart's progress as a poet. He was called up in June 1940 to the East Surrey regiment, and in May 1941 he was commissioned in the Royal Artillery. He served in anti-aircraft batteries in north Africa and Italy, and although he later denied any talent for 'war poetry', his 'Collected Poems, 1933-1980' includes nine 'war poems' written between 1940 and 1946: one of them, 'When a Beau goes in', became a well-known anthology piece ('Beau' was wartime slang for Beaufighter, the twin-engined fighter aircraft introduced in 1940). 
Ewart was demobilized in May 1946 with the rank of captain, and soon afterwards M. J. Tambimuttu, proprietor of Editions Poetry London, took him on as production manager. Ewart was also working for the British Council, helping to select books for overseas distribution, but in 1949 the council was drastically pruned as a result of government cuts and at roughly the same time Tambimuttu went to live in the United States: Editions Poetry London collapsed. Out of a job, Ewart now began the occupation he remained in until 1971: he became an advertising copywriter. He worked for a succession of agencies -- Royds, the London Press Exchange, Notleys (later Saatchi and Saatchi), and finally J. Walter Thompson. 
Ewart found the work uninteresting and the clients tiresome, and his talents as a poet were neglected, although he would sometimes write during quiet periods in the office and had occasional poems accepted by, among others, the 'New Yorker' and the 'New Statesman'. Nor was he the only aspiring writer to look for a livelihood in advertising: another -- at Royds -- was the Australian emigre poet Peter Porter. Ewart's friendship with Porter (they remained friends for the rest of Ewart's life) prompted him to start writing seriously again. Alan Ross, editor of the 'London Magazine' and director of London Magazine Editions, persuaded him to put together the collection which appeared in 1964 with the title 'Londoners', with illustrations by Colin Spencer. This volume, consisting of verse portraits of eighteen London landmarks, was competent rather than inspired, and sold few copies. 

'Londoners' was succeeded in 1966 by 'Pleasures of the Flesh', and now Ewart's distinctive voice began to be heard in verse that was witty, nimble, comprehensible, and metrically resourceful, able to handle the erotic and the satirical with equal verve and confidence; one note clearly heard, however, is of restlessness and vexation with the dullness of his work. Matters came to a head in 1971 when J. Walter Thompson made Ewart redundant. On 24 March 1956 he had married Margaret (Margo) Adelaide Bennett ('b'. 1922), and by now they had two children, Jane Susan ('b'. 1956) and Julian Robert ('b'. 1958). Ewart took a job as a schoolmaster, and for two terms taught O and A-level English at several local schools, principally a south London comprehensive. This excursion into a new profession was not a success -- he found his pupils ill-motivated and mischievous -- but Ewart's confidence as a writer was strengthened by the Cholmondeley award for poetry in 1971, and he resolved once more to make a living as a poet. Indeed his poetic output began to increase rapidly and he was becoming a well-liked member of the literary community. Aware of his debt to Peter Porter, he dedicated to him his next book, 'The Deceptive Grin of the Gravel Porters' (1968). His next volume, 'The Gavin Ewart Show' (1971), is a collection of mature, confident poetry, displaying his talent for metrical dexterity and encompassing a range of feeling and personal experience. As in the next volume, 'An Imaginary Love Affair' (1974), many of the poems reflect a conflict between the anguish of romantic love and the deeper satisfaction of a secure marriage; and in later volumes too, he appears to settle, or at least suppress, this conflict with the help of the bawdy wit and irreverence for sexual convention for which he was now known. 
Ewart was elected chairman of the Poetry Society for the year 1978-9 and when the Oxford professorship of poetry became vacant in 1984 he stood as 'the Cambridge candidate'. He won few votes; Peter Levi was elected. Meanwhile he edited books of light verse, children's verse, and school songs, and the appearance in 1980 of his first collected volume ('The Collected Ewart', dedicated to his wife) demonstrates his productiveness no less than his gifts. He was by now very much the professional poet: writing reviews and taking part in radio programmes; his work appearing in literary periodicals (the 'Times Literary Supplement', the 'London Magazine', 'Ambit'); and becoming a familiar figure at poetry readings. An awkward public performer at first, he rapidly improved; in his last decade he was acknowledged as a virtuoso reader -- witty yet modest, his voice melodious and his manner confident, making the most of his poetry's numerous technical stunts and devices. 
Ewart published a second 'Collected Poems' covering the years 1980-90, it and the 1980 volume totalling almost 900 pages. Then came in 1993 his '85 Poems', and he continued unstoppably, writing for periodicals and in letters to his friends. Verse came to him spontaneously: 'found' poetry, in newspapers and speech, pleased him, and so did experiments with metre and rhyme. His fluency and wit and his gleeful use of sexual imagery (he was the second most prolific contributor to 'The Faber Book of Blue Verse', 1990) usually gave him the status of 'light' poet and he said he was 'most proud' of the Michael Braude award for light verse which the American Academy gave him in 1991. Yet at heart his was serious poetry, admired by such contemporaries as Philip Larkin, Stephen Spender, Anthony Thwaite, Alan Brownjohn, and Peter Porter, who said of him 'There is simply more of the observable surface of our world in his poetry than in most of his contemporaries', and more of its humour and moral seriousness' (personal knowledge). 
Ewart had been handsome as a young man and in his latter years he was still noticeably so: humorous, engaging, sociable, widely read, with many friends, and fond of music, especially 1930s jazz, Mozart, and Richard Strauss. He died of prostate cancer in Trinity Hospice, in Clapham, south London, on 23 October 1995. He was a declared atheist and a member of the British Humanist Association and he was cremated on 30 October at Putney Vale crematorium, south London. At his request, the congregation, of fellow poets and writers as well as family and friends, were played the last of Strauss's 'Four Last Songs', his setting of Joseph von Eichendorff's 'Im Abendrot' ('At dusk'). 


@@@@@


doc= 60153


Richardson, (Sarah) Katharine (1854-1927), mountaineer, was born on 24 April 1854, at Edlington, near Doncaster, Yorkshire, the second of five daughters of the Revd George Richardson, curate of Edlington and later vicar of Kilburn, Yorkshire, and his wife, Isabel Nussey. She first visited the Alps at the age of sixteen. After 1879 Katharine became a distinguished mountaineer, making 176 ascents over 11 climbing seasons, 116 of which were considered major ascents (including 6 first ascents and 14 first ascents by a woman). Although short, petite, and thin, her endurance and agility were remarkable. In 1882, for example, she climbed Zinal Rothorn, Weisshorn, Matterhorn, and Monte Rosa in eight days, and in 1889 she climbed the Aiguille Verte, Grand Dru, and Petit Dru in just three days. Michel Payot, a guide, said of her: 'she glides along the rocks like a lizard' (Paillon, 329). 
Katharine Richardson's reputation as a climber often preceded her. In 1888 she made the first ascent of the Aiguille de Bionnassy, including a traverse to the Dome du Gouter which had been considered impossible, and the first female ascent of Aiguilles des Charmoz. While still in Chamonix, she read in a newspaper that an Englishwoman had arrived in La Berarde intending to make the first female ascent of the Meije. She quickly travelled to the Dauphine, where she inquired as to the name of her compatriot and competitor. The name she was told, however, was none other than her own. Fulfilling the prophecy, she climbed the Meije with Pierre Gaspard and J. B. Bich, and observers below recognized her on the summit by her petite stature and skirt. 
One of these observers was Mary Paillon (1848-1946), from a French medical family, who met Richardson afterwards and arranged to climb with her the following year. They became close friends and Richardson settled at Oullins, near Lyons, on the Paillon family estate, where she lived for the rest of her life. Richardson had a round face, full nose, green eyes, pulled her straight, brown hair back, and invariably wore a skirt while climbing. Paillon had high cheekbones, a thin, Gallic nose, close-cropped, wavy hair, wore a pince-nez, and was a strong advocate for women climbing in trousers. The two women often climbed together, including Pelvoux in 1897, one of the peaks of which was later named Pointe Richardson. After this ascent Paillon's eyesight began to fail and they attempted only less difficult walks. Richardson refused to climb peaks on which Paillon could not join her. They were both members of the Lyonnaise section of the Club Alpin Francais, and they joined the Ladies' Alpine Club in 1908; Paillon was elected vice-president in 1910, and Richardson declined the presidency in 1912 and 1919. Richardson was also a distinguished watercolourist. She died on 20 August 1927 at the Paillon home, 48 rue de la Republique, Oullins, Rhone, France. Paillon wrote innumerable articles for climbing journals, including an obituary notice on Richardson that said she had been 'almost a sister to me' (Paillon, 326). Neither ever married. 


@@@@@


doc= 60154


Straton, (Mary) Isabella Charlet- (1838-1918), mountaineer, was born, possibly in Wales, with the name Mary Isabella Straton. She walked in the Pyrenees and Alps in the 1860s and began climbing with Emmeline Lewis-Lloyd in the 1870s. They made the first female ascent of Monte Viso in 1870, and the first ascent of Aiguille du Moine in 1871. Jean-Esteril Charlet (1839-1925) was her guide on these and all of her later climbs. Before becoming a guide, Charlet had worked as a shepherd and carpenter. Isabella may have first met him at Lewis-Lloyd's home in Nant-gwyllt, Wales, where he had been brought to work for a year as a groom. Although Lewis-Lloyd stopped climbing in 1873, Straton returned to the Alps to climb with Charlet. Their ascents included a 3761 metre peak in the Triolet chain in 1875 that he named Pointe Isabella. She made four ascents of Mont Blanc, including the first winter ascent on 31 January 1876, which made her a celebrity. During the ascent they endured an accident to a porter and a violent storm in which all of her fingers were frostbitten. After restoring circulation to her fingers, they reached the summit and returned to Chamonix after four days and three nights on the mountain. 
They married on 29 November 1876, took the surname Charlet-Straton, and lived in a house that Jean built in the hamlet of Les Frasserands, near Argentiere in Haute Savoie. She continued to receive her private income, once reputed to be worth $4000 a year. He continued to climb and was well known for his ascent of the Petit Dru in 1879 and for developing new methods of abseiling that were universally adopted. In 1881 they made the first ascent of a beautiful peak in the Aiguilles Rouges, which they christened Pointe de la Perseverance in remembrance of the perseverance that they had shown before they had dared to confess their affection for one another. They had three sons, one of whom, Robert, was killed in action in 1915. Isabella had been devoted to him, and contemporaries reported that she never recovered from his death. After an illness she died on 12 April 1918 at La Roche-sur-Foron, Haute Savoie, where she and her husband often spent the winter. She was buried in the cemetery at Argentiere. 


@@@@@


doc= 60155


Hayes, Walter (b. c.1618, d. before 1696?), maker of mathematical instruments, was the son of Peter Hayes, a merchant from Chichester. He was apprenticed to John Allen in the Grocers' Company on 22 February 1632, taking his freedom on 14 June 1642. His first workshop was in Birchin Lane, off Cornhill, in the City of London. By 1652 he had established a reputation for a high standard of work, and advertisements for his instruments began to appear in books on mathematics, astronomy, navigation, and surveying. These show that by 1653 at the latest he was resident 'at the Cross-daggers in Moor-fields near Bethelem-gate', also sometimes referred to as 'next dore to the Popes head Taverne' (Taylor). He remained at this address until the end of his working life. 
Hayes had strong links with several mathematical writers of the time, including George Atwell, William Leybourn, John Eyre, Seth Partridge, Vincent Wing, and Matthew Norwood. He had particularly close relations with Leybourn, for whose books he not only supplied the instruments discussed in the text but also engraved the plates for the illustrations. According to the advertisements placed in these books he offered a 'full range of mathematical instruments' in brass, silver, and wood, as well as globes. 
Hayes was responsible for the training of a large number of apprentices. Between 1648 and 1684 he took fourteen, as well as one probably turned over to him from a former apprentice. His final apprentice was Edmund Culpeper, who was to be highly regarded both for his mathematical instruments and for his microscopes. 
Hayes was a member of the Grocers' Company and became prominent in that guild, but he was most active in the Clockmakers' Company. He joined it as a brother on 24 February 1668, along with eighteen other instrument makers. Two years later he was appointed as an assistant of the company. He refused the post of renter warden on 14 January 1678 but he was elected upper warden on 29 September 1679 and was chosen as master of the company in 1680, being sworn in on 15 October of that year. Having entered the livery of the Grocers' Company in 1668 Hayes was appointed steward two years later and rose to the ranks of assistant and warden in 1681 and 1686 respectively. His last appearance in either company's records came on 21 September 1687, when he was present at the court of assistants of the Grocers' Company. He was probably dead by 1696 since a widow named Jane Hayes (almost certainly his wife) was supplying mathematical instruments to Christ's Hospital in 1696 and 1697. 
Hayes was arguably the most important instrument maker of his day. He was highly respected for the quality of his work, and recommended by many of the contemporary mathematical writers. Like his forerunner Elias Allen he left an important legacy in the shape of his apprentices, several of whom were known for the excellence of their own work and who carried the tradition of precision instrument making into the eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 60158


Singleton, John (1715-1795), jockey and racehorse trainer, was born at Melbourne, near Pocklington in Yorkshire. Details of his parents are unknown. His early working life was spent in Ross Moor (Yorkshire), first as a cattleherd and then tending horses in Mr Read's stables. Although barely in adolescence he was so skilled that a particularly fine piece of work prompted his employer to reward him with a ewe. Showing great business acumen Singleton sold the ewe's offspring, using the money to pay for a racehorse, Smiling Tom, to cover a mare belonging to Mr Read. The resulting foal proved to be an excellent horse which Singleton rode to victory in numerous races throughout the north. By then Mr Read was employing him to ride his best mounts, and in 1732 Singleton won His Majesty's Hundred Guineas race at Hambleton. This proved to be the first of many triumphs for Singleton, who established himself as one of the best jockeys of his day. 
Typically for his time, Singleton was not sparing in his use of the whip, and Mr Read's horse Jack-come-tickle-me was so named because Singleton had informed him that the animal 'ran better for being tickled (whipped)' (Cook, 1.207). Singleton's expertise attracted the attention of the second marquess of Rockingham, who made him both his rider and trainer, and was rewarded by victories in a string of major races. Throughout his career, which spanned over fifty years, Singleton rode for only two owners, Mr Read and Rockingham. An indication of his status can be gleaned from the remarks of the Jockey Club's historian, Robert Black, who declared that although Mr Read was one of the founder members of the club 'his chief title to commemoration is that he introduced to the turf the celebrated jockey John Singleton' (Black, 130). 
In 1769 Singleton married the widow of the jockey Peter Jackson; they had one son, John. Singleton took immense trouble to preserve his health, and remained very fit. At the age of fifty-seven he had a riding weight of just 8 stone 7 lb. Towards the end of his life contemporaries recorded that 'old John could lift a full glass of port without a tremor, for his head and nerves remained as cool as his chest and arms strong and solid' (Cook, 2.353). He made a significant amount of money from horseracing and 'founded the fortunes of his family at Great Givendale, where he was universally loved' (ibid.). He died at Ross Moor in 1795 and was buried in the same church there as his deceased employer, Mr Read. This was in accordance with both their wishes. 




@@@@@


doc= 60161


James, Clara Grace (1866-1954), trade unionist and community activist, was born at 24 John Street, Deptford, Kent, on 30 October 1866, the daughter of George James, journeyman tailor, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Corse. According to her patron, Lilian Gilchrist Thompson, she was orphaned as a child and brought up by an alcoholic employee of her father's. She first came to notice as an activist in the industrial world in 1889, when she joined the Women's Trade Union Association (WTUA). The WTUA was formed in the East End of London after the success of the Bryant and May match girls' strike of 1888, with the aim of establishing self-managed and self-supported unions for women in trades neglected by the more skills-focused Women's Trade Union League. Following dismissal from her job in the confectionery trade for joining a union, James became assistant secretary of the WTUA and a union organizer. As secretary of the Confectioners' Union, she assisted Clementina Black and John Burns to resolve the chocolate makers' strike in 1890. This union failed in 1892, the WTUA annual report suggesting that its demise was partly due to employers' opposition and partly to the notorious difficulty of organizing young girls: juveniles were increasingly employed in this trade. In 1891 Clara James and her friend Amie Hicks (in whose household she was now living, according to the census as Hicks's adopted daughter) were appointed as delegates to the royal commission on labour. They were the only women to give evidence, and they both spoke in favour of women factory inspectors, stipulating that these inspectors should be working women, not ladies. James was also for some time the only woman delegate on the London Trades Council. 
Clara James worked as a typist to earn her living, until in 1892 a personal admirer, Lilian Gilchrist Thompson, promised the WTUA a subscription of $70 a year for two years to employ Clara James as an investigator. By 1894 the WTUA was in difficulties, and its fifth annual report noted that Clara James had been unable to organize the box-makers, adding that 'The collapse of the Union did not conclude Miss James' efforts among the boxmakers. She has been constantly among them... and gathered much information which will... be put into a systematic form'. In November 1894 the WTUA was re-formed as the Women's Industrial Council (WIC); James served on the investigation and organization committees. Thompson, who described James as a lively, persuasive personality, paid for her to train as a gymnastics teacher after the two years' subscriptions had expired. James had set up her first working girls' club under the WTUA, where among other activities she organized extremely successful musical drill classes: according to the WTUA's fifth annual report, these classes were emulated by the People's Palace in London's Mile End Road. Clubs for working girls were to occupy much of the rest of her life. 
In 1899 the WIC set up the Clubs Industrial Association, which arranged lectures on industrial subjects (including the 'Factory Acts'), social meetings, and citizenship classes for affiliated working girls' clubs. James used her popular physical drill classes to gain the trust of the working girls, and to persuade them to help the women factory inspectors to convict employers in breach of the 'Factory Acts'. The classes in themselves were beneficial to girls physically constrained by factory life, and offered both fun and better health. Margaret Bondfield, later a Labour cabinet minister, was among her pupils. By 1909 James had her own organization, separate from the Clubs Industrial Association, called Working Girls at Play, based at 21 Rochester Square, London: she was the overall organizer of twenty-two clubs and hundreds of girls all over London. Ill health eventually prevented her from continuing as a teacher, and she established a holiday home on Canvey Island. At first it was little more than a campsite, but it was eventually replaced by a house with a self-supporting market garden. From 1925 James served as a parish councillor, justice of the peace, and school governor. Clara James died at her home, The Willows, Lakeside Path, Canvey Island, Essex, on 10 August 1954. 


@@@@@


doc= 60162


Wood, Sancton (1815-1886), architect and surveyor, was born in April 1815 at Hackney, Middlesex, the youngest of six children and the only son of John Wood and his wife, Harriet Russell, who was a member of the Smirke family of Wigton, Cumberland. His father was a member of an old and prosperous Cumberland family, who moved to London to pursue a business in cotton goods. Sancton took his forename from his uncle Philip Sancton, a successful London merchant, who had married his father's sister. He first entered a small private school in Devon, and then moved to a school at Hazelwood, Birmingham, run by T. W. Hill whose son Sir Rowland Hill (1795-1879) was author of the penny postal system. The school was run 'To leave as much as possible, all power in the hands of the boys themselves' (M. D. Hill, 'Public Education', 1822), a philosophy that failed to stimulate young Sancton Wood into serious study. Nevertheless his interest in drawing and family influence gained him a pupillage in the office of his cousin Sir Robert Smirke RA (1780-1867), followed by employment with Sydney Smirke RA (1798-1877). His contemporaries recalled his quiet retiring nature, sometimes excitable, but always courteous. He married 'c'.1844, and he and his wife, Elizabeth Sarah (1813/14-1875), had two sons, Herbert ('b'. 1845) and William Winder ('b'. 1846). His wife and both sons predeceased him. 
Wood's impeccable classical training in architecture and presentation, learned in Smirke's office, gained him early recognition. In 1837 he designed one of London's first railway termini, at Shoreditch for the Eastern Counties Railway. Budget restraint limited the scope of work, but success in competitions followed, beginning with a $100 prize for Ipswich station. Then in 1845 he headed a field of sixty-five competitors for the design of Kingsbridge terminus and company offices, Dublin (now known as Heuston station). The magnificent two-storey office block, nine bays wide by five bays deep, is dominated by attached Corinthian columns between the first-floor pedimented windows. The enclosing single-storey wing walls to the platforms are linked to the office block by an intervening domed turret at each corner. In 1846 he won the $100 prize for Blackburn station. Links with Irish railways led to further work for the Great Southern and Western, between Dublin and Cork, and the Limerick Junction line. He also designed the stand at the Curragh racecourse. Other railway commissions included stations on the Rugby and Stamford line (1846), and Syston and Peterborough route (1847). 
Wood was elected an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1841, an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1848, and an associate of the Institution of Surveyors, also in 1848. Commercial buildings, schools, churches, and estate development, principally in the London area, were credited to him. These included the Queen's Assurance Company office (1852) at the south-west corner of King Street and Gresham Street; the Lime Grove estate, Putney; Hackney town hall (1864); and terrace houses, Lancaster Gate (1857). Interest in surveying led to his appointment as district surveyor for Putney and Roehampton, followed by a similar appointment at St Luke's, Chelsea (from 1866). He was a member of the examining board for district surveyors. 
In 1850 Wood, his wife, and their two sons moved to 11 Putney Hill, London, a detached house of his own design where Wood died on 18 April 1886. He was buried six days later in the same grave as his wife and sons, at Putney Lower Common cemetery. His probate records his estate valued at $15,470. 


@@@@@


doc= 60164


Garvey, Marcus Mosiah (1887-1940), pan-African nationalist leader, was born on 17 August 1887 in St Ann's Bay, Jamaica, the last of two surviving children of Malcus Mosiah Garvey, stonemason (1838-1920), and Sarah Jane Richards (1847/1852-1908), a farmer and domestic servant. His father was a descendant of the maroons, fugitive Africans from the era of slavery. Marcus (baptized Malcus) received a good elementary education. He became apprenticed to the printer Alfred E. Burrowes in his early teens, later moving to Kingston where by eighteen he was the youngest foreman printer in Jamaica. His activities expanded into journalism, public speaking, trade unionism, and politics. In 1910 he came third in an all Jamaican oratorical contest. In 1908 Garvey led a pioneering printers' strike. He became assistant secretary of the important National Club. In 1910 he travelled to Central and South America, where he mixed work with travel and political activism. He published newspapers in Costa Rica and Panama. 
Garvey toured Europe in 1912-14, visiting Scotland, Ireland, France, Italy, Spain, Austria, Hungary, and Germany. He settled in London, speaking regularly at Hyde Park's speakers' corner, labouring on the London docks, frequenting the public galleries of the House of Commons, attending law lectures at Birkbeck College, and working for the 'African Times and Orient Review', edited by an Egyptian, Duse Mohamed Ali, a leader of London's Muslim community. Garvey's peripatetic lifestyle and slender resources brought him to the verge of destitution, but he was able to avoid repatriation as a pauper and departed for home on 17 June 1914. He arrived in Jamaica on July 8 and started the Universal Negro Improvement and Conservation Association and African Communities (Imperial) League (usually rendered UNIA) days later. The UNIA emerged from Garvey's realization, enhanced by his travels, that African peoples were everywhere in dire straits and in need of organized uplift. Stories relayed to him on board ship by a Jamaican returning home from southern Africa filled him with a sense of urgency. His simultaneous reading of the American educator Booker T. Washington's autobiography, 'Up from Slavery', convinced him that self-reliance should be the key to reversing the fortunes of his suffering race. 
The fledgeling UNIA articulated both Jamaican and international objectives. The former included the provision of education and jobs and the rehabilitation of fallen women. International objectives included helping to develop Africa and the establishment of a powerful central African nation. The organization immediately became a quasi-literary society with debates, recitations, and oratorical contests. It fed the hungry and visited the sick. It sought employment for the unemployed. Plans to set up an industrial school modelled after Washington's Tuskegee Institute led Garvey into correspondence with Washington and a fund-raising tour of the United States. 
Garvey arrived in Harlem, New York, on 23 March 1916. Within a year he had toured the country and returned to Harlem. There he built a following as a street corner orator. He then moved his meetings indoors and by 1918 had made his decision to shift UNIA headquarters to New York. In 1918 Garvey began the 'Negro World', by the early 1920s the world's most widely circulated African newspaper. In 1918 the Negro Factories Corporation appeared, to found and run several UNIA businesses. The Black Star Line Steamship Corporation, the most spectacular of UNIA businesses, was launched in 1919. The UNIA acquired its own meeting place, Liberty Hall, on 138th Street, Harlem. Attendance at weekly meetings sometimes ran into the thousands. UNIA auxiliaries included the Black Cross Nurses, the paramilitary Universal African Legions, and the women's military unit, the Universal African Motor Corps. Children were organized into the UNIA Juveniles. 
The organization divided the world into districts run by commissioners, with organizers criss-crossing each district. By the early 1920s membership was estimated by Garvey in the millions. There were about 1200 branches in more than forty-one countries. The UNIA attracted not only masses of people, but also many prominent persons. These included the 'Negro World''s editors T. Thomas Fortune and John Edward Bruce, two of African America's most distinguished journalists; the landowner Isaiah Morter from British Honduras, who bequeathed the UNIA $100,000; Adelaide Casely-Hayford, the outstanding Sierra Leone educator; several leaders of the African National Congress in South Africa; the top leadership of the Trinidad Workingmen's Association; Gabriel Johnson, mayor of Monrovia, Liberia; 'Negro World''s literary editor, William H. Ferris, a graduate of Harvard and Yale; and others. 
In the United States the UNIA continued to complement its political work with extensive cultural activity. Garvey's movement is one of the principal originators of the Harlem renaissance of the 1920s, with the 'Negro World' an important outlet for poetry, literary criticism, book reviews, and the like. Augusta Savage, a major African American sculptor and UNIA member, made a bronze bust of Garvey. In the midst of this activity Garvey was married to Amy Ashwood (1895/1897-1969) ['see 'Garvey, Amy Ashwood], lecturer and activist, on 25 December 1919, not long after an attempt on his life. The marriage was short-lived. In 1922 he married Amy Euphemia Jacques (1896-1973), journalist and author. Both women were Jamaicans. 
Garvey's movement represented the nationalist wing of the pan-African struggle. He accordingly advocated 'race first', which insisted that Africans must put their racial self-interest first in historical writing, literary criticism, religion, self-reliance, and nationhood, or political self-determination. The culminating point in Garvey's early rush to prominence was his First International Convention of the Negro Peoples of the World, held in August 1920. The opening night's ceremonies in New York hosted 25,000 people from around the African world. The delegates adopted a declaration of rights of the black peoples of the world and a universal Ethiopian anthem, and declared red, black, and green to be the colours of the race. 
By 1920 Garvey was probably the world's best-known person of African descent and his UNIA had become the largest pan-African movement ever. Success, however, engendered great hostility. Integrationists such as W. E. B. DuBois of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (who preferred interracial organization to the all-black UNIA) and communists (who preferred class first to race first) worked assiduously for his downfall. The most powerful opposition came from the governments of the United States and Europe. British and French administrations banned the 'Negro World' in Africa and the Caribbean, imprisoned Garveyites and denied Garvey entry into such places as Bermuda and the Bahamas. They collaborated with Liberia in thwarting Garvey's efforts to relocate his headquarters there. Despite this, some governors and presidents extended to Garvey the courtesies of a head of state on his travels. 
The Black Star Line collapsed in 1922 as a result of poor management and under-capitalization. But Garvey's most devastating setback came with his imprisonment in the USA in 1925 on a politically motivated charge of mail fraud. His sentence was commuted by President Calvin Coolidge in 1927, followed by immediate deportation to Jamaica. 
It was during the litigation and imprisonment that Amy Jacques Garvey edited her husband's most important work, 'The Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey, or, Africa for the Africans'. This was originally published in two separate volumes in 1923 and 1925 but later became available in a single volume. 'The Tragedy of White Injustice' and 'Poetic Meditations of Marcus Garvey' appeared in 1927; both were collected, together with Garvey's other poetry, in 'The Poetical Works of Marcus Garvey'. Garvey's secret course of instruction for his top organizers in 1937 was published only in 1986, as 'Message to the People: the Course of African Philosophy'. 
Garvey arrived back in Jamaica in December 1927 to the most massive welcome accorded anybody in Jamaica's history up to that time. There he published 'The Blackman' and 'New Jamaican' newspapers and the 'Black Man' magazine. He ran an entertainment business, wrote plays, and held international conventions in 1929 and 1934. 
The Garveys spent five months in England in 1928. After being turned away by fifty hotels in London they secured lodgings at Castleton Road, West Kensington. From here Garvey established a close relationship with Ladipo Solanke and the West African Students Union (WASU), for whom he rented a hostel in West Kensington. Jomo Kenyatta, later independence ruler of Kenya, was among the hostel's residents. From London the Garveys journeyed to France, Belgium, and Germany. At Geneva, Garvey delivered a petition to the League of Nations. 
In 1929 Garvey founded the People's Political Party. He was gaoled by judges in Jamaica at the start of his campaign for the legislative council. They alleged that he compromised the dignity of the judiciary by promising to end unfair judgments motivated by bias. Garvey lost his bid for this council (elections to which were based on undemocratic colonialist arrangements which disfranchised most of his followers). He was, however, elected to the Kingston and St Andrew corporation council from gaol in 1929. 
Garvey emigrated to London in 1935 and lived there until his death in 1940. He hoped that a presence in a major world capital would make it easier to revitalize a movement weakened by his absence from the USA. From his office at 2 Beaumont Crescent, West Kensington, he published the 'Black Man', visited Canada in 1937 and 1938, and toured the Caribbean in 1937. He again spoke regularly at Hyde Park, where he was heckled by younger Marxist activists like C. L. R. James and George Padmore. Amy Jacques joined him from 1937 to 1938 with their two young sons, Marcus jun. and Julius, both born in Jamaica. 
Garvey died of cardiac failure at 53 Talgarth Road, Hammersmith, London, on 10 June 1940 after a series of strokes. Wartime conditions made it impossible to ship his body home so it was placed in a vault in catacomb no. 317, Kensal Green Roman Catholic cemetery, London. Amy Jacques's efforts to repatriate the remains at the war's end were thwarted by Amy Ashwood, who obtained a court injunction. His remains were finally shipped home for burial in Kingston in 1964 for ceremonies making him Jamaica's first national hero. 
Though Garvey's name was expurgated from history books for many years, popular interest in him remained strong. Jamaica's Rastafarian religion made him a prophet. With the black power movement in the 1960s came a great upsurge of popular and scholarly interest. Some of those who joined or sympathized with Garvey's movement in their youth were now leaders of independence and civil rights struggles. These included Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana and Elijah Muhammad of the USA. Children of Garveyites, among them Malcolm X and congresswoman Shirley Chisholm, were now leaders of the post-Garvey generation. 
In 1956 the Kingston and St Andrew corporation erected a bust of Garvey, and in 1957 independent Ghana named its Black Star Square in his honour. In ensuing years Garvey was celebrated on stamps, currency, plaques, and statues by the Cameroon and Jamaican governments and the Organization of American States. Statues were erected in St Ann's Bay and San Fernando, Trinidad. The London borough of Tottenham dedicated a Marcus Garvey Library in 1987. 
The Garvey centenary commemoration of 1987 saw a proliferation of popular and governmental celebrations all over the world, probably unmatched by the acclaim extended to any other pan-African historical figure. 


@@@@@


doc= 60170


Tovey, Nathaniel (bap. 1597, d. 1658), Church of England clergyman, was born in Coventry and baptized there on 23 October 1597 in Holy Trinity Church, son of John Tovey (died 'c'.1614), schoolmaster of the free school in Coventry, who, according to William Dugdale, 'had for his habitation the mansion house'. In 1602 John Tovey resigned his post and the following year moved 2 miles to Combe Abbey, Warwickshire, in order to assume the post of tutor to John Harington, the son of Baron Harington of Exton. Nathaniel Tovey lived in the Harington household until 1612, when he matriculated as a sizar at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge. The following year John Tovey and the younger Harington travelled to Italy; both died shortly after their return to England. The responsibility for Nathaniel Tovey's education was then assumed by Lucy, countess of Bedford (Harington's sister). 
Tovey graduated BA in 1616 and proceeded MA in 1619. In 1621 he was incorporated MA at Oxford and he was ordained, in London, as a deacon and elected to a fellowship and a lectureship in logic at Christ's College, Cambridge. He was dean of the college from 1621 to 1623, and in 1624 served as praelector, so the entries in the admissions book for that year are in his hand. The triers' admission book for 1654 credits Tovey with a BD, but there is no record in the university lists for the relevant period of his receiving this degree. 
Probably in Michaelmas term 1627, Tovey became tutor to John Milton on his readmission to college after quarrelling with his original tutor, William Chappell. There may well have been an existing link between them, since the younger Harington's funeral sermon had been preached by Richard Stock, rector of All Hallows, Bread Street, London, where the Miltons worshipped. When Milton's brother Christopher came up to Christ's College in 1631, he too was assigned to Tovey. The Milton brothers left Cambridge in July 1632. 
In 1630 Tovey was appointed rector of Lutterworth, Leicestershire, and in 1634 he left Cambridge to take up the appointment. In the autumn of 1634 he travelled to London to appear with five other fellows of Christ's before the court of high commission. The nature of the accusations is nowhere specified, though it may have been related to the conduct of services in the Christ's College chapel, but in any case the six fellows were discharged on 19 November, and Tovey returned to Lutterworth. 
On 30 June 1636 Tovey married Elizabeth Warner (died 1658), daughter of Silvester Warner of Wolston Manor and niece of the mathematician Walter Warner. As Wolston Manor was about a mile from Combe Abbey it seems likely that Nathaniel and Elizabeth had known each other for many years. A cache of letters from Tovey to his brother-in-law George Warner in London constitutes a fascinating window into the life of a seventeenth-century Leicestershire rector. Tovey lived quietly in Lutterworth until 1646, when his glebe land was sequestered and a series of charges was laid by the county committee: he was accused of assisting the king's forces in the garrisons at Worcester, Lichfield, and elsewhere, refusing to use the 'Directory for the Publique Worship of God' instead of the 'Book of Common Prayer', railing in the altar, and raising the steps in the chancel. Tovey was ejected, and in 1647 an intruder was installed in Lutterworth. Tovey's whereabouts during his ecclesiastical exile are not known, but in 1654 he secured the patronage of John Manners, earl of Rutland, a prominent supporter of the parliamentary cause, and was appointed rector of Aylestone, Leicestershire, where he recorded in the register that the amendment of the 'Marriage Act' in June 1657 restored the right of ministers to conduct weddings. 
In 1658 Tovey and his wife both succumbed to a visitation of plague, and were buried in Aylestone on 9 September 1658. Their son, John, had predeceased them, but they were survived by their daughter, Elizabeth Vincent. 


@@@@@


doc= 60171


Drew, Dame Joyce Beverly (1911-1996), architect, was born on 24 March 1911, at 8 Parchmore Road, Thornton Heath, Surrey, one of two daughters of Harry Guy Radcliffe Drew (1880-1958), inventor and designer of surgical instruments and founder of the British Institute of Surgical Technicians, and his wife, Emma Spering Jones, a schoolteacher. Jane Drew was educated at Woodford House school, Croydon -- where she befriended Peggy Ashcroft -- and at Croydon High School for Girls (1921-9), where the future painter and illustrator Barbara Jones (1912-1978) became a close friend. An early love of Gothic architecture decided her on a career in architecture (Parker, 10). She entered the Architectural Association School of Architecture in 1929, one of 12 women among 100 students, and graduated in 1934. 
At the Architectural Association Drew met James Thomas Alliston ('b'. 1908), architect, and son of Montagu Shirley Alliston, whom she married on 27 December 1933 at St Paul's Church, Thornton Heath; they had twin daughters, Gillian and Jenny ('b'. 1937), of whom the latter predeceased her. Having worked previously in the offices of the architects Joseph Hill and G. Grey Wornum, in 1934 Drew set up a joint practice, Alliston and Drew, with her husband, based at their home at 24 Woburn Square, London. Over the next five years they designed a number of small houses, predominantly in the Dutch-influenced modern style that had begun to be favoured by the Architectural Association's more progressive students in the early 1930s. 
In 1939 Drew met (Edwin) Maxwell Fry (1899-1987), then the leading British modernist architect, at a meeting at the Royal Institute of British Architects. He fell instantly in love with her (Fry, 161-4). Drew took a little longer to come round but, following the dissolution of her marriage in 1939, and of his early in 1942, the couple married at Westminster register office on 25 April of the same year, with the zoologist Julian Huxley as best man. In part under Fry's influence, Drew had by this date become an enthusiast for the modern movement, and would henceforth identify herself as a modernist designer (Drew, 34). In 1939 she joined the Modern Architectural Research or MARS group, the English branch of the Congres Internationaux d'Architecture Moderne, of which Fry had been a prominent member from its formation in 1933. 
In 1939, with Fry on overseas service with the Royal Engineers, Drew set up what was initially a women-only practice at 12 King Street, St James's, London. Among her staff were Diana Rowntree (1915-2008) and, later, Trevor Dannatt ('b'. 1920); an early commission was for a factory for sea-rescue craft at Walton-on-Thames, Surrey. In 1941 Drew became a consultant to the British Commercial Gas Association and was asked to explore the possibilities of applying wartime technologies to the mass production of gas equipment in peacetime. This led to a research trip to the United States to investigate prefabrication techniques, and an exhibition on kitchen planning held at Dorland Hall, London. 
Throughout the war Drew played an active part in debates on rebuilding bomb-damaged areas. In 1941 she became a member of the housing group, a subcommittee of the RIBA's reconstruction committee. Its report, 'Housing', was published in 1944. Also in 1941 she had the idea of an exhibition on reconstruction, 'Rebuilding Britain', to be organized by the RIBA. With the support of the art historian Kenneth Clark, whom she had met at a dance, a committee was formed and space found for the display in the basement of the National Gallery, London, in 1943 (Parker, 37-8). Through Clark Drew became a close friend of the publisher and arts patron (Eric) Peter Gregory, and this resulted in a lifelong interest in contemporary art. She would always seek to incorporate artworks into her post-war commissions; Ben Nicholson, Victor Pasmore, Barbara Hepworth, and Eduardo Paolozzi were beneficiaries of her patronage. In 1944, with Maxwell Fry, she wrote her first book, 'Architecture for Children', and was appointed as the first editor of the 'Architects' Year Book'. She also lobbied the Ministry of Town and Country Planning to engage young, modernist, architects once the war was over. This resulted in Maxwell Fry's appointment as town planning adviser to the resident minister in west Africa, with Drew as his assistant. The couple left in 1944 for Accra, where they were based for three years. In 1945 they also formed the partnership of Maxwell Fry and Jane Drew -- from 1951 with Lindsay Drake and Denys Lasdun as Fry, Drew, Drake and Lasdun, and subsequently with Frank Knight and Norman Creamer as Fry Drew Knight Creamer -- with premises in Gloucester Place, London. 
Together the couple worked on a number of significant post-war projects. An early commission, executed by Drew, was the conversion of premises at 17-18 Dover Street, London, for the newly founded Institute of Contemporary Arts (1950). This was an outcome of her friendship with Peter Gregory, one of the institute's founders, and in the mid-1960s she designed its new, larger premises at Carlton House Terrace. Drew also led the team that designed a number of schemes for the Festival of Britain (1951) on London's South Bank, chief among them the Thames-side Restaurant with its undulating aluminium roof (dem. 1963) and the Harbour Bar. For much of the 1950s the practice worked extensively in the Gold Coast (from 1957 Ghana) and Nigeria on a programme of housing, education, and health projects, with Drew's principal work including Wesley Girls' School at Cape Coast (1946-7), the women's teacher training college at Kano (1958), and the Ahmadu Bello Stadium in Kaduna (1963). With Fry she also worked on the partnership's most significant project, University College, Ibadan, Nigeria (1948-57), for which she undertook, among other structures, the Queen Elizabeth hall and the domed Sultan Bello hall. In 1951 Drew and Fry joined the team, also comprising Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret, to design Chandigarh, the new capital of Indian Punjab. Drew remained with the project for three years and was principally responsible for housing, shopping areas, and a hospital in the new city. In 1954-5 she undertook similar work for the design of new oilfield towns at Gachsaran in southern Iran. The care taken by the partnership to develop a modernism suitable for west African and northern Indian climates resulted in two further books, 'Village Housing in the Tropics' (1947, with Fry and Harry Ford) and 'Architecture in the Humid Tropics' (with Fry, 1956). 
In England Jane Drew worked on a number of housing schemes, among them the Chantry and Tanys Dell estates, Harlow New Town (from 1949), and the Passfield flats and Downham estate, Lewisham (1950 and 1953), followed in the mid-1960s with housing projects at Hatfield and Welwyn Garden City. The practice continued to thrive during the 1960s and 1970s, with Drew combining overseas commissions in Ceylon (from 1972 Sri Lanka) and Singapore with further domestic work, including the Herne Hill School for the Deaf (1966-8) and the new Torbay Hospital, Devon (opened in 1970). In the previous year the partnership had received the major commission to design a campus for the new Open University at Milton Keynes. Drew was associated with the project for the next six years, with an initial burst of building work seeing construction of the arts faculty, operations building, laboratories, and library by 1973. In this year Maxwell Fry retired, followed by Jane six years later. Drew and Fry had divided their time between homes at 63 Gloucester Place, London, and the Lake House, Rowfant, near Crawley in Sussex. In 1983 they moved to West Lodge, Cotherstone, Barnard Castle, co. Durham, where Drew continued to live after Fry's death in September 1987. 
Jane Drew was among the first generation of women to benefit from the opening up of architecture schools in the wake of the First World War; among her contemporaries were (Margaret) Justin Blanco White, Mary Crowley (later Medd), and Judith Ledeboer. However, her own difficulties in acquiring early positions had been considerable and it was 'because I had such difficulty myself getting a job' that she looked to employ women in her own practice from 1939 (Parker, 10). She would go on to be an exemplary professional, becoming the first woman to sit on the RIBA council in 1964, in which capacity she served until 1970 and again between 1971 and 1974. A member of the council of the Architectural Association, she became the association's first female president in 1969. In addition to her work for Fry Drew and Partners she held a series of visiting professorships, including posts at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1961), Harvard University (1970), and the University of Utah (1976); she received honorary doctorates from, among other universities, Ibadan (1966) and the Open University (1973). 
Friends and colleagues remember Jane Drew as elegantly dressed, dynamic, and supportive. She played an active part in women's architectural organizations, including Union Internationale des Femmes Architectes, and co-organized the exhibition 'Suffragettes and Suffragists' at the House of Commons in 1978. In later years she was championed as much for her significance as Britain's first major woman architect as for her architecture. In 1996 she was appointed DBE and two years later the RIBA and the Arts Council of England inaugurated the Jane Drew prize. She died of cancer on 27 July 1996 at the Memorial Hospital, Darlington, and was buried at St Romald's Church, Romaldkirk, co. Durham. 


@@@@@


doc= 60178


Tod, Marcus Niebuhr (1878-1974), ancient historian and epigraphist, was born at The Park, Highgate, Middlesex, on 24 November 1878, the second son of John Tod, a tea merchant originally from Leith in Scotland, and his wife, Gertrude von Niebuhr. His maternal grandfather was Marcus von Niebuhr, the son of the historian B. G. Niebuhr. Brought up in a strongly Presbyterian family, he was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London (1892-7), where he concentrated on Greek and Latin, and went up to St John's College, Oxford, with a scholarship in 1897. He emerges in his long correspondence with his elder brother, James, as intensely competitive, both at school in a manner typical of the way public school boys were expected to behave, and at Oxford. Firsts in classical moderations (1899) and Greats (1901) -- the latter, he was told, the best first of his year -- were followed by the award of a senior studentship at the British School of Archaeology at Athens, where he spent the next four years (1901-5), together with a senior scholarship at St John's, and the university's Craven travelling scholarship. It is not known whether he applied for the studentship at Athens as the result of any particular influence in his undergraduate teaching, but he would have heard lectures by H. F. Pelham, who had played a major part in the foundation of the British School at Athens and was during Tod's undergraduate career engaged in promoting the foundation of the British School at Rome. 
Tod was elected to a fellowship at Oriel College, Oxford, in 1903 but was granted leave to remain in Greece. After returning to England in 1905 he became tutor in ancient history at the college. Among his pupils was his younger sister, Constance, who was reading Greats at Somerville College, and through her he met Mabel Bowker Byrom (1887-1973), daughter of George F. Byrom, a cotton mill owner of Manchester. They were married on 8 September 1909 and had a son and a daughter. 
Tod's early research was mostly on the inscriptions of Sparta, an interest retained throughout his career. In 1907 he was appointed university lecturer in Greek epigraphy at Oxford (becoming reader in 1927), his wider interest in Greek epigraphy emerging in his 'Greek International Arbitration' (1913), the chapter on clubs and societies in his 'Sidelights on Greek History' (1932), and in his lectures at Oxford on Greek dramatic performances. 
On the outbreak of the First World War, Tod worked initially for the Ministry of Labour in Oxford. In the autumn of 1915 he worked with the YMCA on the western front, where he found that the troops did not share his own strong religious commitment. It was characteristic of his eirenic and generous nature that he collected published material to be given to German and Austrian scholars after the war was over. From November 1915 to January 1918 and from March 1918 to February 1919 he was in Salonika, first as an interpreter and then as a captain in the intelligence corps decoding ciphers, for which his training in epigraphy equipped him well. He was mentioned in dispatches three times, was awarded the Croix de Guerre, and was appointed OBE. 
On his return to Oxford, Tod settled into the standard mix of lecturing, tutorials, and administrative duties for university and college, serving as secretary to the royal commission, and as vice-principal of Oriel from 1934 to 1945. At least one of his pupils remembered his tutorials as rarely responding to the essay which had been read, but as consisting of a lecture on the topic set, which was the same for everyone. 
Tod was best known for the two volumes of 'Greek Historical Inscriptions', which superseded the 'Manual of Greek Historical Inscriptions' edited by E. L. Hicks. The first volume, extending to the end of the fifth century BC, was published in 1933, the second, covering the fourth century, appearing in 1948. They were dedicated to Adolf Wilhelm, whose lectures on Greek epigraphy Tod had attended while a student in Athens, the lectures being conducted in the Epigraphical Museum, in front of the stones. In 1903 he had expressed a desire to participate in R. C. Bosanquet's scheme for excavation in Laconia; digging was to take place only as an adjunct to 'exploration' -- what would later be called archaeological survey. Despite the advanced nature of these ideas, in his later work Tod treated 'historical' inscriptions as those illuminating the great cruces of Greek history defined by the literary tradition. His annotations in his own copy of Dittenberger's 'Sylloge inscriptionum Graecarum' are bibliographical, without noting either corrections to the text or material relevant to its interpretation; many of his publications were indeed bibliographical in nature. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1929; it is hard to think that a record such as his up to that date would have led to election in later periods. His meticulousness and eye for detail underlay his work on Greek numerical systems and coin denominations, as it did the generosity with which he read, commented on, and contributed to the work of others. 
When Tod retired in 1947 honorary fellowships were conferred on him by Oriel and St John's colleges. He settled in Birmingham, and died on 21 February 1974 in Sheldon Hospital, Rubery, his wife having predeceased him in the previous year. 


@@@@@


doc= 60182


Mattingly, Harold (1884-1964), numismatist and ancient historian, was born at Market Hill, Sudbury, Suffolk, on 24 December 1884, the son of Robert Mattingly, a clothier who became a JP and mayor of Sudbury, and his wife, Gertrude Emma Boggis. In January 1896 he went to the Leys School in Cambridge, where he concentrated on classics. In 1903 he went up to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, gaining firsts in both parts of the classical tripos (1906, 1907). Between 1907 and 1909 he studied under Eduard Meyer in Berlin and Ernst Fabricius in Freiburg, the research undertaken in Germany on the Roman administration being published as 'The Imperial Civil Service' (1909). After returning to a fellowship at Gonville and Caius College for 1909-10, he was then appointed to a post in the department of printed books in the British Museum and transferred to the department of coins and medals in 1912. 
Mattingly's arrival in the department of coins and medals coincided with the heyday of the printed descriptive catalogue of the museum's collections; in 1873 the publication of the catalogues of the Greek coins, of notable austerity, had begun; H. A. Grueber, whose interest lay in English coinage, had been set to work on the coins of the Roman republic, publishing the catalogue in three volumes in 1910; and Mattingly was set to work on the coins of the Roman empire. 
The traditional way of arranging the coins of the Roman republic was in alphabetical order of the names of the 'gens' of the monetary magistrate responsible for an issue, with a rough attempt at chronological order of the issues of, say, the Aemillii. The coins of the Roman empire had traditionally been grouped by emperor, then arranged in alphabetical order of the reverse legends. In the case of the coins in the trays of the British Museum, the republican series had been assigned to what he believed to be the correct mints and dates by Count John de Salis between 1859 and 1869; and it is the view of those who worked in the department after Mattingly that de Salis had done the same for the bulk of the imperial series, but that Mattingly had restored much of it to the traditional arrangement. Unfortunately de Salis had left no written explanation of his criteria. In the case of the republican series, Grueber broke new ground by including in his catalogue a long introduction and very extensive annotation; much of both consists of plaintive attempts to make sense of de Salis's arrangement, which he evidently regarded as sacred. Mattingly, on the other hand, did much work on organizing the imperial series for himself. When the first volume of the catalogue, 'Coins of the Roman Empire in the British Museum', appeared in 1923 its introduction and notes represented his justification of his own arrangement; but the preface by G. F. Hill and occasional notes in other publications make it clear that to a large but unknowable extent Mattingly followed de Salis. On any showing, however, the volume made extraordinary progress in ordering the imperial series, and above all made the critical breakthrough of rendering the imperial series intelligible to non-specialists. The model was not replaced until the 1970s and 1980s. The briefer presentation of the coinage in the first volume of 'Roman Imperial Coinage', written in collaboration with E. A. Sydenham and also published in 1923, naturally depended on the research undertaken for the British Museum catalogue. 
In the First World War, Mattingly served initially with the London regiment, then in the postal censorship bureau. His horror of war brought on a nervous breakdown, which was repeated in the Second World War; shortly before the end of the First World War he joined the Society of Friends. On 23 January 1915 he married Marion Grahame (1890/91-1958), the daughter of John Young Meikleham, a merchant; they had a daughter and three sons. 
The volumes of 'Roman Imperial Coinage' and 'Catalogues of the Coins of the Roman Empire in the British Museum' continued to appear throughout Mattingly's career; but an interest in the chronology of the republican series, adumbrated in an article of 1922, occupied more and more of his attention. An article of 1933, written with E. S. G. Robinson (published in the 'Proceedings of the British Academy' for 1932), set the cat among the pigeons by dating the inception of the denarius nearly a century later than had always been believed. The article's clarity of exposition, however, was not rivalled in his later production, which also tended increasingly to resort to 'ex cathedra' statements. At the same time, the later volumes of the British Museum catalogues were marked by less reading than had been apparent hitherto; his general historical work was conventional; and his attempts at economic history did not involve any significant use of comparative material. 
Mattingly was remembered by all who knew him as a model of kindness and helpfulness; he edited the 'Numismatic Chronicle' from 1936 to 1952, and served as president of the Royal Numismatic Society from 1942 to 1948. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1946, and was made CBE in 1960. After retirement as an assistant keeper at the British Museum in 1948, he moved initially to Cambridge, but found little welcome, and later moved to Chesham, Buckinghamshire, where he died at his home, 9 Missenden Road, on 26 January 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 60183


Pfeiffer, Rudolf Carl Franz Otto (1889-1979), classical scholar, was born in the house in Augsburg, Germany, which had belonged in the sixteenth century to the humanist Conrad Peutinger, on 28 September 1889, the son of Carl Philip Jacob Pfeiffer, a printing office proprietor, and his wife, Elizabeth Naegele. He was educated at the Benedictine abbey of St Stephan, remaining a devout Roman Catholic throughout his life, and then at the University of Munich. While there he married, in 1913, Lili (died 1969), daughter of Sigmund Beer. His doctoral dissertation of 1914 on Johannes Spreng, the Augsburg Meistersinger and translator of Homer, combined the history of Augsburg with the study of Greek poetry and the history of classical scholarship, the two themes that informed the whole of his work. 
After military service in the First World War, in which Pfeiffer was severely wounded, he returned to the University of Munich as librarian. In 1920 he was given leave to study for a year in Berlin, editing in 1921 the newly discovered fragments of the Hellenistic poet Callimachus and earning his 'Habilitation'. He returned to Munich as a 'Privat-Dozent', but in 1923 accepted a call as professor, to Berlin, and then in the same year to Hamburg; the appointment evoked the surprise of the Latinist Eduard Norden, who described Pfeiffer in a letter to Fritz Saxl, of the Warburg Institute, as still no more than promising ('nur eine Hoffnung'; 18 July 1923, Saxl MSS). 
Pfeiffer was not at home in the north, and through illness missed lectures at the Warburg Institute. The desire of the institute, whose library Pfeiffer evidently used, that he should lecture on Erasmus took fifteen months to come to fruition: 'Humanitas Erasmiana' was delivered on 27 November 1926, and published in 1931 without significant change, despite Saxl's optimistic suggestion that Pfeiffer might add material about Erasmus and England ('Humanitas Erasmiana', Studien der Bibliothek Warburg, 22, 1931). It was presumably because Pfeiffer was known to be thinking of a new edition of the 'Antibarbari' that Saxl had thought of the subject for the lecture; in the event, Pfeiffer was informed by P. S. Allen that a new manuscript of an early version existed, and abandoned his plans. His work concentrated on Hellenistic poetry in general and on Callimachus in particular; he accepted a call in 1927 to Freiburg im Breisgau and in 1929 to Munich. He remained in touch with the Warburg Institute, accepting in 1931 an invitation to be responsible for the bibliography on the legacy of the survival and transmission of classical scholarship ('Nachleben der Antike in der klassischen Gelehrsamkeit'). 
Both Pfeiffer's beliefs and the Jewish origin of his wife made it in due course impossible for him to remain in Germany, and he resigned his chair in 1937. He arrived in Oxford in the following year. The Warburg Institute had arrived in London in 1933, and the classical scholar Eduard Fraenkel in Oxford in 1935, and Pfeiffer was at once in contact with both: Saxl was soon once more trying to persuade Pfeiffer to lecture. Pfeiffer lived, like most refugees of the period, from a variety of sources, until in 1946 he was offered a post by Oxford as university lecturer in the history of classical scholarship. He became reader in Greek literature in 1950. During his time in Oxford he was a member of the senior common room of Corpus Christi College, of which he was elected an honorary fellow in 1959. 
The most important consequence of Pfeiffer's exile was access to unpublished papyri of Callimachus and the agreement of Oxford University Press to publish his 'Callimachus' (1949, 1953); his obituarist for the British Academy, Hugh Lloyd-Jones, said of the first volume that it was 'hard to think of a critical edition of an ancient text that comes nearer to perfection' (Lloyd-Jones, 776). Pfeiffer was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1949. 
Pfeiffer returned to his chair in Munich in 1951 and retired in 1957; in retirement he concentrated on the history of classical scholarship, his first volume appearing in 1968 and covering the beginning down to the end of the Hellenistic period, the second in 1976, beginning with the Italian Renaissance. The core ideas had already been laid out in an article of 1938 and in a lecture to the Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften in 1960, 'Philologia perennis'. Both volumes appeared in English. The second volume should be regarded as unfinished, and reads like a series of sketches. Pfeiffer died in Munich on 6 May 1979. 
For Pfeiffer, 'philology in the proper sense begins with scholar poets, who are impelled by their love of poetry to preserve the poetry of the past' (Lloyd-Jones, 777), beginning in the Hellenistic period. He regarded the study of the ancient world as having moral value and as essentially the study of great literature, in particular poetry, Greek poetry, and Homer. Like Erasmus, on whom he expressed his views in a paper of 1955, he too believed that the scriptures were a proper study for philology. Pfeiffer saw the two volumes on the history of classical scholarship as an essentially historical exercise, concerned with the continuity of knowledge and with truth that once established lasts forever, like the truth of Christianity. But the truth in which he was interested was internal to the activity of scholarship, an interest that led him to take a favourable view of the 'Augustan peace'; and a phrase used in agreeing to lecture at the Warburg Institute in 1950, but in refusing to do so in a series devoted to religious festivals, is revealing: 'I am, unfortunately, no historian of religion, but only a simple classical scholar, and I would not feel entitled to deal with a festival as such' (14 May 1949, Saxl MSS). 


@@@@@


doc= 60184


Turner, Sir Eric Gardner (1911-1983), classical scholar, was born at 437 Glossop Road, Sheffield, on 26 February 1911, the son of William Ernest Stephen Turner (1881-1963), professor of glass technology at the University of Sheffield, and his first wife, Mary Isobel Marshall (died 1939). After dame-school and preparatory school, he attended King Edward VII Grammar School, Sheffield, and in 1930 went up to Magdalen College, Oxford, where he took firsts in classical moderations (1932) and 'literae humaniores' (1934). After graduating he turned his attention immediately to the texts, both literary and documentary, preserved on papyrus in the dry climate of Egypt. In the only surviving account Turner gave of his career, when elected to a corresponding fellowship of the Austrian Academy in 1975, he attributed his choice to the influence of Hugh Last. It is clear that for his European audience he spoke of his teachers as professors, without attempting to explain the institution of tutorial fellows, for Turner mentioned Gilbert Murray, professor of Greek, along with Last. He was perhaps influenced by the fact that Last became professor of Roman history at Oxford from 1936 to 1948, whereas in 1934 he was tutorial fellow at St John's College. A near contemporary of Turner who graduated in 1939 recalls the brilliance of Last's lectures, and it may be that, even before his appointment as professor, Last was a natural source of advice to those interested in Roman history. Turner's tutor in papyrology was Colin Roberts, but it was Last who introduced Turner to Sir Idris Bell. 
Turner taught classics at the University of Aberdeen from 1936 to 1948, apart from service at Bletchley Park from 1941 to 1945, working in naval intelligence: he later remarked that he had known before Hitler that the 'Bismarck' had been sunk. On 3 October 1940 he had married Louise Barbara Taylor, a modern historian; their children Hilary and Nicholas were born in 1942 and 1944. In 1948 Turner was appointed to a newly created readership in papyrology at University College, London, becoming professor 'ad hominem' in 1950 and remaining there until his retirement in 1978. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1956, became CBE in 1975, and was knighted in 1981. 
In addition to research and the normal run of teaching and administration, Turner undertook a series of tasks which changed the face of classical and papyrological studies in the United Kingdom and overseas. First, he helped to create the Institute of Classical Studies in 1953, and became its first director. In that context he demonstrated by his example the importance of a commitment to research seminars, setting high standards by his contributions to discussion. (He also for many years chaired the committee of the Warburg Institute.) Despite recurring illness, from 1956 to 1978 he chaired the Egypt Exploration Society, rebuilding relations with Egypt after the Suez crisis. In the context of the British Academy, he was a member of the organizing committee of the Corpus Vitrearum Medii Aevi, picking up the work of his father, who in 1915 had created at Sheffield a department of glass technology. One of Turner's last major articles, in 'Antike Kunst' 24 (1981), set out to identify as deriving from a comedy a scene portrayed on a Hellenistic glass beaker. Turner also played a major part in the work of the overseas policy committee and through it in that of the Union Academique Internationale. For much of the scholarly world in Europe, America, and elsewhere he 'was' papyrology, and many of the leading papyrologists of the next generation were his pupils. 
Turner's greatest achievement was to revitalize publication of the collection of papyri from Oxyrhynchus owned by the Egypt Exploration Society. These had been entrusted to Edgar Lobel, whose interest was limited to Greek poetry. With humour, tact, and firmness Turner persuaded Lobel to release texts in which he was not interested, initially for presentation and discussion at seminars, and got the enterprise as a whole moving. He signed his first preface as general editor of the series in 1954 and by 1961 had achieved an annual rhythm for the appearance of the volumes. 
Apart from publishing, with scholarly annotation, hundreds of new texts, Turner wrote three major books on his work, two of which are indispensable handbooks for anyone who cares about the transmission of knowledge in and about antiquity: 'Greek Papyri: an Introduction' (1968; 2nd edn, 1980), 'Greek Manuscripts of the Ancient World' (1970; 2nd edn, 1987, published after Turner's death but following his design and incorporating his material), and an exploration of the origin of the form of the book with which we are familiar today, 'The Typology of the Early Codex' (1977). A characteristic piece of work is the publication, in 'Museum Helveticum', volume 33 (1976), of a papyrus of part of a satyr-play, the fourth element in the complex of plays presented by the Athenian tragedians at the annual dramatic festivals. Turner was able to show that the play had been rewritten so as to exclude the letter sigma, thus providing an example of one of the more bizarre byways of Greek literature. His work also appeared in major contributions to, and encouragement of the contributions of others to, the understanding of the Athenian comic playwright Menander. 
In retirement Turner settled in Fortrose, Ross-shire. He died on 20 April 1983. His obituarist for the British Academy, Peter Parsons, placed him below the greatest in the two fields of literary and documentary papyri, but few have done as much as he in both. The range over which, and the care with which, he worked, evident also for instance in his British Academy obituary of the numismatist Derek Allen, gave him both an astonishing sense of the overall shape of the material of which time has left us a rather erratic selection (see in particular his chapter on the nature of papyrological evidence in 'Cambridge Ancient History', 7, pt 1, 1984) and an outstanding ability to transmit his understanding to others. His enjoyment of great music, as performer on the violin and listener, and of good food, good wine, and congenial company, was simply the other side of his urge to share with others what he found good. 


@@@@@


doc= 60186


Taylor, George (c.1710-1758), pugilist and showman, made his first appearances as a combatant in his teens in the early days of the sport when boxing was only just separating itself from swordplay and cudgelling. He fought at the amphitheatre, half great fairground booth and half theatre, which had been opened by James Figg on the Oxford Road, London, in 1719. Taylor joined its band of well-known boxers, which included the Gypsy 'Prince' Boswell, Tom Smallwood, and John Smith, unflatteringly known as 'Buckhorse' from his appearance. Above all there was Jack Broughton, already famous for one athletic feat in winning the annual Doggett's Coat and Badge rowing race for watermen, and soon to be celebrated as pugilism's first rule maker and earliest undisputed champion. 
George Taylor, a strong, shifty fighter with a powerful wrestling throw, was still prepared to begin contests in the old-fashioned way with a spell of swordplay. In 1734, shortly after Figg's death and while still in his early twenties, he took over the management of the amphitheatre. As a manager and showman he enjoyed considerable success. His advertisements for the amphitheatre were always lurid with the promise of blood and he used the press to put out heated challenges and counter-challenges from supposedly enraged fighters. The crowds flocked in and, as Taylor charged an expensive 2's'. 6died for entrance, a day's takings of $150 was not uncommon. He was, moreover, calling himself the 'champion', conveniently ignoring the fact that Jack Broughton had beaten him just before he took over the running of the amphitheatre and had also been victorious over all comers. At the start of the 1740s everything appeared to be set fair for Taylor; he won plaudits for a successful fight against Boswell and his business was flourishing, but Broughton split with him in 1742 and a year later, with powerful backing led by the duke of Cumberland, opened a new amphitheatre of his own, much more comfortable than Taylor's spartan establishment and furnished with boxes and a viewing gallery. Moreover, it was virtually adjacent to Taylor's premises and Broughton timed its opening to clash with a contest between Taylor and James Field, adding insult to injury by undercutting his rival's prices and charging no more than 1's'. for entry. 
The new venture was an immediate success. There was a bitter war of words in the press with Taylor at length falsely accusing Broughton of taking more than the proprietor's usual one-third share of the takings, a charge that was quickly shown to be false. There was little left for Taylor but to close his own theatre and cross over to Broughton's, taking his fighters with him. It was a great setback from which he never recovered and after a few years he left the amphitheatre to become landlord of The Fountain inn, Deptford. Like too many of his successors in the ring, however, he decided to fight again, taking up the challenge of Tom Faulkner whom he had beaten twice in the past but who now sensed a chance for revenge. They fought on 5 August 1758 near St Albans for 200 guineas and the gate money. It was a long, hard struggle which ended with defeat for the ageing Taylor. Both of his eyes were closed from bruising. His pride was finally shattered and he died a few months later in December. 


@@@@@


doc= 60187


Slack, John (c.1721-1768), pugilist, was born in Norfolk of unknown parents. His trade was that of a butcher and he probably served the usual apprenticeship under one John Browne at Norwich, where he first came to prize-fighting prominence, forging a formidable provincial reputation there. 
Prior to the pinnacle of his boxing career, his unexpected win over the seemingly invincible John Broughton, Slack was advertised in journals of the day as meeting such first-rate fistic exponents as George Taylor, Thomas Smallwood, James Field, Benjamin Boswell, and John James. It appears he made his London debut when he defeated James on 12 October 1743 at the Great Booth, Tottenham Court. Slack at this stage claimed to be unbeaten ('Daily Advertiser', 12 and 14 Oct 1743). Shortly afterwards he again overcame James but was twice vanquished by Smallwood; in line with the general trend of the era, he certainly fought several of his opponents on more than one occasion. However, it was Taylor the Barber, then considered second only to Broughton, who proved to be Slack's most difficult adversary. On 4 November 1747, at Broughton's Amphitheatre, Oxford Road, Taylor survived a burst blood vessel before recording a thirty-six minute victory and on the 16th of the following month he won again at the same venue, this time in thirty-two minutes. Any lost reputation, though, was completely redeemed by Slack in his confrontation with Field the Sailor on 9 February 1749. The battle lasted about ninety-two minutes and was the 'severest and longest ever seen upon the Stage' ('London Evening-Post', 9-11 Feb 1749). Before again losing to Taylor, in a desperately hard encounter on 31 January 1750, Slack had also beaten Boswell and the massive Thomas Hawksley (Hawksly). It is clear, therefore, that he was far more experienced and highly regarded prior to meeting Broughton than has been generally accepted. 
The Broughton match occurred on 11 April 1750 ('GM', 1st ser., 20, 1750, 184). It developed after both claimed to have been physically abused by the other, the previous month, at the election at Brentford of a knight of the shire for the county of Middlesex. Broughton, fighting at his amphitheatre, was the early favourite but Slack surprisingly gained a victory in just over fourteen minutes by temporarily blinding his antagonist. It was thought at the time that as a result of his success Slack became richer by at least $600. Historians since the nineteenth century have credited him with championship (of England) status between this success and his defeat ten years afterwards by William Stevens (Stephens) the Nailer, but there is no evidence of this in contemporary journals. Moreover, in February of the year following the Broughton contest Slack suffered yet another loss at the hands of George Taylor. On that occasion a leg injury sustained in the last fall forced a dominant Slack to concede after approximately sixteen minutes ('Read's Weekly Journal', 9 Feb 1751). Although he easily subdued George Lea (Lee) on 10 February 1752, he had great difficulty beating the cricketer Thomas Faulkner (Falkner) some three months later and, on 15 November of that year, sustained a further defeat when bested by Elias Goddard. 
Apart from the Broughton conquest, Slack's other most notable performance was probably against the remarkably strong Pettit on 29 July 1754 at Harlston, Norfolk. Despite throwing Slack off the stage three times, Pettit became so cowed by his indomitable opponent that he walked away after twenty-five minutes, leaving Slack to be awarded the victory the next morning. Also fought out of London were Slack's triumphs over John and Cornelius Harris on 6 February and 6 March 1755 respectively. Both took place in Bristol; the former lasted about six minutes ('Felix Farley's Bristol Journal', 25 Jan - 8 Feb 1755) and the latter upwards of twenty ('Felix Farley's Bristol Journal', 1-8 March 1755). Slack's last win appears to have been over one Morton (Moreton) before his final contest in which he lost to Stevens in less than four minutes on 2 June 1760 at the Tennis Court, James Street, Haymarket, London ('Public Advertiser', 3 June 1760). 
Slack was a powerfully built man, standing about 5 ft 81/2 in. tall and weighing, in his prime, somewhere between 13 and 14 stone. His physique and fistic attributes were ideally suited to the prevailing style of fighting of the period. He possessed considerable strength and, despite lacking science, when resolved on victory his courage and determination made him a redoubtable adversary. He so abhorred 'shifting' that it is said he 'optionally received a knock-down blow sooner than relinquish his original situation' (Fewtrell, 52). Although later generations of bareknuckle pugilists generally scorned its use, Slack was noted for his success with the 'chopper', a back-handed blow to the face. 
It is probable that the John Slack, butcher, sworn in as a freeman of the city of Norwich (1744) and the butcher John Slack who later became a burgess of the city of Bristol (1759) were both the celebrated prize-fighter. At some time between these dates he certainly plied his trade in London, first at Chandos Street, Covent Garden, and then at the now defunct Brooks Market, Holborn. He died at Bristol on 17 July 1768 ('Felix Farley's Bristol Journal', 23 July 1768). 
Slack was the grandfather of the renowned Belcher brothers, James (1781-1811) and Thomas (1783-1854), the former a champion of England and the latter one of the most scientific boxers of his day. 


@@@@@


doc= 60189


Field, James (d. 1751), pugilist and criminal, was probably born in Ireland; his parents are unknown. Since he was often referred to in the press of the period as Field the Sailor, it may be presumed that some of his early life was spent at sea. His first major fistic contest in London, the centre of pugilistic activity at the time, appears to have been against Benjamin Boswell at the Great Booth, Tottenham Court, on 15 November 1743. It also seems to have been Field's debut at stage fighting, although his inexperience at this form of combat did not prevent him from prevailing over the noted Boswell. 
On 7 December 1743, again at the Great Booth, Field was matched with George Taylor the Barber, and was forced to yield after a determined battle. He was beaten once more by the renowned Taylor on the twentieth of that month, on this occasion at Broughton's Amphitheatre in the Oxford Road. Field blamed both defeats on being a novice on the stage when a third encounter with Taylor was advertised to take place at the Great Booth on 13 March 1744. He evidently intended this to be his last contest, and does not seem to have appeared at either of these venues for a considerable period afterwards. However, he was scheduled to fight John Slack at Broughton's Amphitheatre on 18 May 1748 and again on 18 January of the following year. The two certainly met on 9 February 1749 in a gruelling battle which eventually ended in favour of Slack after about ninety-two minutes. Advertisements in a contemporary newspaper also show that Field was due to oppose Slack on 12 April and the Derbyshire life-guardsman Thomas Hawksl(e)y on 21 June of the same year. 
Field's criminal activities seem to have covered a wide range of felonies. The 'London Evening-Post' (13-15 December 1750) noted that there had been several warrants granted against him by Justice Fielding for 'Robberies on the Highway, Burglaries, Rescues, and other Crimes'. This statement appeared shortly after the pugilist's arrest on 6 December 1750 at the Fox alehouse in Drury Lane, London. He was apprehended only after a severe struggle, and the following day was committed to Newgate prison. His trial took place at the Old Bailey on 16 January 1751, when he was accused of robbing one David Woodman of a pair of spectacles, a tobacco box, a handkerchief, and 13's'. Although Field had previously impeached twenty-eight members of a gang to which he belonged, this did not earn him a reprieve. He was condemned to death, and hanged at Tyburn on 11 February 1751. Because of fears that an attempt to rescue him would be made by his fellow bruisers, he was transported to the place of execution with his legs chained together. As was customary when a well-known person was hanged, Field's purported life story was published in pamphlet form. It was sold for 3died, and advertisements for it included a comment attributed to the pugilist: 'They have knock'd me down;-this is the hardest Cross-Buttock I ever had in my Life' ('Penny London Post', 18-20 Feb 1751). 
Field's notoriety was reflected by the fact that in the same month as he was hanged his name appeared twice in a series of four prints on the subject of cruelty by William Hogarth. In the 'Second Stage of Cruelty' a sign on a wall, above one for cock-fighting, advertised a fight at Broughton's Amphitheatre between Field and George Taylor. In the final print in the series, 'The Reward of Cruelty', Field's name was shown above the skeleton on display on the left-hand side of the print. A James Field, reputed to be a first cousin of Field the Sailor, also competed pugilistically about the same period. His opponents included the active and well-regarded William Chetham. 


@@@@@


doc= 60190


Perrins, Isaac (1750x57-1801), pugilist and mechanical engineer, of whom few early details are known, appears, unusually for a member of the eighteenth-century boxing fraternity, to have been well educated and, as various extant letters in copperplate handwriting show, certainly extremely literate. 
Perrins's enduring fame in the prize ring rests primarily on his memorable bout with the celebrated Tom Johnson. Before this he was credited with easily defeating every rival in the Birmingham area where he lived. Probably the most impressive of these provincial successes was at Coleshill against the locally renowned Jemmy Sargent (or Sargeant). The encounter, for 100 guineas, on 7 October 1782 was won by the underdog, Perrins, in about six minutes. 
The Johnson battle, for 250 guineas a side, took place at Banbury on 22 October 1789. Such was the interest that there was almost unprecedented coverage of the build-up in the contemporary press. Perrins had overwhelming physical advantages but, owing to his naivety, no clause was inserted in the articles of agreement to prevent 'shifting'. Johnson was therefore able to move around at will instead of standing his ground as was the customary practice. Moreover, Perrins was inexperienced in the subterfuges of the sport and found himself outwitted by his artful adversary. Eventually, having exhausted his strength pursuing Johnson around the stage, he became an easy victim of the smaller man's ferocious attacks. The contest lasted some seventy-five minutes during which sixty-two rounds were fought. 
Perrins's last fistic engagement might have been an 85-minute victory over one Richards near Shrewsbury on 30 July 1790, which was widely reported in the London and provincial press but later refuted in some country newspapers. Thereafter, although the renowned Jewish pugilist Daniel Mendoza visited Birmingham in 1791 in an attempt to match Perrins with Johnson's recent conqueror, Ben Bryan (or Bryant, later erroneously recorded as Brain), this contest failed to materialize. 
An upright handsome man, Perrins stood about 6 feet 2 inches tall and weighed between 17 and 18 stone. His strength was prodigious and his agility surprising. He was known to be able to carry over 800 pounds in weight and is said to have once leapt over a turnpike gate for a 10 guinea wager. As a fighter he lacked science but this was more than compensated for by his power and unquestionable courage. Despite his pugilistic background, Perrins was of a mild disposition. On one occasion, when challenged in a Manchester public house by George Frederick Cooke, he endured considerable provocation before calmly picking up the actor as though he were a child and gently depositing him outside. 
Throughout his fistic career Perrins was employed at Soho near Birmingham by the engine manufactory of Boulton and Watt. Later he was sent to Manchester to construct their engines and subsequently took a public house, at 24 Leigh Street, while continuing his work on the company's behalf. Towards the end of 1794 he believed himself to be unfairly discharged from their service but thereafter appears still to have been called upon to work for them in the Manchester district. 
On 27 December 1799 Perrins, now living in New Street, Hanover Street, was appointed inspector of engines and conductor of firemen by the police commissioners of Manchester. The position effectively put him in charge of the city's fire brigade. Late in the evening of 10 December 1800 a fire broke out in the centre of Manchester which raged until after daylight. As a result of his exertions that night Perrins became seriously ill, dying of a fever on 6 January 1801; different sources give his age at death as forty-four and fifty years old. He was buried the next day near the western door of St John's Church, Byrom Street, Manchester, in the same grave as his wife, Mary, who had died, aged forty, on 2 September of the previous year. 


@@@@@


doc= 60191


Bryan, Benjamin (1753-1794), prize-fighter, sometimes named Benjamin Brian or Brain, was born in Bristol; nothing is known about his parents or upbringing. It is unclear whether he had any formal education; however, letters (apparently from Bryan) which appeared in the press towards the end of his life suggest that he was literate. During his early years Bryan worked as a collier in Kingswood, Bristol, during which time he defeated two noted fighters, Clayton and Harris. In 1774 he moved to London, working for several years as a coal porter at a wharf in the Strand. 'Good looking, clean and respectable' (Miles, 65), Bryan had a mild and sociable demeanour, stood 5 feet 10 inches tall, and weighed less than 14 stone. 
Bryan's prize-fighting career began on 31 October 1786 when he defeated the 'Fighting Grenadier' at Bloomsbury. Bryan owed this victory to the intervention of a physician who, taking advantage of a disruption to the bout, lanced a swelling on Bryan's eye, enabling the badly bruised fighter to continue the contest. On 31 December 1788, in a bout that took place in atrocious weather, Bryan defeated Corbally at Navestock, Essex. In the following year he was due to fight the legendary pugilist Tom Johnson for $500, but had to pay $100 default because his health was too poor to take part in the bout. By 23 October 1789 he had recovered sufficiently for him to defeat Jacombs at Banbury in a 'most dreadful battle of one hour and twenty six minutes' (Miles, 66-7). On 30 August 1790 Bryan tried to fight the 'Tinman' Bill Hooper at Newbury for 100 guineas, but after receiving one blow Hooper became so frightened that instead of fighting he: 'fell every time Ben's hand reached him, and even before; ran all over the stage, filled his mouth with water and spirted it in Ben's face, accompanied by provoking and blackguard epithets to irritate Ben and throw him off his guard. (ibid., 67)' Hooper fell 133 times and after three and a half hours, and with night having set in, the bout was declared drawn ('Sporting Magazine', 4, 1794, 77). 
Despite the farcical nature of this contest Bryan's patron, the duke of Hamilton, was sufficiently impressed to back him for 500 guineas for a rematch with Tom Johnson at Wrotham, Kent. On 17 January 1791 Bryan and Johnson fought, the latter being 7-4 on favourite. However, Bryan won a very fierce battle in twenty-one minutes, partly through luck since Johnson 'broke the metacarpal bone of his middle finger by striking the rail of the stage', but also due to his ability, especially 'his straight and severe right hand deliveries' (Miles, 69, 65). Despite the severity of the bout, a few days later Bryan displayed great agility in sparring matches at the Grecian Theatre in London's Strand, as noted in the 'Daily Advertiser' (22 January 1790). Such regular displays, coupled with his role as a second to other fighters, provided Ben with a living between 1790 and 1794. However, on 24 February 1794 he came out of retirement and agreed to fight William Wood. Unfortunately, the battle did not take place because Bryan fell ill, dying at his house in Gray's Inn Road on 8 April 1794. Many 'supposed at the time that his death happened in consequence of some inward bruise which he got in one of the many desperate battles' ('Sporting Magazine', 4, 1794, 45). As it was, when Bryan's body was opened they discovered that he was suffering from a 'scirrhous liver' (Miles, 69). On 11 April he was buried at St Sepulchre's churchyard in Snow Hill, London. Among his mourners were Johnson, Wood, and two other prize-fighters, Bill Warr and John Symonds. These pugilists composed the following epistle that appeared on his tombstone: '
Farewell, the honours of my brow 

Victorious wreaths, farewell! 

one blow from death has laid me low, 

By whom such brave ones fall 

Yet bravely I'll dispute the prize, 

Nor yield, though out of breath, 

Tis not the fall -- I yet shall rise, 

And conquer even death. 
(Miles, 70)' 



@@@@@


doc= 60192


Woods, Edward Sydney (1877-1953), bishop of Lichfield, was born at All Saints' vicarage, Hereford, on 1 November 1877, the third of five children of the Revd Frank Woods (1846-1896), vicar of All Saints', Hereford, and later vicar of St Andrew's, Nottingham, and his wife, Alice Octavia, 'nee' Fry (1845-1923), who was of Quaker lineage and granddaughter of Elizabeth Fry. Along with his elder brother, Theodore Woods (later bishop of Peterborough and then Winchester), he was educated at Marlborough College (1890-96), and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took a second class in the theological tripos in 1899. 
After reading for ordination at Ridley Hall, Cambridge, Woods was ordained in 1901 as curate of Holy Trinity, Cambridge, and chaplain of the Cambridge pastorate. He was chaplain and lecturer at Ridley Hall from 1901 to 1903, and vice-principal from 1903 to 1907. On 30 July 1903 he married Clemence Rachel (1874-1952), daughter of Robert Barclay (1837-1921), of High Leigh, Hoddesdon; her father, a member of the banking family, had been brought up a Quaker but joined the Church of England and was treasurer of the British and Foreign Bible Society. They had three sons and three daughters. Illness with tuberculosis required a change of climate for Woods and a move to Switzerland, where he was successively chaplain at Davos Platz (1908-13) and at Lausanne (1913-15). He was examining chaplain to the bishop of Durham (1911-22). 
In 1915 Woods became a temporary chaplain to the forces serving at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He was a contributor to 'The Church in the Furnace' (1917), a volume of essays by temporary forces chaplains, which sought to inform the church of the pastoral implications of the conflict. In 1918 he visited the western front and early in 1919 he toured the occupation forces in Germany, travelling 2100 miles to interview 280 of the 400 forces candidates for ordination. Demobilized in April 1919, and in restored health, Woods returned to Cambridge to be vicar of his old parish, Holy Trinity. After the war he led the Bristol Crusade, a mission to industrial workers at which Geoffrey Studdert Kennedy was one visiting speaker. He became proctor in convocation for the diocese of Ely (1921-3), and honorary canon of Ely (1923-7). 
In 1927 Woods was appointed vicar and rural dean of Croydon, which was to be the base of his ministry for the next ten years. As suffragan bishop of Croydon, to which position he was appointed in 1930, he instigated the 'Croydon experiment'. This was a local response to the 'Sunday Entertainment Act' of 1932 (which permitted the opening of cinemas on Sunday as long as cinema employees were allowed a day of rest and that a proportion of profits from the opening was given to charity). To these provisos, he suggested the addition of a third, that the films shown should be 'wholesome' and suitable for Sunday viewing. At the local referendum on this issue, in November 1932, the scheme was approved by 34,617 votes to 24,386. He went on to chair the committee that vetted the films for the first year of its operation, proudly reporting in a letter to 'The Times' (29 Oct 1934) that the committee had succeeded in eliminating films that 'made a special feature of crime, cruelty, and loose morality' for those of educational merit, clean comedies, and healthy stories. 
At Croydon, Woods played an important part in the early years of religious broadcasting at the BBC. The first broadcast Sunday morning service was a harvest thanksgiving from Croydon parish church on 6 October 1935. From then onwards Woods (and Croydon) featured in the regular pattern of Sunday services, noted for the quality of the preaching. These broadcasts produced a flow of fan mail for Woods, who published his radio talks as 'Love in Action' (1939) and 'A Life Worth Living' (1941). An 'ideal broadcaster', Woods was in demand well beyond his time at Croydon. He possessed the 'capacity to make each listener feel that he was being spoken to personally' (Tomkins, 135). 
A moderate evangelical (and someone who always kept a spiritual diary), Woods took an increasing interest in church politics and ecumenism as his ministry progressed. He was able to relate well to all wings of the church. A keen supporter of the Life and Liberty Movement, which sought full control for the church of its own affairs, and which led to the 'Enabling Act' of 1919, Woods chaired the movement from 1921, and sought in particular to support church governance practically by educating and supporting the laity in their new-found responsibilities. Woods instigated and then led the Swanwick conferences for parochial church councillors every year (except during wartime) from 1923 until his death. His biographer described him as an 'apostle of unity' (Tomkins, 99), his lifetime spanning the years in which the ecumenical movement grew from strength to strength. He was a speaker at Student Christian Movement conferences, and appointed as one of the Church of England's delegates to the first Faith and Order conference in Lausanne in 1927, and again at the Edinburgh conference in 1937. His publications 'Modern Discipleship' (1911) and 'Everyday Religion' (1922), like his other works, were published by the SCM Press. 
Woods became bishop of the vast diocese of Lichfield in 1937. Despite its geographical size, he adopted his brother Theodore's method of making pilgrimages to various parts of his diocese on foot. By the end of his time at Lichfield, he had made twenty-three such diocesan walks and, covering about 900 miles on foot, made 289 visits to parishes. In his wartime visitation charge of 1941 he declared that the war needed to be fought 'on two fronts, to pray and work for a physical victory over the brute forces of Nazism... but on the other hand... filled with the spirit of forgiveness and reconciliation... wage relentless war on the spiritual hosts of darkness' (Tomkins, 125); and that this war was being fought to 'bring the ideal of a Christian England within the realm of possibility' (Wolfe, 177). Although his diocese was little affected by bombing, Woods attended when an explosion at an ammunition dump annihilated two villages, and when one of his churches, All Saints', Darlaston, was destroyed by the enemy. Towards the end of the war Woods was invited by the YMCA to be a missioner, visiting the troops and chaplains, and made an impression as someone of 'power, simplicity and obvious friendliness' (Tomkins, 130). After the war, during October 1946, he visited service personnel in Austria and northern Italy, including a visit to a prisoner-of-war camp, where he gave the blessing in German. 
Although Woods was socially and educationally of a conventional background for an Anglican bishop, living in a world in which shooting parties were the norm and shortage of money was not an issue, he wore his upper-class and Anglican clerical background lightly. He loved sport, especially hockey and tennis, and created a tennis court in his garden at Croydon, continuing to play the game throughout his life. He had the common touch in his ability to communicate to a range of audiences, not least to students; he was often described as 'lovable'. Even if no intellectual giant, Woods was 'a priest and a gentleman' (Hastings, 448), whose pastoral gifts were self-evident. His sympathetic 'I know how you feel', to someone whose troubles he had never experienced himself, nevertheless carried conviction (Tomkins, 8). 
Woods was left a widower on his wife's death in October 1952. His last sermon was on Christmas day 1952 at Singapore Cathedral, while on a mission to troops in the Far East. Becoming ill on his journey home, he died a fortnight after his return, at the palace, The Close, Lichfield, on 11 January 1953, of myocardial failure and acute bronchitis. His lifelong love of Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress' was underlined by his request for this to be read to him during his last few days. His three sons were all clergyman; one of them, Frank Woods (1907-1992), became archbishop of Melbourne and primate of Australia. 


@@@@@


doc= 60197


Ferguson, Ronald Crauford Munro, Viscount Novar (1860-1934), politician and governor-general of Australia, was born at Kirkcaldy on 6 March 1860, the eldest of the three sons and one daughter of Colonel Robert Ferguson (died 1868), of Raith, Fife, and his wife, Emma (died 1918), daughter of James Henry Mandeville, of Merton, Surrey. He was grandson of General Sir R. C. Ferguson. His father took the additional surname of Munro on the death of his first cousin Hugh Andrew Munro in 1864 when he inherited the estates of Novar, Ross-shire, and Muirton, Moray. He also had land in Fife. Ronald Munro Ferguson was educated at home and in 1875 joined the 1st Fife light horse, and in 1879, after attending Sandhurst, was gazetted to the Grenadier Guards, in which he served for five years until 1884. Intent from an early stage in a political career, in that year he was elected at a by-election as Liberal member for Ross and Cromarty, but was defeated at the general election of 1885 by a crofter candidate. In 1886, with the Liberal Party split over home rule, he was defeated in Dunbartonshire at the general election. However, on the intervention of Lord Rosebery, he was elected at a by-election for Leith burghs in July that year, Gladstone having surrendered the seat which he had won as well as Midlothian, in order to keep out the Liberal Unionist W. Jacks (who stood against Ferguson). He held the seat until he resigned in 1914. Despite saving the constituency for home rule, Ferguson was cautious about the policy. In the Commons he associated himself with R. B. Haldane (who was briefly engaged to his sister), Sir Edward Grey, and Asquith in the group which in due course became known as the Liberal Imperialists and which looked to Rosebery for leadership. Ferguson became the closest of the group to Rosebery. He accompanied him to India in 1886 and served as his private secretary during his foreign secretaryships in 1886 and in 1892-4. During Rosebery's brief premiership, 1894-5, which he had ardently promoted, Ferguson was a junior whip, with special responsibility for Scotland. In 1895 he declined the governorship of Victoria. 
In 1889 Ferguson had married Lady Helen Hermione [Helen Hermione Ferguson (1863-1941)], eldest daughter of Frederick Temple Hamilton-Temple-Blackwood, first marquess of Dufferin and Ava, and his wife, Hariot Georgina. They had no children. The Fergusons, despite Lady Helen's origins, were hard up, and could not keep a carriage when in London. Ronald Ferguson found politics frustrating; though Rosebery's most intimate colleague and go-between, he was ineffective at liaising with Rosebery's Liberal opponents, and Haldane increasingly found himself taking over from Ferguson in this role. In the long Liberal opposition from 1895 until 1905 Ferguson took a prominent and sometimes belligerent part on the imperial side in the internecine struggles within the Liberal Party, and on the Liberals' return to office in December 1905, Campbell-Bannerman did not offer him office. He sought an imperial career, asking for the governorship of Bombay, but his lot was to be provost of Kirkcaldy (1906-14). His national political career seemed over, especially as Rosebery's political behaviour became increasingly eccentric. His privy councillorship in 1910 must have seemed an inadequate sop, and he declined the offer of a peerage. He maintained a strong interest in military matters and assisted Haldane in the implementation of his army reforms. 
In February 1914, however, Asquith, whose constituency comprised some of Ferguson's estates, appointed him governor-general of Australia. The choice was criticized by Australians who thought Asquith was unloading a failed politician, but Ferguson 'soon proved himself one of the ablest of the early governors-general' ('AusDB'). Given Ferguson's short temper and his wife's awareness of her aristocratic origins, it was a risky appointment, but it paid off. He arrived in Australia in May 1914, and was at once faced with a request for a double dissolution which, after taking a variety of advice, he granted. Australia's entry into the war was to Ferguson's personal advantage, for it offered a context which played to his strengths, and to those of his wife, who was made GBE in 1918 for her work as founder and director of the Red Cross in Australia. His tendency to seem abrasive now seemed patriotic, as he urged action. He vigorously promoted the war effort and vociferously complained to Whitehall when he thought Australia was being short-changed. On the other hand he was careful, especially in his dealings with Andrew Fisher and later William Morris Hughes, not to allow the governor-general's powers to be eroded by the need for rapid wartime decisions. Ferguson strongly supported conscription and Hughes's efforts to get it accepted. But when Hughes could not deliver conscription, Ferguson was within a whisker of dismissing him. In April 1918 he held an all-party conference at Government House, which however failed to resolve the matter. Ferguson was annoyed by the right granted to Hughes to represent Australia directly to Lloyd George at the Imperial War Conference in 1918, seeing this as a threat to his own office. He was persuaded to remain in post until 1920, partly to oversee the visit of the prince of Wales. He was active in environmental issues, and especially in promoting the good management and preservation of Australian forests. On his return to Scotland he was created Viscount Novar. 
In 1922 Novar began the official career in Britain to which he had aspired since the 1880s, becoming vice-president of the education committee in 1922 and being made secretary of state for Scotland by Bonar Law in October 1922. He received the freedom of the city of Edinburgh in 1923. He was the only member of cabinet wholeheartedly to support Bonar Law over the row over the American debt, which led to Law's attempted resignation. When Baldwin succeeded Law as prime minister in November 1924, he did not include Novar in his government. In 1925 Novar chaired the committee on political honours and was a member of the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland. He was a trustee of the National Library of Scotland and was appointed KT in 1926. He died at Raith, Kirkcaldy, Fife, on 30 March 1934, and was cremated in Edinburgh on 4 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 60198


Jeeves, Percy (1888-1916), cricketer, was born on 5 March 1888 at Common Side, Soothill Nether, near Dewsbury, Yorkshire, the son of Edwin Jeeves, railway porter, and his wife, Nancy Garforth. The family moved to Goole in 1901 and in the following year Jeeves left Alexander Street School and played in the Goole first eleven. Although he successfully answered an advertisement for a professional at Hawes cricket club, he was unsuccessful in a Yorkshire trial in 1910. R. V. Ryder, Warwickshire's secretary, noted his abilities and he joined the county ground staff in 1911, the year in which Warwickshire won the county championship. While waiting to qualify, Jeeves played for Moseley in the Birmingham league but was permitted to make his county debut against the Australians (1912). 
Jeeves's first full season for Warwickshire (1913), in which he topped the bowling averages, was 'nothing short of a triumph' ('Wisden', 1914, 199). Three successive matches in August were especially significant. Against Worcestershire his seven for 34 were the best figures of his career, while his 86 not out against Yorkshire proved to be his highest score. In the third match, against Gloucestershire at Cheltenham, the spectators included P. G. Wodehouse, an enthusiast for the game. The writer had been casting round for a name to give to the fictional 'gentleman's gentleman' whom he was creating in his mind. In settling on Jeeves he identified the cricketer with a figure who, from 1916 onwards, would have literary immortality. 
Jeeves did well again in 1914 and 'Wisden' was fulsome, seeing him 'as one of the great bowlers of the future' ('Wisden', 1915, 123). He had been selected for the Players against the Gentlemen and his four wickets for 44 in the second innings had brought his side an unexpected victory. The season ended abruptly shortly after the outbreak of war on 4 August. In Warwickshire's last match, against Surrey, Jeeves clean bowled Tom Hayward twice and Jack Hobbs to help his side in a defeat of the reigning county champions. With his medium-fast away-swingers he took, in his career, 199 wickets (average 20.03) while scoring 1204 runs as a late-order attacking batsman. 
Jeeves joined the Royal Warwickshire regiment and was killed in action in France on the Somme at High Wood, Montauban, on 22 July 1916. In the view of P. F. Warner he had been an England bowler of the future. 


@@@@@


doc= 60199


Allan, Eliza MacNaughton Luke (1886-1964), novelist, was born on 13 May 1886 at Headswood House, Denny, Stirlingshire, the only child of Alexander Allan, iron merchant, and his wife, Jean, daughter of John Luke, founder of the Vale paper works in Denny. She was educated privately and attended classes at Glasgow University. 
Allan is described as small, soft-voiced, of a retiring disposition, with dark hair and grey eyes. While still a young woman she moved to Glasgow with her widowed mother, never marrying and remaining there for the rest of her life. Although the archetypal 'daughter at home', who largely abandoned writing during both world wars to concentrate on nursing and charity work, she was nevertheless a prolific freelance journalist, wrote several plays (theatregoing was one of her main interests), and published ten novels between 1921 and 1958. 
Allan once said in an interview: 'I don't believe in the localisation of a writer's talent. One ought to take the world for one's field if one wants to' (Kyle). Glasgow provides the setting for her earlier novels, and the theme of 'Deepening River' (1932) is the development of Clyde shipbuilding from the eighteenth to the early twentieth century. However, her characters, as in her first novel, 'The Syrens' (1921; published simultaneously in Britain and the USA and translated into Dutch), often reject the conventions of their place and time. 'Makeshift' (1928), though uneven in quality, is notable for its young heroine's determination that her life, unlike her mother's, shall not be 'second best -- makeshift all the time' and that she will not be 'used', practically or emotionally. Her sexual awareness, too, is identified and expressed with unexpected frankness. 
Allan's best-known novel, 'Hunger March' (1934), follows the events of one day in a depression-hit city, unnamed but recognizable as Glasgow. Through contrasting but linked characters, including a merchant facing bankruptcy, his office cleaner and her long-term unemployed son, and an enthusiastic middle-class radical, Allan presents the great hunger march which swamps the city centre during the afternoon and evening of her chosen day. Her sympathies are with the marchers, but she acknowledges equally the despair of the conscientious employer. There is a clear indictment throughout of the apathy and insensitivity she sees in the prosperous middle class to which she herself belonged. 
Allan published little or nothing during the Second World War, and her post-war novels, most of which have historical settings, did not attract great attention. 'John Mathew, Papermaker' (1948) is closely based on her mother's family, papermakers since 1780. She was a member of Scottish PEN and in her later years gave unobtrusive financial support to a number of aspiring writers. She died of cancer at her home, 5 Hamilton Drive, Glasgow, on 3 December 1964, and a private funeral took place two days later, after a service at Belhaven Westbourne church. 


@@@@@


doc= 60203


Stiff, George (1807-1874), engraver and newspaper proprietor, of obscure origins, was considered by 'The Bookseller' at his death to have been 'one of the principal pioneers of illustrated literature in its present form'. However, he was an obsessively secretive figure, constantly covering his tracks to avoid his creditors, and very little is known of his personal life. He first appears in London between 1844 and 1845, directing the engraving department of the 'Illustrated London News', a journal which had inaugurated the illustrated newspapers in the Victorian period. In 1847 Stiff became proprietor of the 'Weekly Times', and from 1848 to 1862 carried on a publishing business from an office in 334 Strand. On 1 March 1845, spurred by the success of the twopenny magazine the 'Family Herald' (1843-60), which had no pictures, he had started the 'London Journal' (1845-1912) at a penny for thirty-two pages. This featured often lurid woodcuts, and became the pioneer of a flood of popular illustrated journals. By the third volume it reported, with back numbers, a sale of 120,000. In 1852, aided by the success of J. F. Smith's serial 'Minnigrey', its sales reached an unprecedented half million. 
Stiff claimed to supervise 'the literary department' with 'active zeal', and deserves much of the credit for the 'Journal''s successful design. His editors and writers included several of the most popular sensation novelists of their time, including G. W. M. Reynolds, John Frederick Smith (whom Stiff launched on his career), Percy B. St John, Harrison Ainsworth, Charles Reade, and Mrs E. D. E. N. Southworth. The 'Journal''s woodcuts, occasionally engraved and signed by Stiff himself, featured for some years the work of John Gilbert, besides that of Hablot K. Browne and John Proctor. 
Starting as a publisher without capital Stiff financed his projects by incurring such heavy debts that the paper makers, his main creditors, were obliged to continue to support him to avoid total loss. Although it has been claimed that he was earning some $10,000 a year, in 1857 he sold the 'London Journal' for a sum variously given, but in the region of $30,000, in order to pay off his creditors, and apparently repurchased the title for a similar sum. Later, on 20 March 1862, he filed a petition against bankruptcy with debts of $52,250. He was eventually discharged on 3 December 1862, when the commissioner noted that his personal expenditure in the period prior to bankruptcy had been 'enormous', and related proceedings dragged on for another eighteen months. But Stiff remained an inveterate speculator. From 1860 to 1861 he held the copyright to the 'Morning Chronicle', and was joint proprietor of the 'Weekly Dispatch' from 1869 to his death. In 1864 he attempted to emulate his earlier success with the 'London Journal' by publishing the 'London Reader', identical in style and employing some of the same writing talents, including J. F. Smith and Mrs Southworth. The periodical was to survive to 1903. Stiff, however, died intestate, impecunious, and without known family on 14 November 1874, aged sixty-seven, of heart disease and bronchitis, while visiting Worcester Park, Cuddington, near Epsom. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 60205


Hedderwick, James (1814-1897), journalist and poet, was born on 18 January 1814 in Govan, Glasgow, the third son of James Hedderwick (died 1864), letterpress printer, and Joanna McNeilage. His formative years were spent in Glasgow, but included a short spell in the USA at the age of eight in 1822, where his father had gone in search of work. On the family's return shortly thereafter, his father was appointed the queen's printer, and Hedderwick began an apprenticeship in his father's firm. His literary talents, which he cultivated through contributing to various local literary periodicals and newspapers in his late teens, soon led him to contemplate changing vocations, and in 1836 he began studies in English literature at London University, where he gained distinction in his first year by winning first prize in rhetoric. In 1837, however, he gave up academic study to return to Glasgow, where he started up the 'Saltwater Gazette', a short-lived literary periodical. Later that year he joined the staff of the Edinburgh 'Scotsman', becoming assistant editor under the direction of its editor, Charles MacLaren. It was a position he retained until 1842, when he returned to Glasgow to establish the 'Glasgow Citizen', a weekly paper run in conjunction with his elder brother Robert. The 'Citizen' distinguished itself by featuring work of prominent Scottish authors such as Alexander Smith, David Gray, and William Black. Hedderwick also contributed original work to journals such as 'Chambers's Journal', and in 1844 published his first collection of poetry. 
Now firmly established in a career as editor, poet, and newspaper proprietor, Hedderwick became engaged to Ellen Ness, a young woman from South Leith in Edinburgh. They were married on 11 January 1846 in Gorbals, Lanarkshire, and over the next seventeen years were to have seven children, including Thomas C. H. Hedderwick, lawyer and MP for Wickburghs in 1896. Ellen Ness died some time in the 1860s, and Hedderwick subsequently remarried. 
Between 1850 and 1882 Hedderwick's career flourished. In addition to publishing further works of poetry ('Lays of Middle Age, and other Poems', 1858; 'The Villa by the Sea, and other Poems', 1881) and running the 'Glasgow Citizen', in 1860 he founded 'Hedderwick's Miscellany of Instructive and Entertaining Literature', a compendium similar to 'Chambers's Journal'. It was to last only two years, folding in 1862. Undaunted, Hedderwick started the 'Glasgow Evening Citizen' in August 1864, a daily halfpenny evening newspaper that heralded and gave impetus to the subsequent expansion of cheap late-edition journalism in Britain. While not the pioneer of the first cheap evening paper in Scotland and Britain (that honour lay with the 'Greenock Telegraph'), Hedderwick's 'Glasgow Evening Citizen' was the best known and most successful of such enterprises, at one point claiming the largest circulation of any paper in the west of Scotland. Its success bred imitation south of the border, and Hedderwick was instrumental in aiding subsequent start-ups of other evening papers in England, including that of 'The Echo' (London). Based on his initial success with the 'Glasgow Evening Citizen', Hedderwick also established the 'Glasgow Weekly Citizen', a weekly literary continuation of the original daily broadsheet. He continued in his capacity as editor of both papers until 1882, when he retired to Helensburgh, near Glasgow. His literary and editorial work was recognized in 1878 by the award of an honorary degree of doctor of laws by the University of Glasgow, and he published a volume of memoirs entitled 'Backward Glances' in 1891 which focused on the literary acquaintances he had made during his working career. He died from complications arising from a stroke on the morning of 1 December 1897 at his home in Rocklands, Helensburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 60206


Fraser, George Sutherland (1915-1980), poet and literary scholar, was born on 8 November 1915 in Glasgow, one of the two children of George Sutherland Fraser (1885-1942), a member of the legal staff of Glasgow corporation, and his wife, Ada Grace, 'nee' Jones (1887-1952). The latter is described by William Hall as having been 'a talented musician' (Hall, 51); she was a descendant of the same Johnson family that produced Samuel Johnson, the hymn-writer, and which was collaterally connected with Dr Samuel Johnson. Fraser attended the primary section of Glasgow Academy, but when the family moved to Aberdeen in 1924 (the father was appointed deputy town clerk, and promoted town clerk in the following year) he went to Aberdeen grammar school. 
To Fraser, Glasgow and Aberdeen were respectively 'romantic' and 'classic' cities, symbolic of the two aspects of his own temperament. In his autobiography, 'A Stranger and Afraid' (posthumously published, 1983), he wrote that 'the relaxing air of Glasgow' encouraged in him 'a sad and helpless dreaminess', while 'the brisk, cold air of Aberdeen' woke him up and 'brisked' him 'into an unaccustomed alertness' (p. 37). For his poetry, however, Aberdeen was the more significant. In poems such as 'Social Pleasures', 'Problems of a Poet', 'A Letter to Anne Ridler', 'A Winter Letter', and especially in 'Home Town Elegy', the Aberdonian environment provided exactly what Fraser needed to fulfil his aim (expressed in a letter to David Daiches) of exploring 'personal and local themes in a mood of gently restrained lyricism' ('THES'). 
In 1933 Fraser went to St Andrews University as a bursary student, and in 1937 took a joint honours degree in English and history, although he also acquired a love for moral philosophy, which he had to take as part of the more general preparation for an honours degree required by the Scottish university system. While still an undergraduate he made something of a reputation for himself as a writer and student journalist, and on returning to Aberdeen he became a cub reporter on the 'Aberdeen Press and Journal'. At the outbreak of war in 1939 he volunteered for the army and joined the Black Watch -- motivated by a patriotism which, as his poem 'Meditation of a Patriot' suggests, was distinctly non-jingoistic, and perhaps also by the example of his father, who had been an officer in the Highland light infantry during the First World War. Fraser, however, was anything but a man of military cast; he belonged to nature's 'awkward squad' and could never master the intricacies of drill. He was transferred to the RASC, and spent most of his service in the Middle East as a warrant officer carrying out journalistic and editorial duties, first with the army public relations directorate in Cairo (1941-2), and then in Eritrea in charge of the 'Eritrean Daily News' (1942-4). He was posted back to Cairo in 1944, and then returned to London where he was demobilized in December 1945. Poems such as 'Egypt' and 'Monologue for a Cairo Evening' came out of this experience. 
Fraser's first volumes of poetry belong to the 1940s, including 'The Fatal Landscape' (1941), 'Home Town Elegy' (1944), and 'The Traveller has Regrets' (1948). At this time he also became involved with the New Apocalypse movement centred on J. F. Hendry and Henry Treece. Fraser became their critical spokesman and he wrote the introduction to the movement's 1941 anthology, 'The White Horseman'. He argued that New Apocalypse was a flexible philosophy 'which hardly dictates to anyone how he is to write or feel' (p. 6); its controlling ideal was 'the living completeness of man', reflected in a balanced art form in which 'intellect and will' were as necessary as the creatively potent outpourings from the unconscious more obviously associated with a cult of the 'apocalyptic' (p. 3). Although this was very much a young man's manifesto, and the movement itself one with which Fraser associated himself only for a short time, the desire to reconcile emotional upheaval and rational structures remained with him throughout his life. 
After the war Fraser returned, not to Aberdeen, but to a flat in Beaufort Street, Chelsea, London, where his mother and sister, Jean (to whom he was most closely attached), had moved after his father's death in 1942. The life to which he dedicated himself now was that of poet and writer, existing, often precariously, on reviews and articles for literary journals, including the 'TLS', the 'New Statesman', and the 'quality' Sunday newspapers, and broadcasts for the BBC Third Programme. Another inhabitant of Beaufort Street was a young woman, Eileen Lucy (Paddy) Andrew ('b'. 1918), daughter of Melville and Evelyn Andrew. Paddy, who had taken an English degree at St Anne's College, Oxford, and was then working at the Board of Trade, shared Fraser's passion for poetry, and it was not long before they fell in love and were married, on 30 August 1946. Their house in Great Ormond Street, Bloomsbury, soon became a kind of unofficial cultural centre for young, aspiring writers. 
Among other commissions undertaken by Fraser at this time were two travel books on Scotland and 'News from South America' (1949), an account of a journey to Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina, and Chile made as a member of a cultural mission sponsored by the Hudson Institute. In Buenos Aires he had interviews with Borges and Peron, and attended a political rally addressed by both Evita and General Peron. The country which most impressed him, however, was Chile. He liked Santiago with its 'affectionate flavour of use' ('News', 167) and its spectacular backdrop of the Andes; but the deepest impression was made by his encounter with Pablo Neruda, at whose house he stayed. Neruda was for Fraser a type of the heroic man of action conjoined with the uncompromising man of letters. Although his own position as an uncommitted liberal set him aside from the dangerous extremism of Neruda, he was one of the first to recognize the outstanding quality of the Chilean writer's work; and this meeting led Fraser to translating Neruda's poetry. 
In 1953 Fraser's first major critical work was published -- 'The Modern Writer and his World'. This was the fruit of his being appointed in 1950 to succeed William Empson as cultural attache to the British embassy in Japan. In the preface he describes it modestly as an attempt 'to provide Japanese students of English literature, who had been cut off from contact with us during the war, with a fairly clear guide-book to modern tendencies' ('The Modern Writer', 7). It is more than that, however. Ranging from the late nineteenth-century symbolists to mid-twentieth century literature, it offers a highly readable survey which manages to be both just to individual writers and perceptive in its treatment of their relation to their times. 

'Impressions of Japan and other Essays' (1952) and 'Three Philosophical Essays' (n.d.) also belong to the Japan visit. In the latter Fraser confesses that he would have liked to become a philosopher, but realized that he did not have a sufficiently abstract frame of mind. These essays are concerned with the exploration of personality and Sartrean existentialism, but drift towards the anecdotal mode which became increasingly characteristic of Fraser's later writings. He puts the emphasis on social interaction rather than logical analysis, and typically concludes that 'truth, like personality, is made actual in the response of one mind to another, and like human life itself it is a developing project' (Fraser, 'Three Philosophical Essays', 52). 
In 1958 Fraser exchanged his absorbing, but insecure, literary life in London for a post in the English department of the newly chartered University of Leicester. The young poet was turning into the middle-aged family man (he and Paddy had three children: the eldest, Helen, was born in 1949, the second, George, in 1951, and the third, Katie, in 1952); and his growing domestic responsibilities made a regular income and the more settled pattern of life offered by a provincial city both necessary and desirable. University life offered him the chance to focus on the critical work that now seemed to be his main strength, and to pursue his fascination with modern writers in greater depth. A number of volumes followed including 'Vision and Rhetoric' (1959), 'Lawrence Durrell' (1968), 'Metre, Rhythm, and Free Verse' (1970), 'Essays on Twentieth Century Poets' (1977) -- which overlaps considerably with 'Vision and Rhetoric: Alexander Pope' (1978) -- and the posthumously published 'A Short History of English Poetry' (1981). All are informed with that balanced awareness of 'romantic' and 'classic', visionary and rationally moderate, which runs as a theme throughout Fraser's life, but there is an undeniable decline in the forcefulness and originality of the later work. Although he was interested in the various manifestations of literary theory which British universities eagerly adopted from France and America in the 1960s and 1970s, and which his philosophical interests particularly qualified him to analyse and assess, his own work continued in an earlier vein of warm appreciation illuminated with passages of practical criticism. 
In 1963 Fraser was appointed reader in poetry at Leicester, and he spent part of the following year as visiting professor at the University of Rochester in New York state. Increasingly, his vocation was becoming that of a teacher; in 1975 he said of himself: 'Poetry is my main gift. But to earn a living I became first a literary journalist, then a university teacher, and now teaching, especially the teaching of poetry, has become as true a vocation as writing poetry' (King and Smith, 13). His lectures, though on occasion inclined to the rambling and diffuse, were most often a blend of inspired, off-the-cuff analysis and wide-ranging literary reference (he seemed to have read everything, and to be able to deliver an astute judgement on any author or subject). But his forte was the seminar and, still more, private or after-dinner conversation, where his penchant for anecdote and reminiscence had full scope. 
Despite the predominance of critical work and teaching, Fraser did have the fortune to experience a late resurgence of his talent for poetry. A new volume, 'Conditions', appeared in 1969, and he continued to write occasional poems in the 1970s. These were gathered with the previously published work in 'Poems of G. S. Fraser', edited by his friends Ian Fletcher and John Lucas (1981). The later poems continue the formal neatness and rhymed precision of the earlier ones, but the themes are less parochial and the verse movement more colloquially liberated. Although the need for balance is still their underlying concern, they are also more coolly discursive than the plangently elegiac earlier poems, more cosmopolitan, and more urbane. 
Illness overshadowed Fraser's life in the late 1970s. He retired from the University of Leicester in 1979, but after little more than six months of leisure he died, at his home, 19 Guilford Road, Leicester, of heart disease on 3 January 1980. He was buried in Leicester. In later years his hair, and his appearance generally, was often untidy in a rumpled, academic way; he had a broad forehead, thick eyebrows, dreamy but slightly ironic, bespectacled, hazel eyes, and rubicund cheeks. His voice, long since Anglicized, nevertheless still carried a hint of the lilting, Scottish intonation. Fraser was survived by his wife and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 60207


Last, Joseph William (1809?-1880), printer and journal proprietor, was probably born on 13 October 1809 in Stoke Green, Ipswich, Suffolk, the son of Joseph and Eliza Last. He married Elizabeth Smith on 8 January 1833 at St Bride's Church, Fleet Street, London. By 1839 he was described as a printer, dealer, and chapman, and had gained a considerable trade reputation in Edward Street, Hampstead, where he produced some highly successful weekly publications entitled 'Tales of the Wars' for the publisher William Mark Clark of Warwick Lane. Splendidly illustrated with either a naval or military battle on the first page, they attained an immense circulation. Last early had a reputation for as extensive a knowledge of the machinery and practicalities of printing as any man of his time. He claimed to be the first to print a six-sheet poster and was one of the earliest to execute superior work from a cylinder-press supposedly unfitted for the requirements of woodcut reproduction. 
With his excellent taste in effective and fancy display typography, from 1838 onwards Last established himself as a theatrical printer in various places near the Strand. Noteworthy in a forty-year career full of vicissitudes was his management of the Strand Printing Company and the Savoy Press in Savoy Street, the Strand (1861-3). He finally settled down in Wych Street, London, where he carried on a successful business until his death, his son, Alfred Last, being his manager. Best known, however, was 3 Crane Court, Fleet Street (1840-43), nearly opposite the Whitefriars Printing Works. Here also were born Parr's Life Pills, puffed as a longevity pill by Herbert Ingram, who for this purpose rented some rooms 'on the premises of his friend Mr Last' ('Mr. Punch: his Origin and Career', 14). His landlord's close ancestral ties were with 'gutter papers' best known for their short shelf-life, small sales, scurrility, and sensationalism. In June 1837 Last launched 'The Town', a weekly featuring original indecorous essays for aspiring gentlemen about town, which collapsed after 156 numbers in May 1840. He owned another weekly with a rickety provenance, 'The Crown', which ran from July 1838 to April 1839. He seemingly could not exist without a comic journal, his next venture being 'The Squib', self-described as a 'granulation of wit, satire and amusement', which survived from 29 May to 17 December 1842. 
With the engraver Ebenezer Landells, Last was starting a periodical called 'The Cosmorama' when he introduced Landells to Henry Mayhew, a son of his solicitor. Although a coherent story of its birth remains cloudy, Last's family was to claim that the initiative lay with the master printer for the birth of an English version of Philipon's 'Charivari' (a periodical built around a large satirical drawing), initially to be called the 'Funny Dog' but destined to achieve immortality as 'Punch, or, The London 'Charivari''. The printer met with and discussed the project with a literary circle meeting at an inn kept by Mark Lemon, and at least one meeting took place in Last's office, where it appears a prospectus was first read and debated. 
Despite bankruptcy proceedings in March 1839 and mindful of the bleak age of the 'hungry forties', when it took courage to launch a comic journal, Last contrived to invest $600, representing one-third of the new property. Another third came from Landells, who was to act as art editor, and the remaining third was divided equally between three co-editors, Mayhew, Lemon, and Stirling Coyne. The first number was printed on 17 July 1842 and distributed from 13 Wellington Street. Mayhew wanted emphasis on a whole-page political cartoon with the back left blank, but Last expressed anxiety over this ingredient for success. Less emotionally involved with the project and having to bear its start-up costs, Last soon saw little prospect of any returns and refused to go on. Rival printers Bradbury and Evans (familiarly known as the 'Whitefriars potentates') broke off negotiations to acquire Last's share, which was eventually acquired by Landells. Last's son, however, was to maintain that there had been a direct sale to Bradbury and Evans in September 1841. 
Meanwhile, with the growth of mass literacy Ingram had enjoyed a remarkable success with cheap, illustrated weekly periodicals, and Last was engaged as managing printer for the 'Illustrated London News' (1842). His proven ability influenced that great pictorial speculation, printed on the same machinery erected for 'Punch'. While still actively engaged in business as J. W. Last & Co., Last died in St Peter's Hospital, Berners Street, London, on 23 March 1880 from a combination of peritonitis and 'exhaustion'. 


@@@@@


doc= 60209


Friel, George (1910-1975), novelist, was born on 15 July 1910, in a room-and-kitchen tenement flat at 1172 Maryhill Road, Glasgow, the fourth of the seven children (two girls, five boys) of Jimmy Friell and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Toal ('b'. 1883). His father, born in Donegal in 1879, had left school at eleven, but had nevertheless found 'respectable' work as a salesman for the Scottish and Legal Insurance Company; he believed, though, that his true vocation was the music-hall stage, where he occasionally performed. George Friel signalled revolt by dropping the second 'l' which Jimmy had added to the family name, and later made feckless, selfish fathers a staple of his fiction. He seems to have been very close to his mother, who was an avid reader. In the Maryhill tenement hierarchy of subclasses, the Roman Catholic Friells, though cramped in their two rooms, were nowhere near the bottom. The liveliness of the area, with Maryhill army barracks and Partick Thistle football ground close at hand, would make a vivid mark on George's fiction. 
George Friel's elder siblings, Cissie, Jack, and Tommy, had all impressed their teachers at St Charles's Primary, before leaving school at fourteen, and George received encouragement to proceed further. After going on to St Mungo's Academy, in 1926 he reached Glasgow University, where he fell under the spell of recent modernist writing. He became deeply interested in philosophy and in left-wing political ideas, making a lifelong friend of James Gillespie, a science student, son of a miner, who introduced him to Marxism. In autumn 1929 he published his first contribution to the 'Glasgow University Magazine', and he rose to edit the magazine in 1931; his brief tenure was curtailed by unpleasant controversy raised by his Catholic origins. 
Like several other very gifted Scottish writers who attended university at this time of deep economic depression, Friel could not see beyond schoolteaching as a career: after he graduated with an ordinary MA degree in 1932 he went on to Jordanhill Teacher Training College. After a phase in 1934 when he had eleven brief supply-teaching appointments in eight different schools, he was a master at St Roch's junior school until 1940. On 9 July 1938 he married Isabella Keenan, 'nee' McAulay (1912/13-1985), a fellow teacher whom he had met four years previously. They had no children, and resided for the rest of their lives at 25 Brackenbrae Road in the outer suburb of Bishopbriggs. Their relationship struck outsiders as staunch and warm, though, in the Scottish manner, undemonstrative. She was a constant supporter of his writing. 
In 1933 Friel had a poem published in the 'Adelphi' magazine, but he abdicated his verse ambitions after several publishers rejected an offered collection. Before the Second World War disrupted literary life he had made a promising start as a writer of short stories, publishing eight, most of them involving a family called Plottel whose circumstances echoed the Friells'. From 1940 to 1946 he served in the Royal Army Ordnance Corps, where he became a warrant officer; he was posted in England, then moved to Belgium and Germany. Isabella spent most of the war in Dumfriesshire, where her family farmed. In 1947 George resumed his teaching life at St Mark's junior school, and in 1960 transferred to become assistant head teacher at St Philomena's primary school. 
Friel's literary career languished. A first novel, 'So I was Told', which threaded his Plottel stories together, did not impress publishers. Late in 1946 he began to send out 'Sons and Daughters', and after this had been rejected by eight different London publishers he revised it as 'No other Herald', which incurred an identical number of rejections. He was in his late forties before his luck changed. The distinguished fiction writer Fred Urquhart reprinted one of Friel's pre-war productions in 'Scottish Short Stories' (1957). 'No other Herald' impressed, though it did not convince, Hutchinson's readers, and Timothy O'Keeffe of that firm wrote encouragingly to Friel early in 1958. Within six months Friel responded with another book which Hutchinson brought out in a series quixotically devoted to first novels. 'The Banks of Time' (1959) is a carefully crafted story which refractedly echoes Friel's disagreements with his brothers and exasperation with their father. The protagonist, David Heylyn, is the first of Friel's self-conscious, autodidactic, petty-bourgeois Glaswegian aesthetes, a charmless youth with prickly integrity. Friel suppressed his splendid ear for dialogue and rendered the speech of all his characters in standard English. 
Publication of 'Banks of Time' did not make Friel famous, but did spur him to quest for further publication. Hutchinson rejected his second rewrite of 'No other Herald', now 'Three Days with Delaney' (Friel was to rewrite and retitle this novel twice more, with consistent lack of success). In 1960 he tried out 'All for Moira's Wedding', which he set aside permanently after three rejections. Meanwhile, he had acquired an agent, James McGibbon of Curtis Brown. Friel had a new novel, 'The Boy who Wanted Peace', which unusually he had written in a rush, without pernickety revision. The raciness of this grim yet hilarious fable about juvenile corruptibility eventually prevailed. After eight publishers had rejected it, John Calder, after many months of dithering, accepted it in July 1963. This might have seemed something of a mismatch, as in the 1950s Calder had become Samuel Beckett's English publisher, and his list promoted the European avant-garde in general and the French 'nouveau roman' in particular. The tenement-close, slice-of-life realism of Friel's previously published work might indeed have seemed out of place. In his reply to Calder's reservations Friel dramatized his humdrum career, making exaggerated play with brief episodes when he had tended bars, helped his father sell insurance, and appeared on stage at university, so that teaching might seem merely a retreat to a steady job after picaresque roving: 'I am not a Scottish writer at all. I am a Glasgow-Irishman, which makes writing in English feel like trying to walk in your teacher's cast-off shoes... I am old enough to have bought for a florin Samuel Beckett's 'Dolphin'-book essay on Proust when it was first published, and I knew he was an exceptionally intelligent writer long before 'Waiting for Godot' became a text for parsonical parables. (G. Friel, letter, 1963, Friel MSS)' In fact Calder's was a highly apt firm to produce, in succession, Friel's further four novels, in which the writer freely indulged at last his Joycean delight in wordplay and bizarre incidents. Language itself emerged as his major theme. Glasgow became an Eliotesque 'waste land' haunted by symbolic resonances. Friel was not, as it turned out, an alien stablemate for Beckett. 

'The Boy who Wanted Peace' appeared in October 1964, and was respectfully reviewed in major British journals -- the praise of Anthony Burgess in 'The Spectator' was particularly gratifying. Calder was not the most smoothly efficient of publishers, but the firm's zeal in promoting the book took Friel himself aback -- he first heard about serialization in the 'Scottish Daily Express' from the newspaper itself. There was much activity concerning film rights over the next few years, and, though this came to nothing, BBC Scotland broadcast a radio adaptation in March 1967, then a version for television in February 1970. Although the Calder edition sold fewer than 2000 copies before Friel's death, and a Pan paperback edition launched in February 1972 was pulped after disappointing sales eighteen months later, Friel was now established in literary circles. Marion Boyars, Calder's partner, had handed the manuscript of 'Grace and Miss Partridge' back to him early in 1965, and he had tried other publishers. Then in 1967 Boyars sheepishly asked to have it again -- she had found it unforgettable. This very offbeat theological fable is narrated by an authorial persona who claims to have known the characters (indeed, has married Grace herself) and developed the story out of documents and intuitions. 
Calder and Boyars published 'Mr Alfred MA' early in 1972. To Friel's annoyance he had to abandon his chosen title, 'The Writing on the Wall', because Mary McCarthy brought out a book of essays with that name. It was preserved as the title of part two of the novel, in which a gentle, alcoholic Glasgow English teacher eventually loses his wits, overpowered by the ferocious graffiti now scrawled all around the city by its teenage gangs, more meaningful, as he surmises, than his own always-rejected volume of poems. 
Friel himself was by now sick of teaching. St Philomena's, as a primary school, gave him less time to himself during the day than he had had at St Mark's. The discrepancy between his lowly status as an educationist and the esteem which many now had for him as a writer was expressed in an unctuous letter from Glasgow corporation's director of education, giving him one day's leave of absence -- 'without salary' -- to represent himself at a launching event for new Pan paperbacks, and concluding 'May I congratulate you on your success.' Friel was developing a sideline in scripts for radio and television that might have become profitable. In 1973 he resigned from his teaching job on grounds of ill health. Sadly, these were not spurious. On 5 March 1975 he died of lung cancer, at home, just two months before Calder and Boyars published his last novel, 'An Empty House'. 
For all his natal Catholicism, Friel's personality, like his writings, had been deeply affected by the dour Scottish Calvinist tradition. He kept himself to himself, did not mix with other writers, and refused to yield any ground in argument. Immensely observant, fascinated by overheard snippets of conversation, he uttered extremely funny remarks without a smile. One radio producer who worked with him remembered a small man with rather cherubic features dominated by large spectacles -- 'giving nothing away, taut and tight, very quiet'. He was a heavy smoker. He relaxed after his day's teaching, then wrote after midnight, whisky and cigarettes to hand. 
Friel died just before a remarkable efflorescence of fiction in the west of Scotland was signalled by William McIlvanney's 'Docherty' (1975) and Alasdair Gray's 'Lanark' (1981). He could have seen in these two writers, and in James Kelman who followed them, many affinities with his own work. He had written fiction exclusively about Glasgow. The tenement world of his youth dominates his novels, with its warmth and its feuding, its gossip and its violence, its pub talk and prevalent petty criminality, remembered with mingled pain and nostalgia. Pain largely comes from the discrepancy between the visions which literature, music, and art reveal to some of his characters and the dwarfish opportunities of a provincial city. Friel's belated status as an important writer was marked by two Scottish Arts Council awards for his third and fourth published novels, and the inclusion of 'Mr Alfred MA' among the earliest titles in the new 'Canongate Classics' series launched with the support of the council in 1987. Douglas Gifford, introducing the book, acclaimed it as 'one of the greatest of Scottish novels'. 


@@@@@


doc= 60210


Gaitens, Edward (1897-1966), short-story writer and novelist, was born on 26 February 1897 at 104 South Wellington Street, in the Gorbals, Glasgow, probably fourth of six surviving children of Edward Gaitens, stationer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Colwell. Gaitens was educated locally and left school at the age of fourteen, taking up a succession of unskilled jobs. During the First World War he spent two years in Wormwood Scrubs prison as a conscientious objector. He was homosexual and never married. 
Gaitens began writing in his middle thirties. His first short story, 'Growing Up', was published in the 'London Mercury' in 1938 on the recommendation of the playwright Osborne Henry Mavor (James Bridie), to whom he later dedicated his only novel. His first book, 'Growing Up and Other Stories' (1942), was well reviewed. H. G. Wells wrote to the author, 'I do not exaggerate when I say that at least two of these stories are among the most beautiful in the English language' (Gaitens, 'Dance of the Apprentices'). These ten lively, social-realist pieces depict a sensitive boy observing and responding to his Glasgow background -- family, shipyard work, unemployment -- and discovering transcendental moments of beauty, as in 'The Sailing Ship'. They appear to draw their inspiration from Gaitens's own experience. His long-term companion (and later literary executor) Charles Turner has been quoted as saying that 'he put his life into his writings' (Urquhart and Gordon, 203). 
Gaitens lived in London during the Second World War and served for four years as a firewatcher. He returned to Glasgow after the war, working as a night telephonist. Encouraged by an Atlantic award in literature (1946) for 'Growing Up', he wrote 'Dance of the Apprentices' (1948), the novel for which he is best-known today. It is episodic in structure, six stories from 'Growing Up' appearing, with minor alterations, as chapters in the novel. Again the book seems to be semi-autobiographical, charting the adolescent experiences of Eddy Macdonnel and his friends, the apprentices of the title. Part 1 closes as they go gladly to prison as conscientious objectors at the outbreak of the First World War. Part 2 covers the next twenty years as they come to terms with the unsatisfactory 'world fit for heroes' to which they have returned, but the last chapter is a strikingly detailed and bitter depiction of Eddy's -- or Gaitens's -- experiences in prison. 
Gaitens published little else during his lifetime and his work was neglected for some years, perhaps owing to the restricted scope of his subject matter, perhaps to the ephemeral nature of his true medium, the short story. During the early 1960s, renting a basement flat in Edinburgh in poor health and considerable poverty, he sublet a room to the poet George Mackay Brown, who later wrote 'I think his gift had deserted him, but he kept still a bright eye and an eager spirit... He had long abandoned Catholicism, but men must be believing something and Edward's religion was art' (Brown, 159). Gaitens died of a heart attack in Deaconess Hospital, Edinburgh, on 16 December 1966. 


@@@@@


doc= 60211


Low, (Helen) Nora Wilson (1886-1930), novelist and screenwriter, was born on 16 June 1886 in North Street, in the village of Strichen, Aberdeenshire, the second of the four daughters and a son of Charles Low (1860/61-1952) and Margaret Benzies (1863-1945). Charles was registered at birth as the illegitimate son of Mary-Ann Low and Charles May, the butler of a family for whom Mary-Ann had worked in Deeside. Family rumour, however, speculated that his father may have been a more aristocratic member of the household. Brought up by his grandmother, Charles Low followed his grandfather into the family trade of stone-dressing and plastering. While Nora (as she wanted to be known) was growing up, her father worked abroad. After returning to Strichen he became landlord of the Temperance Hotel. An atheist and socialist who enjoyed discussing politics, her father was a powerful figure, who has been described as widely experienced, extremely intelligent, and well read. Local anecdote also paints him as rejecting the success of his daughter, who dedicated her first book, 'Doorways in Drumorty', to him: 'To My Dad This, His Wee Nottie's First Book.' His granddaughter Evelyn and eldest daughter, Annie, are both quoted as disputing this account and claim that he was proud of her writing (de Mille, 124). Margaret Benzies, her mother, suffered considerable hardship bringing up the family. Anecdotal evidence also describes her character: 'She wis a woman like this; she'd a likit to be upper class' (William Center, quoted in 'Leopard Magazine', February 1981). Nora Low grew up in the small community she depicts with such detail in her fiction. She received an elementary education at the local Episcopal school, but according to various sources had a passion for reading and attended evening classes in an attempt to further her education. The few surviving photographs show that Nora possessed a dark red-haired and intense beauty. In 1907 a commercial traveller staying at the Temperance Hotel, 29-year-old William Hebditch (1878-1960) from Yorkshire, fell in love with Nora and they secretly arranged to be married on Christmas eve of that year in Aberdeen. They left for Selby in Yorkshire, where Nora had a child, Bill, but soon emigrated to Entwistle in Alberta, Canada. 
Information on the intervening years was for some time sketchy and contradictory. Research by her son has, however, established that Nora left Hebditch in 1913 for another Yorkshireman, Walter Moon (1890-1971), moving first to Winnipeg then Minneapolis in 1917, where she worked as a journalist. She also bore Moon a child, Mary, in 1914, but the child was sent back to Moon's family in England. Accounts of her transition to Hollywood are again contradictory; her son concedes there is a problem in that she 'told so many false stories' and liked to create a mythical background for herself (de Mille, 259). She appears, however, to have left Walter Moon and found herself employment, working for Cecil B. DeMille on 'The Affairs of Anatol' (1921). Hollywood at the time was keen to attract new and marketable writers into the developing field of screenwriting, and Lorna Moon, as she was now known, achieved success very quickly. She also appears to have became the mistress of William de Mille (1878-1955) and to have borne another son, Richard de Mille, the 'foundling' child who was adopted by William's brother, Cecil, in 1922. While pregnant she was also diagnosed as having tuberculosis, and spent a considerable amount of time in a sanatorium, while working on her fiction. 
In Hollywood, Nora worked on a number of screenplays. Her greatest success was 'Mr. Wu' (1927), produced by MGM and starring Lon Chaney, but she also worked in screenwriting teams on a variety of silent films, including the romantic comedy 'Don't Tell Everything' (1921) starring Gloria Swanson, and 'Her Husband's Trademark' (1922), again with Gloria Swanson, the latter directed by Cecil B. DeMille, 'Love' (1927), a version of 'Anna Karenina' with Greta Garbo, 'After Midnight' (1927), and 'Women Love Diamonds' (1927). She was also involved with the storylines of 'Too much Wife' (1922) and 'Upstage' (1926). The last film with which she is accredited, a comedy, 'Min and Bill', brought out in 1930, appears to have been a much changed, Americanized, version of her novel, 'Dark Star', which she had sold to MGM at the suggestion of her friend and fellow screenwriter, Frances Marion, as a means of raising funds. Marion, one of the best-known of Hollywood screenwriters, describes how, 'all of us loved this girl, who had blithesome flights of fancy and a rare sense of humour' (Marion, 204). In her obituary the 'Los Angeles Times' acknowledged Moon as one of the three best scenario writers in Hollywood. While the exotic quality of her Hollywood career may appear surprising given her origins in rural Aberdeenshire, her fiction demonstrates the writing talent which won her acclaim. 
Both the collection of short stories, 'Doorways in Drumorty' (published in America in 1925, in Britain in 1926), and Nora's novel, 'Dark Star' (1929), draw on her experiences of growing up in a small and inward-looking community, presenting this world with a vividness and harshness which distinguishes her writing from other fiction of the Scottish kailyard school, and aligns it more closely with the work of Lewis Grassic Gibbon (Leslie Mitchell), another novelist from north-east Scotland. Drawing upon local characters and tales for her inspiration, she also parallels Gibbon in having offended the local community. Various accounts suggest that her father was particularly upset by a story 'The Funeral', in 'Doorways in Drumorty', which depicts the pride and suffering of a mother whose child is dying, and whose husband, working abroad, leaves her in poverty. Some commentators suggest this story, which does seem to draw upon her own memories of her father working away, shows the guilty man as living 'in elegance' while his wife suffers. The story, however, suggests he is unable to get work, and that the community is at fault for creating a code of pride whereby the mother cannot confess her poverty. It is therefore more focused on the tensions experienced by the woman, and less directly critical of the father, than some readings suggest. All the stories in 'Doorways in Drumorty' explore similar themes: the particular codes and conventions created by such a closed community, patterns of surveillance, strictures of public morality, evidence of private despair. They engage with the margins of this world, presenting itinerants, outcasts, and misfits with a distinct lack of sentimentality. Low's work is also striking in its awareness of the position of women in the community: her stories deal with minutiae, with networks of power which operate in apparently insignificant areas. 
Nora's novel, 'Dark Star', which was well received in both America and Britain, presents a similarly uncompromising picture of rural life, and again has a local setting, drawing on Strichen, but also nearby fishing villages such as Broadsea, Pennan, or Gardenstown. The plot may, in fact, have been based on stories Nora Low heard as a child when visiting relatives in Broadsea. The novel dissects, with an odd mixture of realism and melodrama, the plight of Nancy, illegitimate and an outsider in her narrow world. While delineating her attempts to escape its confines through romance, the text explores the precarious social structures, the sexual instabilities, and the surface hypocrisies which define it. This book too appears to have been unpopular in Strichen and was, according to some reports, banned from the local library because its depiction of a legless librarian was rather too close to the actuality. 
Nora's books (published under the name Lorna Moon) remained unknown to the mainstream of Scottish literature for a considerable time although, through the advocacy of David Toulmin, both were republished in 1980 and 1981 by Gourdas House publishers. After that her work was given growing attention, in particular through feminist interest in its depiction of women's lives, although her name is still not widely known, even in Scotland. Nora was ill with tuberculosis in the last few years of her life and, the subject of much media interest in America, died from a fatal haemorrhage in Albuquerque, New Mexico, on 1 May 1930. On 3 June that year her ashes were brought home by a young American man she had met in a sanatorium, Everett Marcy (1902-1948?), and, according to her wishes, were scattered 'to the four winds' on Mormond Hill, behind Strichen. 


@@@@@


doc= 60212


McCrone, Guy Fulton (1898-1977), novelist, was born on 13 September 1898 at 93 Westbourne Road, Birkenhead, the elder son of Robert McCrone, margarine manufacturer from Ayrshire, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Hugh Osborne, cheese merchant. The family moved to Glasgow where McCrone was educated at Glasgow Academy. He graduated in economics at Pembroke College, Cambridge, before studying singing in Vienna under Jean de Reske. He married Sylvia Louise Shanks ('b'. 1899/1900) on 30 April 1931. 
McCrone took an active part in Glasgow musical life, being a member of the local grand opera and chamber music societies. He sang Aeneas in a Glasgow production of Berlioz's 'Les Troyens' in 1935, the first British performance of the complete opera. With his cousin the playwright Osborne Henry Mavor (James Bridie) he was involved in founding Glasgow Citizens' Theatre in 1943, being at different periods business manager and managing director. McCrone had no experience in theatre management but, a colleague later wrote, 'Bridie had decided that Mr McCrone would somehow rise to the occasion... [He] settled nobly to his pioneer task... when he might have been writing [a best-selling novel] like his 'Wax Fruit'' (Bannister, 208-9). 
McCrone's first novel, 'The Striped Umbrellas', was published in 1937. He began to write 'Antimacassar City', which later became part 1 of 'Wax Fruit', before the outbreak of the Second World War and finished it during the spare moments of his wartime job as an air-raid warden. Published in 1940, it was always planned as the first part of a trilogy about a middle-class family of provision merchants in Victorian Glasgow, but the second and third parts, 'The Philistines' and 'The Puritans', were not published separately at that time. All three appeared in one volume as 'Wax Fruit: the Story of the Moorhouse Family' (1947), the novel for which McCrone remains best known. Because of paper rationing the original print run was fairly small, but the novel was chosen as a book of the month in America and became a best-seller. It was later translated into French and German. By the time of McCrone's death it had sold 1 million copies. 

'Wax Fruit' was especially popular with Glasgow readers and there was a persistent belief that it was possible to identify the real-life originals of the characters. McCrone explicitly denied this in dedicating 'Wax Fruit' to 'Glasgow readers': 'No. You must forgive me. But I did not have the impertinence to draw for you portraits of your grandparents and their friends'. The novel and its sequels 'Aunt Bel' (1949) and 'The Hayburn Family' (1952), which together cover the period 1870-1901, are, however, the product of considerable research into Glasgow social history. McCrone wrote: 'It is fleeting detail that matters to the novelist and gives him his background. In the newspapers, it is not the great things that are remembered to this day. It is such things as the advertisement columns' (McCrone). Guy McCrone retired to the Lake District with his wife in 1965 and died of heart disease at his home, Brackenmere, Birthwaite Road, Windermere, on 30 May 1977. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 60213


McLellan, Robert (1907-1985), playwright, was born at Kirkfieldbank in Lanarkshire on 28 January 1907, the son of John McLellan, a compositor, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Hannah. His maternal grandparents had a fruit farm in the Clyde valley, where he spent many childhood holidays and which provided the background for the short stories collected under the title 'Linmill' (1977). McLellan attended secondary school in Bearsden, a well-to-do suburb to the north of Glasgow, but his university studies in philosophy were cut short by a bout of ill health, and he never completed his degree. 
On 1 October 1938 McLellan married Kathleen Heys ('b'. 1912/13), whom he had met while leading summer climbs in the Lake District, and settled with her in a cottage at High Corrie on the island of Arran in the Firth of Clyde, where he remained for the rest of his life. They had two children, Kathleen and John. From the time that he moved to Arran, McLellan supported himself by his writing, something which has proved very difficult in Scotland unless the individual concerned has been able to achieve success beyond his or her native land. As to the apparent remoteness of his home, and its distance from professional theatrical activity, McLellan commented in a magazine article: 'I can never be quite sure where the centre of things is... more often than not, though I keep the feeling to myself for fear of ridicule, it seems to be in High Corrie.' He also felt that too close an involvement in the theatre 'can lead to a restricted view of human nature. Actors are, in no unkind sense of the word, a peculiar people' (McLellan, 35-6). 
The development of a Scottish dramatic tradition in the twentieth century was somewhat erratic. In the latter part of the nineteenth century the native element in the theatre north of the border consisted largely of adaptations of the novels of Walter Scott, of original pieces on other well-worn historical themes, and of music-hall sketches. But in the first years of the twentieth century the Glasgow Repertory Company (1909-14), an organization funded by subscribing citizens of the city, offered apprentice Scottish dramatists the chance to expand their artistic horizons and to see their work alongside a range of contemporary playwrights. Several availed themselves of the opportunity, but by the time McLellan came to write the principal outlets for the indigenous dramatist in Scotland were a number of amateur companies, such as the Scottish National Players and the Curtain Theatre. From 1933 to 1940 the Curtain offered programmes, principally of new plays, in a converted drawing-room in the west end of Glasgow, and then in the small Lyric Theatre. In January 1934 it presented as one of a triple bill of one-act pieces McLellan's 'Jeddart Justice'. This was followed by several other one-act plays and a number of full-length ones, including 'Toom Byres' (1936) and 'Jamie the Saxt' (1937). This latter piece is generally regarded as McLellan's finest work; the title role was originally played by Duncan Macrae, a Scottish actor of distinction who, like so many of his generation, came into the professional theatre via the amateur one. Nevertheless, McLellan always had reservations about Macrae's approach to the part, reservations which were heightened when the piece was revived in 1956 as part of a season of mainly Scottish plays in Edinburgh and Glasgow, and the actor cut speeches wholesale in order to secure the comic effects at which he had become so adept. 
The founding of professional repertory theatres in Scotland during and after the Second World War provided McLellan and others of his generation with opportunities that had not been available to them in their native land until that point. Unlike O. H. Mavor (James Bridie), whose wit and urbanity suited audiences outside Scotland, McLellan wrote in a form of lowland Scots that does not travel very well, and so the West End route which Bridie pursued with alacrity was not open to him. McLellan was adamant throughout his career that the Scots he employed had none of the artifice of the Lallans found in the poetry of C. M. Grieve (Hugh MacDiarmid), but stemmed from the variety of the language he had heard as a child growing up on the edge of rural lowland Scotland. Ruefully McLellan recalled that whenever he had a success on the stage he was encouraged to write in English, something he did not wish to do. Indeed, it is striking that, when he does employ both languages, for instance in plays such as 'The Hypocrite' or 'Young Auchinleck', the passages in Scots move with vivacity, while the English ones tend to limp along. Given McLellan's linguistic position, the appearance in his own country of a number of theatres which were actively seeking plays by indigenous writers was absolutely crucial to the later development of his writing. Indeed, he was associated with most of the important companies in Scotland in the period immediately after the war: Glasgow Unity Theatre premiered 'Torwatletie' in 1946 and 'The Flouers o' Edinburgh' in 1948, the Glasgow Citizens' staged 'Mary Stewart' in 1951, and Edinburgh Gateway gave 'Young Auchinleck' its first performance in 1962. McLellan continued to work as a dramatist until 1967, when 'The Hypocrite' was presented by the Royal Lyceum Company in Edinburgh. 
Of McLellan's plays the two which have been most frequently revived are 'Jamie the Saxt' and 'The Flouers o' Edinburgh'. The continued popularity of these pieces is easy to explain. One presents a most appealing picture of James VI as a very canny individual, who skilfully outwits those who seek to undermine his position at the Scottish court, then reaps his reward in the shape of the prospect of the throne in England. The other explores the issue of Scottish identity through a dramatization of the controversy which arose in the post-Union Edinburgh of the eighteenth century as to whether people with serious social aspirations should abandon their 'barbarous' native tongue in favour of English; this issue and related aspects of national consciousness are hardy perennials in the Scottish context. 
Most of McLellan's plays are historical dramas, and his few forays into the modern world -- such as the early 'Portrait of an Artist' (the Curtain, 1939), which is set in 'bohemian' Glasgow, and 'The Road to the Isles' (Glasgow Citizens', 1954), which tries to engage with the problem of highland regeneration -- are not successful. McLellan is at his happiest and most effective when he is recreating Scotland's past: he once offered the view that he was, in a sense, writing some of the plays which would have been written if Scotland had continued to have a vigorous drama after the departure of the court for London in 1603, and if the depredations visited on the theatre by the Presbyterian reformers had never taken place. For the most part McLellan's view of Scotland's past is devoid of the sentimentality and nostalgia which have permeated Scottish culture: even in comedy, violence and sudden death are never very far away. McLellan's great strength, however, is in the creation of lively action and of character. He was particularly concerned, as he saw it, to 'fix' in dramatic form aspects of the Scottish character which he considered to be important, and in this he is often very successful. 
McLellan's skilled use of the Scots language to create character on the stage is paralleled by its employment to suggest particular place and circumstance in much of his occasional verse, but particularly in the stories republished as 'Linmill', many of which were originally written to be broadcast on BBC radio. McLellan also produced a popular guide to his adopted home, 'The Isle of Arran' (1976). He took an active part in the affairs of the community: he was a member of Arran district council for a number of years and became chairman of the Association of District Councils of Scotland, the body which represented these second-tier authorities prior to local government reorganization in 1975. He was made an OBE in 1978. McLellan died at his home in Arran on 27 January 1985 of a cerebral haemorrhage, and was buried in Sannox cemetery on the island on 30 January. 
There is a certain heroism about McLellan's dogged pursuit of what he saw as his proper path as a dramatist, despite the meagre financial returns and the limited number of productions of his work. It is perfectly understandable that he chose to do what he knew he could do best, but it is none the less a matter of regret that in his writing his engagement with the modern world is oblique rather than direct. 


